

                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

        HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|23rd - 26th July 2007                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

    Mr C. M. G. Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                      Senior Immigration Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                     HS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Henderson, Counsel instructed by the Refugee
                    Legal Centre.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kovats, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor.




   1. Failed asylum seekers do not, as such, face a risk of being subjected,
      on return to Zimbabwe, to persecution or serious  ill-treatment.  That
      will be the case whether  the  return  is  voluntary  or  involuntary,
      escorted or not.


   2. The findings in respect of risk categories in SM  and  Others  (MDC  -
      Internal flight - risk categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100,  as
      adopted,  affirmed  and  supplemented  in  AA  (Risk  for  involuntary
      returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061 are adopted and  reaffirmed.
      The Tribunal identifies one further risk category, being those seen to
      be  active  in  association  with  human  rights  or   civil   society
      organisations where evidence suggests that the particular organisation
      has been identified by the authorities as a critic or opponent of  the
      Zimbabwean regime.


   3. The process of screening returning passengers is an  intelligence  led
      process and the CIO will generally have identified from the  passenger
      manifest in advance, based upon such intelligence, those passengers in
      whom there is any possible interest.   The  fact  of  having  made  an
      asylum claim abroad is not something that in itself will give rise  to
      adverse interest on return.


   4. The Tribunal adopts and reaffirms the findings in AA in respect of the
      general absence  of  real  risk  associated  with  any  monitoring  of
      returnees that might take place after such persons have passed through
      the  airport  and  returned  to  their  home  area  or  re-established
      themselves in a new area.

   5. Country conditions have continued to deteriorate but are not generally
      such as to bring  about  an  infringement  of  Convention  rights  for
      returnees or to require the grant of humanitarian protection.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and scope of reconsideration

   1. In this determination the Tribunal reconsiders  the  country  guidance
      given in AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006]  UKAIT
      00061 in the light of the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
      (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 149 and the additional evidence  the
      parties have chosen to submit.


   2. The appellant, who was born  on  23rd  June  1965,  is  a  citizen  of
      Zimbabwe. She arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  May  2002  and  was
      granted leave to enter as a visitor for six months. Just  before  that
      leave expired she applied unsuccessfully for  leave  to  remain  as  a
      postgraduate (medical) doctor. She then applied for leave to remain as
      a highly skilled  migrant.  When  that  application  was  refused  she
      claimed asylum. This was on the basis that she was at risk  on  return
      to Zimbabwe because she  had  attracted  adverse  attention  from  the
      authorities while working at a state hospital both by participating in
      a strike and by taking photographs of the injuries of  a  patient  who
      had been attacked by government supporters and because of her father's
      claimed involvement with the MDC.


   3. Reconsideration has been ordered of the decision  of  the  immigration
      judge who, by a determination  dated  31st  March  2006,  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 13th
      February 2006 that the appellant should be  removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom after her asylum and human rights claims had been refused.

   4. The immigration judge rejected as untrue the whole  factual  basis  of
      the appellant's claim to be at risk on return to Zimbabwe and, at  the
      first stage reconsideration hearing on 1st March 2007, the appellant's
      representatives  did  not  seek  to  challenge  those  findings.   The
      immigration judge gave clear and cogent reasons for  disbelieving  the
      appellant's evidence. She referred, as she was bound to, to  the  then
      binding country guidance case AA  (Involuntary  returns  to  Zimbabwe)
      Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT 00144 CG ( "AA(1)") and said:

           "Had it not been for the country guidance case law that binds me
           I would have dismissed the appellant's appeals."

   5. At the first stage reconsideration hearing  it  was  agreed  that  the
      immigration judge was wrong in law to allow the appeal on this  basis.
      AA(1) was itself found by the Court of Appeal to be  wrongly  decided:
      AA and LK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  401.  This  means  that  any  appeal
      allowed solely in reliance upon it is also materially wrong in law and
      cannot stand. See: OM (AA(1) wrong in law) Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
      00077.


   6. That being the case the decision of the immigration judge to allow the
      appeal has been set aside and the Tribunal  must  substitute  a  fresh
      decision to  allow  or  dismiss  the  appeal.  But  the  Tribunal  has
      directed, with the  agreement  of  the  parties  at  the  first  stage
      reconsideration hearing, that there is no reason at all to disturb the
      unchallenged findings of fact made by the immigration  judge  and  set
      out between paragraphs 13 and 18 of her determination, the  effect  of
      which is summarised above. (The full text of the  Tribunal's  decision
      at the first stage of this reconsideration is set  out  in  the  first
      annex to this determination.) This means that the appellant  would  be
      returned to Zimbabwe as a person with no profile such  as  to  attract
      attention other than that, having made clear that she is unwilling  to
      return voluntarily, she would be identifiable upon arrival  at  Harare
      airport as someone who had  been  forcibly  removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom. Although such deportees will  not  be  identified  as  failed
      asylum seekers,  the  respondent  accepts  that  they  should  not  be
      expected to lie about having made a claim for  asylum  in  the  United
      Kingdom if asked about this on return.

   7. At the commencement  of  the  hearing  before  us  Mr  Henderson,  who
      appeared  for  the  appellant,  sought  to  widen  the  scope  of  the
      reconsideration. This was on the basis that  the  appellant's  brother
      had appealed successfully against a decision that he should be removed
      from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant after his  asylum  claim
      had been refused. His claim was based in part upon the assertion  that
      his father had been an MDC activist well known in his area for holding
      MDC meetings at the family farm, something that the immigration  judge
      who allowed this appellant's appeal found not to be true. As that much
      had been accepted by the adjudicator who allowed the brother's appeal,
      Mr Henderson submitted that the appellant should be allowed to  reopen
      her claim to be at risk on return on account of the family profile  of
      support for the MDC.

   8. Mr Kovats, for the respondent, resisted this application. It  was,  he
      submitted, far too late to widen the scope of the  reconsideration  as
      directed by the Tribunal with the agreement  of  the  parties  at  the
      earlier hearing. In any event, the fact that the  appellant's  brother
      had persuaded an adjudicator that his father had suffered  persecution
      on account of his activities on behalf of the MDC  did  not  establish
      that the immigration judge who dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  was
      wrong to reject a similar claim made by the appellant.

   9. The  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  as
      amended, sets out clearly the procedure  to  be  adopted  by  a  party
      seeking to introduce fresh evidence. Paragraph 32 of those Rules deals
      with the evidence to be considered upon reconsideration of an appeal:
           Evidence on reconsideration of appeal

           32. - (1) The Tribunal may consider  as  evidence  any  note  or
           record made by the Tribunal of any previous hearing at which the
           appeal was considered.
           (2) If a party wishes to ask the Tribunal to  consider  evidence
           which was not submitted on any previous occasion when the appeal
           was considered, he must file with the Tribunal and serve on  the
           other party written notice to that effect, which must -
           (a) indicate the nature of the evidence; and
           (b) explain why it was not submitted on any previous occasion.

           ...

  10.  Regard is to  be  had  also  to  what  is  said  in  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal Practice Directions:


      14.1   Subject to paragraph 14.12, where an appeal  has  been  ordered
           under section 103A to be reconsidered, then, unless and  to  the
           extent that they are directed  otherwise,  the  parties  to  the
           appeal should assume that the issues to  be  considered  at  the
           hearing fixed  for  the  reconsideration  will  be  whether  the
           original Tribunal made a material error of law (see rule  31(2))
           and, if so, whether the appeal should be allowed  or  dismissed,
           by reference to the original Tribunal's findings of fact and any
           new documentary evidence admitted under  rule  32  which  it  is
           reasonably practicable  to  adduce  for  consideration  at  that
           hearing.
        ...
      14A.3 A party who wishes the Tribunal on reconsideration  to  consider
           any evidence that was not  before  the  original  Tribunal  must
           indicate in the notice under rule 32(2) whether the evidence  is
           sought to be adduced:-
              1.
        2. (a) in  connection  with  the  issue  of  whether  the  original
           Tribunal made a material error of law; or
        3. (b) in connection with the substitution of a fresh  decision  to
           allow or dismiss the appeal under rule 31(3), in  the  event  of
           the original Tribunal being found to have made a material  error
           of law.

  11.  This was considered by the Court of Appeal in DH (Serbia) and  others
      v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1747:
        1.  As  far  as  what  has  been  called  the  second  stage  of  a
           reconsideration is concerned, the fact that it  is,  as  I  have
           said, conceptually a reconsideration by the same body which made
           the original decision, carries with it a number of consequences.
           The most important is  that  any  body  asked  to  reconsider  a
           decision on the grounds of  an  identified  error  of  law  will
           approach its reconsideration  on  the  basis  that  any  factual
           findings  and  conclusions  or  judgments  arising  from   those
           findings which are unaffected by the error of law  need  not  be
           revisited. It is not a rehearing: Parliament chose  not  to  use
           that concept, presumably for good reasons. ...
        1. It follows that if there is to be any challenge to  the  factual
           findings, or the judgments or conclusions reached on  the  facts
           which are unaffected  by  the  errors  of  law  that  have  been
           identified, that will only be other than in the most exceptional
           cases on the basis of new evidence or new material as  to  which
           the usual principles as to the reception of such  evidence  will
           apply, as envisaged in rule 32(2) of the  Rules.  It  is  to  be
           noted that this rule imposes the obligation on  the  parties  to
           identify  the  new  material  well  before  the  reconsideration
           hearing. This requirement is now underlined in the new  Practice
           Direction 14A. This sets out in some detail what is required  in
           such a notice.
  12. The appellant's brother, whose appeal had been allowed in March  2004,
      well before the date of  the  appellant's  appeal  was  heard  by  the
      immigration judge two years later  in  March  2006,  could  have  been
      called to give evidence at the appellant's appeal but he was  not.  As
      Mr Henderson accepted, there has been no notice as  required  by  Rule
      32. There have been two directions  hearings  since  the  first  stage
      reconsideration hearing but no request was made to  widen  the  agreed
      scope of the reconsideration hearing that was to follow.

  13. A formal application to widen the scope  of  the  reconsideration  was
      made to the Tribunal for the first time only on the first day of  what
      had been set down as a five day hearing. Mr  Henderson  made  no  such
      application, nor did he give any indication that he intended to,  when
      he appeared for the appellant, instructed by the Refugee Legal Centre,
      at the directions hearing on 14th May 2007. At  that  hearing  it  was
      with the agreement of both parties that the  Tribunal  reaffirmed  the
      direction that the issues before the Tribunal were to be determined on
      the basis of the facts as found by the immigration judge.  It  is  now
      said  to  be  a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  appellant's   former
      representatives that the brother  was  not  called  to  give  evidence
      earlier, but this has not been put to them for comment as required  by
      BT (Former solicitors' alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311.

  14. The findings of fact made by the immigration judge are  unaffected  by
      the error of law that has led to the need  for  a  reconsideration  of
      this appeal. In those  circumstances,  following  DK  (Serbia),  those
      findings ought not to be revisited.

  15. There are other compelling reasons not to depart from  this  approach.
      Generally, where there is an earlier determination of a  person  other
      than the appellant in respect of which there  is  an  overlap  of  the
      factual basis of the claim, regard  should  be  had  to  that  earlier
      determination as a starting point in  the  assessment  of  the  issues
      resolved  in  that  earlier  determination.  This  is  the  effect  of
      Deevaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00282, TK (Georgia) [2004]  UKIAT  00149  and
      Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1276. On the other hand it is clear from
      Ocampo that there is no concept of res judicata or issue  estoppel  in
      asylum appeals. But the adjudicator who  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
      appellant's  brother  did  so  on  evidence  that  was   significantly
      different from that put before the immigration judge who  rejected  as
      untrue the factual account of this appellant.

  16. Since the date of the hearing the Court of Appeal  has  explained  and
      followed Ocampo in AA (Somalia) & AH (Iran) v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
      1040. This makes clear  that,  where  there  is  an  earlier  decision
      relating to another person but in respect of which there is a material
      overlap of evidence, findings of  fact  upon  issues  common  to  both
      should not be revisited unless there is good  reason  to  do  so.  The
      Court of Appeal's prospective hearing of this case was referred to  at
      a preliminary hearing in respect of this appeal that took place on 4th
      May 2007.as potentially having relevance to this appeal. Although this
      was heard by the Court of Appeal on 18th July 2007 the  judgement  did
      not become available until 25th October. We  have  received  from  the
      appellant's representatives a letter dated 2nd November 2007 in  which
      their submissions as to the effect of AA and AH are set out.  We  have
      had regard to those submissions. We considered whether we should  seek
      further submissions from the parties in respect of AA & AH but decided
      not to. For the  reasons  that  follow,  this  would  not  assist  the
      appellant and would only serve to delay further  the  promulgation  of
      this determination.

  17. It is of fundamental importance to keep firmly in  mind  that  we  are
      concerned here not simply with an appeal but with the  reconsideration
      of an appeal. The reconsideration is necessary because it was an error
      of law for the immigration judge to apply flawed country  guidance  to
      his  unchallenged  (at  least  until  recently)  findings   of   fact.
      Importantly, the immigration judge, in reaching  those  findings,  had
      taken account of the fact that the appellant's  brother,  although  he
      had not been called  to  give  evidence,  had  been  recognised  as  a
      refugee: see paragraph 9 of the determination.

  18. Hooper LJ, in giving what was a dissenting judgement  in  AA(Somalia),
      set out what was said by the Tribunal below in AA:
           "... and the fact that a previous court or other  decision-maker
           has reached a view on facts which are in issue  in  the  present
           appeal is not of itself any evidence as to those facts.  On  the
           other hand, in the general interests of good administration,  it
           is  probably  true  to  say  that  decisions   should   not   be
           unnecessarily  divergent.  It  is   that   principle   of   good
           administration which, so far as we can see,  provides  the  sole
           basis in logic or on authority for saying that the result of the
           previous litigation may be relevant in the present appeal.
            What then is its relevance? It can surely only  be  this:  that
           the previous decision can be taken as establishing the issue  in
           question  unless  there  is  any  reason  not  to  take  it   as
           establishing that  issue  in  question.  It  has  no  evidential
           effect. It does not even give  rise  to  a  presumption.  It  is
           simply a starting point. That is, indeed, what  was  decided  in
           TK, as we have seen. ... [T]he old decision remains, but only as
           long as there is no reason for displacing it."
  19. But here, as we have explained, there are good reasons for  displacing
      the earlier findings. Further, we are reconsidering  the  decision  of
      the immigration judge and not hearing the appeal afresh.  Carnwath  LJ
      said in AA (Somalia) that the applicable principles:


           "... reflect the well-established  principle  of  administrative
           law that "persons should be uniformly treated  unless  there  is
           some valid reason to treat them differently."

  20. We heard from Mr Walker, who  was  the  only  witness  called  by  the
      respondent to give oral evidence and whose  evidence  we  consider  in
      detail below, that the respondent does not agree with the decision  of
      the adjudicator who allowed the brother's appeal. He said  that  leave
      should  have  been  sought  to  appeal  to  the   IAT   because   that
      determination is materially legally flawed. But leave was not  sought.
      The respondent's present view of the  validity  of  the  adjudicator's
      decision  plays  no  part  in  our  decision  on  the  scope  of   the
      reconsideration now before us.

  21. The appellant's brother arrived in the United Kingdom as long  ago  as
      December 1997. He has not returned to Zimbabwe since then. The MDC did
      not come into existence until 1999, (even though the appellant claimed
      at  her  interview  that  her  father  was  a  member  in  1998).  The
      appellant's brother has described becoming an active MDC supporter  in
      the United Kingdom.  He has no first hand knowledge of the  activities
      the appellant says her father engaged in on behalf of the MDC.  It  is
      readily apparent from the evidence in and  the  determination  of  the
      appeal of the appellant's brother, which the appellant has  chosen  to
      put before us as an exhibit to her brothers statement dated 25th  June
      2007, that an examination of that material and a comparison  with  the
      appellant's  evidence  demonstrates  significant  contradictions   and
      inconsistencies. These relate mainly to the chronology  of  events  in
      respect of which, had they occurred, it would be reasonable to  expect
      a consistent account to be given.

  22. But  it  is  not  on  this  basis  that  we  rejected  Mr  Henderson's
      application to broaden the scope of the reconsideration as  identified
      at the first stage of the reconsideration process,  but  for  all  the
      reasons set out above.

Issues

  23. At the directions hearing on 14th May 2007  it  was  agreed  that  the
      issues to be determined are whether, on the basis of the  findings  of
      fact made by the immigration judge and set out between  paragraphs  13
      and 18 of the determination dated 31st  March  2006,  upon  return  to
      Zimbabwe: (i) the appellant faces a well founded fear  of  persecution
      for a reason  recognised  by  the  Refugee  Convention;  or  (ii)  the
      appellant faces a real risk of being subjected to serious harm so that
      she qualifies for the grant of humanitarian protection; or (iii)   the
      appellant faces a real risk of being subjected to ill  treatment  such
      as to infringe her rights under Article 3 of ECHR.


  24. The findings of fact made by the immigration judge and  preserved  for
      the purposes  of  reconsideration  are  that  this  appellant  has  no
      possible adverse personal profile other than as a consequence  of  her
      failed asylum claim. Thus, the two real issues  to  be  addressed  are
      whether the appellant would be at risk on return on account of  having
      made an unsuccessful claim for asylum in the United  Kingdom,  whether
      her return was voluntary or involuntary  and,  secondly,  whether  the
      general country conditions are  themselves  sufficiently  poor  as  to
      enable the appellant to resist removal to  Zimbabwe  on  that  account
      alone.

  25. At a preliminary hearing on 14th May 2007 the Tribunal made an  agreed
      direction in relation to the general issue of risk on  return  in  the
      following terms:

           "In terms of evidence the Tribunal takes as its  starting  point
           the  record  and  summary  of  evidence  as  set  out   in   the
           determination of  the  Tribunal  in  AA  (Risk  for  involuntary
           returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061 ("AA(2)"), read in the
           light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in AA (Zimbabwe)  v
           SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 149."

  26. The Tribunal has made an order under section 11  of  the  Contempt  of
      Court Act 1981 that prevents the disclosure of the identity of most of
      the sources of the material which we take into account and to which we
      refer in this determination.  Where  we  refer  to  a  witness  or  an
      organisation by name that is because they have  not  sought  anonymity
      and are content to be identified.

   History of the AA litigation


  27. A moratorium on enforced returns to Zimbabwe in respect of  all  those
      having no right to remain, including those who had not made an  asylum
      claim, was introduced in January 2002 after a newspaper report of  ill
      treatment of a failed asylum  seeker  removed  to  Zimbabwe.  Removals
      recommenced on 16th November 2004.


  28. In a determination promulgated on 11th May 2005 the Tribunal  assessed
      the evidence relating to the treatment of asylum deportees on  arrival
      in Zimbabwe, as well as identifying risk categories for  returnees  to
      Zimbabwe in general, in SM and Others (MDC - Internal  flight  -  risk
      categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100.  The  Tribunal  found,  at
      paragraph 42, that:


           "... returnees are  regarded  with  contempt  and  suspicion  on
           return and do face a very hostile  atmosphere.  This  by  itself
           does not indicate  that  all  returnees  are  at  real  risk  of
           persecution..."


      And at paragraph 51(i) the Tribunal concluded that:


           "There is no general risk for failed asylum seekers of a  breach
           of article 3 as a result of the current hostility  towards  such
           returnees."


  29. But on 7th July 2005 the respondent suspended the  involuntary  return
      of failed asylum seekers once more after reports appeared in the press
      of such returnees being mistreated by the authorities in Zimbabwe  and
      after judicial review proceedings were  brought  in  the  High  Court.
      Those proceedings were stayed until the Tribunal gave country guidance
      in AA(1).


  30. The appellant in AA(1) was also a person who  was  found  to  have  no
      relevant profile on return to Zimbabwe other than  that  he  had  been
      refused asylum after putting forward a claim to be at risk in Zimbabwe
      that was found to be untruthful. Before the Tribunal he relied  solely
      on the fact of having made an unsuccessful asylum claim. The  Tribunal
      made clear, at paragraph 36, how it viewed such a claim:

           "It will be  seen  at  once  that  his  argument  is  distinctly
           unattractive.  This country, like any  other  signatory  to  the
           Refugee Convention, takes a pride in giving  proper  shelter  to
           those who seek its protection having fled from  persecution,  or
           fear of persecution, elsewhere.  The Appellant  is  not  such  a
           person.  If his argument is successful, there is a risk that any
           Zimbabwean can obtain the protection of the  Refugee  Convention
           simply by coming to the United Kingdom and claiming asylum, even
           though  there  is  no  merit  at  all  in  his  claim.   If  the
           Appellant's claim is right, residence as a refugee in the United
           Kingdom and all the  benefits,  whether  by  standard  of  life,
           employment, social security,  or  health  services,  which  such
           residence offers are potentially  open  to  any  Zimbabwean  who
           could manage to get here and who is prepared  to  indulge  in  a
           cynical manipulation of the asylum  system.   No  court  in  any
           country that is a party to the Refugee Convention would wish  to
           see the Convention abused in that way."

  31. But, in allowing the appellant's appeal, the Tribunal recognised  that
      in assessing risk on return the  appellant's  motives  in  making  his
      claim were immaterial. The question to be addressed was simply whether
      the evidence established the  existence  of  such  a  real  risk.  The
      Tribunal concluded that:


           "... on the evidence before us the process by which  the  United
           Kingdom authorities enforces the involuntary return of  rejected
           asylum seekers to Zimbabwe  exposes  them  to  a  risk  of  ill-
           treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  CIO  [Central   Intelligence
           Organisation]."


  32. The Court of Appeal  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  that
      decision: AA and LK v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 401. This was  because  the
      Tribunal was said to have been wrong to say that the body of  evidence
      all went one way and wrong also to say that  the  respondent  had  not
      relied on any evidence  that  individual  Zimbabwean  returned  failed
      asylum seekers had not been ill treated.  The Tribunal was  said  also
      to have misapplied a concession made on behalf of the respondent as to
      the reason  for  any  persecution  that  might  occur.  The  Tribunal,
      although applying the decision of the Court of Appeal in Mbanza v SSHD
      [1996] Imm AR 136, upholding R v IAT ex  parte  Senga  (unreported,  9
      March 1994) upon which it regarded itself as bound, was found to  have
      erred also in not making any finding  as  to  whether  the  appellant,
      should he pass through the airport, would be at risk on return to  his
      home area in Zimbabwe. The Court of Appeal explained that an appellant
      is not a refugee if he was able to make a safe return voluntarily even
      if he would be at risk if returned forcibly.   This  was  because,  in
      such circumstances, he was not  outside  his  country  of  nationality
      owing to a well founded fear of persecution but because he  chose  not
      to return to it.


  33. At a hearing commencing on 3rd July 2006 the Tribunal considered  AA's
      case afresh. Its determination was promulgated on 2nd August  2006  as
      AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00061
      ("AA(2)"). The Tribunal had before it all the evidence  that  was  put
      before the Tribunal in  AA(1)  and  a  good  deal  more  besides.  The
      Tribunal heard oral evidence from a country expert, Professor  Terence
      Ranger, three witnesses who had worked at the old  airport  at  Harare
      before it was replaced by a newer, larger one and two  witness  called
      by  the  respondent  who  were  able  to  give  evidence   about   the
      respondent's  policy  and  procedures  for   enforcing   removals   of
      Zimbabwean asylum seekers whose claims had failed.  The  Tribunal  had
      also a large array of documentary evidence about country conditions in
      Zimbabwe and the evidence of a number of NGOs who may or  may  not  be
      expected to be aware of whether there was systematic ill treatment  of
      deportees from the United Kingdom.

  34. The Tribunal in AA(2) carried out a detailed analysis of the  evidence
      relating to 39 individual returnees and then set out  its  conclusions
      as follows:

"
       244. A person who is returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe having  made
            an unsuccessful asylum claim in the  United  Kingdom  does  not
            face on return a real risk of being subjected to persecution or
            serious ill-treatment on that account alone. That is so whether
            or not the removal is escorted. Each case must be considered on
            its own facts. We reaffirm  the  country  guidance  in  SM  and
            Others (MDC - internal flight-  risk categories) CG [2005]UKIAT
            00100. The evidence before us demonstrates that those  at  risk
            upon  return  to  Zimbabwe  continue  to  fall  into  the  risk
            categories identified and set out in SM.  This  is  subject  to
            what we say about those whose military history discloses issues
            that  will  lead  to  further  investigation  by  the  security
            services upon return to Harare Airport and those in respect  of
            whom there are outstanding and unresolved criminal issues.


       245. There continue to be three  flights  a  week  from  the  United
            Kingdom to Harare Airport. These  are  generally  fully  booked
            with ordinary travellers who pass freely and without difficulty
            in and out of Zimbabwe. Anyone who  is  indistinguishable  from
            the ordinary traveller will not have any difficulty in  passing
            through the airport. A person  who  has  made  an  unsuccessful
            claim for asylum but who makes  a  voluntary  return,  with  or
            without the assistance of an IOM reintegration package, will be
            indistinguishable from the ordinary traveller unless  there  is
            reason to believe that he  will  be  identified  on  return  as
            falling within one of the risk categories we have identified.


       246. A person who has made an  unsuccessful  asylum  claim  and  has
            exhausted his rights of appeal will still be able to arrange  a
            voluntary return until  he  is  detained  for  the  purpose  of
            removal. After he has been  detained  for  removal  his  travel
            documents will be held by the airline staff even if the  person
            being removed is co-operative and compliant.


       247. All those returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe will be identified
            as deportees as the respondent  has  no  plans  to  change  the
            method of removal. This will mean that the returnee will either
            be escorted, in which case the escort will  hand  the  passport
            over to the authorities at Harare Airport or, if not  escorted,
            the travel documents will be retained by airline staff who will
            hand them over to the authorities at Harare  Airport.  Although
            the airline staff has discretion  with  regard  to  the  travel
            documents,  the  evidence  does  not  indicate  that   in   any
            significant number of cases the deportee is allowed  possession
            of the documents before disembarking.


       248. All persons  identified  as  deportees  will  be  diverted  for
            questioning by CIO officers  who  are  required  to  produce  a
            report in respect of all persons who have been forcibly removed
            to Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom, whether  escorted  on  the
            plane or not. There is no indication that  the  authorities  in
            Zimbabwe have any means to distinguish  between  deportees  who
            have made an unsuccessful asylum claim in  the  United  Kingdom
            and those who have been removed simply  because  they  have  no
            leave to remain.


       249. The purpose of the initial interview is  to  establish  whether
            the deportee is of any interest to  the  CIO  or  the  security
            services. The deportee  will  be  of  interest  if  questioning
            reveals that the deportee has a  political  profile  considered
            adverse to the Zimbabwean regime.  Further  interrogation  away
            from the airport may also follow if enquiries reveal aspects of
            a military history to be  followed  up  such  as  being  absent
            without leave or being involved in military activities  outside
            Zimbabwe. Also, the CIO will refer to the police any issues  of
            outstanding criminal matters such as arrest warrants. There  is
            no evidence that the fact alone of a past criminal  conviction,
            as opposed to an unresolved allegation of criminal activity  or
            an outstanding arrest  warrant,  will  give  rise  to  such  an
            interest.   There is also no evidence that the simple fact that
            a returnee has in the past served in the Zimbabwean  army  will
            prevent the passage of a returnee  through  the  airport  after
            this first stage enquiry.


       250. If such a political or relevant military profile is  suspected,
            or if there are outstanding criminal matters  to  be  resolved,
            the deportee will be taken away by the relevant branch  of  the
            CIO for interrogation. The evidence does not suggest  that  the
            CIO has any interest in manufacturing or  fabricating  evidence
            to create suspicion that is otherwise absent.


       251. This second stage interrogation carries with it a real risk  of
            serious mistreatment  sufficient  to  constitute  a  breach  of
            article 3. If the reason for suspicion is that the deportee has
            a political profile considered to be adverse to the  Zimbabwean
            regime that is likely to be sufficient to give rise to  a  real
            risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  for  a  reason  that   is
            recognised by the Refugee Convention. That will not necessarily
            be the case where the only matter of  interest  is  a  relevant
            military history or outstanding criminal issues. Each case must
            be considered on its particular facts.


       252.  A deportee from the United Kingdom who, having been  subjected
            to the first stage interview at the airport, is allowed to pass
            through the airport  is  likely  to  be  the  subject  of  some
            monitoring in his home area by the local  police  or  the  CIO.
            This monitoring may take the form of being required  to  report
            to  the  local  police  station  for  questioning  or  may   be
            significantly lower key such that the subject may not  even  be
            aware of it. If nothing untoward is discovered the  authorities
            will lose interest and the monitoring will cease. It  may  take
            some considerable time, certainly a period  of  months,  before
            the monitoring ceases.


       253. The objective evidence does suggest that the police and the CIO
            are capable of acting in a  seriously  abusive  manner  towards
            those they perceive to be dissident or in some way an enemy  of
            the state but the evidence does not support the assertion  that
            there is a real risk of persecutory ill-treatment for those who
            are being monitored solely because of  their  return  from  the
            United Kingdom.


       254. The general country conditions are extremely  difficult.  There
            is some evidence that newcomers to an area, and not necessarily
            just newcomers from abroad, are watched and might attract  some
            interest. That evidence does not establish  a  real  risk  that
            persecutory ill-treatment will follow as a result. There is  no
            evidence of societal disapproval of those who have been abroad,
            whether to claim asylum or not. The returnee  may  or  may  not
            have a home to which he can return and relatives to whom he can
            turn for support. Very many Zimbabweans, perhaps most, have  to
            deal  as  best  they  can  with  food   shortages   and   other
            difficulties  arising  from  the  collapsed   economy.    Those
            difficulties will  not  generally  be  sufficiently  severe  to
            enable an appellant to rely upon article 3 to resist removal.


       255. A  failed  asylum  seeker  can  chose  to  return  to  Zimbabwe
            voluntarily, with or without the assistance of IOM and where he
            will  face  no  real  risk  of  harm   because   he   will   be
            indistinguishable from the  ordinary  traveller.  It  might  be
            argued that a person may face a real risk of  persecutory  ill-
            treatment on an involuntary return to Zimbabwe because of  what
            might emerge from the interview that would take place following
            an involuntary return  but  would  not  following  a  voluntary
            return. In those circumstances he will not be able  to  succeed
            in an asylum appeal unless he can demonstrate  that  a  similar
            risk exists should he agree to return  voluntarily.   This  was
            considered by the Court of Appeal in  this  case  who  said  at
            paragraph 99 that:


                 "...a person who can voluntarily return in safety  to  the
                 country   of   his   nationality   is   not   a   refugee,
                 notwithstanding that on a forced return  he  would  be  at
                 risk. Such a person is not outside his home State owing to
                 a well-founded fear of persecution. Neither s 84(1)(g)  of
                 the Act of 2002 nor Article 33 of the Convention can begin
                 to demonstrate the contrary, since  neither  enlarges  the
                 "refugee" definition; and a  safe  voluntary  returnee  is
                 outside the definition."


       256. The Court of Appeal did not deal with the question of whether a
            person who can voluntarily  return  in  safety  can  rely  upon
            article 3 to resist an involuntary return. It is not necessary,
            in order to decide this appeal, for us to address that  either.
            It may be that such a person cannot succeed under article 3. He
            has chosen in  those  circumstances  to  expose  himself  to  a
            claimed risk unnecessarily. It would be his decision to  do  so
            that would expose him to that risk  and  not  the  act  of  the
            United Kingdom in returning him compulsorily as  a  consequence
            of his refusal to return voluntarily. In any event,  a  refusal
            to exercise a voluntary return option, in  the  knowledge  that
            the only  alternative  is  a  forced  return,   may  be  cogent
            evidence that the returnee himself is satisfied  that  no  such
            real risk exists on a compulsory return."

  35. But the Court of Appeal has upheld part of the  appellant's  challenge
      to those conclusions and has ordered reconsideration  to  the  limited
      extent indicated: AA (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 149.


  36.  The  Court  of  Appeal   remitted   AA(2)   for   further,   limited,
      reconsideration because it considered that the Tribunal in  AA(2)  did
      not deal adequately with the  evidence  of  two  important  witnesses,
      identified as witnesses 5 and 6 ("W5" and "W6"), these being  the  two
      witnesses who had worked with military intelligence, one of whom,  W6,
      was based at the old Harare airport. Although neither  had  worked  at
      the new airport and had both left Zimbabwe some years ago,  they  both
      said they were able to describe current procedures at the new  airport
      because they had remained in contact with former colleagues who worked
      at the new airport.

  37. It is, of course, important to identify  clearly  the  extent  of  the
      reconsideration of AA(2) required by the Court of Appeal and so we set
      out what was said in this regard by May LJ:
        1. The case advanced on behalf of AA in this appeal is both general
           and particular. The general case is that it was  not  rationally
           open to the Tribunal on the evidence as a  whole  to  find  that
           there  was  a  two-stage  screening  interview  process  at  the
           airport, and that the first stage was to be  regarded  as  risk-
           free  for  those  without  an  adverse  political   profile,   a
           questionable military history or outstanding  criminal  matters.
           The direct experience of W5 and W6 was out of date. It ended  in
           1998 and 1996 respectively. It was at a time when there were few
           returning asylum seekers from the United Kingdom. It  was  at  a
           different and less spacious  airport.  The  Tribunal's  findings
           were incompatible with what is known about  Zimbabwe  generally,
           with  what  is  known  about  how  the  CIO  operates,  and  the
           experiences of a significant number of the individual  returnees
           properly  considered.  It  is   said   that,   in   contemporary
           circumstances, the division of the procedure into two stages was
           illusory. It  was  extrapolated  from  evidence  which  did  not
           include suspicion of the person returning  to  Zimbabwe.  Now  a
           failed asylum seeker returning from the United Kingdom would  be
           regarded with suspicion and  hostility  and  would  probably  be
           revealed to be a failed asylum seeker. In  these  circumstances,
           interrogation by intelligence services, whom W6 regarded  as  no
           longer  professional,  for  a  period  of  several  hours   must
           constitute a real risk of serious ill-treatment in the light  of
           the evidence as a whole.
        1. We are not persuaded that this general case alone predicates  an
           error of law sufficient to sustain this  ground  of  appeal.  We
           have carefully considered the written and oral  evidence  of  W5
           and W6. Their direct experience was not contemporary,  but  they
           both had contacts in Zimbabwe.  Their  evidence  did  sustain  a
           finding of a two-stage process.  Apart  from  particular  points
           about their evidence, which we consider below,  and  subject  to
           possible further consideration of the evidence  and  information
           about individual returnees in the light of the particular points
           and generally, we consider that it was open to the  Tribunal  to
           make the factual evaluative judgment in this respect which  they
           did.
        1. The particular part of this ground of appeal is,  however,  more
           persuasive. Those advising AA  considered  that  the  Tribunal's
           written determination had failed to take account of parts of the
           evidence  of  W5  and  W6  which   supported   the   case   that
           involuntarily returning failed asylum seekers faced a real  risk
           of  serious  ill-treatment  even  at  a  first  stage  screening
           interview. There was no transcript  of  the  evidence  of  these
           witnesses, but the notes of evidence taken  by  members  of  the
           Tribunal have been provided to us. In summary the relevant parts
           of that evidence are as follows.
        1. W5 said in his statement that his current contact at the airport
           told him that all returned asylum seekers were  handed  over  to
           the CIO who carried out thorough questioning  and  then  decided
           what should be done. In re-examination, as noted by the Chairman
           and another member  of  the  Tribunal,  he  explained  that  the
           thorough questioning, as he understood it, involved the  use  of
           crude techniques, which he referred to as coercion.
        1. W6 also explained in oral evidence what happened at the  airport
           in the screening interview. As noted  by  the  Chairman  of  the
           Tribunal, he said "there was  abuse  at  the  airport;  kicking,
           beating, not torture". The note made by another  member  of  the
           Tribunal was to the same effect, but noticeably that was when W6
           worked at the airport. He left, he said, because  of  corruption
           in government and things going the wrong  way.  These  days,  he
           said,  the  Zimbabwe  Intelligence  Services  were   no   longer
           professional.
        1. This evidence of W5 and W6 as to  significant  violence  at  the
           airport did not stand alone. It was reflected  in  some  of  the
           complaints made by or  on  behalf  of  some  of  the  individual
           returnees, and in our judgment it should have been addressed. Mr
           Kovats accepts that the Tribunal's decision says  nothing  about
           hitting and kicking at the airport. The  reference  to  thorough
           questioning  is  quoted,  but  there  is  no  reference  to  the
           explanation by the witness of what he understood those words  to
           mean. Whether or not there was violence at the airport  was,  in
           the context of this case and in the context  of  the  Tribunal's
           own conclusions as  outlined  above,  an  important  issue.  Not
           having heard the  evidence,  we  are  unable  to  say  with  any
           confidence how, if this had been addressed, it may have affected
           the evaluation as  a  whole.  It  might  thus  be  seen,  as  we
           indicated earlier, as pivotal. It could have been  determinative
           of the  appeal,  as  is  apparent  from  the  structure  of  the
           Tribunal's judgment.
           ...
        1. However, the question whether  failed  asylum  seekers  with  no
           adverse political  profile  or  relevant  military  or  criminal
           attributes returning involuntarily to Zimbabwe face a real  risk
           of inhuman or degrading treatment is obviously a finely balanced
           one. We have indicated that, in our view, a  reconsideration  of
           the evidence of W5 and W6 might tip the balance. Since we regard
           the evaluation of this evidence about procedures at the  airport
           as pivotal, and since it is  intrinsically  bound  up  with  the
           general evidence about the attitude and practice of the CIO,  we
           shall not embark on an analysis of the  Tribunal's  handling  of
           that evidence in isolation. We note in particular, however,  the
           submissions in paragraphs 97 to 102 of AA's skeleton argument to
           the effect that the Tribunal failed to take explicit account  of
           the evidence of W1 and W2 as to physical ill-treatment of  those
           questioned by the CIO.
        1. Reconsideration of the evidence of W5 and W6  may  also  require
           reconsideration, in the light of all the evidence, of the impact
           which the evidence  and  information  about  the  39  individual
           returnees, taken as a whole and with  the  other  evidence,  may
           have on the appeal. We say this for two reasons. First, ground 5
           of  the  present  appeal  seeks  to  challenge  the   Tribunal's
           conclusions about three of the individual returnees.
        1. There were two inconsistent accounts of R4's treatment  when  he
           was removed in January 2005. According  to  the  first,  he  was
           intensively questioned, then released; according to the  second,
           he was beaten by the CIO during  intensive  questioning  at  the
           airport. The Tribunal regarded the second account as  unreliable
           for evaluative reasons which are by themselves  sustainable,  if
           their earlier conclusions about procedures at  the  airport  are
           also   sustainable,   but   which    otherwise    may    require
           reconsideration. One of their reasons was that the first account
           given by R4 was consistent with the evidence they  had  received
           concerning procedures at the  airport.  If,  as  we  think,  the
           Tribunal's conclusion about procedures at the  airport  requires
           reconsideration, so too may their conclusion about R4.
        1. Second and  generally,  the  Tribunal's  conclusions  about  the
           individual accounts taken as a whole (see paragraphs 229  ff  to
           which we have already referred) drew (in paragraph 231) on their
           earlier conclusions about the  evidence  of  procedures  at  the
           airport. Since,  as  we  think,  the  balance  is  a  fine  one,
           reconsideration of the  evidence  of  W5  and  W6  will  require
           reconsideration also of the relevance of evidence about the risk
           of violence to voluntary and involuntary returnees, who were not
           merely failed asylum seekers, to those of whom AA is taken to be
           representative. We note, for instance, submissions on behalf  of
           AA that the evidence of R25 (W7) and R26 (W8)  was  inconsistent
           with a conclusion that a real risk of serious ill treatment only
           arises when a returnee is taken away from the airport.  R25  and
           R26 were MDC activists (not merely failed asylum seekers)  whose
           evidence complained of serious ill  treatment  and  showed  that
           there  are  sufficient  facilities  to  enable  beatings  to  be
           inflicted  during  questioning  at  the  present   international
           airport.
        1. Ground 5 also seeks to  criticise  the  Tribunal's  findings  in
           relation  to  R19,  but  the  criticism  is  insubstantial.  The
           information about R19 was  extremely  vague  and  there  was  no
           indication at all of the nature of the problem he  was  said  to
           have encountered. That remained  so  with  the  addition  of  Ms
           Harland's  evidence  that  the  problems,  whatever  they  were,
           occurred at the airport.
        1. Criticism of the Tribunal's decision in relation to R31 seems to
           us to have more substance. She was not an asylum seeker and  the
           information about her came from what appears to be  an  internet
           news report. She was a student who had been refused an extension
           of her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  At  the  airport,
           she was, according to a report, subjected to a hostile interview
           during which she was struck across the mouth when she asked  why
           the interviewers would not believe she was just a student. After
           about three hours of interview, she said that she had  an  uncle
           in the Zimbabwean national army. He was contacted  and  she  was
           released. As she left, she could hear the shouts and  groans  of
           two other deportees. In paragraph 205 of its determination,  the
           Tribunal said that the treatment to which this  witness  claimed
           to have been subjected did not amount to  serious  ill-treatment
           such as to engage Article 3. We  have  difficulty  understanding
           why not. We agree that trivial violence to an interviewee  might
           not engage Article 3. But Mr Nicol pointed to what was  said  by
           the European Court of Human Rights in Ribbitsch v Austria (1995)
           21  EHRR  573  at  paragraph  38  about  injuries   deliberately
           inflicted on a person in police custody, as follows:
           "The court emphasises that, in respect of a person  deprived  of
           his liberty, any recourse to physical force which has  not  been
           made strictly necessary by  his  own  conduct  diminishes  human
           dignity and is in principle an infringement of  the  rights  set
           forth in Article 3 (art 3) of the Convention."
           The brief account in relation  to  R31  does  not  give  us  the
           impression  that,  properly  considered  and  in  context,   the
           violence was trivial. In saying this,  we  take  account  of  Mr
           Kovats' submission that the physical violence in  Ribbitsch  was
           gross and that the issue  was  whether  the  injuries  had  been
           sustained accidentally; and that other cases in which the  court
           has found physical mistreatment of those in detention  by  state
           officials went well beyond that complained of  in  the  case  of
           R31. Mr Kovats referred in Ireland v  United  Kingdom  (1978)  2
           EHRR 25, paragraphs 92-130; Tomasi v France (1992)  15  EHRR  1,
           paragraphs 105-115;  Selmouni  v  France  (2000)  29  EHRR  403,
           paragraphs  82-89;  and  Balogh  v  Hungary,  [2004]  ECHR  361,
           application 47940/99 (20 July 2004), paragraphs  10  and  45-46.
           The Tribunal went on to point  out  that  the  news  report  was
           clearly intended to fulfil a journalistic point,  and  that  R31
           could not be identified, so the Secretary of State was unable to
           test the account in any way. That certainly affects  the  weight
           to be given to the evidence. But, unless the account was  to  be
           wholly disregarded, the point  in  relation  to  the  Tribunal's
           perception of the threshold for  Article  3  violence  for  this
           returnee did need to be addressed.
  38. It is common ground that the reconsideration of these  issues  can  be
      conducted in this appeal. The appellants are  not  the  same  but  the
      issues  are.  Both  parties  are  represented  by   the   same   legal
      representatives and both  counsel  have  appeared  throughout  the  AA
      litigation.


Overview of evidence

  39. Apart from one person who was removed  involuntarily  following  AA(2)
      there have been no  such  removals  of  failed  asylum  seekers  since
      November 2004. This means that there is no recent direct  evidence  of
      such removals and so the risk faced by those who might now be forcibly
      removed to Zimbabwe after making an unsuccessful asylum claim must  be
      assessed on the basis of other evidence. That evidence, broadly, falls
      into the following categories. As well as the evidence of Witnesses  5
      and 6 there  is  background  evidence  about  the  country  conditions
      generally. We have the  benefit  of  expert  evidence  from  Professor
      Ranger and witness 66. That evidence assists the Tribunal in  that  it
      provides an opinion as to  what  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  the
      objective evidence by those who are said to be well informed and so in
      a position to express such an opinion. There  is  also  evidence  from
      other informed sources who do not hold themselves out to  be  experts.
      This category of evidence includes what is said  by  the  NGOs,  staff
      working at the British Embassy in Harare and  journalists  and  others
      who maintain an interest in Zimbabwean affairs. The respondent  relies
      also upon the evidence of Mr Walker, a Senior Executive Officer in the
      Country Specific Asylum Policy Team of the Asylum Policy,  Border  and
      Immigration Agency and upon the information collected by the IOM.


  40. We  have  regard  also  to  the  evidence  concerning  the  individual
      returnees, which has been updated by  further  enquiries  made  by  Ms
      Sarah Harland of the Zimbabwe Association.

  41. Without making this determination needlessly long we cannot separately
      analyse all the evidence that has been put before us but  in  reaching
      our conclusions we have, of course, had regard to  all  the  evidence,
      paying particular attention to that to which we have been specifically
      referred.

The legal test in assessing risk.

  42. The Court of Appeal approved the test applied in AA(2) as was set  out
      at paragraph 31 of that determination:


           "The issue is whether the evidence establishes a real risk.  The
           Appellant does not need to show a  certainty  or  a  probability
           that all failed asylum seekers returned involuntarily will  face
           serious ill-treatment upon return. He needs to  show  only  that
           there is a consistent pattern of such treatment such that anyone
           returning in those circumstances faces a real risk of coming  to
           harm even though  not  everyone  does.  So,  is  there  evidence
           pointing to a substantial number of  cases  in  the  context  of
           general evidence  showing  that  involuntarily  returned  failed
           asylum seekers are at real risk of being  subjected  to  serious
           ill treatment on that account alone?"

      This does not mean, of course, that the assessment of risk  is  to  be
      based solely upon our assessment of the evidence concerning those  who
      have been subjected to enforced return in the past. That is just  part
      of the overall picture. As  there  is  no  current  evidence  of  what
      happens to  asylum  deportees,  inferences  must  be  drawn  from  the
      evidence as a whole. As the Tribunal said in AA(1):


           "... the Appellant needs to establish a real  risk  to  returned
           asylum seekers. He does not need to show  that  all,  or  nearly
           all, returned asylum seekers are harmed. He needs only  to  show
           that all returned asylum seekers are at real  risk.  He  can  do
           that, as a matter of logic (and in our judgement as a matter  of
           law) by any evidence that properly leads to  the  conclusion  in
           question."

   The existing country guidance: SM and  Others  (MDC-internal  flight-risk
   categories) CG [2005] UKIAT 00100.


  43. Having heard evidence from Professor Ranger the Tribunal in  SM  found
      that the evidence established  that  those  identified  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe as persons who had been  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom
      would be subject to interrogation:


      "41.  The Tribunal accepts from his evidence and from the news reports
           in Zimbabwe that those deported  to  Zimbabwe  from  the  United
           Kingdom will be subject to  interrogation  on  return.   In  the
           light of the interest and comment the resumption of returns  has
           raised in the government press in Zimbabwe it seems to us to  be
           inevitable that this will be the case.  If it is being  asserted
           by the Zimbabwe government that returns  are  being  used  as  a
           cloak for British agents and saboteurs to be smuggled  into  the
           country, it is likely  that  those  returns  will  be  carefully
           monitored whether for that reason or to identify and  intimidate
           opponents to the regime.   The  reports  in  the  newspapers  in
           Zimbabwe are  consistent  with  there  being  an  atmosphere  of
           suspicion to those returned.   The returnee in the New  Zimbabwe
           report was released following a telephone call made to an  uncle
           serving in the army but only after  an  intimidating  interview.
           We take into account that before returns  were  suspended  there
           was some evidence that returnees were investigated.  We have our
           doubts about the story of  the  returnee  in  the  article  from
           January 2002 and his escape out of an airport lavatory window at
           Harare and his subsequent travel to South  Africa,  but  in  any
           event we are concerned with returns at  the  present  time.   We
           also approach with caution the reports that a number  of  recent
           returnees have never re-appeared once they were taken  from  the
           plane by CIO agents and that others have disappeared.   No names
           or details have been provided and if, as Professor  Ranger  says
           the returns have been carefully monitored, we would have thought
           such details would be available.


       42. Nonetheless the Tribunal  is  satisfied  in  the  light  of  the
           statements made by the Zimbabwean authorities that returnees are
           regarded with contempt and suspicion on return  and  do  face  a
           very hostile atmosphere.   This by itself does not indicate that
           all returnees are at real risk of persecution but that returnees
           are liable to have their background and circumstances  carefully
           scrutinised by the authorities.  We are satisfied that those who
           are suspected of being politically active with the MDC would  be
           at real risk.  We  agree  with  Professor  Ranger  that  if  the
           authorities  have  any  reason  to  believe  that   someone   is
           politically  active  the  interrogation  will  be  followed  up.
           There is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  this  will
           include   treatment   sufficiently   serious   to   amount    to
           persecution."


  44. Two observations might be made concerning that extract from SM. First,
      Professor Ranger  has  identified  the  first  returnee  mentioned  in
      paragraph 41 above as the person referred to in these  proceedings  as
      witness 8 or returnee 26. The individual who  was  released  following
      the intervention of her uncle is Returnee 31.

  45. Secondly, as we shall see, the word "interrogation" when used  in  the
      context of the CIO in Zimbabwe has acquired a very particular  meaning
      and is quite different from what is referred to as an interview. It is
      clear to us that the Tribunal in SM did  not  intend  to  import  that
      meaning into the process of interrogation referred  to  above  and  so
      this is not a finding that all those questioned by the CIO  on  return
      to Zimbabwe will be questioned in a manner that can be expected to  be
      accompanied by violence.

   The background country evidence


  46. In AA(2) the Tribunal described  the  general  country  conditions  in
      Zimbabwe as poor and deteriorating. That deterioration has  continued.
      This is acknowledged by Mr Kovats who sets out  this  summary  in  his
      skeleton argument:


           "The population of Zimbabwe is about 13 million:  18  June  2007
           Home Office Border and  Immigration  Agency  Country  of  Origin
           Information Report on Zimbabwe ("COIR") paragraph  1.04  [R178].
           It has been estimated that about 3.4 million of them  have  left
           the country, most to South Africa: 1 July 2007 Observer  article
           [A vol.A 770].


           ...


           Inflation is spiralling out of  control,  and  the  currency  is
           effectively worthless: COIS  [R175].  A  United  Nations  report
           published on 14 June  2007  predicted  that  the  country  would
           collapse within 6 months:  COIR  [R175].  The  shops  have  been
           emptied by panic buying: 5 July 2007 Guardian article  [A  vol.F
           774]. On 5 April 2007 the Catholic bishops of Zimbabwe issued  a
           pastoral letter which was a damning indictment of the Zimbabwean
           government [A vol.A 403-406]. On 10 July 2007 the  BBC  reported
           Archbishop Ncube as saying that the situation  had  become  life
           threatening. It has been said that only remittances from  abroad
           and revenue from platinum mining keep the  country  going:  COIR
           paragraph 2.08 R181-R182]; 8 July 2007 Times  article  [A  vol.A
           780].


           The unemployment rate is 80%: COIR paragraph 7.02 [R197]. 80% of
           Zimbabweans live on less than US$1 a day:  COIR  paragraph  2.08
           [R181].


           The judicial system bows to the executive: COIR paragraph  13.13
           [R254-R255].


           The public health service has collapsed: COIR  paragraphs  29.01
           [R327] ICRC [A vol.A  576].  Zimbabwe  has  the  world's  lowest
           female life expectancy, 34 years: COIR paragraph  25.01  [R304].
           One in 12 children dies before the  age  of  5:  COIR  paragraph
           26.05 [R312]. There  are  1.8  million  orphans  and  vulnerable
           children, largely as a result  of  AIDS:  COIR  paragraph  26.20
           [R316]. Approximately 1.6 million  Zimbabweans  are  HIV+:  COIR
           paragraph 29.26 [R333]. About 3,000 are
dying from AIDS every week: COIR paragraph 29.05 [R327-R328]. The BBC has
reported that you need a ZANU-PF card to get treatment at government
hospitals: COIR 29.24 [R332].


           The World Health Organisation estimates  that  about  5  million
           Zimbabweans are unable to meet their minimum food  requirements:
           COIR paragraph 29.01 [R327]. Drought  will  further  reduce  the
           harvest  this  year:   COIR   paragraph   30.22   [R348].   Food
           distribution was used as a political tool in the 2005  election:
           COIR paragraphs 30.28 [R349] and 30.31 [R350].  The  CIO  is  in
           charge of grain distribution: COIR paragraph 11.62 [R233].


           The electricity and water systems are in crisis: COIR  paragraph
           29.04 [R327].


           Around  700,000   people   lost   their   homes   in   Operation
           Murambatsvina, and a total of  about  2.4  million  people  were
           affected, directly or indirectly: COIR paragraphs  31.01  [R352]
           and 31.10 [R354]. About 500,000 farm workers lost their homes in
           the government's land seizure programme:  COIR  paragraph  30.04
           [R343-R344]. There  are  approximately  1.7  million  internally
           displaced people in Zimbabwe: COIR paragraph 33.01  [R361].  75%
           of families deported to rural areas in  Operation  Murambatsvina
           have returned to urban areas [A vol.A  4].  The  report  by  the
           Zimbabwe Peace Project, entitled Partisan Distribution  of  Food
           and other forms of Aid at District Level: the Case of Manicaland
           (September  2006)  [A  vol.A  8-33]  provides  evidence  of  the
           distribution of aid on political grounds but does  not  indicate
           significant discrimination against returnees as such. Only 14 of
           the 74 case studies concerned  persons  who  had  returned  from
           abroad, and of  those  only  1  had  returned  from  the  United
           Kingdom. "


  47. In his skeleton argument Mr Henderson  points  to  evidence  that  the
      purpose of operation Murambatsvina was to drive the  urban  population
      into rural areas under the control of  the  Mugabe  regime  so  as  to
      prevent any uprising in the cities. He refers to a report  from  Human
      Rights Watch published in September 2005 in which it was said:

           "The scale of destruction is unprecedented in Zimbabwe.  Indeed,
           there are few if any precedents of a government so forcibly  and
           brutally displacing so many of its own citizens in peacetime"

  48. In a more recent report, published on 28th March 2007, it is said that
      the suppression and harassment of perceived or potential opponents  of
      the regime continues:


           "The government of Zimbabwe has  permitted  security  forces  to
           commit serious abuses with impunity against opposition activists
           and ordinary Zimbabweans alike, Human Rights Watch  said  today.
           Security  forces  are  responsible  for  arbitrary  arrests  and
           detentions and beatings of opposition  Movement  for  Democratic
           Change (MDC) supporters, civil society activists and the general
           public."


      The deputy Africa director at Human Rights Watch is quoted in the same
      report as saying:


           "The  government  of  Zimbabwe  has   intensified   its   brutal
           suppression of its own citizens in an effort to crush all  forms
           of dissent. The crackdown shows the government has extended  its
           attack on  political  dissent  to  ordinary  Zimbabweans,  which
           should prompt the Southern African Development Community to  act
           quickly."

      Although the  reports  concerning  state  sponsored  violence  against
      Zimbabwean citizens  indicate  that  the  primary  targets  are  those
      perceived to be the ruling party's political  opponents,  this  report
      gives examples of abuse  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the  police  by
      ordinary citizens who were not conducting themselves in a manner  such
      as to identify themselves as political activists:


           "Human  Rights  Watch  recently  spent  two  weeks  in  Zimbabwe
           interviewing  many  victims  of  abuse  and  witnesses  to   the
           political unrest in the cities of Harare, Bulawayo  and  Mutare.
           Witnesses and victims  from  Harare's  high-density  suburbs  of
           Glenview, Highfield and Mufakose told Human  Rights  Watch  that
           for the past few weeks police forces patrolling these  locations
           have randomly and viciously beaten Zimbabweans in  the  streets,
           shopping malls, and in bars and beer halls.


           Police forces have also gone house to house beating people  with
           batons, stealing possessions and accusing them of supporting the
           opposition. The terror caused by  the  police  has  forced  many
           families in the affected areas into a self imposed curfew  after
           dark."

  49. The view that abuse is now being visited by  the  authorities  upon  a
      wider range of victims than those who involve themselves in opposition
      activity is expressed in another more recent Human Rights Watch report
      dated May 2007 entitled "Bashing Dissent": Having  made  reference  to
      the arrest and detention of hundreds of MDC members  following  a  ban
      upon political rallies and  meetings  imposed  in  February  2007  the
      report observes:


           "The arrest and severe beating of these opposition  leaders  and
           civil society activists by police and  state  security  officers
           marked a new low in Zimbabwe's seven-year political  crisis.  It
           ignited a new government campaign  of  violence  and  repression
           against members of  the  opposition  and  civil  society  -  and
           increasingly ordinary Zimbabweans - in the  capital  Harare  and
           elsewhere throughout the  country.  The  ominous  statements  by
           Zimbabwe's President Mugabe on March 17 and 29,  2007  that  the
           opposition members and civil society activists  deserved  to  be
           "bashed" by the  police  highlighted  the  government's  blatant
           disregard for the  basic  human  rights  of  its  citizens  that
           authorities at all levels have shown during Zimbabwe's political
           crisis."


  50. In an Independent On Line report dated 1st June 2007 it is said that:


           "President Robert Mugabe has urged Zimbabwe's security forces to
           remain on high alert to thwart attempts to topple his government
           by the opposition and his western foes, official media  reported
           on Friday"

      President  Mugabe,  addressing  a  ceremony  for   graduating   police
      officers, said:


           "Our security forces have heightened their vigilance in order to
           thwart the subversives manoeuvres of those who engage in  crimes
           of political violence. I wish to call upon people of Zimbabwe to
           unite against the shameless British arm-twisting  tactics  being
           orchestrated through the MDC and the so called civil groups."

  51. That evidence establishes that conditions for the ordinary citizen  of
      Zimbabwe are exceedingly difficult and  those  politically  active  in
      opposition to the regime or who are identified as  active  critics  of
      the regime continue to face a real risk of being subjected to  serious
      ill-treatment if they fall into the  hands  of  the  agencies  of  the
      state. The risk categories identified in SM will need to be  revisited
      in the light of the evidence about the treatment of  those  active  in
      human rights organisations and what are  referred  to  as  the  "civil
      society organisations".


  52. But that is not the main issue in this appeal which is concerned  with
      the question of whether  a  person  identified  on  return  to  Harare
      airport as a failed asylum seeker would face  a  real  risk  of  being
      subjected to serious harm on that account alone. We are concerned also
      with an assessment of the risk faced by such a person after he or  she
      has passed through the airport and returned to his or her home area or
      other place of intended residence.

  53. There is no current evidence of how that class of persons is  treated.
      But in assessing that risk  the  Tribunal  can  look  at  the  current
      country evidence with the assistance of the expert  opinion  available
      in the light of what is known about the experiences of those who  were
      forcibly  returned  to  Zimbabwe,  even  though  those  removals  were
      suspended some time ago. Put another way,  inferences  must  be  drawn
      from what is known to occur today in Zimbabwe as to how failed  asylum
      seekers are likely to be treated, if they are identified as such  upon
      return.

Country conditions and article 3 of the ECHR.

  54.  Before embarking upon that enquiry we consider the argument  advanced
      on the appellant's behalf  that  the  general  country  conditions  in
      Zimbabwe are now so bad that there would be  an  infringement  of  her
      rights under article 3 of the ECHR if she were required to return.


  55. Article 3 of the European Convention provides that:

           "No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading
           treatment or punishment."

  56. In submitting that there would be an  infringement  of  article  3  Mr
      Henderson relies upon what was said by Lord Brown at paragraph  24  of
      his speech in R (Bagdanavicious) v SSHD [2005] UKHL 38. He  said  that
      it was important:


           "to grasp the distinction in non-state agent  cases  between  on
           the one hand the risk of serious harm and on the other hand  the
           risk of treatment contrary to article 3. In cases where the risk
           "emanates  from  intentionally  inflicted  acts  of  the  public
           authorities in the receiving country" (the language of  para  49
           of D v United Kingdom 24 EHRR 423, 447) one can use those  terms
           interchangeably: the intentionally inflicted acts would  without
           more constitute the proscribed treatment.  Where,  however,  the
           risk emanates from non-state bodies, that is not  so:  any  harm
           inflicted by non-state agents will not constitute article 3 ill-
           treatment unless in addition the state  has  failed  to  provide
           reasonable protection."


  57. Although Mr Henderson asserts in his skeleton argument that it is  not
      in dispute that the present humanitarian  catastrophe  "emanates  from
      the intentionally inflicted acts" of President Mugabe's  regime,  that
      is  not  so.  As  Mr  Kovats  makes  clear  in  his  submissions,  the
      respondent's position is that  the  food  shortages,  interruption  in
      water and power supplies, and the other consequences of the  collapsed
      economy may well be the result of governmental incompetence  and  crop
      failures due to the lack of farming expertise and drought  but  it  is
      not the purpose of governmental policy to visit deprivation  upon  the
      people of Zimbabwe.


  58. We do not accept that the current economic crisis and  near  collapsed
      infrastructure is a deliberate, intended consequence of the actions of
      the  government.  Subject  to  what  we  say  below  about   Operation
      Murambatsvina, the evidence simply does not establish that the current
      country conditions are the intended aim as opposed to  the  unintended
      consequence, of government policy.

  59. We do accept that poor living conditions are  capable  of  raising  an
      issue under article 3 if they reach a minimum level of severity.  See:
      Pancenko v Latvia No 40772/98. A similar view was taken by  the  House
      of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Adam, Limbuela and  Tesema  [2005]  UKHL
      66. At paragraph 7 Lord Bingham said:

           "... Treatment is  inhuman  or  degrading  if,  to  a  seriously
           detrimental extent, it denies the most basic needs of any  human
           being.  As  in  all  article  3  cases,  the  treatment,  to  be
           proscribed, must achieve a minimum standard of severity,  and  I
           would accept that in a context such as this, not  involving  the
           deliberate infliction of pain or suffering, the threshold  is  a
           high one. ...... But I have no doubt that the threshold  may  be
           crossed if a late applicant with no  means  and  no  alternative
           means  of  support,  unable  to  support  himself,  is,  by  the
           deliberate action of the state, denied shelter, food or the most
           basic necessities of life. .."

  60. This concept of a  varying  threshold  to  engagement  of  article  3,
      dependant upon the responsibility  of  the  receiving  state  for  the
      circumstances complained of, is analogous to that discussed  below  in
      the context of  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  faced  by  deportees  to
      Zimbabwe at the hands of  those  concerned  with  their  reception  at
      Harare airport. But we have found that the difficult living conditions
      are  not  visited  upon  the  people  of  Zimbabwe  generally  by  the
      deliberate actions of the state. Other than those who have  been  made
      homeless and displaced to areas where they have no support  mechanisms
      to fall back on as a consequence of Operation Murambatsvina,  citizens
      of Zimbabwe face such difficulties as  they  have  to  confront  as  a
      consequence   of   ill-judged    political    initiatives,    economic
      mismanagement and unusually bad weather conditions  affecting  further
      the capacity of the country to produce crops.


  61. That being the case the appellant faces a high threshold in seeking to
      establish that the act of the  United  Kingdom  in  returning  her  to
      Zimbabwe will expose  her  to  a  real  risk  of  having  to  live  in
      circumstances that  will  represent  an  infringement  of  her  rights
      protected by article 3.


  62. The country conditions, poor as they are, do not  establish  that  the
      generality of those returning to Zimbabwe today would be subjected  to
      conditions that are sufficiently grave as to infringe article 3.  Even
      if conditions were life threatening, that in itself would  not  enable
      the appellant to rely upon article 3 to resist removal. That  much  is
      established from what might be referred to as  the  article  3  health
      cases. As can be seen from N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31, there would be  no
      infringement even where:

           "in almost all these cases stopping the treatment will lead in a
           very short time to a revival of all the symptoms from which  the
           patient was originally suffering and to an early death."

  63.  Further, the evidence does  not  establish  that  everyone  presently
      living in Zimbabwe is doing so in  the  conditions  of  near  complete
      deprivation that some evidently are. The WHO  report  referred  to  in
      paragraph 46 above notes that 5 million Zimbabweans are unable to meet
      their minimum food requirements. That means, of course, that something
      approaching a similar number are able to. We have  heard  evidence  of
      how people survive which  we  discuss  later  in  this  determination.
      Support, both material and financial, can be and is provided  to  some
      by relatives living abroad. Many houses have been demolished and  many
      people have been required to relocate to areas  they  might  not  have
      chosen, but many are not subjected to  those  difficulties.  There  is
      free movement across borders with some neighbouring countries  and  we
      have before us accounts of those who make  regular  trips  across  the
      border to buy goods or to trade.

  64. We find that returnees, whether deportees or voluntary  returnees,  do
      not all face  living  conditions  sufficiently  severe  to  reach  the
      article 3 threshold. This does not mean  that  each  such  claim  must
      fail. Each  case  must  be  considered  on  its  own  facts.  That  is
      acknowledged by the respondent's  own  Asylum  Policy  Instruction  on
      discretionary leave:

           "There may be some extreme cases (although such cases are likely
           to be rare) where a person would face such  poor  conditions  if
           returned - e.g. absence of water, food or basic shelter  -  that
           removal could be a breach of the UK's Article 3 obligations..."


  65. The appellant is a qualified doctor who has worked at a state hospital
      in the past. It can be seen from the  Country  of  Origin  Information
      report that there is a huge  demand  for  medical  professionals  and,
      despite what she says in a recent witness  statement  (which  we  deal
      with below),  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  she  will  not
      immediately be welcomed back into practice and hence  relatively  well
      paid employment.

  66. Large numbers of people lost their homes in the  course  of  Operation
      Murambatsvina. This appellant has parents living in Bulawayo. There is
      no suggestion that her father, having  left  the  farm,  has  had  any
      difficulty  in  obtaining  and  retaining  the  accommodation  he  now
      occupies. The appellant's mother continues to  have  access  to  their
      former home on the farm, even if  the  land  is  no  longer  in  their
      possession. The appellant has not suggested that her parents have been
      unable to feed and accommodate themselves  or  otherwise  provide  for
      themselves. Her brother is settled in the United Kingdom. She can,  if
      it be necessary, look to him for support as very many Zimbabweans with
      relatives abroad do. Hers is by no means an extreme case.

  67. There may be some people  whose  living  conditions  are  sufficiently
      desperate  to  establish  the  required  minimum  level  of   severity
      necessary to engage article 3. The evidence indicates that  some  have
      no housing, income, access to basic services including healthcare  and
      education as well  as  no  dependable  source  of  drinking  water  or
      adequate supply of food or basic shelter. But there are also  a  large
      number of Zimbabweans who continue to travel to Zimbabwe  as  ordinary
      passengers and it is not reasonably likely that would be the  case  if
      all those in  Zimbabwe  at  any  given  time  faced  a  real  risk  of
      experiencing the more extreme living conditions  possibly  experienced
      by some.

  68. We are satisfied that the evidence does not  establish  that  removing
      this appellant to Zimbabwe would bring about an  infringement  of  the
      United Kingdom's obligations under article 3 on account of the general
      country conditions or the living conditions that she would be returned
      to.


The respondent's case.

  69. The respondent accepts that there are some categories of  persons  who
      would be at risk of being subjected to  persecutory  ill-treatment  at
      the hands of the agencies of the state upon return  to  Zimbabwe.  But
      the respondent does not accept that  those  identified  on  return  to
      Harare airport as persons who have unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum  in
      the United Kingdom are such a category.


  70. We heard oral evidence from one witness on behalf of  the  respondent.
      Mr Mark Walker, Senior  Executive  Officer  in  the  Country  Specific
      Asylum Policy Team  of  the  Asylum  Policy,  Border  and  Immigration
      Agency. He has provided evidence at each stage of the AA litigation.

  71. Mr Walker adopted his witness statement dated 26th June 2007 as all he
      wished to say  in  his  evidence  in  chief.  Not  everything  in  the
      statement is within the personal knowledge of Mr Walker.  He  received
      and passes on information received from a  variety  of  sources,  some
      identified and some not.

  72. Mr Walker confirmed that after the suspension of enforced  returns  of
      failed asylum seekers was lifted following AA(2), just one such person
      was removed before the Secretary of State once more undertook to defer
      involuntary removals to Zimbabwe on 26th September 2006.

  73. He said that  did  not  mean  that  there  was  a  moratorium  on  all
      involuntary removals. Since that date  23  Zimbabweans  who  had  been
      refused leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom but who did not
      claim  asylum  were  forcibly  returned  to  Zimbabwe.  One  of  these
      returnees was deported following  his  conviction  of  an  offence  of
      possessing cannabis, an offence for which he was  imprisoned  for  two
      years. He has given details  of  his  experiences  on  return.  He  is
      identified as Witness 56 ("W56").

  74. W56 said that the police were waiting for him at Harare  Airport  when
      he arrived on 19th March 2006. After passing  through  immigration  he
      was taken to their office at the airport and asked about the  offence.
      When he said that he was simply carrying a case for a  woman  who  was
      not herself arrested they told him he was not co-operating and  so  he
      was taken to Harare Central police station where he was questioned for
      three hours before being released.  He was asked to give the names  of
      other Zimbabweans in prison in the United  Kingdom.  He  was  told  he
      would be beaten at the police station but this did not happen. He  was
      not physically ill-treated at any stage and although he was told  that
      he would be the subject of continuing attention, he was not aware that
      he was.

  75. There  is  no  report  that  any  of  the  other  22  persons  removed
      involuntarily to Zimbabwe since September 2006 has been  subjected  to
      ill-treatment upon return, either at the point of entry or upon return
      to their home areas.

  76. Mr Walker described how an officer from the British Embassy in  Harare
      meets key NGOs and representatives of the IOM on a monthly  basis  and
      reports of the information obtained from those sources  are  produced.
      We do not propose to embark upon a detailed analysis of this  part  of
      the evidence. With regard to the evidence of the IOM we take the  same
      view as did the Tribunal in AA(2) in concluding  that  the  monitoring
      then proposed of returnees under the pilot project  described  in  the
      draft Memorandum of Understanding  with  the  IOM  was  of  no  direct
      relevance to the assessment of the risk on return  to  any  particular
      returnee, as the IOM is not in a position  to  observe  what  goes  on
      before a passenger emerges from immigration control. All that  can  be
      said of this evidence is that it does  not  assist  the  appellant  in
      establishing that abuse does occur at the airport.

  77. There is now some information from the IOM  monitoring  exercise  but,
      with one exception, that relates to those  who  were  not  removed  as
      failed asylum seekers and would not have been identified  as  such  at
      the airport because it may be assumed that the Zimbabwean  authorities
      were well aware that removals of such persons had been suspended.

  78. With regard to the NGOs, again we find this evidence really takes  the
      matter not much further either way. Insofar as that evidence  concerns
      the general country conditions or  describes  the  excesses  of  state
      agents, that does no more than repeat what is before the Tribunal from
      other sources.  We  have  regard  to  this  category  of  evidence  as
      providing   further   confirmation   of   those   conditions.    Those
      organisations are unable to comment on the treatment of failed  asylum
      seekers forcibly returned to Zimbabwe because there have been no  such
      returns,  apart  from  the  single  case  in  July  2006,   for   some
      considerable time. We do take account of the opinions expressed as  to
      how  they  believe  involuntarily  returned  failed   asylum   seekers
      identified as such would be treated but it  is,  of  course,  for  the
      Tribunal to assess that risk based upon the evidence available.

  79. A significant part of Mr Walker's  evidence  concerns  information  he
      passes on  that  has  been  obtained  by  two  unidentified  officials
      associated with the British Embassy in Harare. They are referred to as
      BE1 and BE2, and their evidence, as it is reported by Mr Walker, is as
      follows.

  80. As he travelled through the airport BE1 engaged in casual conversation
      a number of individuals working for the Civil  Aviation  Authority  of
      Zimbabwe, Air Zimbabwe and the management of the airport.  From  these
      conversations BE1 gleaned information which he or she believed  to  be
      true because the sources were apparently "speaking in good faith". The
      information included that  military  personnel  were  present  at  the
      airport only infrequently and required specific authorisation to enter
      airside or the arrivals area and that CIO officers will normally  pick
      out any passenger they wish to interview  as  he  or  she  leaves  the
      baggage collection area where there is a  line  of  interview  booths.
      Other offices  are  available  in  the  Civil  Aviation  Authority  of
      Zimbabwe above the terminal.

  81. BE1 said that his informants had told him that:

           "In practice it is extremely rare (the individual from the Civil
           Aviation Authority of Zimbabwe said "never") for individuals  to
           be picked out and interviewed by CIO officers  at  the  airport;
           the  expectation  was  that  this  would  happen  elsewhere   if
           required.


           If CIO or other security personnel were intent on using violence
           against an arriving passenger, they would be very unlikely to do
           so at the airport."

  82. BE2, who was said to be familiar with operations  at  Harare  Airport,
      informed Mr Walker that CIO  officers,  equipped  with  the  passenger
      manifest, monitor arriving passengers. They are rarely at  immigration
      desks but may have the means of  monitoring  arrivals  through  a  new
      immigration computer system as immigration officers type in details.


  83. Mr Walker says also:

           "British Embassy  officials  have  also  spoken  to  one  person
           familiar with the operation of  the  airport,  but  who  is  not
           willing to be identified, who told  the  Embassy  that  returned
           failed asylum seekers would have a routine  interview  with  the
           CIO airport team and little or no follow  up  afterwards.   That
           person has never heard of returnees coming to any harm."

  84. Mr Walker produces a statement from another individual,  who  declines
      to be identified and is known  only  as  "X".   He  was  contacted  by
      Embassy officials because he is familiar with  the  operation  of  the
      airport  in  Harare.  He  says  in  that  statement  that  individuals
      returning to Zimbabwe voluntarily would  be  of  no  interest  to  the
      authorities as they would be indistinguishable from other  passengers.
      Those returned involuntarily would be of interest  only  if  something
      was already known of them or if  they  have  some  form  of  political
      profile. Apart from the recent attack on Nelson Charmisa,  which  took
      place outside the airport building, after he had been  denied  passage
      though the airport, X has never heard of or seen instances of physical
      violence at Harare Airport or of anyone  being  taken  away  from  the
      airport by the Zimbabwean authorities.


  85. In the statement of X he says also that he has never come  across,  or
      heard of, a Major of the name referred to by Witnesses 5 and 6.

  86. In his witness statement Mr Walker said that the British  Embassy  had
      made enquiries about the individuals referred to by Witnesses 5 and  6
      ("W5 and W6"). The Embassy has  "good  and  comprehensive  records  of
      officers of the Zimbabwean Defence Forces, including those who  worked
      in military intelligence between 1980 and 2001. But, there is no trace
      on that database of either W5, who claimed to work in that capacity at
      the airport between 1993 and 1998, or of the Major who is said  to  be
      the source of W5's information about procedures at the new airport.

  87. In response to the assertion  that  there  was  no  Major  working  in
      military intelligence to supply up to date information to W5 and  that
      W5 himself was not a military intelligence officer as he claimed,  the
      appellant's representatives assembled and submitted a large  array  of
      evidence to the contrary. Subsequently, Mr Kovats said in his skeleton
      argument:

           "In light of the information provided in the further  statements
           of witnesses 5 and 6  the  respondent  accepts  that  witness  5
           worked  for  Zimbabwean  military  intelligence   and   is   not
           contesting the existence of the Major."

  88. As became plain from Mr  Walker's  oral  evidence,  those  words  were
      chosen carefully. Mr Walker declined to confirm, when asked to  do  so
      in cross examination, that he now accepted that the Major  did  exist.
      He simply accepts that he is not  able  to  put  before  the  Tribunal
      sustainable evidence to establish that he does  not.  That  being  the
      case, he accepts also that in view  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
      Major put forward by the appellant the Tribunal  is  bound  to  accept
      that the appellant has established to the standard required  that  the
      Major does exist and that he has carried out the role described by  W5
      and W6.


  89. To what extend does this concession made  by  the  respondent  have  a
      broader effect? Mr Henderson submits that no weight at all  should  be
      placed  upon  the  evidence  of  Mr  Walker   that   originates   from
      unidentified  sources  associated  with  the  Embassy  in  Harare.  Mr
      Henderson points out that the Tribunal is asked by the  respondent  to
      rely upon evidence that is given third hand and to accept Mr  Walker's
      assessment of  the  sources  as  being  reliable.  In  Mr  Henderson's
      submission such evidence should not be seen as reliable.


  90. Of course, the same could be said of the evidence of W6  who  declines
      to identify his sources. At least "X" has provided a written statement
      so that we can see his words rather than those recalled and passed  on
      by those to whom he spoke. But in the one respect  that  it  has  been
      possible to check the accuracy of the information passed  on  to  him,
      thought by Mr Walker to be correct and reliable, it has been found  to
      be wrong. This, in our view, so undermines this part of  the  evidence
      that we are unable to rely upon it at all.  There  is  no  independent
      reason for finding it to be reliable: the only evidence is that it  is
      not.

  91. Mr Walker also addresses that part of the appellant's case that raises
      repeated references to the attitude of the Zimbabwean authorities  who
      are seen to be associated with Britain. Mr Walker points  to  evidence
      of co-operation between the Zimbabwean authorities and this country in
      the interests of its citizens who wish to benefit from  being  in  the
      United Kingdom.  Through  the  Chevening  Scholarship  and  the  Canon
      Collins Chevening Scholarship programmes, administered by the  British
      Council in Zimbabwe, 74 people came to the United Kingdom to study. At
      least 23 scholars who have benefited  from  these  scholarships  since
      2004 have returned to Zimbabwe to assume responsible positions in  the
      public sector. Some are now senior civil servants. Others are managers
      in government agencies, banks, business and the  media.  There  is  no
      suggestion that any of these people have experienced any difficulty in
      travelling in and out of Zimbabwe even though  it  would  be  apparent
      that they had been in the United Kingdom for some time.

  92. There has been no  suggestion  either  that  these  people  have  been
      accused of being indoctrinated in the United Kingdom and sent back  as
      spies or to destabilise President's Mugabe's regime or to bolster  the
      opposition.

The Central Intelligence Organisation

  93. The current Country of Origin Information report (COIR) upon  Zimbabwe
      notes that:


           "The  Central  Intelligence  Organisation  was  formed  by   the
           Rhodesian authorities in the late 1960s as  the  country's  main
           civilian intelligence agency. It was later  taken  over  by  the
           Zimbabwean  government,  ideologically  re-oriented  and  placed
           under the Ministry of National Security  in  order  to  adopt  a
           protective role for the new regime.
           ...


           Since 2000, the CIO has  been  used  to  spearhead  the  ZANU-PF
           political-economic program, including farm occupations  and  the
           suppression of opposition politicians and media.
           ...


           The  CIO  has  taken  over  immigration   security   at   Harare
           International Airport in its search for dissidents  (mostly  MDC
           activists), especially on flights to  the  UK  and  the  US.  It
           justifies this action within the remit of  co-operation  in  the
           international fight against terrorism.
           ...


           Dr Diana Jeater, Principal Lecturer in African  History  at  the
           University of the West of England, noted  in  a  briefing  paper
           that: "The CIO and police have always  been  very  efficient  at
           being able to identify and locate  people  within  Zimbabwe  ...
           There is good evidence that the CIO keeps lists  of  people  who
           are suspected of sympathy with opposition positions...
           ...


           CVNI.com noted that "Over the last couple of years, the CIO  has
           been widening its scope of  operations.  The  agency  now  works
           actively with the ZANU-PF youth organisation; which is  part  of
           the state funded training programme of  the  Ministry  of  Youth
           Affairs. They are trained in a network of "youth  camps"  across
           the country and in a  short  time  have  become  a  paramilitary
           extension of the CIO."

  94. The COIR report contains also a report that in Matobo district, 68  km
      south of Bulawayo, state agents had asked local traditional leaders to
      compile lists of the names of all known opposition supporters  in  the
      area.


  95. Efforts to obtain information about and to identify  those  associated
      with the opposition are not confined to Zimbabwe itself. At  paragraph
      11.72 of the COIR report:

           "... A report broadcast by SW Radio Africa  (Zimbabwe  news)  in
           July 2005  stated  that:  "There  is  mounting  concern  that  a
           significant number of state security agents  from  Zimbabwe  are
           infiltrating groups in the  UK  under  the  pretext  of  helping
           asylum seekers  or  even  claiming  asylum  themselves.  Several
           meetings have been disrupted by rowdy elements who claim  to  be
           genuine activists. The growing fear is that  Mugabe  is  sending
           spies  into  the  UK  who  will  be  collecting  information  on
           activists in the country..." [89aj] The Institute  for  War  and
           Peace Reporting noted on the 23 June 2006, that Mugabe  had  CIO
           operatives working in Britain. [77r] ZimOnline  reported  on  16
           April  2007  that  an  intelligence  source  claimed  that   CIO
           operatives  had  in   the   past   "...been   assigned   special
           surveillance missions on  opposition  leaders  when  they  visit
           neighbouring countries." [49br]"

  96. When commentators speak of the CIO they often mean  to  refer  to  the
      plain clothes security agents who are  responsible  for  much  of  the
      widely  reported  state  sponsored  violence  perpetrated  upon  those
      perceived to be enemies of the regime of President  Mugabe.   But  the
      CIO is in fact comprised  of  a  number  of  branches,  of  which  the
      Military Intelligence Branch is branch 3. As we heard from witnesses 5
      and 6, in order to avoid confusion most people refer to  the  civilian
      branch as the CIO and refer to the other branches  by  their  name  as
      that will generally identify their role within the CIO.


  97. There is ample evidence of the propensity of the CIO to use  violence.
      We  have  referred  to  this  already  in  this   determination   when
      considering  the  background  country  information.  In  his  skeleton
      argument Mr Henderson refers to what was said by the Court of  Appeal,
      summarising the evidence before the Tribunal in AA(1):
        1. Professor Ranger described the man who is currently in charge of
           the CIO as someone who was notorious for using violence  against
           political  opponents.    The   CIO   was   now   invested   with
           responsibility for food  distribution.  It  was  also  currently
           involved in Operation Murambatsvina ("the  clean-up  operation")
           which started in May 2005 and was concerned with the destruction
           of thousands of homes in urban areas.  In November 2002 this man
           said: "We will be better off with only six million people,  with
           our own people who support the liberation  struggle.   We  don't
           want all  these  extra  people".   He  has  accused  Britain  of
           conspiratorial interference in Zimbabwean affairs and is said to
           believe that many British spies have been infiltrated  into  the
           country.
        1. The professor considered that the violence used by the CIO could
           not be attributed to a lack of discipline  by  "rotten  apples",
           with those affected having a  right of  complaint  to  a  higher
           authority.  Beatings during  interrogation  were  a  fundamental
           part of CIO practice and would not be punished.  The  CIO  used
           interrogation,  torture  and  killings  to  achieve  its   aims.
           Professor Ranger referred to a recent report entitled "Zimbabwe:
           The Face of Torture and  Organised  Violence!"  (Redress,  March
           2005).  The author of this  report  asserted  that  the  use  of
           torture was deeply ingrained, particularly within the CIO, whose
           budget was increased sixfold in 2004. Professor Ranger  believed
           that the nature and outlook of the CIO did not  appear  to  have
           changed in the thirty years he had known  it.  He  said  it  has
           always hunted down opponents of the regime, often using  extreme
           violence.
        1. There was no real dispute about this  part  of  the  professor's
           evidence"
  98. The view expressed by many who have provided evidence to the  Tribunal
      is that since then there has been a further deterioration in  the  way
      in which the CIO conduct  themselves  and  that  the  scope  of  their
      operations has widened.


  99. A number of witnesses, including W5 and W6, have referred also to  the
      fact that the  quality  of  recruits  to  the  CIO  has  deteriorated.
      Training  is  shorter  and   so   the   operatives   act   with   less
      professionalism.

 100. Mr Henderson asks the Tribunal to place considerable weight  upon  the
      views of Witness 2. He is a widely respected representative of  Source
      F, itself a well known and  respected  organisation.  In  his  witness
      statement, dated 25th June 2007, W2 said this:

           "Anyone held even by the ordinary police for  questioning,  even
           for an hour  or  two  will  routinely  face  some  physical  ill
           treatment.   The  CIO   are   more   brutal.    The   increasing
           politicisation, and decreasing  professionalism  and  heightened
           impunity of the ordinary police gives rise to an increased  risk
           to such people in their home area.  And in the same way as I put
           the increasing brutality of the  security  forces  down  to  the
           message  of  impunity  created  by  the  encouragement  of   the
           leadership, so their increasing emphasis on the role  played  by
           Britain in  fomenting  the  opposition,  in  particular  in  the
           context of blaming the UK for the recent dramatic deterioration,
           is likely to create an increased risk for  anyone  suspected  by
           the CIO or police of being a sell-out/traitor because  they  had
           sought asylum in the UK."

 101. This view needs to be  examined  carefully.  First,  anyone  held  for
      questioning by the police or the CIO will have been picked up  because
      the authorities have some reason  for  having  an  interest  in  them.
      Second, this view stands out from many others in that W2 says not only
      will those identified as political  opponents  be  at  risk  but  that
      "anyone suspected by the CIO or police of  being  a  sell  out/traitor
      because they have sought asylum in the UK" would be as  well.   It  is
      important to recognise that this is not evidence  of,  or  based  upon
      evidence of, what is happening to such people in Zimbabwe today.  This
      is the view of W2 about what is likely to happen  to  returned  asylum
      seekers, based upon his assessment of the behaviour  of  the  CIO  and
      police generally.

 102. The evidence concerning the CIO establishes clearly  that  anyone  who
      comes to the attention of the CIO and is perceived to be an  enemy  of
      the regime faces a very real risk of being subjected to physical  ill-
      treatment. The evidence demonstrates also that although the  range  of
      people perceived to be enemies of the regime has widened, it is  those
      seen to be leaders, activists, and those actively supporting  the  MDC
      who are the principal focus of the apparatus deployed  to  secure  the
      continued authority of President Mugabe's regime.

 103. It is clear also that the economic resources available  to  the  state
      are  increasingly  under  pressure.  The  government   invests   those
      resources where it believes it will best  benefit  in  protecting  its
      political survival. It is noted at paragraph 11.73 of the COIR  report
      that a sign of how essential the security forces are to  the  survival
      of President Mugabe and the ruling party is demonstrated by  the  huge
      wage increases awarded to CIO agents who are now paid  Z$5  million  a
      month compared to the Z$90,000 per  month  earned  by  those  ordinary
      workers who retain employment.

 104. We consider it significant that the regime has  invested  considerable
      resources in seeking to infiltrate groups in  the  United  Kingdom  to
      identify those who support the opposition or who are "activists in the
      country". This does indicate that it distinguishes those  people  from
      Zimbabweans present in the United Kingdom generally. It is  noteworthy
      that it has not been suggested that those carrying out  that  function
      in the United Kingdom are collecting information about those who  have
      made an asylum claim, but that they are concerned  to  identify  those
      considered to be activists.

The evidence of Professor Ranger

 105. The Tribunal observed in AA(2) that the professor might be thought  to
      be well placed to express an expert  view  on  country  conditions  in
      Zimbabwe. He has more than 45 years of familiarity with  the  country.
      He has known  Robert  Mugabe  and  other  senior  leaders  of  ZANU-PF
      throughout that time. He has spent periods teaching at the  University
      of Zimbabwe, most recently between January 1998 and June 2001. He last
      visited Zimbabwe in August last year.  He  maintains  regular  contact
      with human rights activists in Zimbabwe, some of whom have visited him
      in the United Kingdom.

 106. In his first report dated 28th July 2005 Professor  Ranger  said  that
      the views of the Zimbabwean regime of those who had sought  asylum  in
      the United Kingdom could be deduced from  ministerial  statements  and
      comments reported in  the  state  press.  He  referred  to  the  often
      reported statement by Jonathan Moyo,  then  Minister  of  Information,
      published in the Herald newspaper in December 2004:


           "Threats by the United  Kingdom  to  deport  10,000  Zimbabweans
           could be  a  cover  to  deploy  elements  trained  in  sabotage,
           intimidation and violence to destabilise the country before  and
           during next March's parliamentary elections..... There had been,
           for some time, a  number  of  media  reports  that  as  part  of
           Britain's illegal regime change agenda,  it  had  been  training
           some Zimbabweans in acts of sabotage and violence."

 107. When giving evidence before the Tribunal in AA(2) the  professor  said
      that he had not included in his report reference  to  a  contradictory
      statement  made  by  The  Minister  for  Justice  to  the   Zimbabwean
      parliament the day before that:


           "Zimbabwe will unconditionally take back all those returned from
           the UK"


      and that those returned by the United Kingdom


           "will be welcomed"


      because  he  believed  the  earlier  statement  to  reflect  the  true
      position.  He   referred   to   other   hostile   comments   made   by
      representatives of the Mugabe regime at about the same time.


 108. He referred to press reports in the Zimbabwe state-sponsored press  in
      December 2004 attacking asylum seekers  as  "accomplices  in  London's
      campaign  of  destabilisation  against  this  country  over  its  land
      policies" and to a letter published  in  the  newspaper  referring  to
      failed  asylum  seekers  being  returned  to  Zimbabwe   as   "Blair's
      mercenaries" who had been  trained  to  cause  "havoc  and  sabotage".
      Professor Ranger described assertions of the "British conspiracy" that
      have been put about for years. In 2002 it was asserted in the Zimbabwe
      Sunday Mail that  thousands  of  Zimbabweans  were  undergoing  secret
      military training and that Britain was recruiting former soldiers from
      Zimbabwe to be deployed in a military offensive against Zimbabwe.

 109. In a more recent report dated  25th  June  2007,  prepared  for  these
      proceedings,  the  professor  responded  to  a  request   from   those
      commissioning the report to comment  upon  developments  since  summer
      2006. He said that it seemed clear that conditions in  Zimbabwe  "have
      reached a new stage of confrontation and extremity". President  Mugabe
      had respondent  to  the  widespread  international  criticism  of  his
      attempts to eliminate political opposition by saying that his  critics
      can "go hang".

 110. Relevant to the question of safety on return for failed asylum seekers
      was the fact that the CIO has taken over  "total  responsibility"  for
      immigration control at Harare airport. As noted above, in the  current
      Country of Origin Information Report, at paragraph 11.54, it is  said,
      citing from Jane's Security Sentinel -  Country  Profile  on  Zimbabwe
      that the  CIO  has  taken  over  this  function  "in  its  search  for
      dissidents, especially on flights to the UK and the US"  At  the  same
      time, according to a report published in the Independent on March 25th
      2007, the government is removing  civilians  from  the  Department  of
      Immigration at border posts  and  airports  and  replacing  them  with
      security and intelligence officers.

 111. That this change has had an effect upon movement through  the  airport
      is indicated by the fact that four leading members of  the  opposition
      have been prevented from leaving Zimbabwe via the airport and one, the
      M.P. Nelson Chamisa, was beaten,  and  prevented  from  leaving  on  a
      flight to Brussels. Two women activists were  prevented  from  leaving
      Zimbabwe to seek medical treatment abroad for  injuries  sustained  in
      police custody.

 112. Professor Ranger says in his latest report that the  present  attitude
      of the Zimbabwean regime towards the United Kingdom  is  evidenced  by
      the stories carried in two state-sponsored  Zimbabwean  newspapers  on
      21st June 2007. One, entitled "Plot to destroy  Zim  economy  exposed"
      offered "shocking details of a major plot by the British and  American
      governments to bring Zimbabwe's economy down to its knees  and  incite
      an uprising  against  the  Government."  Professor  Ranger  says  that
      although much of this may be rhetorical, his contacts in Zimbabwe  who
      have access to men  such  as  Didymus  Mutasa,  head  of  Security  in
      Zimbabwe, assure him that he is personally convinced of the  existence
      of British plots.

 113. In this report Professor Ranger was asked to respond to this question:

           "What inferences would you draw as to the risk  to  someone  who
           had sought asylum in the UK and is transferred into CIO  custody
           for questioning at the present date as opposed to July 2006"


      Perhaps unsurprisingly in view of  what  is  said  above,  it  is  the
      professor's view that such risk is enhanced because of  the  intensity
      of the humanitarian crisis, the CIO's total control  of  the  airport,
      the revival of the youth militia, the asserted link between opposition
      and  civil  society  organisations  and  violence  and   the   renewed
      insistence on  the assertion of  British  subvention  and  control  of
      these organisations.

 114. Under the heading "Conclusions" Professor Ranger says in this report:


           "In  short,  conditions  in  Zimbabwe  have  evidently  worsened
           sharply over the past year and particularly the last six months.
           More and more Zimbabweans have  been  defined  as  traitors  and
           enemies, particularly those with  international  and  especially
           British connections."

 115. A  significant  matter  arises  in  connection  with  these  words  of
      Professor Ranger. His evidence before the Tribunal in AA(2)  was  that
      the Zimbabwean regime "criminalises" anyone  connected  with  Britain.
      The Tribunal found that in that he went too far. The  evidence  before
      us was that there were three direct British Airways flights  from  the
      United Kingdom to Harare airport  each  week.  Very  recently  British
      Airways has discontinued all flights  to  Zimbabwe,  citing  business,
      rather than security reasons. But there  are  also  three  direct  Air
      Zimbabwe flights each week as well as a  significant  number  of  non-
      direct flights that travel to  Harare  via  Kenya,  South  Africa  and
      elsewhere. The evidence before us indicated  that  these  flights  are
      generally full, although that may  not  be  the  case  in  respect  of
      British Airways if declining passenger  levels  contributed  to  their
      decision to discontinue flights. But it  is  apparent  that,  overall,
      passenger traffic  remains  at  a  high  level.  Many  passengers  are
      Zimbabwean citizens who are "connected to Britain" in that  they  have
      an immigration history involving business of one kind or another  with
      Britain. There is no  evidence  that  these  people  are  in  any  way
      "criminalised" on that account or that they are in any way impeded  in
      passing through the airport. Indeed the evidence is to the contrary.

 116. In his oral evidence to us Professor Ranger  explained  that  when  he
      referred to people being "connected" with Britain he  means  connected
      in the eyes of the authorities. It would include  those  persuaded  to
      claim asylum in Britain and not, for example those who come to  study.
      He said that anyone who can be identified as a  failed  asylum  seeker
      would be regarded as connected with Britain.

 117. One has to look very hard at the professor's  evidence  to  find  upon
      what, other than his own assessment of the conduct of the  authorities
      generally, he bases the view expressed in the final  sentence  of  the
      extract of his report reproduced above. It is notable  that  elsewhere
      he refers to sources, but here he does not. We are, therefore, at this
      point dependant only upon his unsupported opinion which, as an  expert
      witness, he is entitled to express. But, it is  for  the  Tribunal  to
      decide what weight to give to that in  the  context  of  the  evidence
      before us as a whole.

 118. In his conclusions in his recent written report he said that more  and
      more Zimbabweans have been defined  as  traitors,  particularly  those
      with  British  connections.  In  his  oral  evidence  he  said  anyone
      identified as a failed asylum seeker would be regarded as connected to
      Britain, and so regarded as a traitor and an enemy. In this regard  we
      have the same reservation as we expressed in respect of  the  evidence
      of W2. This is not evidence of what  has  happened  to  failed  asylum
      seekers or how they are regarded  by  the  authorities  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe. This is the professor's view of how they would be  regarded.
      It is clear that the near hysterical political  rhetoric  blaming  the
      British government for all the problems being experienced in  Zimbabwe
      continues. But we cannot see that the professor has been able to point
      to any evidence that the allegations of treachery visited upon  anyone
      "connected to Britain" - absent some other reason for  believing  them
      to be political opponents - has led  to  any  individual  difficulties
      that would not have arisen in any case.

 119. W69, whose evidence we consider  below,  makes  clear  in  his  recent
      witness statement that President  Mugabe  has  settled  views  of  the
      British government and welcomes any opportunity to criticise it in the
      most extravagant terms. W69 said:

           "Mugabe genuinely hates the UK, which he believes is  the  major
           player in attempts to  overthrow  him.  He  blames  the  UK  for
           influencing the European Union and the United States against his
           regime. He makes hate filled speeches against Britain and  there
           is real venom in his voice. He hates the British government.  He
           refers to the Cabinet as the "gay gangsters" on the  basis  that
           there have been out homosexuals in the Cabinet [sic]. Before the
           travel ban was imposed, he  loved  to  go  to  Harrods  and  his
           inability to do so really angers him. The travel ban  on  Mugabe
           and the senior ZANU people really hurts and angers him."

 120. But it is difficult to find reliable or compelling examples  of  those
      people upon whom this hatred has been visited on this  account  alone.
      In making this observation the Tribunal has  very  much  in  mind  the
      accounts of the individual returnees.

 121.  Professor Ranger, in his oral evidence, noted also that there was  no
      evidence of any increased violence in the run up to the  elections  in
      2006.

 122. It is difficult also to reconcile the professor's view  that  the  CIO
      and the Zimbabwean government regard all those who have claimed asylum
      in the United Kingdom as traitors and sell outs who, on  that  account
      alone, should be subjected to persecutory ill-treatment on return with
      the  significant  body  of  evidence  concerning  attempts  to  obtain
      intelligence from the United Kingdom. If it were the case that the CIO
      regarded all failed asylum seekers to be opponents of the  regime  who
      should be taken for interrogation  and  subjected  to  torture  it  is
      difficult to understand why such extensive effort and resources should
      be invested in infiltrating Zimbabwean groups in the United Kingdom in
      order to identify political activists and not those who  had  made  an
      asylum claim and had no  other  basis  for  remaining  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

 123. In cross examination Professor Ranger was asked about his  last  visit
      to Zimbabwe last  summer.  He  travelled  by  direct  flight  and  was
      admitted without difficulty. Yet he accepts that he is known to  be  a
      critic of the  regime.  He  was  unable  to  explain  why  he  had  no
      difficulty in passing through the airport other than to  surmise  that
      as he was a well known person in Zimbabwe - a school  has  been  named
      after him - it would be an embarrassment  to  the  government  if  any
      action had been taken against him.

 124. The professor was asked if the authorities in Zimbabwe were aware than
      many Zimbabweans who came to the United Kingdom were not refugees  but
      economic migrants. He said that it is the contention of the Zimbabwean
      regime that all Zimbabweans who come  to  this  country  are  economic
      migrants. It does not accept that any had any reason to claim  asylum.
      Therefore those that have claimed asylum came as economic migrants and
      were persuaded to tell lies in order to claim asylum. Those who worked
      abroad to provide financial support for relatives  at  home  might  be
      said to be patriotic. The Diaspora is important in keeping the economy
      afloat.

 125. On the other hand, Professor Ranger explained,  in  the  eyes  of  the
      authorities in Zimbabwe, a person who has made an  asylum  claim  must
      have told lies about human rights abuses and that is why failed asylum
      seekers returned to Zimbabwe are treated with suspicion.

 126. What is hard to understand, if that were the case, is why there is  no
      consistent pattern of evidence to be  found  in  the  reports  of  the
      individual returnees who were identified as failed asylum  seekers  of
      being asked the nature of their claim, or  the  lies  that  they  were
      perceived to have told in support of the false claim.

 127. The professor explained how those Zimbabweans living abroad  who  were
      not failed asylum seekers were important  to  those  who  remained  in
      Zimbabwe because of the financial and other support they were able  to
      send home. He said the view was that  such  persons  do  not  need  to
      return to Zimbabwe as it was acceptable for them to remain  abroad  to
      send money for school fees, hospital fees and so on.

 128. He explained that there is a thriving trade in  food  parcels  ordered
      and paid for from the United Kingdom but delivered to  family  members
      in Zimbabwe. The companies offering this service advertise openly both
      in Zimbabwe and in the United Kingdom. He is aware of one  person  who
      sends six deliveries of groceries each month to her extended family in
      Zimbabwe. The professor himself employs a  carer  to  look  after  his
      wife, this carer being a Zimbabwean lady who is present in the  United
      Kingdom having been granted leave to remain as a  student.  She  sends
      such food parcels on a regular basis to her family  in  Zimbabwe.  The
      carer, incidentally, had recently returned from a visit to her  family
      in Bulawayo and had made no  report  of  any  difficulties.  Professor
      Ranger said that there  was  no  difficulty  with  such  transactions,
      whether involving food parcels  or  money.  The  authorities  did  not
      regard this as "dirty money" even where the  funds  or  parcels  arose
      from relatives in the United Kingdom.

 129. Reinforcing this aspect of  his  evidence  he  said  later  that  when
      President Mugabe spoke about Zimbabweans  outside  Zimbabwe  as  being
      unpatriotic he did not, in the professor's  opinion,  refer  to  every
      Zimbabwean but only to failed asylum seekers.

 130. In his most recent written report Professor Ranger said:

           "However, the CIO take-over [of immigration  control  at  Harare
           airport]  has  consequences  for  Zimbabweans   returning   from
           Britain. It has been clear for some time  that  "failed"  asylum
           seekers, deported from the UK, will be  automatically  drawn  to
           the attention of the CIO at the airport.  Now,  every  returnee,
           including voluntary ones, will be subject to CIO scrutiny."


      The professor made clear in his oral evidence that such returnees  who
      were not failed asylum seekers would be subject to "CIO scrutiny"  but
      not to "CIO interrogation".

 131. This evidence is significant for two reasons. It is established by the
      evidence that failed asylum seekers cannot all be "automatically drawn
      to the attention of the CIO at the airport" as a discernible class  of
      passengers because there is  nothing  that  identifies  any  returnee,
      automatically, as some one who has made an unsuccessful  asylum  claim
      in  the  United  Kingdom.  This  information  will  be  known  to  the
      authorities at Harare  airport  only  if  it  is  volunteered  by  the
      returnee himself or if there is intelligence to that effect  from  the
      United Kingdom.

 132. The CIO officers at the airport will be  able  to  identify  from  the
      passenger manifest all those who have been deported  from  the  United
      Kingdom, as  opposed  to  failed  asylum  seekers  who  have  returned
      voluntarily, and each of these may be  asked  if  they  have  made  an
      asylum claim in the United Kingdom, although it can be seen  from  the
      individual accounts that this is far from being uniform practice.

 133. Secondly, in his evidence the professor appears to agree that there is
      a sifting process inherent in the initial questioning at the  airport.
      He distinguishes between "scrutiny" and interrogation.

 134. Our conclusion upon the evidence of Professor Ranger is that his clear
      opinion, sincerely held, that  all  failed  asylum  seekers  would  be
      identifiable as such upon return to Harare airport and would  on  that
      account alone be subjected to serious ill-treatment is one  that  does
      not sit  easily  with  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  is  far  from
      determinative upon the issue of risk on return.


   The evidence  of Witness 66


 135. In order to protect the anonymity of this witness we are unable to set
      out in this determination the full  details  of  his  career  and  the
      experience that Mr Henderson says qualifies this witness to express an
      opinion upon country conditions in Zimbabwe today.  But  we  have,  of
      course, had regard to those matters in reaching our assessment of  his
      evidence. W66 worked in a professional capacity in Harare  until  July
      2002 when he settled in the United Kingdom.

 136. Since moving to the United Kingdom W66 has maintained an  interest  in
      human rights issues, not just in Zimbabwe  but  in  respect  of  human
      rights issues worldwide. He made a short visit to Zimbabwe  in  August
      last year.

 137. W66 has prepared two written reports for these proceedings. The first,
      dated 24th June 2007, was in response to a series of  questions  posed
      for him to consider by the appellant's  representatives.  The  second,
      which appears to be  undated,  is  said  to  be  in  response  to  the
      statement of the respondent's witness Mr Walker.

 138. W66 made clear in his oral evidence that he has no personal  knowledge
      of the experiences of any individual returned to  Zimbabwe  and  bases
      what he says on the reports he has read in order to keep in touch with
      what is happening in Zimbabwe today. He said:

           "My area of  expertise  is  not  the  treatment  of  involuntary
           returnees."

 139.  In  his  first  report  W66  speaks  of  a  recent  further   serious
      deterioration in the situation in Zimbabwe in that there has  been  an
      increase in the level of violence meted out to political opponents  of
      the  regime.  He  said  that  President  Mugabe  "has   launched   his
      characteristic campaign of violence against all those who he  sees  as
      the enemy". The primary target is the MDC.  W66 describes the  current
      political climate as being "at its worse for decades" with  widespread
      arrests and abductions of MDC-linked individuals who are subjected  to
      torture and against whom false allegations are made of involvement  in
      bombings and attacks on police and ZANU-PF members.

 140. W66 says that at risk are those perceived to  be  MDC  supporters  but
      that, in his view, this has come to mean anyone who is  suspected  not
      to be "in line with" ZANU-PF.

 141. It was the coming together of the two factions of the MDC at a  prayer
      meeting  on  March  11th  2007  that  sparked  off  the  recent  sharp
      deterioration  in  events  for  opposition  supporters.  Since   then,
      according to W66, brutal attacks on MDC personnel have  continued  and
      every day there are new reports of people  being  detained,  tortured,
      "disappeared" and even murdered.

 142. W66 also detects there to have been a  serious  deterioration  in  the
      situation of those perceived to be political opponents of  the  Mugabe
      regime in Zimbabwe  since  events  of  Mach  2007  when  a  number  of
      prominent MDC people were detained and ill-treated in  police  custody
      with the apparent approval of the President. In response to a  request
      to comment upon the risk faced by  a  failed  asylum  seeker  returned
      today to Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom, W66  says  that  given  the
      recent sharp deterioration taken together with  recent  "anti  British
      rhetoric", the risk is currently considerably greater than  it  was  a
      year ago.

 143. It will be remembered that, apart from a visit lasting a few  days  in
      August last year, this witness has been away from Zimbabwe since 2002.
      His evidence is based upon what he has been told by  people  who  have
      not been identified and upon what he has read. Much  of  his  evidence
      concerns that which is not, in any event, in dispute. It has been  the
      case for some years that  those  in  Zimbabwe  active  in  support  of
      opposition of the regime will be at risk of being subjected to serious
      ill-treatment if they fall into the hands of the CIO,  the  police  or
      any of the other groups of people used by the regime  to  achieve  its
      aims.

 144. We have regard to what W66 says about  the  widening  scope  of  those
      subject to this repressive attention from the state. The categories of
      interest have been expanded to include those active in what  is  often
      termed civil society. For example, W66 describes how  an  organisation
      called the National Constitutional Assembly, a group which is not part
      of the MDC and is to some extent a rival to it, is often targeted  and
      its leaders have often been  beaten,  arrested  and  tortured.  Church
      leaders have been abused  if  outspoken  against  the  regime.  "Human
      rights defenders" have been attacked as have ordinary people who  have
      tried to rebuild homes destroyed during Operation  Murambatsvina.  W66
      concludes from all this that:

           "The main political threat to the Government, however, is  still
           the MDC (even though it has been weakened since it split in late
           2005) and therefore the organisation which bears  the  brunt  of
           its violence,  particularly  during  elections.  For  all  these
           reasons the position of asylum seekers has to be assessed within
           the current lawless climate in Zimbabwe."

 145. This is the reasoning  that  underpins  the  views  of  both  W66  and
      Professor Ranger. Their view is that because the state authorities are
      known to act with impunity in subjecting those seen as a threat to the
      continued authority of the regime  to  violent  repression,  therefore
      asylum seekers identified as such on return to Harare airport would be
      considered within  that  class  of  persons  who  should  be  seen  as
      potential opponents and so treated as such. W66 states:

           "There can be little doubt that any Zimbabwean, whether directly
           or indirectly involved  in  anti  government  activity,  is  now
           regarded as a legitimate target for physical attack. I would  go
           further and say that anyone who is perceived as not being  loyal
           to the regime is also in danger. "


 146. Thus, the effect of the  evidence  of  this  witness  is  that  anyone
      involved in anti  government  activity  or  who  is  perceived  to  be
      disloyal to the regime will be at risk and so if those  identified  on
      return are identified as being disloyal  because  they  have  made  an
      asylum claim in the United Kingdom, they will be at risk.

 147. It is W66's view that because President Mugabe continues to blame  the
      United Kingdom for leading a regime change crusade  against  him  this
      will influence the agents of the state in their dealings  with  people
      so that those who have claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom  will  be
      considered disloyal and so suitable candidates to be ill-treated.  But
      interestingly, W66 says that it is the appellant's claimed MDC  family
      connections that would "substantially increase the risk" she faced  on
      return.

 148. Once again, this view is not based upon evidence that people have been
      ill-treated because they have claimed asylum in the United Kingdom but
      is the opinion of this witness of what he believes would be the  case,
      based upon what is happening in Zimbabwe generally.

 149. As we know from the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  and  from  that
      referred to by Professor Ranger in particular, it is the view  of  the
      Zimbabwean government and the CIO that the vast majority of those  who
      claim asylum abroad do so not to escape persecution but  for  economic
      reasons. There is no reason to suppose  that  those  in  Zimbabwe  who
      support the ZANU-PF party, especially those at a low level  who  would
      have shared many of the experiences of the difficulties of  every  day
      life in Zimbabwe in recent times, would consider themselves personally
      disqualified from seeking economic betterment by moving to the  United
      Kingdom and extending their stay by pursuing an asylum claim.  We  did
      not understand either witness to suggest that not to be so. That would
      be another reason for seeking  to  identify  from  those  returned  as
      failed asylum seekers those who are associated with the opposition  or
      otherwise of adverse interest, apart  from  being  returned  in  those
      circumstances.


   The evidence of Witness 69


 150. Mr Henderson has made references to the evidence of this witness, both
      in his skeleton argument and in his closing  submissions.  He  regards
      him as an important  witness.  Although  protected  by  the  anonymity
      order, and thus referred to as  W69,  his  identity  will  be  readily
      ascertainable from the information upon which Mr Henderson relies. For
      that reason we do not repeat in  this  determination  the  information
      concerning W69's professional activities and background  but  we  have
      taken that into account in assessing his evidence.

 151. The view of W69 of  the  reception  awaiting  those  now  returned  to
      Zimbabwe as failed asylum seekers is perhaps best summarised  by  what
      he has said in his most recent statement,  made  in  response  to  the
      evidence submitted in this appeal by the respondent:

           "I  have  been  told  that  the  Home  Office  state  that  "The
           Zimbabwean  Government's  stated  policy   is   that   it   will
           unconditionally welcome all deportees and that  the  source  for
           this statement appears to be press coverage  of  the  Tribunal's
           ruling last summer which attributes comments to  Chinamasa  that
           asylum seekers will be welcomed with "open arms", that there was
           "never a genuine  reason  to  justify  them  seeking  asylum  in
           Britain" and "These are people who were incited by  the  British
           to leave  Zimbabwe  for  political  reasons".   I  consider  the
           proposition that all deportees from  the  UK  will  be  welcomed
           unconditionally to be hogwash. It is not  credible  that  asylum
           seekers returned from the UK will be unconditionally welcomed by
           the CIO, state police and militia, and ZANU-PF.  What form would
           this welcome take? I remain of the clear view as I  indicate  in
           my statement that they would be viewed as sell outs and  treated
           accordingly."

      And:

           "Given the poisoned atmosphere, and given the mistrust, the  CIO
           will be all the more interested in interrogating returned asylum
           seekers to find out what they have been up to.  They  have  been
           told these people are traitors."

 152. In offering his view of how he believes failed asylum seekers would be
      treated if returned to Zimbabwe today, this witness  says  first  that
      President Mugabe has admitted he now has serious competition from  the
      MDC.  That is, in our view, significant  because  it  illuminates  the
      real motivation behind the arrangements that would be put in place for
      the management of such returnees. This witness goes further  and  says
      that President Mugabe perceives Zimbabweans  outside  the  country  as
      unpatriotic. In that (if he applies the description to all Zimbabweans
      outside the country, and nothing he says suggests otherwise) he offers
      a different view to the opinion expressed by Professor Ranger which we
      have discussed above. W69 says also  that  the  regime  perceives  the
      Zimbabwean community in the UK as being pro-MDC.


 153. There can be little doubt that the regime perceives the  community  in
      the United Kingdom to include those  who  support  the  MDC.  But  the
      evidence  simply  does  not  support  the  view  that  the  Zimbabwean
      authorities regard all its citizens  who  have  been  staying  in  the
      United Kingdom as opposition supporters and thus worthy  of  attention
      on return as being of interest as adverse to the regime. That is clear
      from the evidence of the large numbers of ordinary travellers, who  of
      course  are  voluntary  returnees,  including  the  lady  working  for
      Professor Ranger, who are clearly part of the Zimbabwean community  in
      the United Kingdom and who periodically return to  visit  friends  and
      family in Zimbabwe without difficulty.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that
      amongst Zimbabweans in the United Kingdom  are  a  number  of  persons
      working for the Zimbabwean government or who are members or supporters
      of ZANU-PF.

 154. It is said on behalf of the appellant that involuntary returnees  from
      the United Kingdom will be seen as a danger or threat to the regime in
      Zimbabwe when voluntary returnees are not.  In order to justify such a
      conclusion there  would  have  to  be  evidence  that  the  Zimbabwean
      authorities believe that the United  Kingdom  allows  friends  of  the
      regime of President Mugabe (whose  regime,  it  is  said,  the  United
      Kingdom opposes) to travel freely but throws out of the United Kingdom
      those who are its own friends  (i.e.  enemies  of  President  Mugabe's
      regime).  There is simply no evidence to that  effect.  We  deal  with
      this in more detail below.

Procedures at the airport:  W5 and W6


 155. Of these two witnesses who gave oral  evidence  before  us,  we  heard
      first from W6, who has provided evidence  at  each  stage  of  the  AA
      litigation. He has made  a  number  of  witness  statements.  In  this
      determination we refer mainly to two  of  them,  as  those  have  been
      relied upon by the parties. The first statement made in July 2005  was
      prepared for the purpose of the judicial review proceedings. Where  we
      refer to his second statement we refer to one signed on 7th July 2007.



 156. W6 has a military background. Importantly, he  served  as  a  sergeant
      with Military Intelligence, being part of a  team  based  at  the  old
      Harare international airport for a period of  two  and  a  half  years
      between 1993 and 1996 before coming to the United Kingdom where he has
      been granted refugee status. Before joining Military  Intelligence  he
      served in the army in other capacities. In his first statement made in
      July 2005 he said that in 1980 he was seconded as  a  soldier  holding
      the rank of private to the President's Regimental  Institute.  In  his
      second statement he said that this posting was as an  accounts  clerk.
      By the time he gave oral evidence before us he felt able to  say  that
      he worked with that Institute as an accountant.

 157. The written evidence adopted by W6 was in line with  his  evidence  in
      AA(2). Indeed, he incorporates into his statement in this appeal  most
      of what he said in his statement put before the Tribunal in AA(2). The
      Tribunal in AA(2) summarised that evidence as follows:
      "
           87. The next witness,  Witness  6,  who  has  also  been  granted
               refugee status in the  United  Kingdom,  was  a  sergeant  or
               section leader with the military intelligence branch  of  the
               CIO based at Harare airport for two and a  half  years  until
               1996. His role was to check upon passengers  passing  through
               the airport. In the witness statement  which  he  adopted  as
               part of his evidence he began by saying this:


                 "I set out below in outline, the  procedures  that  applied
                 (and that,  I  believe,  still  apply)  when  a  Zimbabwean
                 citizen is deported back to Zimbabwe from another  country.
                 These are standard and longstanding  procedures.  I  am  in
                 regular touch with former colleagues who still work at  the
                 airport, and  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  these
                 procedures have  changed  significantly.  These  procedures
                 would also apply where a person had  been  identified  from
                 the passenger manifest and was of interest."


          88. Witness  6  said  that  the  deportee  would  be  interviewed
              initially at the airport by a team comprising representatives
              of the military, the police and the CIO. He explained that in
              fact each is a branch of the CIO but the term "CIO"  is  used
              to distinguish the  internal  security  branch,  whereas  the
              nature of the other two relevant  branches,  the  police  and
              military intelligence, is obvious from its name. He continued
              :


                 "In the interview room, each  agency  would  interview  the
                 deportee about any issues of concern they might  have.  For
                 example, the police would interview the deportee about  any
                 criminal matters that might be  outstanding,  the  military
                 about whether the deportee was a  former  soldier  and  any
                 issues about being absent without leave or having conducted
                 military activities outside Zimbabwe,  and  the  CIO  would
                 check for any political activities.


                 Once it was decided which agency would have custody of  the
                 deportee, the deportee would be taken by  that  agency  for
                 interrogation with the benefit of the report of the  agency
                 that had led the airport interview."


              In his oral evidence this witness made clear, as did  Witness
              5, that not all deportees were taken away by one of the three
              agencies for interrogation. He said "It depends how  valuable
              the subject is whether they were taken away". When  a  person
              is released that was not the end of  it  as  there  would  be
              monitoring in the persons home area.


          89. This witness said that there  was  a  significant  difference
              between an interview and an interrogation. He knew what  went
              on at the interrogation stage because a former colleague  who
              currently  works  in  army   counter   intelligence   central
              administration had seen reports of  such  interrogations.  In
              his witness statement he said:


                 "It should  be  understood  that  there  is  a  significant
                 difference  between  a  person  being  interviewed  (eg  on
                 arrival at the airport), and a person  being  interrogated.
                 Within   the   Zimbabwean   intelligence   community,   the
                 implication of a person having been interrogated (and hence
                 an interrogation report) is that  the  interrogated  person
                 will have been ill-treated."


              And in his oral evidence:


                 "There is not an interrogation  at  the  airport,  just  an
                 interview.  I  took  part.  That's  why  I  was  there,  to
                 interview. When  the  detainee  was  taken  away  from  the
                 airport he is handed over to somebody else."


           90. Witness 6 said that the approach to those being returned from
               the United Kingdom  was  based  not  just  upon  the  initial
               interview but was intelligence led. People working  with  the
               London Embassy were recruited from the  Zimbabwean  community
               in the United Kingdom. Intelligence was  collected  and  sent
               back to Harare:


                 "People in Harare are well briefed by people in  London  so
                 they know who  they  are  interested  in.  If  you  do  any
                 activities in the UK you put yourself in a situation.  This
                 is so we have a record to be used - to be a member of  this
                 organisation in London - you must be monitored. I know that
                 because  that  is  what  happened  when  I  worked  at  the
                 airport."


           91. Finally, this witness made clear that the sifting  nature  of
               the  initial  interview   is   genuine   and   is   conducted
               professionally. Information that might give rise to suspicion
               is not fabricated in order to justify further enquiry:


                 "The questioning at the airport was  intelligence  led.  We
                 knew something about it. Our purpose was to produce a  true
                 and good report. We were not trying to cook up a  case.  We
                 do not cook up intelligence."

158.  But, as  is  clear  from  what  was  said  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,
   reproduced above, the Tribunal in AA(2) failed to deal with what W6  said
   in his oral evidence before the Tribunal concerning  the  abuse  that  he
   said went on at the airport, that is to say at  the  first  or  interview
   stage of the two stage process. That evidence is restated by  W6  in  his
   latest statement:


           "As I told the Tribunal when I gave oral evidence,  during  such
           interviews at the airport, there would be abuse but not torture.
           Anyone who was of sufficient interest to be questioned  for  say
           an hour or more would be liable to abuse. People would be beaten
           but not too hard because it was  not  discreet  enough.  If  the
           person was worth more effort then he would be  taken  away  from
           the airport for questioning and torture."

159. It might be thought astonishing  that  a  witness  who  was  called  on
   behalf of the appellant to establish that a returnee to Harare airport is
   at risk of precisely the sort of hitting or kicking that W6 described  in
   his oral evidence should make no mention at all of such treatment in  the
   written statements prepared for the judicial review  proceedings  or  the
   statement prepared for the appeals  in  AA(1)  and  AA(2).  In  contrast,
   adding to what  he  said  in  his  statement  reproduced  above,  W6  has
   subsequently gone on to say this:


           "It would be quite common for a deportee to be roughed up during
           interview. They would be kicked, hit and  slapped  in  order  to
           intimidate them and make them too frightened to lie. I have seen
           this hitting and kicking at the  airport.  Whatever  agency  was
           leading one of these interviews of a deportee  at  the  airport,
           there would be likely  to  be  some  roughing  up.  There  is  a
           tradition of that sort of abuse."


160. If there is any reason why this apparently  crucial  evidence  was  not
   included in his earlier witness statements we were not told what it  was.
   It is also out of step with the experiences of the majority of individual
   returnees who have given an account of how they were treated during these
   initial interviews at the airport. With  few  exceptions,  those  who  do
   complain about being physically ill-treated  at  the  airport  are  those
   about whom the CIO had some reason to have an interest for reasons  other
   than the fact that they arrived in Harare as deportees. In so  observing,
   we have had regard to the analysis  of  these  returnees  undertaken  and
   offered by Mr Henderson in which he  attempts  to  demonstrate  that  the
   number of returnees experiencing no  adverse  experiences  represented  a
   very much smaller proportion of the relevant number of such cases  to  be
   considered. But, with respect, for the  reasons  we  set  out  below  (at
   paragraph 208) when dealing with the evidence concerning  the  individual
   returnees, we do not accept that his analysis is sustainable in the light
   of  the  findings  of  fact  we  have  made  and  what  we  say  in  this
   determination.

161. It must be remembered that here W6  is  speaking  of  his  own  claimed
   experiences when he was working at the old airport more  than  ten  years
   ago.  He himself has never dealt with any asylum  seekers  returned  from
   the United Kingdom or anywhere else. All the deportees he dealt with were
   those who had been  deported  from  another  country  because  of  having
   committed a criminal offence.


162. It is hard to understand why, if a member of Military  Intelligence  or
   a CIO officer felt the  need  to  ill-treat  someone  physically  in  the
   privacy of an interview room at the airport, he would feel  any  need  to
   act with discretion. The evidence indicates clearly that  agents  of  the
   state act with impunity, facing no real prospect of any form  of  censure
   for acting with unrestrained  brutality  towards  those  deemed  suitable
   candidates for such treatment. This, after all, is the whole basis of the
   appellant's claim that she would be at risk as a failed asylum seeker.

163. The assertion that a person becomes at risk of physical  abuse  as  the
   period of detention becomes extended may be thought to be  in  line  with
   what is known of the CIO.  The purpose of the  screening  process,  which
   clearly does take place on arrival at the airport, is to  identify  those
   who may be of interest. It is those who are thought to be of interest who
   are at risk. The evidence of the individual returnees  demonstrates  that
   it is very frequently the case that the initial  screening  interview  is
   concluded relatively quickly.

164. W6 was asked about this in cross-examination. The point  he  was  asked
   to deal with was clear and simple but, as was the case often  during  the
   cross examination of this  witness,  when  he  was  asked  to  deal  with
   apparent difficulties in his evidence, his answer was evasive and largely
   incoherent. We set out this exchange reproduced from the transcript:

        Q. "Anyone who was of sufficient interest to be questioned for  say
           an hour or so would be liable to abuse." Does that mean that  if
           you weren't questioned for an hour or so you were not liable  to
           abuse?
        A. No, no, no. That's not the case; its just  the  person  himself.
           Some people when you just say, "Have a seat here"  automatically
           prepared just to say, within to or three minutes, then there are
           some people who are prepared, who can resist; so, you know  when
           such people end up abusing.
         Q. Why would someone who is not of interest, either to  the  police
           or the CIO or the army service, why would  such  a  person  like
           that be abused at the airport?
         A. Oh, actually I think the problem is you are  in  a  first  world
           country. You are talking about a third world  country,  whereby,
           you know, abuse is like our daily bread, because we want  things
           as soon as possible you know, so we can call somebody  -  if  we
           called you, "Sit here" so of an aggressive nature you see, so it
           end up abusing the person."

   And, once W6 had agreed that not everyone passing through the airport was
   liable to be the subject of abuse, he was asked who would be at risk.  W6
   said that it depends upon the interest in that person.  But,  if  someone
   facing simple questions tried to resist or was awkward,  for  example  by
   saying "I know my rights. I'm not supposed to be asked," then they  would
   be liable to be abused.

165. If that much were correct it may be an explanation for  the  experience
   described by R31, whose account was a matter of concern before the  Court
   of Appeal. She described how she was slapped across the  face  after  she
   had demanded  to  know  why  the  interviewers  were  not  accepting  her
   assurance that she had returned because her student visa had expired.


166.  W6 says that he is not someone who is himself  inclined  to  ill-treat
   those with whom he dealt as an agent of the state in Zimbabwe. He said in
   his recent statement:

           "When posted to  Mozambique  and  Matabeleland  I  did  not  use
           torture although I was present when electric shocks were used. I
           used to get complaints that my interrogations took  much  longer
           to produce reports because I  used  different  techniques  other
           than torture.   My  colleagues  who  used  to  torture  produced
           reports much more quickly"


167.  It is reasonable to  assume  that  if  complaints  were  made  by  the
   colleagues of W6 about his reluctance to use  torture,  then  that  would
   have been known to his superiors. That being the case  he  would  not  be
   likely to  be  seen  as  an  appropriate  person  to  lead  the  Military
   Intelligence team based at the airport, under the overall supervision  of
   a major who was based away from the airport, if that role required  those
   concerned  routinely  to  abuse  and  ill-treat  those  held   back   for
   questioning.

168. As mentioned above, W6 left Zimbabwe more than ten years  ago,  he  has
   never visited the new airport facility at Harare and he has never himself
   had to deal with failed asylum seekers returned from the United  Kingdom.
   In discussing these issues he says he relies upon what he has  been  told
   by his two former colleagues who remained in Zimbabwe after  he  left  to
   come to the United Kingdom. It is said that he does not  simply  pass  on
   that hearsay evidence but that, because of his own knowledge of the  work
   of Military Intelligence at the airport, he is able to express a view  as
   to whether what he has been told has about it a ring of truth  such  that
   he accepts it to be accurate.

169. But, the fact remains that this is  not  evidence  about  what  happens
   today at the airport. It is evidence about what he says he has been  told
   happens. That being the case, some assessment must  be  made  as  to  the
   reliability of his sources and the value of the information  he  received
   from them. These contacts are said to be senior non-commissioned officers
   from different sections of Army Counter Intelligence. One works  in  Army
   Counter Intelligence central administration  in  Harare,  and  the  other
   works as an operative in the International Airport.  W6  has  no  further
   contact with either because the first has resigned and the other has been
   transferred to other duties.


170.  The  former  colleague  who  worked  not  at  the   airport   but   in
   administration has no personal knowledge of what goes on at interviews at
   the airport  because  he  was  not  present.  He  is  able  to  read  the
   interrogation reports that are prepared. W6 said in his first statement:


           "My  former  colleague  who  currently  works  in  Army  Counter
           Intelligence central administration has confirmed to me that  he
           has seen reports of interrogations of returning Zimbabweans  who
           had sought asylum in the UK. It should be understood that  there
           is a significant difference between a person  being  interviewed
           (e.g.  on  arrival  at  the  airport)   and   a   person   being
           interrogated. Within the Zimbabwean Intelligence  community  the
           implication of a person having been interrogated (and  hence  an
           interrogation report) is that the interrogated person will  have
           been ill treated. I  am  not  able  to  give  the  names  of  my
           informants, and they are not willing to give  a  statement  even
           anonymously, as it would put them in danger."

171. The information this contact is able to provide is limited to  what  he
   is able to  glean  from  interrogation  reports.  The  evidence  is  that
   interrogation, which is to be distinguished from the interview that takes
   place at the airport, is something that takes place after  a  person  has
   been found to be of interest and so is taken away for that purpose. It is
   difficult to see how the reading of such reports can assist  the  witness
   to know what now goes on at the airport. However, despite the very  clear
   distinction drawn by W6 above between interrogation on the one  hand  and
   the interview at the airport on the other, his new evidence before us was
   that these reports did relate also to interviews at the airport.

172. That is difficult, if  not  impossible,  to  reconcile  with  W6's  own
   evidence. In his witness statement, reproduced  above,  W6  says  clearly
   that it is interrogations that give rise to the  risk  of  ill-treatment,
   that interviews are to be distinguished from interrogations and  that  it
   is only in respect of interrogations that a report is produced.  If  that
   were correct then his colleague, whose  knowledge  of  the  treatment  of
   failed asylum seekers came only from the reading of such  reports,  would
   have information only about what happened  after  such  people  had  been
   found to be of interest and had been taken  away  from  the  airport  for
   interrogation.


173. Even if the term "interrogation" here is used loosely and does  include
   the reports prepared from the questioning at the airport, there are still
   difficulties with this evidence. There would seem to be no reason at  all
   to suppose that such reports would include an account of  an  interviewee
   being physically ill-treated. That would  only  serve  to  undermine  the
   value of the information obtained from the interview. Further, even in  a
   climate of impunity, it is difficult to see why  the  author  of  such  a
   report would make a written acknowledgement of having abused  someone  in
   his custody.

174. It was important to establish, if at all possible,  precisely  what  it
   was that this contact told W6. In cross-examination Mr Kovats  sought  to
   obtain from W6 a clear answer to this question  but,  again,  when  faced
   with a clear and specific question about a matter at the very core of his
   evidence the witness simply failed to provide an answer. The best that W6
   could do was to say:

           "I asked how was the airport these days and received: we've  got
           some  interrogation  reports  coming  from   the   interrogation
           department. But of course I won't discuss it too deep because of
           the security of the police."

      and:

           "He was just saying that they are receiving interrogation report
           from the airport, from people who were coming from this country,
           going to Zimbabwe."

      Mr Kovats persisted, saying that he was trying  to  find  out  exactly
      what W6 was told:

           "It was about interrogation reports from people, failed  asylum,
           coming from UK, passing through Harare airport"

175. This line of questioning ended with the witness saying that he  thought
   that those selected for interrogation were those who  were  detained  and
   deported to Zimbabwe. We do not accept that this is what he was  told  by
   his contact because if it had been  it  would  have  been  reasonable  to
   expect this information to have been provided much earlier than  it  was.
   Further, if that was the information supplied the witness would not  have
   said that this is what he thought to be the case.


176. The other contact upon whom W6 relies is a Military Operative based  at
   the airport. Such a person would be in a position to know how  passengers
   passing through  the  airport  were  treated  by  the  CIO  and  Military
   Intelligence and who would be of interest to the  authorities.  But  what
   exactly did W6 learn from this contact? When one  examines  W6's  written
   evidence it can be seen that there is no indication of anything  that  W6
   was told by his contact at the airport about  what  actually  happens  to
   people as they pass through. In the  first  statement  prepared  for  the
   judicial review proceedings W6 said simply that he had  heard  from  both
   contacts that the CIO considers that the deportation  of  asylum  seekers
   was a process used by the  British  authorities  to  smuggle  spies  into
   Zimbabwe. In the more recent statement he says that  both  contacts  told
   him that deportees who do pass  through  the  airport  are  monitored  or
   followed up in their home areas.

177. W6 was asked in cross examination what he was told by this contact.  He
   said that this contact at the airport phoned him on a  neighbour's  phone
   at the airport. Being an intelligence officer  he  was  aware  the  phone
   might not be secure. He did not ask a direct question and his contact did
   not give him a direct answer but W6 said he knew what he  meant.  He  was
   asked again, later in cross examination, whether  he  asked  this  former
   colleague at the airport to describe exactly how passengers  are  treated
   when they arrive at the airport. We reproduce this from the transcript of
   his evidence:

           A. Well, it says they do the same procedure, but they  got  more
           space, so by more space it means they might change some  of  the
           techniques.


           Q. The extent of your knowledge is, same procedure, more space?


           A. Yes, but you can always evaluate it, it was every  month  you
           had a security threat, so that you can adjust it.

178. This arose from something W6 said in his more recent written  statement
   (emphasis added):


           "There is now a much larger international airport, and as I told
           the Tribunal a year ago when I gave oral  evidence,  the  actual
           procedure may have expanded in the new airport where  there  are
           better facilities. They may now have cells. My friend  has  said
           that there is "enough space" now and the CIO facility is further
           away from the passenger facilities."


179. This illustrates  that  although  W6  claims  to  be  able  to  provide
   evidence about what happens  now  at  the  new  airport  because  he  has
   information from contacts in Zimbabwe, in fact this is not so.  He  bases
   what he says upon what he thinks may be the case.

180. W6 was asked also about a proposal of the respondent's that,  in  order
   to enhance the prospects of an escorted  deportee  making  an  unhindered
   passage through the airport, the escorts could remain  on  the  plane  or
   remain airside so that the deportee, with his travel documents, would  be
   indistinguishable from other passengers. W6  said  this  would  not  work
   because the presence of  those  escorts  would  become  known.  That  was
   because:

           "... the staff of, let us say, Air Zimbabwe, the staff will tell
           us. Even the pilots will tell us. We have  got  what  you  call,
           those who put fuel, the jet fuel in the plane. They will know he
           is on board and we have got those who  clean  the  airplane,  we
           know to talk to those, everyone. Even the staff of the  airline,
           even it - when a plane arrives at the airport that is  staff  of
           Air Zimbabwe put more food on the plane...."

181. But none of that  would  be  necessary  to  discover  the  presence  of
   escorts or, indeed, that the plane contained a  passenger  who  had  been
   deported to Zimbabwe. Before the Tribunal is the unchallenged evidence of
   Ms Cheryl Cates,  Deputy  Director  in  the  Enforcement  and  Compliance
   Directorate within the Border and Immigration  Agency.  This  establishes
   that there is a global and uniform practice that the  passenger  manifest
   identifies passengers who are accompanied or unaccompanied deportees  and
   those who are escorting deportees by the  appropriate  letters  appearing
   next to their name. W6 said that he would have access  to  the  passenger
   manifest. It was one of the sources of information. It is little short of
   fanciful that a person who had in fact been personally concerned with the
   monitoring of deportees returned to Harare airport over a two and a  half
   year period would be unaware of this and would believe instead  that  the
   presence of detainees or their escorts had to be detected by the sort  of
   enquiries W6 has referred to.

182. W6 claims to have personal knowledge of the procedures at  the  airport
   and the mechanisms used by the CIO  to  identify  those  who  may  be  of
   interest. In particular, he would be interested in  those  who  had  been
   deported. He spoke of passports being examined to see if stamps indicated
   that they were likely to be asylum seekers. But of course no stamp  would
   give such an indication. The most that could be discerned would  be  that
   someone was an overstayer in the United Kingdom or had been refused leave
   to enter or remain. Again, we would have expected that someone  with  the
   experience of airport procedures this witness claimed  would  have  known
   that.

183.  All  this  leads  us  to  entertain  very  real  concerns  about   the
   reliability of W6's evidence. It emerged during his oral evidence that he
   did not base what he said about procedures at  the  airport  simply  upon
   what he had been told by these two contacts considered in  the  light  of
   his own personal knowledge of the CIO:

           "What have I learnt about developments in the CIO since I  left?
           Well there are so many sources  of  information.  I  still  have
           friends in the army, police in the CIO itself. And just to speak
           to other people who were in the CIO but who have got, I can  say
           maybe experts, like journalists and so  forth  as  well  as  the
           newspapers, like foreign language newspapers, there are loads of
           language newspapers in Zimbabwe, so there  is  quite  a  lot  of
           information."

184. But we have no information at all about  these  additional  sources  of
   information, disclosed for the first time during the course of  his  oral
   evidence. We have no basis upon which to judge the reliability  of  those
   sources or the extent to which W6 has understood and repeated  accurately
   what they intended to convey. The material that  is  peculiar  to  W6  is
   unreliable. Even if, which is far  from  clear,  he  has  had  regard  to
   sources that are reliable those sources would not  be  peculiar  to  him.
   Thus W6's evidence adds nothing of any  real  evidential  weight  to  the
   appellant's case

185. For these reasons we do not feel able to rely upon W6 as a witness  who
   is in a position to describe authoritatively or reliably the processes to
   which those returned forcibly to Zimbabwe are now subjected. Most of what
   he says about his own experiences of working at the airport is undermined
   by what we  say  above  and  the  rest  is  based  upon  speculation  and
   conjecture, arrived at in the light of unidentified news reports produced
   by journalists he considers as experts. We accept that W6  was  based  at
   the old airport as part of a Military Intelligence team  but  we  do  not
   accept that  this  witness  played  a  role  that  involved  the  routine
   monitoring of passengers or deportees or that he  is  in  a  position  to
   speak about what went on in interviews at the airport  conducted  by  the
   civilian branch of the CIO. For the reasons given above,  we  reject  his
   evidence that he personally witnessed low level violence or "roughing up"
   at the airport.


186.  We consider next the evidence of Witness 5 (W5).

187. W5 has also provided evidence at each stage of the  AA  litigation.  He
   gave oral evidence before us and adopted an additional witness  statement
   dated 26th June 2007, which incorporates much of  what  he  said  in  his
   earlier statements.

188.  In AA(2) the Tribunal summarised his evidence as follows:


       257. ... Witness 5 was recognised as a refugee after he came to  the
            United Kingdom in June 1998. He had been a  Lieutenant  Colonel
            working with the CIO, attached  to  the  military  intelligence
            branch, known as Branch 3. Between 1991 and  May  1998  he  was
            based at the school for military  intelligence  in  Harare  but
            from around 1993 until May 1998 he was  Adjutant  to  the  NCOs
            carrying out day to day security  procedures  at  the  airport.
            This meant that those NCOs were under his command.


       258.    Witness 5 left Zimbabwe before the new airport terminal  had
            been opened but he says that he knows from those still  working
            at the new airport that procedures have changed  only  in  that
            security measures have become even more stringent.


       259.     Dealing  first  with  "ordinary  travellers",   Witness   5
            explained that the CIO would receive the passenger manifest  in
            advance, from which they would identify those  travellers  they
            were interested in and these people would be  approached  after
            they had passed the immigration desk but before they  collected
            their luggage. Then, at the old airport,  there  were  no  real
            facilities for interrogations to be  carried  out  and  so  the
            passenger would be taken away to CIO headquarters.


       260.    Sometimes an immigration officer would refer a passenger  to
            the CIO. When this happened the person would be  questioned  at
            the airport by representatives of the security services present
            at the airport. If found to be of interest he or she  would  be
            taken either by the CIO to headquarters, by the police  to  the
            police station or by the military intelligence  branch  to  the
            barracks on the outskirts of the city.


       261.    Witness 5 told us that during the time he  was  in  Zimbabwe
            they never saw any returned  asylum  seekers  from  the  United
            Kingdom but he confirmed what he had said in his statement  how
            other deportees, mainly from South  Africa,  were  dealt  with.
            After the pilot had handed  the  passport  to  the  immigration
            officer the deportee would be taken to a  separate  room  until
            all the other travellers had been processed  after  which  they
            would be handed over to the CIO.


       262.    Witness 5 has kept in touch with an old friend from military
            intelligence in Harare, Major [     ],  who  is  based  at  the
            airport today. When they spoke on the  telephone  in  mid  2005
            they discussed the proceedings that had  been  brought  in  the
            High Court.  In his witness statement Witness 5 said this:


                 "Major [   ] told me that all the returned  asylum  seekers
                 are questioned because they are  all  considered  to  be  a
                 security risk. It is believed by the security services that
                 the returned asylum seekers have been trained  in  military
                 procedures and espionage in the UK and are now  being  sent
                 back to destabilise the country. He told me  they  are  all
                 handed over to the CIO who carry out  thorough  questioning
                 and then decide what is to be done. Major [   ] went on  to
                 tell me that those asylum  seekers  who  are  released  are
                 nonetheless kept under surveillance."

           And the Tribunal concluded from this evidence:

                 "Thus, it is clear that there has always been and continues
                 to be a screening process carried out at the  airport.  All
                 deportees will be questioned to see if there is any  reason
                 to pursue the enquiry further  and  it  is  only  those  in
                 respect of whom something  of  interest  arises  from  this
                 initial interview, or  from  intelligence  received  before
                 arrival, who will  be  taken  away  for  interrogation.  We
                 consider it significant that this witness,  as  do  others,
                 distinguishes between an interview or  questioning  at  the
                 airport and the "interrogation" that is conducted of  those
                 taken away from the airport. Witness 5  said  that  he  had
                 never seen anyone being tortured at the  airport,  although
                 he added that there was limited space at the old airport."

   189. As  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  pointed  out,  in  reaching  those
        conclusions the Tribunal did not deal directly  with  an  important
        part of his evidence.  W5  did  not  say  in  his  initial  witness
        statement, obtained by AA's legal representatives as part of  their
        case that asylum seekers faced a real  risk  on  return  to  Harare
        airport, that there would be  any  physical  ill-treatment  at  the
        airport. But he did say in his oral  evidence  in  AA(2)  that  the
        "thorough questioning", as he understood it,  involved the  use  of
        "crude techniques" which he referred to as "coercion".


   190. W5 sought to clarify this part of his evidence in his  most  recent
        witness statement. At paragraph 14 of that statement he said:

           "The CIO might take the lead in interviews at the airport or  he
           might be interviewed first by the police and then passed  on  to
           the CIO. There were no facilities at the old  airport  to  carry
           out any proper interrogation and for  this  reason  I  would  be
           surprised if someone was subjected  to  proper  torture  at  the
           airport. However, "low level" ill-treatment  where  someone  was
           roughed up a bit in the office was of course possible. I did not
           witness questioning at the old airport because I was  not  doing
           that work although I had administrative responsibility  for  the
           operatives who worked there.


           However, I would not be at  all  surprised  that  someone  being
           interviewed by the CIO was roughed up in  their  office.  People
           have  grown  up  in  a  violent  society  from  colonial  times.
           Slapping and kicking is common so I certainly  would  not  doubt
           that people being questioned by the CIO were treated  like  that
           at the old airport.  I would not call that torture - it  is  not
           something to write home about.  It is viewed as quite a low  key
           in Zimbabwe.  Someone who has this roughing up would  never  try
           to complain.  They would think themselves lucky and  would  want
           to ensure that they avoided the real torture that  would  likely
           ensue if they made a fuss about it."

   191. It can be seen that here W5 is not describing what he knows  to  be
        the case but what he thinks may have been. He, of course,  has  not
        himself been involved with the questioning  of  passengers  at  the
        airport and has no direct personal experience of what went  on.  He
        had other responsibilities apart from "administrative  command"  of
        the small team of Military Intelligence staff that was based at the
        airport. He confirmed to us in his oral evidence that  he  knew  of
        what went on because he "normally" received  written  reports  from
        his men at the airport.  Asked what  was in these reports he said:


           "All operational matters, there is forms that we would use where
           people are writing intelligence reports that will end up with  a
           comment or assessment of a situation."


   192. Thus, although he had administrative command of  the  team  at  the
        airport for the five years between 1993 and 1998 he does not  claim
        to have personal knowledge of a single specific  incident  of  ill-
        treatment during questioning at the airport.


   193. So, as W5 cannot tell us what went on at the old airport,  or  what
        goes on today at the new airport from his own direct experience  of
        those matters it is important to establish  clearly  upon  what  he
        bases his evidence. It is also essential  to  establish  what  this
        witness means when he refers to the "thorough questioning" that  he
        says all asylum seekers are subjected to upon return to the airport
        as part of the  process  of  deciding  whether  he  or  she  is  of
        sufficient interest to be taken away for interrogation.


   194. We consider first the information available  to  W5  about  current
        procedures at the new airport. This, he said, comes only  from  his
        old friend and colleague, a Major [ ]. The major is referred to  in
        this way because W5 does not wish his name to  be  disclosed.    It
        might be thought, looking the evidence of W5 as a  whole,  that  he
        must have had regular and detailed contact with this source. But it
        emerged in W5's oral evidence to us that, in fact, his evidence  is
        based upon one single conversation with this source, in July 2005.

   195. W5 said that he could remember this  conversation  clearly  and  he
        recalls exactly what he asked and what the  Major  told  him.  That
        asylum seekers were being returned  to  Zimbabwe  from  the  United
        Kingdom was a topic covered in the newspapers. W5 said that "out of
        curiosity" he asked the Major how asylum seekers were  being  dealt
        with. The Major said:

           "We question them thoroughly."

   196. W5 was reminded that he said in  his  witness  statement  that  all
        asylum seekers were handed over to the CIO for thorough questioning
        and he was asked if this meant that  they  were  all  subjected  to
        thorough questioning or to torture. W5 said:


           "I think he was only referring to those who might be of interest
           to the CIO, the police or the military.


           ...
           I think, from my experience, those people who are questioned are
           those people who have been identified already, who they want  to
           speak to."


   197. This, of course, is what the Tribunal  found  to  be  the  case  in
        AA(2). The question that remained was whether the  process  of  the
        "thorough questioning" conducted to identify those of interest  was
        also accompanied by a real risk of ill-treatment.


   198. This is the exchange that took place  as  W5  was  asked  in  cross
        examination about this single conversation with the Major  in  July
        2005:


           Q. And what did he  tell  you  happened  to  passengers  at  the
           airport?


           A.  He  told  me  about  the  questioning,  because   when   the
           deportations started it became big news  everywhere,  so  I  was
           just asking for interest's sake. And then he told me  that  they
           do thorough checks there.


           Q. And did this con(versation) take place in English or Shona?


           A. It took place in  both  English  and  Shona.  Because  in  my
           dialect we usually mix English  and  Shona.  (Major  used  Shona
           phrase meaning thorough questioning)


           Q Is there any particular reason why the Major did not  use  the
           word "interrogation" or indeed the word "interview"?


           A It means one and the same thing as far  as  I  understand  it,
           from the Shona perspective.

   199. So, in fact,  all  that  the  Major  told  W5  during  a  telephone
        conversation W5 described  as  "just  a  general  talk",  was  that
        passengers at the airport are subjected to thorough checks.


   200. It is perhaps surprising that the Major, a serving officer  working
        with the CIO and responsible for the Military Intelligence team  at
        the airport should be willing to supply any information  to  W5  at
        all. The major knew at the time of this conversation  that  he  was
        speaking to a person who had travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  to
        claim asylum and was closely associated with the MDC in the  United
        Kingdom.

   201. As we have seen, it is W5's evidence that there is indeed a  filter
        process to which those identified at the airport as  failed  asylum
        seekers are subjected  in  order  to  identify  those  who  are  of
        interest to the police, the CIO or the military. But we  are  asked
        to conclude that W5's evidence  supports  the  assertion  that  all
        returned asylum seekers face a  real  risk  of  being  ill-treated,
        whatever their  personal  profile  because  all  are  subjected  to
        "thorough questioning" as part of that filter process which W5 says
        is the same thing as interrogation, which, as every knows,  carries
        with it a likelihood of torture.

   202. In his most recent statement W5 said this:


           "[The  Major]  used  a  Shona  phrase  which   means   "thorough
           questioning". What was meant by that phrase was clear to me as a
           former intelligence officer: he meant an interrogation such that
           would  be  expected  to  be  accompanied  by  ill-treatment  and
           torture. Interrogation at the hands  of  the  CIO  is  routinely
           supported by the use of torture."


   203.  But if it were truly the case that W5 believed that  the  thorough
        questioning to which all asylum seekers would be subjected  at  the
        airport would be  expected  to  carry  with  it  ill-treatment  and
        torture it is impossible to understand why he did not say so in his
        first two witness  statements,  both  of  which  were  obtained  to
        support the assertion of such a risk.

   204. And this is not what the Major told W5. It is his interpretation of
        what the Major said. The only information passed on  by  the  Major
        was that all asylum seekers, because they were considered to  be  a
        security risk, will be handed over to the CIO at  the  airport  and
        will face "thorough questioning". The Major chose to  use  a  Shona
        phrase   which   could   have   meant   either    "interview"    or
        "interrogation". W5 chose to place  upon  that  phrase  the  latter
        meaning but he cannot know that the Major intended that  also.  The
        Major  chose  not  to  say  that  all  asylum  seekers   would   be
        interrogated.  That  thorough  checks   are   made,   or   thorough
        questioning is carried out at the airport as part of the process of
        identifying those who are of interest and so are to be  taken  away
        for interrogation, does not support the interpretation placed  upon
        it by W5.

   205. We are satisfied that the evidence given by W5  is  not  objective,
        fact based nor a reliable indication of what goes on at the airport
        today, any more than it is reliable evidence of the risk  faced  by
        passengers passing through the old airport.

   206. Certainly, W5 has a  keen  interest  in  all  that  is  wrong  with
        Zimbabwe today. He says in his most recent statement:

           "In the UK I am chairperson of the Hertfordshire branch  of  the
           MDC... I know most of the top leadership in the UK with  whom  I
           have worked together for many years. My late cousin brother  was
           the national chairman.


           I  am  also  a  commentator  on  Zimbabwean  issues,  especially
           military, security and policing issues on SW Radio Africa.  That
           is a short wave radio station which  is  based  in  the  UK  and
           broadcasts to Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwean regime attempts to jam it
           ... the station's journalists are banned from Zimbabwe. "

   207. There is ample background evidence concerning the propensity of the
        CIO  to  use  violence  against  those  perceived  to  merit   that
        treatment. But for the reasons given above we do not find that  the
        repetition by  this  witness  of  an  account  of  that  propensity
        establishes  that  violence  is  used   routinely   against   those
        passengers passing through Harare airport who are identified as  or
        who are perceived to be asylum seekers returning  from  the  United
        Kingdom and in respect of whom there is no reason  to  suspect  any
        more.

   208. All that is established by the evidence of W5 is that he  was  told
        by his contact in Zimbabwe that only those  failed  asylum  seekers
        who were of interest to the CIO on account of an adverse political,
        criminal  or  military  profile  would  be  subjected  to  thorough
        questioning and those would have  been  identified  in  advance  of
        arrival. Put another way, they  were  not  of  interest  simply  on
        account of being perceived to be failed asylum seekers returning to
        Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom but  because  they  attracted  the
        attention of the CIO on  or  in  advance  of  arrival,  they  being
        identified as someone in whom there was  reason  to  have  such  an
        interest.


The evidence concerning individual returnees


   209. In AA(2) the Tribunal carried out a  detailed  examination  of  the
        evidence  then  available  concerning  the   experiences   of   the
        individual returnees. This led to the conclusion that this evidence
        did not point to there being a consistent pattern of  involuntarily
        returned failed asylum seekers being subjected to ill-treatment  on
        that account alone such as to engage either Convention,  either  at
        the airport or on return to their home areas after passing  through
        the airport.


   210. Mr Henderson  submits  that  this  evidence  should  be  approached
        somewhat differently. In his skeleton argument, at paragraph 153-4,
        he says this:

                 "It was not A's case that  an  inference  of  ill-treatment
                 should be drawn simply from the lack of information about a
                 returnee. However, there was plainly no basis to  draw  the
                 contrary inference (that lack of information  was  evidence
                 of safety).


                 It followed that when the AIT stated that "At  its  highest
                 this evidence  can  only  demonstrate  that  a  very  small
                 minority  of  the  210  failed  asylum   seekers   returned
                 involuntarily may have been subjected to ill-treatment", it
                 was not intending to suggest that an  inference  of  safety
                 should be drawn in relation to those returnees  about  whom
                 no information was available. If it did intend  to  compare
                 the total number  of  cases  about  which  the  information
                 indicated ill-treatment on return with the total number  of
                 returnees rather than with the  total  number  about  which
                 anything was known, it erred. Such an approach  could  only
                 be sustained if there was a finding that those  about  whom
                 no information could be obtained were more likely  to  have
                 returned safely."

   211.  But this is to overcomplicate what is a  straightforward  process.
        The burden of  proof  remains  throughout  upon  the  appellant  to
        demonstrate to the required  standard  the  facts  upon  which  she
        wishes to rely. There is no question of "an inference of safety" in
        the absence of any report at all. In seeking to establish that  all
        involuntarily returned failed asylum seekers face a  real  risk  of
        harm on return to Harare airport the appellant relies, as  part  of
        her case, upon the evidence of what has happened to such persons in
        the past. If there is no  information  about  how  a  returnee  was
        treated on return then  that  does  not  assist  the  appellant  in
        establishing that there is a consistent pattern of abuse.  But  the
        fact of that person being returned does not lose all  significance.
        It is, and it is no more  than  this,  evidence  that  such  person
        returned and there is no evidence to suggest  he  or  she  came  to
        harm.

   212. Mr Henderson has demonstrated that a number of those returnees said
        to be involuntarily returned failed asylum seekers must  have  been
        immigration returnees so that the accounts of the former constitute
        an even smaller sample from which to draw  conclusions  as  to  how
        such persons were treated as a group or class. We accept  that  the
        smaller the group the less  significance  can  be  attached  to  an
        analysis of their collective  experiences.  But  that  evidence  is
        before us and we take it into account.


   213. Ms Sarah Harland, of the Zimbabwe  Association,  has  made  further
        enquiries about those returnees, and some  others,  to  update  the
        information available about their experiences on return.  She  sets
        out what she has discovered in  what  is  now  her  fourth  witness
        statement, dated 26th June 2006.

   214. In this statement  Ms  Harland  says  why  she  believes  that  the
        information  she  has  discovered  since   first   describing   the
        circumstances of their return should lead the Tribunal to different
        conclusions than were reached in AA(2). But, having  examined  what
        she now says, and bearing in mind all the evidence now  before  the
        Tribunal, we see no reason at all to depart from  the  findings  in
        respect of those individual returnees. We consider briefly the  new
        information she offers.

   215. The initial report concerning returnee  4  (R4)  was  that  at  the
        airport he was "intensively questioned" but allowed to pass through
        the airport after persuading the CIO  officer  who  questioned  him
        that he was an overstayer and not an  asylum  seeker.  He  made  no
        claim that he was physically abused. He then left Zimbabwe and went
        to Botswana. Subsequently, a member of the Zimbabwe Association who
        had been detained with R4 in the United  Kingdom  told  Ms  Harland
        that he had spoken to R4 who now said he  had  been  beaten  during
        questioning.

   216. That person, unidentified previously, is now  identified  as  C.K.,
        described as "a very  well  known  political  activist"  whose  own
        immigration status in the United  Kingdom  remains  unresolved.  Ms
        Harland says that the first report does not refer  to  the  beating
        because she had not thought to ask R4 if he had  been  beaten  and,
        presumably, he did not say anything about that when  asked  how  he
        was treated.  More recent information is that R4, whose account  of
        the circumstances in which he had returned to Zimbabwe was one upon
        which the Tribunal explained it could not rely, had  been  detained
        when attempting to leave Zimbabwe recently and has not  been  heard
        from since being taken to a youth training centre.

   217. None of this is reason to cast doubt upon the  reliability  of  the
        first report that was unaccompanied by any account of ill-treatment
        at the airport, even though R4 had every opportunity of  describing
        such ill-treatment, had it occurred.

   218. Returnees 8 and 11 made  no  allegation  of  being  ill-treated  on
        return  in  the  initial  reports  that  were  obtained  about  the
        circumstances of return. The Tribunal  in  AA(2)  found  that  "the
        persistence of  the  Zimbabwe  Association  eventually  secured  an
        indication in the vaguest terms that some form of ill-treatment had
        been inflicted", but saw no reason  not  to  rely  upon  the  first
        reports that no such difficulty was encountered on return.

   219. In her recent witness statement Ms Harland makes clear that she  is
        most uncomfortable with what she sees  as  the  implicit  criticism
        made of her persistence in seeking  further  information.  But  the
        Tribunal does not  mean  to  suggest  any  dishonesty  or  lack  of
        integrity about her efforts to compile information.  The  point  is
        that  repeated  approaches  have  been  made  to  some  sources  of
        information. As a result, changes in the account  of  events  given
        have been recorded. That does not mean that more weight  should  be
        given to the later account that support the appellant's case,  than
        to the initial account which does not.   The  first  account  given
        might well be thought to be more reliable.

   220. Returnee 19 (R19) was someone about whom Ms  Harland  became  aware
        only after AA's case came before the Court of Appeal.  Having  been
        informed by an unidentified minister of religion that a  member  of
        his  congregation  told  him  that  R19  experienced   unidentified
        problems upon being returned to Zimbabwe, Ms Harland spoke  to  R19
        by telephoning him  on  his  mobile  phone  but  that  conversation
        disclosed no complaint of ill-treatment on return. Although R19 did
        not say so, Ms Harland assumes that he did not  feel  able  to  say
        anything at all about any adverse experiences, not even to hint  at
        them, for fear that the  mobile  telephone  conversation  might  be
        monitored.

   221. In her recent statement Ms Harland says that she has exchanged text
        messages with R19 as well as some very brief calls. She did not ask
        if he had been ill-treated but did ask, in a text  message,  if  he
        had been detained and if so for how long. He  responded  by  saying
        that "he was indeed detained (although he did not say how long for,
        and I did not press him on this) and that his leg continues to pain
        him."

   222. Ms Harland assumes this is  a  reference  to  a  detention  at  the
        airport, although that much is far from clear from  this  exchange.
        There is also no specific connection between the  painful  leg  and
        the detention, although we appear to  be  invited  to  assume  some
        connection. We have no idea of what, if  any,  activities  R19  has
        involved himself since his return to Zimbabwe. This response  needs
        to be considered in the context of the exchange as a whole but that
        context is not before us.

   223. This is not, in our view, clear evidence to support the proposition
        that failed asylum seekers returned to Zimbabwe face a real risk of
        being ill-treated at the airport.

   224. Ms Harland's fresh comments concerning Returnee 21 (R21)  throw  up
        further concerns about this part of the evidence generally.

   225. The adjudicator dismissed R21's appeal because he was found to have
        "embellished and exaggerated his story". In her statement  prepared
        for AA(2) Ms Harland said that the Zimbabwe Association "learned of
        [R21] through his partner in  the  UK".  The  Zimbabwe  Association
        understood that R21 was removed involuntarily at the  end  of  2004
        and failed to emerge from the airport to meet his  family  who  had
        gone there to meet him. He later contacted his family and said that
        he had been detained at the airport and held for six months, during
        which time he had been ill-treated. It was not clear how he secured
        his release but he had left Zimbabwe and  was  calling  from  South
        Africa. But it was established that no  such  person  was  removed.
        R21's partner no longer wished  to  co-operate  with  the  Zimbabwe
        Association.

   226. In her recent statement Ms Harland says that the information  about
        the method of removal was not categorical which  is  why  she  said
        that it was understood that the removal had been  involuntary.  But
        if there was no suggestion that this had been an enforced  removal,
        it is difficult to see on what basis Ms Harland felt  able  to  say
        that she understood it had been.

   227. Further concern arises from the fact that Ms Harland says  she  did
        not speak to R21's partner, the source of this information, at  any
        stage. We do not know whether a record was made by the unidentified
        representative of the Zimbabwe Association  of  what  was  said  by
        R21's partner (and if so whether all that was said is  recorded  in
        the statement) or whether this was an  anecdotal  account  recalled
        sometime after the event by someone unconcerned about the need  for
        accuracy.

   228. This account, we find, does  not  take  the  appellant's  case  any
        further.

   229. No fresh information is given  concerning  Returnee  22  (R22)  but
        further evidence of the  methodology  deployed  in  assembling  the
        content of Ms Harland's statement emerges from what  she  now  says
        about R22. Once again, Ms Harland did  not  herself  speak  to  the
        source of the information. She explained how she is able to include
        this account in her statement:

           "I learnt of the case through a female friend of [R22] in the UK
           who herself learnt the  information  not  from  [R22]  but  from
           [R22]'s mother .... My contact in the UK merely  passed  on  the
           limited information she had gleaned from the mother".


        We do not know who this friend is or whether she is to be  regarded
        as independent. If her own immigration status is unresolved she may
        herself have an interest in the outcome of these proceedings.

   230. There is even less certainty about the circumstances  of  Returnees
        23 and 24 because of what Ms Harland says  now.  Once  again,  from
        what we are now told,  they  cannot  be  taken  to  be  involuntary
        returnees at  all.  Ms  Harland  says,  as  she  did,  erroneously,
        concerning  R21,  that  she  understood  these  to  be  involuntary
        returnees. But once again there is  no  indication  upon  what  she
        bases that understanding. This is important because, of course,  if
        they were not involuntary returnees it could  not  have  been  that
        alone  that  gave  rise  to  any  difficulties  they   might   have
        experienced on return.


   231. This is also a case where Ms Harland has not spoken to or otherwise
        communicated with either returnee himself. The Zimbabwe Association
        had received this report from a family member in the United Kingdom
        who had not himself spoken to R23 or R24 but to someone in Zimbabwe
        with whom the United Kingdom relative was  in  infrequent  contact.
        Thus this information, when passed on by Ms Harland, is third hand.



   232. Ms Harland has had further contact with Returnee 38's sister in the
        United Kingdom and says that she has told  her  that  R38,  who  is
        trying to get into South Africa,  has told her that he:

           "... is not ok; so many people are being arrested;  people  have
           fear; there is so much intimidation."

        But this appears to relate to country conditions  generally  rather
        than the risk faced by  failed  asylum  seekers,  on  that  account
        alone, returned from the United Kingdom to Zimbabwe.


   233. Those are the returnees about whom information is provided  by  the
        Zimbabwe Association. There are others we need to consider as well.




   234. Returnee 31 (R31) was not a failed asylum seeker  but  someone  who
        had failed to secure an extension of  her  leave  to  remain  as  a
        student. We know of her only what is contained in a short  internet
        news report from "NewZimbabwe.com" dated 2nd March 2005.  Her  real
        name is not known and the date of the flight upon  which  she  says
        she was one of three deportees is not known.

   235. According to the internet  news  report,  R31  and  the  other  two
        deportees were separated on arrival at Harare airport and taken  to
        recently constructed CIO interview rooms. She was the subject of  a
        hostile interview conducted by two plain clothes men who identified
        themselves to her as "state security guards"  who  wanted  to  know
        what she had been doing in the United Kingdom and what was her role
        with the MDC. She was told that they had information that she was a
        mercenary. She described how she was struck once across  the  mouth
        when she asked why they would not believe she was just a student.

   236. After three hours of this R31 said that she then "remembered"  that
        she had an uncle serving in the Zimbabwean national  army.  At  her
        request the two state security guards stopped questioning  R31  and
        telephoned him. When he promised to  keep  her  in  check  she  was
        allowed to go.  As she left the building she said she could  "still
        hear shouts and groans from  the  other  two  deportees".  That  is
        something that places her apart from every other returnee  who  has
        given an account of what happens on return to the airport,  for  no
        one else, to whose account we have  been  referred,  has  described
        hearing the groans or cries of others under "thorough  questioning"
        at the airport.

   237. The Tribunal in AA(2) clearly felt unable to place much reliance on
        this evidence but did not say that it should  carry  no  weight  at
        all. The Court of Appeal was concerned that the  Tribunal  may  not
        have dealt with this evidence correctly,  saying  that  unless  the
        Tribunal found that it was to be  wholly  disregarded  it  was  not
        justified in concluding so easily that the slap to R31's face would
        not be sufficient to engage article 3 of the ECHR.

   238. The first question to be addressed  is  whether  the  ill-treatment
        described in the news report about R31 was sufficiently serious  to
        cross the article 3 threshold.

   239. It is clear that, as a matter of common  sense,  there  must  be  a
        minimum  level  of  severity  below  which   there   will   be   no
        infringement. If  it  were  otherwise  then  any  physical  contact
        between detainees and those detained, for example  the  application
        of handcuffs or a search of the  person,  would  give  rise  to  an
        infringement.

   240. The European case law generally anticipates  as  a  starting  point
        that there will be at least some evidence of injury.  For  example,
        in Selmouni v France 25803/94 [1999] ECHR 66 at paragraph 87:

           "The Court considers that where  an  individual  is  taken  into
           police custody in good health but is found to be injured at  the
           time of release, it is incumbent  on  the  State  to  provide  a
           plausible explanation of how those injuries were caused, failing
           which a clear issue arises under Article 3 of the Convention."


      In Balough v Hungary 47940/99 [2004] ECHR 361:

           "... it was difficult for a victim to prove  that  he  had  been
           subjected to police brutality in custody. For  that  reason,  it
           was for the Government to provide a  plausible  explanation  for
           his injuries and to prove that its agents were  not  responsible
           for those injuries."

        And in Adan, Limbuela and Tesema, quoting with  approval  what  was
        said in Pretty v United Kingdom 35 EHRR 1:

           "As regards the types of "treatment" which fall within the scope
           of article 3 of the Convention, the court's case law  refers  to
           "ill-treatment" that attains a minimum  level  of  severity  and
           involves actual bodily injury  or  intense  physical  or  mental
           suffering. Where treatment humiliates or debases  an  individual
           showing a lack of respect for, or diminishing, his or her  human
           dignity or arouses feelings  of  fear,  anguish  or  inferiority
           capable  of  breaking  an  individual's   moral   and   physical
           resistance, it may be categorised as  degrading  and  also  fall
           within the prohibition of article 3....."

   241. The circumstances in Pretty were, of course,  very  different,  but
        the principles involved are the same. The high water  mark  of  the
        argument that any application of physical force applied to a person
        in detention will cross the  article  3  threshold  is  Ribitsch  v
        Austria. At paragraph 38:

           "The Court emphasises that, in respect of a person  deprived  of
           his liberty, any recourse to physical force which has  not  been
           made strictly necessary by  his  own  conduct  diminishes  human
           dignity and is in principle an infringement  of  the  right  set
           forth in Article 3 of the Convention."

   242. The report of R31's experiences did not suggest  she  suffered  any
        injury or actual bodily harm. But we accept that a young girl under
        questioning at Harare airport by CIO officers who is slapped on the
        face, even though no injury results, would most likely  fear  as  a
        result that worse was to come, whether it did or, as in this  case,
        did not. We accept that in those circumstances the blow, if it were
        accepted to have occurred, might be sufficient to cross the article
        3 threshold. Therefore we must consider again  the  evidence  about
        R31.

   243. We proceed on the basis that the Tribunal in  AA(2)  did  not  make
        sufficiently  clear  findings  concerning  R31.  The  Tribunal  was
        satisfied that:

           "The way in which this article is written demonstrates that  its
           purpose is not to set out an objectively balanced assessment  of
           the account but is clearly intended  to  fulfil  a  journalistic
           point. It is not possible to identify the true identity of  this
           person and so the respondent has no opportunity of  establishing
           that such a person was removed at all."

   244. For our part we would have  no  difficulty  in  finding  that  this
        evidence does not carry any weight. We find not  reasonably  likely
        that a person who could bring such  an  experience  to  an  end  so
        easily by mentioning the existence of a  relative  serving  in  the
        army would not do so until having suffered hostile questioning  for
        three hours. The claim to be able to hear others  being  abused  at
        the airport stands alone. There is no indication at all as  to  the
        means by which the facts were communicated to NewZimbabwe.com.


   245. But it is not part of the respondent's case that R31 does not exist
        and so we assess the evidence on the basis  that  this  account  is
        true. This was a young girl who did not sit meekly in the interview
        room but asked to know why her word was not good  enough.  She  had
        said she was merely a student  and  that  should  be  accepted.  We
        recall the evidence of W6. Although we have rejected as  unreliable
        his evidence of treatment of returnees at the airport, he is  in  a
        position to speak of the general behaviour of the CIO. He said that
        if someone facing simple questions tried to resist or was  awkward,
        for example by saying that he or she knew their rights,  then  they
        were likely to be abused.

   246. On R31's account she was slapped because she was  impertinent.  She
        interrupted the questioning. That is not  to  be  condoned  but  it
        demonstrates that the reason she suffered  that  ill-treatment  was
        not because she was  identified  as  a  deportee  from  the  United
        Kingdom but because of how she conducted herself. Absent that there
        was no indication that she  would  otherwise  have  attracted  such
        treatment.

   247. That does not establish that anyone subjected to  the  first  stage
        screening interview faces a real risk of being treated in a similar
        way. It establishes only that a person who conducts  themselves  in
        such a way as did R31 does face such a risk. The evidence does  not
        indicate that persons being interviewed by the CIO would  generally
        act in such a way as did R31. The evidence is to the contrary.

   248. R31  describes  hearing  groans  and  shouts  from  the  other  two
        detainees. That evidence is difficult to assess. There is no  other
        similar account in the context of which to consider it. We do  not,
        of course, know anything at all of the  personal  profiles  of  the
        other two detainees. This does not establish  that  they  attracted
        adverse attention at the airport  simply  on  account  of  being  a
        failed asylum seeker returned from the United Kingdom. At  best  it
        stands alone as evidence that, if those groans were the  result  of
        blows (which were not discerned) or any other form of ill-treatment
        being applied in the interview room, then at least on this occasion
        there was ill-treatment at the airport itself.

   249. There has been just one enforced return of a failed  asylum  seeker
        following AA(2). The experiences of that person  are  available  to
        the Tribunal because he was assisted  on  return  by  the  IOM  who
        visited him on four occasions as part  of  the  monitoring  of  the
        resettlement package made available to him.  As we  have  explained
        above, generally the IOM monitoring process will not assist  in  an
        assessment of the level of risk faced by any  particular  returnee.
        Nevertheless, this information concerning the one  recent  forcibly
        returned failed asylum seeker is available and, as one party to the
        proceedings specifically relies upon it, we have regard to it.


   250. The IOM registration form, completed shortly after his  arrival  at
        the airport on 30th August 2006, says this:

           "Had problems because escorts told immigration officials that he
           was being escorted (unnecessary  because  had  valid  passport).
           Immigration questioned him on where he lived, wrote it down  and
           asked why he was being deported."

   251. The "problem" appears to be no more than  that  he  was  questioned
        about the reasons for his enforced return rather than being allowed
        to pass through unhindered as an ordinary traveller.


   252. There is no reason at all to doubt the  accuracy  of  this  account
        because it was recorded by the IOM after he  had  been  allowed  to
        leave the airport. But this account is impossible to reconcile with
        the evidence of other witnesses who insist  that  such  questioning
        would always be carried out  in  a  hostile  manner  and  that  all
        deportees arriving at the airport are handed over to  the  CIO  for
        hostile questioning that can be expected to be  accompanied  by  at
        least low level violence or "roughing up".

   253. This returnee was visited  by  the  IOM  on  13th  September,  28th
        September,  31st  October  and  30th  November.  He   reported   no
        difficulties from the authorities and said  that  he  was  able  to
        attend the polling station and vote in the October  2006  elections
        and had had no problem in doing so.

   254. Professor Ranger has provided evidence of a person identified  only
        as "M" who,  having  been  removed  to  Zimbabwe  from  the  United
        Kingdom, was detained upon arrival  at  Harare  airport  and  later
        subjected to torture. The professor deals with this in a  statement
        dated 15th June 2007. He knows of this case because he was asked to
        look at the case papers and to prepare a report.

   255. We do not know much about the  activities  M  involved  himself  in
        before leaving Zimbabwe in March 2001 and travelling to the  United
        Kingdom. All we are told is that

            "because of the dangers to which his activism had exposed him M
           was sent to the United Kingdom on an exchange programme".

        He did not make a claim for asylum in the United  Kingdom.  He  was
        arrested as an  overstayer  in  June  2003  and  deported  back  to
        Zimbabwe.  On  arrival  the  immigration  officer  appeared  to  be
        expecting him because having looked  at  M's  passport  he  made  a
        telephone call and M was taken to a room.  Another  telephone  call
        was made and two men arrived, introducing themselves as coming from
        the President's office.  We  know  from  other  evidence  that  CIO
        officers sometimes introduce themselves in that way.

   256. M's account of his experiences upon return is this. He says he  was
        taken from the airport to a disused  army  barracks  where  he  was
        subjected to severe torture. He was asked about being a  member  of
        the  MDC  and  about  spying  for   Britain.   When   he   regained
        consciousness he found himself dumped close to  his  home.  He  was
        taken by a member of the MDC to the border.  M  crossed  over  into
        Botswana and claimed asylum at the  British  High  Commission.  His
        claim was processed by UNHCR who recognised him as a refugee.

   257. But this evidence reinforces that which is not in dispute. It  does
        not assist with the issues to be addressed in  this  appeal  other,
        perhaps, than providing further confirmation that, if interrogation
        and abuse is going to take place, it will do so elsewhere  than  at
        the airport during an initial  interview.  M  did  not  suffer  any
        physical  ill  treatment  at  the  airport.  He  had  clearly  been
        identified before arrival as someone in whom  the  authorities  had
        sufficient interest to justify him being  taken  for  interrogation
        off the airport.

   258. M was, clearly, politically active in Zimbabwe. It is apparent that
        those activities were known to the authorities because otherwise it
        would not be said that he had to flee from Zimbabwe because of  the
        dangers to which his activism had exposed him. On his own  account,
        even if accepted at its very highest, he did  not  attract  abusive
        ill-treatment on return because he was a failed asylum  seeker.  He
        had not made any such claim. If he was ill-treated it  was  because
        he had been identified as someone of adverse  interest  because  of
        his individual political profile and what was known about him.

Conclusions

   259. The Court of  Appeal  ordered  that  the  Tribunal  reconsider  the
        country guidance given in AA(2) mainly because the Tribunal did not
        deal expressly with important evidence  of  W5  and  W6  which,  if
        accepted, might be pivotal to what was seen as  a  finely  balanced
        decision. This is because it would indicate that the first stage of
        the screening process found to take place at the airport  would  be
        accompanied by a real risk of violence. If that were  found  to  be
        the case, then it would be necessary to  revisit  the  findings  in
        respect of the accounts of the individual returnees. They had  been
        assessed in the  light  of  the  Tribunal's  understanding  of  the
        evidence of W5 and W6 that violence would accompany only the second
        stage of the process, where a person was taken  for  interrogation.
        We have identified above the other areas of  concern  expressed  by
        the Court of Appeal.

   260. We have examined carefully those issues about which  the  Court  of
        Appeal expressed concern. We have more extensive  and  up  to  date
        background and expert evidence as well as the  benefit  of  hearing
        further evidence from W5 and W6 and receiving detailed  submissions
        from counsel. We have explained why, as a result, we see no  reason
        to take a different view of the evidence as a whole from that taken
        by the Tribunal  in  AA(2).  Indeed  that  is  the  view  we  reach
        ourselves on the basis of all the evidence now available.  We  have
        explained why the evidence of  W5  and  W6  does  not  support  the
        proposition that violence is used during the initial interview that
        will take place at the airport. The evidence before  us  reinforces
        the finding that there is a two stage process at  the  airport  and
        that anyone identified during the initial  questioning  that  takes
        place at the airport  as  being  of  interest  will  be  taken  for
        interrogation. At that second stage there is a real risk of serious
        harm, but not before.

   261. Given that, in the light of the findings of fact set  out  in  this
        determination, the basis upon which concern was expressed about the
        conclusions of the Tribunal in AA(2) has fallen away, it  might  be
        thought that would be sufficient to determine the  issues  in  this
        appeal. But we must  make  clear  our  findings  generally  on  the
        further, more up to date evidence we have considered.

   262. We cannot in this determination discuss all the evidence  that  has
        been put before us. The determination is long enough without  doing
        so. But we have had regard to all that the parties have referred us
        to. For the reasons given above we do not feel able  to  rely  upon
        those parts of Mr Walker's  evidence  that  depends  upon  the  new
        information provided by the British Embassy. We have  reviewed  the
        deteriorating country conditions, taken account of the views of the
        expert witnesses and looked carefully at the  new  evidence  relied
        upon by the appellant, including the additional and new information
        concerning individual returnees.

   263. The general country conditions in Zimbabwe continue to deteriorate.
        Many people in Zimbabwe struggle to have access to sufficient food.
         Water and electricity  supplies  are  sporadic.  Shops  have  been
        affected badly by recent attempts by the government to control  the
        ever spiralling inflation that has  brought  the  economy  to  near
        collapse. Shelves are empty and there  is  no  sign  that  business
        owners are able or willing  to  restock  since  they  may  well  be
        required to sell goods at less than cost price.


   264. The  CIO  has  taken  over  responsibility  for  the  operation  of
        immigration control at Harare airport and immigration officers  are
        being replaced by CIO officers. We accept  also  that  one  of  the
        purposes of the CIO in monitoring arrivals at  the  airport  is  to
        identify those who are thought to be, for whatever reason,  enemies
        of the regime. The aim is to detect those of interest because of an
        adverse military  or  criminal  profile.  The  main  focus  of  the
        operation to identify those who may be of adverse interest  remains
        those who are perceived to be politically active in support of  the
        opposition. But anyone perceived to be a threat to or a  critic  of
        the regime will attract interest also.

   265. The fact that the CIO has taken over responsibility for  monitoring
        all returning passengers at Harare airport is  not  something  that
        effects the level of risk. The evidence before AA(2) was  that  all
        deportees were handed over to the CIO for questioning in any event.
        Then, as now, those deportees will have been identified in  advance
        from the  passenger  manifest  and  the  CIO  will  have  formed  a
        preliminary view as to which, if any, are of further interest.


   266. Large numbers of passengers  pass  through  the  airport.  The  CIO
        continues to recognise that it cannot  question  everyone;  and  so
        there is a screening process to  identify  those  who  might  merit
        closer examination. We see no reason to suppose that the heightened
        role of the CIO would change this. There are now additional demands
        upon the CIO as it is responsible  for  monitoring  all  passengers
        passing through the airport, both on arrival and departure. We have
        set out the  evidence  that  indicates  in  whom  the  CIO  has  an
        interest. This will be those in respect of whom there is any reason
        to suspect an adverse political, criminal or  military  profile  of
        the type identified in AA(2). In addition, those  perceived  to  be
        associated with what have come to be identified  as  civil  society
        organisations may  attract  adverse  interest  as  critics  of  the
        regime.

   267. There is no evidence that ordinary passengers  returning  from  the
        United Kingdom experience any difficulty  in  passing  through  the
        airport. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary. Nor is  there  a
        real risk that those returning  to  Zimbabwe  after  being  refused
        leave to remain after the leave initially granted has  expired  are
        regarded with suspicion  or  treated  otherwise  than  as  ordinary
        travellers.


   268. Nor is there evidence of any consistent  pattern  of  treating  any
        differently those who have not claimed asylum in the United Kingdom
        but who have been forcibly removed to Zimbabwe  because  they  have
        been refused leave to enter or remain. There is  no  evidence  that
        any of the  twenty  three  "immigration  deportees"  removed  since
        August  2006  have  experienced  any  such  difficulties.  We  have
        accepted that all those who are deportees will be  identifiable  as
        such upon return  to  Harare  airport  and  so  will  generally  be
        subjected to some enquiry before being allowed to pass through  the
        airport.


   269. This demonstrates that, despite the political rhetoric of President
        Mugabe and other highly placed members of  the  ruling  party,  the
        fact alone of returning to Zimbabwe having spent time in the United
        Kingdom, even if there is some irregularity discernable from stamps
        in the passenger's passport, does not give rise to any real risk on
        return to Harare airport.

   270. The question, then, is whether in respect of  a  deportee  who  has
        made an unsuccessful asylum claim before being returned  to  Harare
        airport, but about whom nothing is known such as to  give  rise  to
        any adverse interest,  he  will  be  identified  and  detained  for
        questioning, either at the airport or elsewhere.


   271. It may seem to be extremely unlikely  that  someone  who  has  been
        found to  have  given  an  untruthful  account  in  support  of  an
        unfounded asylum claim pursued  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
        driven as  a  matter  of  integrity  to  volunteer  on  return  the
        information that he or she has made an asylum claim in  the  United
        Kingdom. But the respondent accepts that  the  Tribunal  cannot  be
        asked to assess the risk faced by such returnees on the basis  that
        they are expected to lie to immigration officials on their  return.
        Therefore, we proceed on the basis that  the  fact  of  the  failed
        asylum claim will be disclosed to anyone who asks.


   272. It seems to us that there are three main reasons advanced why it is
        claimed that those who have made an unsuccessful  asylum  claim  in
        the United Kingdom might be at risk if  returned  involuntarily  to
        Zimbabwe and the fact of the asylum claim became known.  First,  it
        is said they would be seen to be as disloyal, since they must  have
        told lies about the regime. Second, they may be seen  as  spies  or
        saboteurs, sent  by  Britain  to  cause  trouble  for  the  regime.
        Finally, it  may  be  thought  that  they  are  supporters  of  the
        opposition MDC party and so opponents of the regime.


   273. Nearly a quarter of the population of the  Zimbabwe  has  left  the
        country. It is clearly the case that the Zimbabwean government  and
        its agents are fully aware that the overwhelming majority of  these
        are economic migrants. It is Professor Ranger's evidence  that  the
        fact that a person has sought to prosper economically in the United
        Kingdom will not lead to him being thought of as disloyal.  Loyalty
        can be demonstrated  by  having  provided  a  stream  of  financial
        support for those family members who have remained at home.

   274. It is reasonable to assume that the Zimbabwean government  and  its
        agents are well aware of the ways in which those  of  its  citizens
        outside the country seek to support those who  remain  behind.  The
        services of companies who deliver  within  Zimbabwe  groceries  and
        other goods ordered and paid for here are advertised openly.  There
        is no evidence that the authorities seek in any way to obstruct the
        delivery of these goods.  It is, no doubt, recognised that  without
        food and money sent by Zimbabweans living abroad the  situation  in
        Zimbabwe for those that remain would be even worse.

   275. Professor Ranger says also that  the  position  of  the  Zimbabwean
        government is that there are no true asylum seekers from  Zimbabwe.
        Those who have claimed, other than criminals who  do  not  wish  to
        return to face the consequences, have been persuaded by the British
        to tell lies about the Zimbabwean authorities. The fault lies there
        rather than with the Zimbabwean  citizen  who  left  not  to  claim
        asylum but to improve his economic circumstances and perhaps  those
        of relatives who remain in Zimbabwe. As we have noted above,  there
        is little evidence that the authorities have  translated  the  anti
        British rhetoric and assertions of disloyalty made against those in
        the United Kingdom into adverse action against any of its  citizens
        returning to Zimbabwe in whom there is otherwise no interest.

   276. There is certainly evidence of the  political  rhetoric  portraying
        Britain as using asylum seekers as a cloak  to  conceal  spies  and
        saboteurs being sent back to destabilise the situation in Zimbabwe.
        The issue to be addressed is whether that assertion is believed and
        acted upon.

   277. As a matter of logic that claim is nonsense. It is difficult to see
        why the authorities in Zimbabwe would think that someone who sought
        to remain in the United  Kingdom  but  is  being  forcibly  removed
        should agree to spy for the country  that  was  deporting  him.  If
        Britain did wish to send spies to Zimbabwe it is hard to understand
        why  they  would  seek  to  send  them  within  a  small  group  of
        identifiable people who are likely to attract at least a  screening
        interview on return to Harare airport. There is  something  in  the
        region of 50,000 people travelling in  and  out  of  Zimbabwe  each
        year. The vast majority of those, regarded as ordinary  passengers,
        pass  through  the  airport  unhindered.  Plainly,  the  Zimbabwean
        authorities will be aware that there  are  in  the  United  Kingdom
        supporters of the MDC and critics of the Zimbabwean regime who have
        not claimed asylum.

   278. It is said, of course, that rationality  is  not  a  characteristic
        displayed by the Zimbabwean government and  its  agents.  But  even
        witness  66, who is said to be in  a  position  to  know,  said  in
        evidence that the purpose of the rhetoric was to  demonstrate  that
        people were foolish to go abroad to claim asylum. Those who do will
        be sent back. Thus,  there  is  no  benefit  in  fleeing  from  the
        country. He said, referring to the claim by Mr Mayo that  thousands
        of asylum seekers were being trained in Britain, that this was,  in
        his view, no more than a response to what  was  going  on  at  that
        time: He added:

           "I do not think they believed it. Nor the CIO operators  on  the
           ground."

   279. We do not accept either that  all  those  seen  as  having  claimed
        asylum in the United Kingdom will be thought to  be  supporters  of
        the MDC on that account alone. As  noted  earlier,  the  suggestion
        that the Zimbabwean authorities proceed on the  basis  that  anyone
        with a connection with Britain must be considered  a  supporter  of
        the MDC is impossible to reconcile with the significant effort  put
        into obtaining intelligence concerning those in the United  Kingdom
        who do support the opposition. After all,  there  would  be  little
        point in sending CIO operatives to infiltrate groups in the  United
        Kingdom if everyone retuned was, in any event, to be presumed to be
        a supporter of the MDC and an enemy of  the  state  qualifying  for
        detention and interrogation.

   280. We have examined above, at paragraph 249, the  only  actual  recent
        evidence of how a failed asylum seeker,  compulsorily  returned  to
        Zimbabwe, would be treated after  he  or  she  passed  through  the
        airport and returned to their home area. That individual  was  told
        that he would be monitored after being  released  from  the  police
        station but he  was  not  aware  of  that  happening.  He  did  not
        experience any discriminatory exclusion from food or  services  and
        there is nothing to suggest that,  having  returned  home,  he  was
        treated any differently from anyone else  returning  home  after  a
        period abroad.

   281. The evidence before us does not indicate  any  reason  to  reach  a
        different view from that reached by  the  Tribunal  in  AA(2)  that
        there may well be some form of  post-airport  monitoring  of  those
        returned involuntarily from the United Kingdom but that will not be
        persecutory and will cease if nothing of interest comes  to  light.
        There  is  no  real  evidence  of  returnees  being  subjected   to
        discriminatory deprivation of food aid or other services on account
        of having been in the United Kingdom.

   282. For all these reasons we adopt and reaffirm the guidance  given  in
        AA(2), set out above at paragraph  34  of  this  determination.  We
        identify one further risk category.  The  evidence  indicates  that
        those associated with the civil  society  organisations  that  have
        attracted adverse interest from  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  will
        face the same level of risk as  those  perceived  to  be  political
        opponents of the Zimbabwean regime.

HS's appeal

   283. Should the appellant, being a person about whom nothing is known to
        make her of adverse interest to the authorities in Zimbabwe, choose
        to return voluntarily she will,  on  return,  be  indistinguishable
        from an ordinary passenger returning from the United Kingdom and so
        will be at no risk of attracting any interest such as  may  require
        her to disclose the fact of  having  made  an  unsuccessful  asylum
        claim in the United Kingdom. There is no reason to suppose that her
        passage through the airport would be hindered.

   284. The appellant says she will not return voluntarily and so  will  be
        removed. On arrival at Harare airport she will be identified  as  a
        deportee, whether escorted or not. An examination of  her  passport
        will indicate that she entered the United Kingdom lawfully but that
        her leave has expired. Her passport may show also that she  applied
        unsuccessfully for leave to remain in a different capacity. That is
        not something that will excite further interest.


   285. If she discloses the fact of having  made  an  unsuccessful  asylum
        claim while in the United Kingdom, in the  absence  of  some  other
        reason for the CIO to entertain interest in  her  that  fact  alone
        will not give rise to any real risk that she  would  be  taken  for
        further more intense questioning or interrogation. That may explain
        the accounts of the returnees who say they were not  asked  whether
        they had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom. A positive  response
        would not in itself lead to any reason for further  action  in  the
        absence of other intelligence, in which  case  the  returnee  would
        already have been identified as a candidate for interrogation.


   286. The appellant would, therefore, be  allowed  to  pass  through  the
        airport after, at most, a relatively short screening interview.


   287. As a deportee from the United Kingdom who is returning  home  after
        having spent some time away the appellant  may  well  attract  some
        interest on return to her home area, or wherever she chooses to  go
        to  re-establish  herself.  This  interest  will  be  from  whoever
        represents the authorities in the area to which she has gone. There
        is nothing about  this  appellant  to  give  rise  to  any  intense
        monitoring or any adverse interest from those authorities that will
        cause the appellant any difficulty.


   288. This appellant has relatives in Zimbabwe as well as a  brother  who
        is settled in the United Kingdom to whom she can look for  support,
        should it be required, both financial and material.  She is herself
        a medical professional whose services will be much in  demand.  She
        is in a better position than many returning  to  Zimbabwe  after  a
        period of time away. There is no reason to suppose  that  she  will
        not  be  able  to  find  accommodation  and  employment  relatively
        quickly. She said in a witness statement  at  B/240  that  when  it
        becomes known that she has been in the United Kingdom and has  made
        an unsuccessful asylum claim the practicing certificate  she  would
        need to work as  a  doctor  would  not  be  granted.  But  that  is
        difficult to reconcile with our findings generally and with what is
        known about  other  well  qualified  professionals  returning  from
        Britain to Zimbabwe who are accepted into influential posts.  Those
        persons, such as the Chevening scholars, are not of  course  failed
        asylum seekers. But in view of our findings  generally  we  do  not
        accept that the appellant would be disqualified from working.


   289. For these reasons we find that the appellant does not have  a  well
        founded fear of persecution on return to Zimbabwe for any reason at
        all. Having considered her individual circumstances, we  find  that
        there are not substantial grounds for believing that  she  faces  a
        real risk of serious harm, whether on account  of  general  country
        conditions or otherwise.


   290. The appellant has not established there to be a real risk that  she
        would be subjected to any ill-treatment such  as  to  infringe  her
        rights under article 3 of the ECHR.


   291. We do not understand there to  be  any  claim  that  requiring  the
        appellant to return to Zimbabwe would infringe article  8.  Such  a
        claim  would  not  be  made  out.  The   appellant   suffers   from
        hypertension, a condition controlled by medication. She  says  that
        she would be unable to access that medication in  Zimbabwe  and  so
        would be at risk of having a stroke. But there is  no  evidence  in
        support of that assertion. In view  of  what  is  known  about  the
        ability to  have  items  sent  from  abroad  it  may  be  that  the
        appellant's brother in the United Kingdom could be called  upon  to
        assist  should  there  be  any  interruption  in  the   access   to
        medication.

   292. The appellant has not established any family  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom. In view of the time that the appellant  has  been  in  the
        United Kingdom, she may well have established a private  life,  but
        it has not been demonstrated that she could not enjoy that  private
        life equally well in Zimbabwe. Any interference  that  might  arise
        would, plainly,  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  being
        pursued in requiring her to return.

Summary of conclusions

   293. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

   294. The appellant does  not  qualify  for  the  grant  of  humanitarian
        protection.

   295. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Signed                                       Date: 9th November 2007





Senior Immigration Judge Southern


                                   ANNEX 1

REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW
IN THE DETERMINATION

   1. Reconsideration has been ordered of the decision of Immigration  Judge
      Foudy who, by a determination  dated  31st  March  2006,  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent made  on  13th
      February 2006 that the appellant should be  removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom as an illegal entrant after her asylum and human rights claims
      had been refused.


   2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Zimbabwe, was  born  on  23rd  June
      1965. She arrived in the United Kingdom  on  11th  May  2002  and  was
      granted leave to enter as a visitor for six months. She then sought to
      secure further leave to remain in various capacities, including  as  a
      highly skilled migrant on the basis of being a fully qualified medical
      doctor.  It  was  after  those  applications  were  refused  that  the
      appellant claimed asylum on the basis  of  being  at  risk  on  return
      because of her support for the MDC and because of what she had done in
      the course of her employment as a hospital doctor.

   3. The immigration judge rejected as untrue the whole  factual  basis  of
      the appellant's claim to be at risk in Zimbabwe  and  the  appellant's
      representative does not  seek  to  challenge  those  findings.  It  is
      unambiguously clear from the determination that the immigration  judge
      would have dismissed the appeal if she had not been  bound  to  follow
      the then binding country guidance case of AA (Involuntary  returns  to
      Zimbabwe) CG [2005] UKAIT 00144.

   4. It is now agreed between the parties that,  although  the  immigration
      judge cannot possibly be criticised for having allowed the  appeal  on
      this basis, she was in fact wrong in law to do  so.  This  is  because
      that country guidance case was itself found to be wrongly  decided  by
      the Court of Appeal in AA & LK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 401.  This means
      that any appeal allowed solely in reliance upon it is also  materially
      wrong in law and cannot stand. See: OM (AA(1) wrong in  law)  Zimbabwe
      CG [2006] UKAIT 00077.

   5. That being the case the decision to allow the appeal cannot stand  and
      shall be set aside. The Tribunal must now substitute a fresh  decision
      to allow or dismiss the appeal.

   6. But that  cannot  be  done  today.  The  Tribunal  must  consider  the
      appellant's position in the light of  the  current  objective  country
      evidence. The  Tribunal  is  aware  of  the  extremely  fluid  country
      conditions in Zimbabwe which might be  thought  to  have  deteriorated
      significantly in some  respects  since  the  appeal  came  before  the
      immigration judge a year ago. This may or may not be relevant  to  the
      appellant's human rights claim. The appellant's  representatives  wish
      to have the opportunity  of  putting  forward  up  to  date  objective
      evidence and to advance those arguments and, in view of the overriding
      objective of fairness set out in the Procedure Rules, it is right that
      they should be able to do so.

   7. But there is no reason at all to disturb the unchallenged findings  of
      fact made by the immigration judge and set out between  paragraphs  13
      and 18 of the determination. This means that the issues  at  large  at
      the  second  stage  reconsideration  hearing  shall  be   limited   to
      submissions upon the appellant's position on return to Zimbabwe in the
      light of the current objective country evidence  in  addition  to  any
      recent expert evidence the appellant's  representatives  may  wish  to
      rely upon.


                                   ANNEX 2

     Findings of fact made by the immigration judge and set out between
                    paragraphs 13-18 of her determination
Findings



     1. I accept that the Appellant is a Zimbabwean  national  because  she
        has been consistent in this part of her claim and she  entered  the
        UK on a valid  Zimbabwean  passport.  The  Respondent  accepts  the
        nationality of the Appellant.



     2. I also accept that the  Appellant  is  not  willing  to  return  to
        Zimbabwe voluntarily. She gave that evidence before me and  I  also
        find that her history of making several applications to  enter  and
        remain in the UK are  further  evidence  of  her  unwillingness  to
        return to her home country.


     3. I accept that the Appellant is a qualified doctor because  she  has
        been consistent in this part of her claim and the Respondent  takes
        no issue on her occupation.



     4. I do not find it credible that the Appellant was  involved,  either
        personally or through her family, in supporting the  MDC   for  the
        following reasons:
               a) the Appellant stated in her interview that her father had
                  been a member of  the MDC  since  1998  (Q18).  She  also
                  stated that when she returned to  Zimbabwe  from  Germany
                  (and she returned in 1998)  there was a  new  party  that
                  was promising change, namely the MDC (Qs 17).  However  I
                  find that the CIPU report records that the  MDC  was  not
                  formed until September 1999 (  CIPU  paragraph  4.10  and
                  Annex A).  The Appellant claims now that her  answer  was
                  misunderstood and that she had meant to explain that  her
                  Father supported the trade union movement  whose  leaders
                  went on to form the MDC. If that is the case, I  find  it
                  incredible that the Appellant did not  simply  give  that
                  account in her interview. She is  a  clearly  intelligent
                  woman with an exceptional command of English.  It  was  a
                  simple matter for her to say in interview that her father
                  supported the trade  unionists  that  were  opposing  the
                  government and that when they helped to form the  MDC  he
                  followed them. However  her  answers  in  interview  were
                  clear and unambiguous statements that in 1998 the MDC had
                  already been formed. That is, I find,  the  only  logical
                  way to interpret her reference to  her  own  interest  in
                  1998 in "the new party that promised  to  effect  change"
                  (Q17).
               b) In oral evidence the Appellant stated that prior  to  the
                  formation of the MDC her father had been an active  trade
                  unionist. That was  also  the  account  in  her  rebuttal
                  statement of 8th March 2006  (Appellant  bundle  page  9,
                  paragraph 8). However the Appellant made no reference  to
                  those  activities  in  her  first  statement  or  in  her
                  interview. I find that if the  Appellant  's  father  had
                  genuinely been involved as an active trade  unionist  the
                  Appellant it is not credible that the Appellant failed to
                  mention those activities earlier in her asylum claim.
               c) The Appellant claimed that she participated in  a  strike
                  in August  1999 and that in  November 1999 she found that
                  a snake had been placed at her door. She assumed that the
                  CIO had placed the snake there to frighten her as she had
                  participated in the strike. I find  that,  whilst  it  is
                  credible that the Appellant found a snake at her door, it
                  is not credible that it was deliberately placed there  by
                  the CIO because of her strike action.  I  find  that  the
                  objective evidence shows that the CIO acts in swift  and,
                  at times, brutal fashion therefore  it  would  be  highly
                  unlikely to be so reticent as to  wait  3  months  before
                  taking any action against a government employee  that  it
                  disfavoured. Furthermore, the Appellant has  not  claimed
                  that any arrests were made at the strike, or  thereafter,
                  and no other participants appear  to  have  received  the
                  same treatment as the  Appellant.  I  therefore  find  it
                  incredible that the snake was connected to the CIO as the
                  Appellant claims;
               d) the Appellant claims that the last event  that  triggered
                  her flight from Zimbabwe was when she took photographs of
                  a beaten patient and the youth militiamen confiscated the
                  camera and threatened her. In  her  first  statement  the
                  Appellant clearly stated that her sole intention  was  to
                  document the patient's  injuries  for  his  medical  file
                  (Respondent bundle page B6,  paragraph  19).  However  in
                  interview the Appellant changed her account  markedly  to
                  claim that she intended to send the  photographs  to  the
                  Amani Trust Respondent bundle page C20, Q  107).  I  find
                  that the Amani Trust is a human  rights  organisation  in
                  Zimbabwe. It is quite incredible that the Appellant  ever
                  intended to send photographs of a beaten patient  to  the
                  Amani Trust when she would not even join the MDC  because
                  to be found with a membership card would  jeopardise  her
                  career (Respondent bundle page B2, paragraph  6).  It  is
                  yet more incredible when compared with her first account,
                  which  stated  plainly  that  the  Appellant   took   the
                  photographs "purely  to  document  it  in  the  patient's
                  file," (Respondent bundle page B6, paragraph 19). I  find
                  that  these  important  inconsistencies   are   a   clear
                  indication of the incredible nature of the  Appellant  's
                  claim;
               e) if, as the Appellant claims, she left Zimbabwe in fear of
                  her life,  it is incredible that she did not claim asylum
                  on arrival here.  Instead  she  stated  that  she  was  a
                  genuine visitor.  The  Appellant  must,  therefore,  have
                  indicated that she intended to  leave  the  UK  within  6
                  months of  her  arrival,  when  she  did  not  have  that
                  intention.  At best, the Appellant had a vague hope  that
                  the political situation in Zimbabwe might change at  some
                  time in the future; that is not consistent with a settled
                  intention to leave the UK within 6  months.  Furthermore,
                  the Appellant made two further applications to remain  in
                  the UK, neither of which revealed that she had an  asylum
                  claim.  It  was  not  until  the  all   the   Appellant's
                  application to remain for professional  purposes  failed,
                  and after a period of living in the UK without any leave,
                  that she finally claimed asylum. I find  that  those  are
                  not the actions of a genuine refugee and add considerable
                  evidence to the asylum claim being an incredible one;
               f) the delay that the Appellant made in claiming  asylum  is
                  even more incredible when one considers that she  was  in
                  close contact with her brother, whose  own  asylum  claim
                  was granted in March 2004. In oral evidence the Appellant
                  actually stated that her brother suggested that she claim
                  asylum when he did but she did  not  do  so  as  she  was
                  reluctant  to  accept  that  she  could  not  return   to
                  Zimbabwe. I do not  find  it  at  all  credible  that  an
                  intelligent woman with the fears the Appellant claims she
                  had would delay as long as this Appellant did  in  making
                  her asylum claim.



     5. Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
        etc) Act 2004 requires me to take account of certain  behaviour  as
        damaging the credibility  of  the  Appellant.  In  accordance  with
        section 8 I have taken into account as damaging to the  Appellant's
        credibility the following behaviour of the Appellant :
        (a) entering the UK as a visitor as behaviour designed or likely to
         conceal information;

        (b) failing in her previous immigration applications to reveal that
        she was in need of international protection  as behaviour designed
        or likely to  mislead;

        c) The gross  delay  in  making  her  asylum  claim   as  behaviour
           designed  or  likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the  handling  or
           resolution of his claim or the taking of a decision in  relation
           to the claimant.



        Furthermore, in respect of those behaviours set out at (a), (b) and
        (c) above, I find that the Appellant has failed to provide a
        reasonable explanation for the behaviour.



     6. Given my findings, the issue of internal relocation is redundant.




                                   ANNEX 3

                 Schedule of documentary evidence submitted

All material in the public domain is identified in the form in which  it  is
publicly available. No conclusion should be drawn from the  presence  of  or
absence from the list of material in this schedule as  to  the  identity  of
any source mentioned to in the determination

                            Appellant's Volume A

|Document                                                   |Date   |
|NCA members arrested again! - Zimbabwe Peace Project       |14/7/07|
|Zimbabwe: Abusive policies disrupt progress on HIV/AIDS    |28/7/07|
|Human Rights Watch (HRW)                                   |       |
|No help for Zimbabwe's homeless, BBC News                  |30/8/06|
|Outrage at Zimbabwe bugging plan, BBC News                 |31/8/06|
|Food Aid Report: September 2006 - Zimbabwe Peace Project   |Sep    |
|                                                           |2006   |
|Commission blames state agents for MP's assault, ZimOnline |21/9/06|
|Zim union men 'deserved beating', BBC News                 |25/9/06|
|Police Brutality Victim Speaks Out, Dzikamai Chidyausike in|27/9/06|
|Harare, Institute for War and Peace Reporting (AR No.77,   |       |
|27-Sep-06)                                                 |       |
|Zim says unionists injured themselves, Mail & Guardian (SA)|6/10/06|
|Shock secret DVD captures brutal torture of unionists,     |11/10/0|
|Zimbabwe Online                                            |6      |
|Zimbabwe prisons 'embarrassing', BBC News                  |16/10/0|
|                                                           |6      |
|Mugabe's CIOs infiltrate church and donor organizations in |17/11/0|
|S.A. By Tererai Karimakwenda, SW Radio Africa              |6      |
|Hunger will finish us off, say elderly and handicapped,    |22/11/0|
|Zimbabwe Peace Project                                     |6      |
|Don't cry when state responds, Harare warns protesters,    |23/11/0|
|Zimbabwe Online,                                           |6      |
|"Who guards the guards?" Violations by Law Enforcement     |Dec    |
|Agencies in Zimbabwe, 2000-2006 Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO  |2006   |
|Forum                                                      |       |
|Images of injuries sustained during beatings by the Police,|4/12/06|
|Women of Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA)                             |       |
|Zanu thugs attack MDC members in UK, Movement for          |4/12/06|
|Democratic Change                                          |       |
|Politically motivated violence against women escalates in  |8/12/06|
|Zimbabwe, Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum                  |       |
|Prisoners fume over toil on govt officials' farms          |8/12/06|
|Lucia Makamure, The Zimbabwe Independent                   |       |
|Zimbabwe police 'brutality rises', BBC News                |14/12/0|
|                                                           |6      |
|Statement on the attempted assassination of NCA National   |2/1/07 |
|Chairperson, Dr Lovemore Madhuku National Constitutional   |       |
|Assembly (NCA)                                             |       |
|Police brutality at Mabvuku police station, Zimbabwe       |2/1/07 |
|Lawyers for Human Rights (ZLHR)                            |       |
|Worst agricultural year since Independence, Augustine      |5/1/07 |
|Mukaro, The Independent (Zimbabwe)                         |       |
|Zimbabwe opposition faction says party infiltrated by state|5/1/06 |
|agents  Zim Online                                         |       |
|Continued impunity by state-sanctioned actors, Zimbabwe    |12/1/07|
|Lawyers for Human Rights (ZLHR)                            |       |
|Severe hunger looms for Zimbabwe, BBC News                 |26/1/07|
|Tsunga detained at the airport, released after             |26/1/07|
|interrogation, Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition                |       |
|Zimbabwe cartoon's bullet warning, BBC News                |1/2/07 |
|Army forces research institutions to grow maize, ZimOnline |5/2/07 |
|ZESN condemns politicisation of food aid, Zimbabwe Election|9/2/07 |
|Support Network (ZESN)                                     |       |
|"You will know them by their fruits": Is Zimbabwe's CIO    |10/2/06|
|involved in the MDC split? Sokwanele Report:               |       |
|Happy Birthday, Robert Mugabe, Wilf Mbanga, Open Democracy |21.2.07|
|"Arnold Tsunga detained at airport", OSISA (Open Society   |Mar    |
|Initiative for Southern Africa),                           |2007   |
|Aid halted over 'Zanusation' of food, Herbert Dapi, The    |1/3/07 |
|Zimbabwean                                                 |       |
|Mujuru has destroyed own succession bid - Mugabe, Zimbabwe |2/3/07 |
|Independent, Dumisani Muleya                               |       |
|Mugabe purges security forces, Zimbabwe online             |9/3/07 |
|SCMZ leadership arrested by armed police at a female       |11/3/07|
|capacity building workshop in Harare, Student Christian    |       |
|Movement of Zimbabwe (SCMZ)                                |       |
|ZESN condemns politicisation of food in Harare, Zimbabwe   |12/3/07|
|Election Support Network (ZESN)                            |       |
|State warns MDC against lawlessness, The Herald (Zimbabwe) |13.3.07|
|Tsvangirai describes savage police beating, Times online   |14/3/07|
|Right of reply to the UNHRC on the Zimbabwe crisis,        |14/3/07|
|Government of Zimbabwe                                     |       |
|Opposition forces in Zimbabwe, A trail of Violence, 1      |Undated|
|January to 15 March 2007, Zimbabwe Republic Police         |(Mar)  |
|Opposition forces in Zimbabwe, The naked truth, Volume 2,  |Undated|
|Zimbabwe Republic Police                                   |(Mar)  |
|Zimbabwean police 'fire-bombed', BBC News                  |15/3/07|
|Rising frustration brings hardening attitudes, IRIN News   |16/3/07|
|"Zimbabwe stops activists leaving", BBC News               |18/3/07|
|Political violence, torture and beatings, Media Monitoring |18/3/07|
|Project Zimbabwe (MMPZ) Weekly Media Update 2007-9 Monday  |       |
|March 5th 2007 - Sunday March 11th 2007                    |       |
|Police beatings - what really happened, top journalist     |18/3/07|
|speaks, Tsvangirayi Mukwazhi                               |       |
|"Mugabe critic is beaten up at airport to silence plea for |19/3/07|
|world help", The Times                                     |       |
|Statement on the violent attack on Nelson Chamisa MP on    |19/3/07|
|Sunday 18 March 2007Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum        |       |
|Police defend Zimbabwe travel ban, BBC News                |19/3/07|
|Reporters without Borders, "Intelligence agency and media  |19/3/07|
|commission help torpedo remaining independent news media", |       |
|Zimbabwe threatens diplomats with expulsion, The           |20/3/07|
|Independent (London)                                       |       |
|Zimbabwe's crackdown widens to reach opposition grass roots|20/3/07|
|Michael Wines, New York Times                              |       |
|Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Open letter from AI's    |20/3/07|
|Secretary General Irene Khan to President Robert Mugabe",  |       |
|Public Statement                                           |       |
|International Bar Association, "Zimbabwe: Violence and     |21/3/07|
|Threats against Lawyers Condemned by the IBA", Press       |       |
|Release                                                    |       |
|Zimbabwe's crisis 'like Titanic', BBC News                 |21/3/07|
|My wife, Sekai Holland, battered by Mugabe's thugs, Save   |21/3/07|
|Zimbabwe Campaign                                          |       |
|Mourners assaulted and ZUPCO bus vandalized - The true     |22/3/07|
|story, Peter Bhokosi, Combined Harare Residents Association|       |
|(CHRA)                                                     |       |
|"Mugabe seizes passports from opposition activists", The   |26/3/07|
|Independent,                                               |       |
|Angola sends 2500 'ninjas' to Zimbabwe", Sydney Morning    |22/3/07|
|Herald                                                     |       |
|Trainee journalist arrested for asking pesky questions, Zim|23/3/07|
|Online                                                     |       |
|A Criminal State, A statement and brief chronicle of events|24/3/07|
|in Zimbabwe 18 February- 22 March, Solidarity Peace Trust  |       |
|Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Calls for investigation  |12/3/07|
|into killing of activist and release of peaceful           |       |
|protestors", Press Release                                 |       |
|More violence possible, analysts warn IRIN News            |26/3/07|
|"CIO replace immigration officers", Zimbabwe Independent   |26/3/07|
|The food situation in Zimbabwe 2007, Renson Gasela, MDC    |26/3/07|
|Secretary for Lands and Agriculture                        |       |
|"Zimbabwe Crisis: Commons Statement", Foreign Office       |26/3/07|
|Minister Ian McCartney,                                    |       |
|Petition on health and human rights violations in Zimbabwe |27/3/07|
|Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights (ZADHR)   |       |
|"Zimbabwe's Tsvangirai 'arrested'", BBC News,              |28/3/07|
|Human Rights Watch, "Zimbabwe: Security Forces Extend      |28/3/07|
|Crackdown to Public", Press Release,                       |       |
|Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: End harassment, torture  |28/3/07|
|and intimidation of opposition activists", Press Release,  |       |
|Tankers petrol bombed in eastern Zimbabwe, state media     |29/3/07|
|reports, Monsters and Critics                              |       |
|Zimbabwe: Trouble in the Neighbourhood" and "Zimbabwe: How |30/3/07|
|to put it together again -as the Mugabe regime totters",   |       |
|Africa Confidential,                                       |       |
|Mugabe rival 'asked for beating', BBC News                 |30/3/07|
|"Briefing. Robert Mugabe. The man behind the fist", The    |31/3/07|
|Economist                                                  |       |
|Chris McGreal, "President wins Zanu-PF backing to fight    |31/3/07|
|election", The Guardian                                    |       |
|Their words condemn them: The language of violence,        |April  |
|intolerance and despotism in Zimbabwe, Zimbabwe Human      |2007   |
|Rights NGO Forum                                           |       |
|Creating a climate that justifies full-scale repression    |1.4.07 |
|Comment, The Standard (Zimbabwe)                           |       |
|Zim police detain scores of teenagers, Mail & Guardian     |1.4.07 |
|(South Africa)                                             |       |
|Teacher challenge Mugabe insult charges in Supreme Court,  |1.4.07 |
|Zim Standard                                               |       |
|"Freed on bail, journalist immediately hospitalized because|6.4.07 |
|of beatings in police custody", Reporters sans Frontieres  |       |
|How Mugabe's violence will free us, Wilf Mbanga, The New   |2.4.07 |
|Statesman                                                  |       |
|UN, "Government of Zimbabwe must immediately halt use of   |2.4.07 |
|lethal force against unarmed political activists", Press   |       |
|Release                                                    |       |
|Chris McGreal, "Corrupt, greedy and violent: Mugabe        |2.4.07 |
|attacked by Catholic bishops after years of silence", The  |       |
|Guardian                                                   |       |
|Committee to Protect Journalists, "Zimbabwean reporter     |2.4.07 |
|jailed, beaten and paper threatened over coverage", News   |       |
|Alert,                                                     |       |
|Female student threatened with rape, Zimbabwe National     |3.4.07 |
|Students Union (ZINASU)                                    |       |
|Daniel Howden, "Zimbabwe journalist murdered 'over leaked  |4.4.07 |
|Tsvangirai pictures'", The Independent                     |       |
|Special forces unit 'Department 5' allegedly behind wave of|4.4.07 |
|violence, By Lance Guma                                    |       |
|Lawyer discloses details of Bake torture, By Lance Guma    |4.4.07 |
|Chris McGreal, "Zimbabwe general strike fails in face of   |4.4.07 |
|police action", The Guardian                               |       |
|'Home in a body bag' warning to UK diplomat, The Guardian  |4.4.07 |
|Freelance cameraman found dead two days after being        |5.4.07 |
|kidnapped outside home, Reporters sans frontires /        |       |
|Reporters Without Borders                                  |       |
|Harare cameraman's body dumped, BBC News                   |5.4.07 |
|Army helicopter gunships patrol skies in show of force, By |5.4.07 |
|Nqobizitha Khumalo and Hendricks Chizhanje, Zim Online     |       |
|God hears the cry of the oppressed: Pastoral Letter by the |5.4.07 |
|Zimbabwe Catholic Bishops' Conference on the current crisis|       |
|of our country, Zimbabwe Catholic Bishops' Conference      |       |
|Harare sets up new radio station, BBC News                 |6.4.07 |
|Expect more Mugabe brutality, says US envoy, Daily         |7.4.07 |
|Telegraph                                                  |       |
|Petrol bomb witness 'fictional' - lawyers, by Valentine    |8.4.07 |
|Maponga, Zim Standard                                      |       |
|Chris McGreal, "Orphaned in the 80s, persecuted today:     |10.4.07|
|Mugabe's victims twice over", The Guardian,                |       |
|'I was in a Zimbabwe death squad', [South African] Mail and|10.4.07|
|Guardian online,                                           |       |
|Mugabe revives torture camps ahead of election, By Brian   |11.4.07|
|Ncube, Zim Online                                          |       |
|"Zimbabwe: Living under "Operation Go to Sleep"", IRIN     |11.4.07|
|(United Nations Integrated Regional Information Network),  |       |
|"Zimbabwe: Press Freedom falls prey to arrests and         |11.4.07|
|torture", IRIN (United Nations Integrated Regional         |       |
|Information Network),                                      |       |
|Bombings designed to cause chaos, The Zimbabwean           |12.4.07|
|"Raped Zimbabwean Women Seek Justice", IWPR (Instiute for  |13.4.07|
|War and Peace Reporting),                                  |       |
|State supplies stale food, Kholwani Nyathi, The Standard   |15.4.07|
|(Zimbabwe)                                                 |       |
|"Zimbabwe targets aid groups as crackdown expands", Reuters|17.4.07|
|Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Call for Africa leaders  |18.4.07|
|to speak out against brutality in Zimbabwe", Public        |       |
|Statement                                                  |       |
|Mugabe blames...... Brits, Associated Press                |18.4.07|
|Mugabe blames...... greed, BBC News                        |18.4.07|
|Mugabe blames...opposition, BBC News                       |18.4.07|
|Mugabe blames...... West, SADC                             |18.4.07|
|Zimbabweans' desperate quest for aids drugs, Institute for |19.4.07|
|War & Peace Reporting (IWPR), By Matilda Chivasa in Harare |       |
|(AR No. 109, 19-Apr-07)                                    |       |
|The godfathers of the Zanu PF Mafia, Reflections with Dr   |22.4.07|
|Alex T Magaisa,  Zimbabwe Standard                         |       |
|Another petrol bomb attack on police camp in Zimbabwe:     |22.4.07|
|report, Monsters and Critics                               |       |
|Holding arrested women naked is the most gross and inhumane|23.4.07|
|act by any standard, Zimbabwe Exiles Forum (ZEF)           |       |
|I was abducted and dumped close to the Botswana border,    |23.4.07|
|Trust Nhubu, Kubatana                                      |       |
|Hunger strikes the rural areas, IRIN News                  |24.4.07|
|Arrest and assault of women activists, Zimbabwe Lawyers for|26.4.07|
|Human Rights (ZLHR)                                        |       |
|Zimbabwe activist says she was tortured, Associated Press  |26.4.07|
|(published in Boston Globe)                                |       |
|5 Brigade-type secret force formed, The Zimbabwean         |26.4.07|
|CIO takes over Harare farm, Shakeman Mugari, Zim           |27.4.07|
|Independent                                                |       |
|Zimbabwe announces new controls over charities,            |28.4.07|
|non-governmental organizations, Associated Press,          |       |
|(published in New York Times)                              |       |
|Bashing Dissent: Escalating Violence and State Repression  |May    |
|in Zimbabwe (Human Rights Watch)                           |2007   |
|Amnesty International Report 2007: Zimbabwe                |May    |
|                                                           |2007   |
|South Africa overwhelmed by new arrivals of Zimbabwean     |1.5.07 |
|refugees, By Tichona Sibanda                               |       |
|Death threats against several human rights defenders -     |4.5.07 |
|OMCLT                                                      |       |
|Zimbabwe Clamps down on Charities, Associated Press        |5.5.07 |
|(published in Christian Post)                              |       |
|Release lawyers immediately says IBA, International Bar    |8.5.07 |
|Association (IBA)                                          |       |
|"Zimbabwe: Justice takes another beating", IRIN (United    |8.5.07 |
|Nations Integrated Regional Information Network),          |       |
|Armed police drag leading lawyers on to lorry for public   |9.5.07 |
|beating, Jan Raath, The Times (UK)                         |       |
|Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Repression of political  |9.5.07 |
|opponents continues, with new incidents of police          |       |
|brutality", Public Statement,                              |       |
|Prisoners Routinely Dying From Starvation, Illness, UN     |10.5.07|
|Integrated Regional Information Network                    |       |
|Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, Political Violence        |10.5.07|
|Overview Report March 2007,                                |       |
|Scores of prisoners die as conditions deteriorate, Zim     |13.5.07|
|Standard                                                   |       |
|UK policy won't change after Blair - Envoy, By Nqobani     |13.5.07|
|Ndlovu, Zim Standard                                       |       |
|Police promotion for government loyalty, By Tichaona       |16.5.07|
|Sibanda                                                    |       |
|Ill-treatment, arbitrary detentions and releases, judicial |16.5.07|
|proceedings and unlawful search (FIDH)                     |       |
|Miffed Zimbabwe accuses Australia of funding terrorism,    |16.5.07|
|Yahoo News                                                 |       |
|Article 19, "Article 19 and Index on Censorship condemn    |17.5.07|
|recent attacks on Zimbabwe Law Society members", Press     |       |
|Release                                                    |       |
|Human Rights Watch, Oral Submission to the 41st Ordinary   |17.5.07|
|Session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples'    |       |
|Rights on the Human Rights Situation in Zimbabwe           |       |
|Govt faces grilling over rights abuses (Kubatana.net)      |18.5.07|
|Minister Patrick Chinamasa must apologise for issuing      |18.5.07|
|threats (Kubatana.net)                                     |       |
|Zimbabweans Face Utilities Misery, Tariro Chimuti,         |18.5.07|
|Institute for War and Peace Reporting                      |       |
|As millions starve, Mugabe builds a 2m shrine,  Sunday    |19.5.07|
|Telegraph                                                  |       |
|CIO descend on border post, By Trust Matsilele,            |19.5.07|
|zimbabwejournalists.com                                    |       |
|Zimbabwe groans amid shortages and spiralling inflation,   |20.5.07|
|Financial Times                                            |       |
|Zanu PF thugs issue threatening letter to church goers in  |22.5.07|
|Mashonaland East, Tererai Karimakwenda, SW Radio Africa    |       |
|Hunger exacerbating child mortality, Ignatius Banda,       |24.5.07|
|InterPress Service (IPS)                                   |       |
|Youth Service report opens can of worms, Clemence Manyukwe,|24.5.07|
|The Financial Gazette                                      |       |
|MPs horrified at Zim youth camps - report, IOL             |24.5.07|
|Food for Votes in Zimbabwe, By Nonthando Bhebhe, Institute |24.5.07|
|for War and Peace Reporting                                |       |
|'Public Order And Security Act Will Remain in Force'  The  |26.5.07|
|Herald (Harare)                                            |       |
|BBC News - Zimbabwe to boost police for poll               |28.5.07|
|Zimbabwe Nearly Doubling Size of Police Force Ahead of     |28.5.07|
|Elections, By Peta Thornycroft, VOA, Zimbabwe              |       |
|Passport shortage breeds corruption                        |30.5.07|
|Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR)               |       |
|By Tecla Dehwa (AR No. 114, 30-May-07)                     |       |
|Zims sleep in sugar queues, The Zimbabwean                 |31.5.07|
|Rural granaries as empty as shop shelves, The Zimbabwean   |31.5.07|
|Harare says Blair is crazy, By Patricia Mpofu, Zim Online  |1.6.07 |
|UK using 'shameless arm-twisting tactics, Reuters,         |1.6.07 |
|published on Zim Online                                    |       |
|Blair backs 'softly, softly' approach to Zimbabwe The      |2.6.07 |
|Independent                                                |       |
|Zimbabwe security forces on high alert - Mugabe,  Reuters  |2.6.07 |
|Red Cross says Zim like 'war situation', by Nqobani Mdlovu,|3.6.07 |
|Zim Standard                                               |       |
|Mugabe renders Zimbabweans stateless, By Trust Matsilele,  |4.6.07 |
|zimbabwejournalists.com                                    |       |
|Zimbabwe Power Charges Raised,  Associated Press           |5.6.07 |
|Mugabe could be jailed, says UK minister, Tariq Panja      |5.6.07 |
|Sapa-AP                                                    |       |
|Zimbabwe health service has collapsed - doctors' group,    |5.6.07 |
|Associated Press (published in China Daily)                |       |
|Mugabe's Turbulent Priests                                 |5.6.07 |
|FAO/WFP Crop and Food Supply Assessment Mission to         |5.6.07 |
|Zimbabwe,                                                  |       |
|More than Red Cross one-third of Zimbabweans face food     |5.6.07 |
|shortages - Drought and economic crisis to blame, FAO/WFP  |       |
|report says                                                |       |
|Zimbabwe: pro-government militia target Catholics in       |6.6.07 |
|campaign of fear, Independent Catholic News - London, UK   |       |
|Zimbabwe Short of Food for 4 Million, By Peta Thornycroft  |6.6.07 |
|Harare, Zimbabwe (published on Voice of America website)   |       |
|Zimbabwe ruling party scouts for food as people brace for  |6.6.07 |
|                                                           |       |
|Shortages, article from Monsters and Critics               |       |
|A Third of Population Could Starve - Financial Gazette     |6.6.07 |
|Transcript: 'Running from Mugagbe' BBC2 broadcast          |7.6.07 |
|Zimbabwe's terror: How I raped and tortured for Mugabe The |7.6.07 |
|Independent                                                |       |
|Mugabe to banish opposition from rural areas, Zim Online   |7.6.07 |
|Hospital Strike Compounds Healthcare Crisis - IWPR         |8.6.07 |
|Zimbabwe in Darkness - Ohmynews                            |10 Jun |
|                                                           |2007   |
|Police arrest hundreds in protests against ec. Hardships   |11.6.07|
|Ruling Party Holds seat - intimidation alleged - VOA       |11.6.07|
|Shock for lawyers in Zimbabwe - BBC News                   |11.6.07|
|Mugabe extends olive branch.. - VOA                        |12.6.07|
|In Africa, a desperate stampede - Chicago Tribune          |12.6.07|
|State Security Agents on the Prowl - The Zim Situation     |12.6.07|
|Zimbabwe lawyers face campaign of vilification - Yahoo news|12.6.07|
|Church leaders in trouble for distributing sweets - Zim    |12.6.07|
|Online                                                     |       |
|Mugabe regime accursed of using brainwashing - Indian      |12.6.07|
|Catholic                                                   |       |
|AG sent on forced leave - zimbabwejournalists.com          |13.6.07|
|Aid agencies contemplate doomsday scenario - IHT           |13.6.07|
|Controversial security law advances in Zimabwe - Reuters   |13.6.07|
|How Robert Mugabe plans to win the 2008 elections - The    |14.6.07|
|Zimbabwe Situation                                         |       |
|Cops recruit Green Bombers - The Zimbabwean                |14.6.07|
|Kunonga's land grab - The Zimbabwean                       |14.6.07|
|Farm tools used to buy votes - The Zimbabwean              |14.6.07|
|Former army boss says does not care if villagers do not    |14.6.07|
|vote for him - Zim Online                                  |       |
|Parliamentary committee says health delivery has collapsed |14.6.07|
|-Zim Online                                                |       |
|Hospital almost closed - The Herald (Harare)               |14.6.07|
|Zimbabwe 'collapse in six months'  - BBC News              |14.6.07|
|Zambia to export food to needy Zimbabwe - AFP              |14.6.07|
|Councils face collapse - The Zimbabwe Situation            |14.6.07|
|Wheat stocks run out - The Zimbabwe Situation              |14.6.07|
|Zimbabwe 'will collapse in 6 months' The Times             |14.6.07|
|ZANU PF coerces youths to register as voters - Zim online  |15.6.07|
|50 NCA activists missing, six detained after Harare demo - |15.6.07|
|SW Radio Africa                                            |       |
|Coup 'plot' feeds Zimbabwe political tension, The Times    |16.6.07|
|(London)                                                   |       |
|Slavery has been 'legalised' - IRIN                        |18.6.07|
|Zim opposition activists murdered - Zim Online             |18.6.07|
|No help for HIV patients in Zimbabwe - The Zimbabwean      |19.6.07|
|Coup claim made to 'mask Mugabe party split' - Telegraph   |19.6.07|
|Transcript: 'Mugabe's reign of terror' - Channel 4  -      |20.6.07|
|broadcast                                                  |       |
|Crackdown on student leaders intensifies - SW Radio Africa |20.6.07|
|Economic collapse worsens food crisis - SW Radio Africa    |21.6.07|
|Zimbabwe inflation 'to hit 1.5m%'' The Guardian            |21.6.07|
|Mediation doomed to fail - Association of Zimbabwe         |22.6.07|
|Journalists                                                |       |
|Sliding into a totalitarian state - The Zimbabwe situation |22.6.07|
|Petrol stations reject cash as currency becomes worthless  |22.6.07|
|The Times                                                  |       |
|Zimbabwe in meltdown as currency halves The Telegraph By   |22.6.07|
|Sebastien Berger, Southern Africa Correspondent            |       |
|Zimbabwe's Dollar Plummets 67 Percent; Retailers Stop      |22.6.07|
|Trading  Bloomberg                                         |       |
|Waiting for the hard rain of culpability Business Day      |22.6.07|
|Mugabe faces pressure as currency crashes, Yahoo News By   |22.6.07|
|Nelson Banya   (Reuters)                                   |       |
|Petrol stations reject cash as currency becomes worthless, |22.6.07|
|The Times                                                  |       |
|Zimbabwe: 'Green Bombers' to enforce price controls,       |23.6.07|
|Munyaradzi Shonhayi Zimdaily.com                           |       |
|Mugabe faces dollar disaster, The Times                    |23.6.07|
|Zimbabwe slams US envoy over Mugabe comments - Reuters     |24.6.07|
|Treat Zimbabweans humanely, Tsvangirai tells UK -          |25.6.07|
|zimbabwejournalists.com                                    |       |
|Pakistani military experts strengthen Mugabe's army - The  |11.1.07|
|Independent                                                |       |
|Mbeki's rehabilitation of Zanu PF                          |7.7.07 |
|Food a Political Tool? - IPS news                          |25.6.07|
|Rights activists say torture on the rise in Zimbabwe - Zim |26.6.07|
|online                                                     |       |
|The Corrosive Power of Hate Speech - The Zimbabwe Situation|26.6.07|
|Zim health service collapses - Health24                    |28.6.07|
|Zimbabwe general linked to coup 'murdered' - The           |28.6.07|
|Independent                                                |       |
|Coup plot bogus - The Zimbabwe Situation                   |29.6.07|
|'We only want your food' - FinGaz                          |(no    |
|                                                           |date)  |
|Army on high alert - FinGaz                                |(no    |
|                                                           |date)  |
|Someone might be listening - IRIN                          |29.6.07|
|Zimbabwe's top cleric urges Britain to invade - The Sunday |1.7.07 |
|Times, UK                                                  |       |
|Refugees flood from Zimbabwe - The Guardian                |1.7.07 |
|Zimbabwe Price Controls Cause Chaos                        |3.7.07 |
|Shops emptied as panic grips Zimbabwe - the Guardian       |5.7.07 |
|Zimbabwe's silent genocide, Sunday Times (UK)              |8.7.07 |
|Lunch with a Dissident Minister, The Times Online (UK)     |8.7.07 |
|Secret Lives, The Observer (UK) (incl photos)              |8.7.07 |
|Gwanda Chief Threatens Village Heads Over MDC - Zimbabwe   |8.7.07 |
|Standard                                                   |       |
|Robert Mugabe critic 'raped' - Telegraph                   |9.7.07 |
|NGOs under probe for Hoarding - The Herald                 |9.7.07 |
|Safe Migration Zimbabwe - IOM, Harare                      |2005   |
|Canada suspends deportations to Zimbabwe - CBC news        |30.1.02|
|Country Fact Sheet: Zimbabwe - Immigration and Refugee     |May    |
|Board of Canada                                            |2007   |
|Temporary Suspension or Reinstatement of Removals to       |Current|
|Countries in Crisis: Submission Guidelines (Factors for    |       |
|Considerations) - Citizenship & Immigration Canada         |       |
|Australia - Refugee Review Tribunal - Decisions by country-|       |
|2006/07                                                    |       |


                            Appellant's Volume B

|Document                                                   |Date   |
|Report by Witness 66                                       |24.6.07|
|Expert report by Professor T.  Ranger                      |25.6.07|
|Case specific report by Professor  T.  Ranger              |25.6.07|
|Report of Norma Kriger (approved by email)                 |8.7.07 |
|Report of  Witness 67 (approved by email)                  |9.7.07 |

                            Respondent's Volume C

|Document                                                  |Date   |
|IOM report 1 August 2006 to February 2007                 |       |
|IOM questionnaire database August 2006 - February 2007    |       |
|Memorandum of Understanding respondent & IOM              |August |
|                                                          |2006   |
|Draft amendment of MOU                                    |Undated|
|Series of interview reports with NGOs and others collected|       |
|by British Embassy Harare                                 |       |
|Agence France Presse "Britain wins right to deport failed |2.8.06 |
|asylum seekers to Zimbabwe"                               |       |
|South African Independent Online: "We will welcome        |3.8.06 |
|deportees with open arms"                                 |       |
|The Herald: "Howard a shameless racist"                   |16.2.07|
|The Herald: "real terrorists unmasked"                    |20.2.07|
|Guardian Unlimited: "US reveals its efforts to topple     |6.4.07 |
|Mugabe regime"                                            |       |
|US Fed newsfeed- Voice of America: "US rejects Zimbabwe   |10.4.07|
|terror allegations, deplores continuing political         |       |
|violence"                                                 |       |
|The Herald: "West's hidden hand exposed"                  |19.4.07|
|SW Radio Africa News: "Police claim South Africa is       |20.4.07|
|training MDC activists in terrorism"                      |       |
|The Herald: "Racists behind boycott calls"                |9.5.07 |
|The Herald: "Zim, ICC rap Australia"                      |14.5.07|
|The Herald: "US steps up anti-Zim drive"                  |15.5.07|
|The Herald: "Howard's decision disgusting"                |15.5.07|
|The Herald: "Australia: The most racist country"          |18.5.07|
|The Herald: "Charity begins at home, Howard"              |25.5.07|
|The Zimbabwe Independent: "Nothing racist about           |1.6.07 |
|Australia's Zim policy"                                   |       |
|PR-inside.com: "Mugabe says security forces on alert      |1.6.07 |
|against Western-backed terror"                            |       |
|AllAfrica.com: "Zimbabwe: SA Meets Pressure Groups in     |13.6.07|
|Harare."                                                  |       |
|The Herald: "Cops denied SA entry."                       |20.6.07|
|Country of Origin Information Service report on Zimbabwe  |18.6.07|
|Draft Operational Guidance Note for Zimbabwe              |July 07|

                            Appellant's Volume D

|Document                                                  |Date   |
|Expert report of Professor Ranger                         |28/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Supplementary expert report of Professor Ranger           |02/08/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Expert report of Dr McGregor                              |02/08/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Extract, FCO Annual Review                                |Jul    |
|                                                          |2005   |
|Extract, minutes of the 4th meeting of the Advisory Panel |08/03/0|
|on Country Information                                    |5      |
|HO response to APCI comments on the Oct 2004 CIPU report  |Undated|
|Email, Army Headquarters Land Command                     |03/03/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|                                                          |       |
|Jack Straw (HC, 9WS)                                      |14/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Charles Clarke (HC, Col 1028)                             |27/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Charles Clarke (HC, Col 1034)                             |27/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Baroness Scotland (HL, Col 25 - 32)                       |27/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Ian Pearson (HC, Col 1123-1125                            |27/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Ian Pearson (HC, Col 1779W)                               |20/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|                                                          |       |
|Letter, UNHCR                                             |06/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Letter, UNHCR to RLC                                      |27/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Letter, Amnesty International to Rt Hon Charles Clarke MP |28/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Amnesty report: Zimbabwe: human rights defenders under    |10/05/0|
|siege                                                     |5      |
|New Zimbabwe (A Gestapo welcome for UK deportees)         |02/03/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (Mugabe's regime lays waste...)                 |05/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Extract, International Crisis Group Report (Post-election |07/06/0|
|Zimbabwe...)                                              |5      |
|The Independent (Inside Zimbabwe)                         |10/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Sunday Times (Mugabe policy branded "new apartheid")  |12/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (Misery in the ashes for shanty people...)      |17/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|BBC News (Zimbabwe's human tragedy)                       |24/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (Wedding 'sting'...)                            |24/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Extract, Solidarity Peace Trust report: (Discarding the   |27/06/0|
|filth)                                                    |5      |
|The Independent (Zimbabwe's secret famine)                |27/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (Archbishop attacks "immoral" deportations...)  |28/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (An exceptional case)                           |29/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|IWPR (Urban demolition seen as retribution)               |30/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|IWPR (Mass clearances hit smallest towns)                 |30/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|IWPR (Evicted urban poor held in camps)                   |30/06/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (Beaten and tortured...)                        |04/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Times (Proof of deportees' torture...)                |05/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Observer (Britain sent me back to Mugabe...)          |10/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Independent on Sunday (Tortured and dumped...)        |13/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Guardian (UN report damns Mugabe...)                      |23/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Extract, Guardian (Mugabe is starving his own people)     |28/07/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Extract from Human Rights Watch Report - "Clear the Filth"|11/09/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Extract from International Crisis Group Report            |17/08/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Guardian: Minister vows to rid Zimbabwe of "filth"        |19/09/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Zim On Line: Zimbabwe to introduce exit visas to rein in  |14/09/0|
|critics                                                   |5      |
|Human Rights Watch: Mass evictions lead to massive abuses |11/09/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|BBC News: Close encounter with Zimbabwe's Secret Police   |29/08/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Voice for America: Survey finds 1.2 million hit by        |23/08/0|
|Zimbabwe clean up operation                               |5      |
|SW Radio Africa: Youth militia joins City Police          |22/08/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|BBC News: Living in fear after Harare evictions           |29/08/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|IWPR: Harare descends into chaos                          |10/05/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|IRIN News: Government confirms probe into NGO             |02/05/0|
|activities/funding                                        |5      |
|The Guardian: Mugabe warns that Opposition Election       |30/03/0|
|victory will not be tolerated                             |5      |
|The Guardian: Mugabe paints MDC as Blairite cronies       |27/03/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|The Guardian: Vote for us or starve, Mugabe's Party tells |26/03/0|
|villagers                                                 |5      |
|IWPR: Mugabe set for "ugly" campaign                      |12/02/0|
|                                                          |5      |
|Items in The Observer regarding Gerald Muketiwa           |13/01/0|
|                                                          |2      |
|Human Rights Watch, 'Zimbabwe: Evicted and Forsaken,      |12/05  |
|Internally displaced persons in the aftermath of Operation|       |
|Murambatsvina'                                            |       |
|Human Rights Watch, 'Zimbabwe: Crackdown on the Press     |9/2/06 |
|Intensifies'                                              |       |
|BBC News 'Zimbabwe in meltdown - UN envoy'                |8/12/05|
|BBC News 'Zimbabwe demolition images shown'               |31/5/06|
|ZimOnline 'Zimbabwe prison chief says inmates virtually on|7/2/06 |
|death row'                                                |       |
|ZimOnline 'Harare moves to set up law allowing passport   |16/12/0|
|seizures'                                                 |5      |
|IRINnews.org 'Zimbabwe: NGO coalition calls on the ICC to |28/11/0|
|intervene'                                                |5      |
|ZimOnline 'Zimbabwe accuses Britain of plotting to drag   |5/11/05|
|Harare to UN Security Council'                            |       |
|SW Radio Africa (UK) 'Torture cases on the rise in        |2/6/06 |
|Zimbabwe'                                                 |       |
|Institute for War and Peace Reporting 'Mugabe moulds      |31/5/06|
|pliant judiciary'                                         |       |
|ZimOnline 'Victorious Zimbabwe opposition party gears for |22/5/06|
|protests'                                                 |       |
|Human Rights Watch 'World Report 2006: Zimbabwe'          |18/1/06|
|ZWNEWS.com 'Zim as bad as it can get - UN'                |1/1/06 |
|The Zimbabwean 'News briefs' (Mugabe arms war vets,       |11/5/06|
|youths/ Torture cases increase)                           |       |
|The Zimbabwean 'Protestors will be shot - Mutasa'         |       |
|Second supplementary report, Prof Ranger                  |8/6/06 |
|article in The Zimbabwean                                 |21/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|Amnesty International statement to 86th Session of the    |20/11/0|
|Council of IOM                                            |3      |
|Extract from Human Rights Watch statement to 90th Session |29/11-0|
|of the Council of IOM                                     |2/12/05|
|The Independent (Zimbabwe) - Murambatsvina still on       |16/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|Zimbabwe Standard - Churches, Clergy in Mugabe's Pocket   |19/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|The Times - Church of the Flunkey bolsters Mugabe's grip  |11/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|Africa Reports - Mugabe's Day of Prayer                   |23/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|Africa Reports - Zimbabwe: Storm over Rights Commission   |23/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|IRIN - Zimbabwe: Ruling party looks for spiritual support |26/06/0|
|                                                          |6      |
|SW Radio - Zimbabweans show their scars on world torture  |26/06/0|
|day                                                       |6      |
|The Times - Zimbabwe police 'carried out torture on a     |26/06/0|
|massive scale'                                            |6      |
|The Times - When everything is illegal, a guilty          |27/06/0|
|conscience seeps into your dreams                         |6      |

