
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

JA (human rights claim: serious harm) Nigeria [2021] UKUT 00097 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 March 2021                              |On 30 March 2021              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                            JA - FIRST APPELLANT
                            DA - SECOND APPELLANT
                            JAD - THIRD APPELLANT

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr C Ndubuisi, Solicitor, Drummond Miller
(Edinburgh)
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


    (1) Where a human rights claim is  made,  in  circumstances  where  the
    Secretary of State considers the nature of what  is  being  alleged  is
    such that the claim could also constitute a  protection  claim,  it  is
    appropriate for her to  draw  this  to  the  attention  of  the  person
    concerned, pointing out they may  wish  to  make  a  protection  claim.
    Indeed, so much would appear to  be  required,  in  the  light  of  the
    Secretary of State's international obligations regarding  refugees  and
    those in need of humanitarian protection.

    (2) There is no obligation on such a person to make a protection claim.
     The person concerned may decide to raise an alleged  risk  of  serious
    harm, potentially falling within Article 3 of the ECHR, solely for  the
    purpose of making an application for leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom that is centred on the  private  life  aspects  of  Article  8,
    whether  by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  or  outside   the
    immigration rules.  If so, the "serious  harm"  element  of  the  claim
    falls to be considered in that context.

    (3) This is not to say, however, that the failure of a person to make a
    protection claim, when the possibility of doing so is  drawn  to  their
    attention by the Secretary of State, will  never  be  relevant  to  the
    assessment by her and, on appeal, by the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    "serious harm" element of a purely human rights  appeal.  Depending  on
    the circumstances, the assessment may well be informed  by  a  person's
    refusal to subject themselves to the procedures that  are  inherent  in
    the consideration of a claim  to  refugee  or  humanitarian  protection
    status. Such a person may have to accept that the  Secretary  of  State
    and the Tribunal are entitled to approach this  element  of  the  claim
    with some scepticism, particularly if it is advanced only late  in  the
    day. That is so, whether or not the element constitutes a "new  matter"
    for the purposes of section 85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

    (4) On appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim, a person who
    has not made a protection claim will not be able to rely on the grounds
    set out in section 84(1) of the  2002  Act,  but  only  on  the  ground
    specified in section 84(2).




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria, born respectively in 1988, 1980
    and 2012.  The third appellant is the  son  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants.  The second appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2013 as
    a student, securing further leave to remain in that  capacity  until  8
    January 2019.  The  first  and  third  appellants  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in November 2013, as dependants of the second appellant.   They
    too secured further leave, in line with that of the  second  appellant,
    until January 2019.

 2. In December 2018, the first appellant submitted a  family  and  private
    life application, whilst the second appellant submitted  a  family  and
    private life dependent spouse  application;  and  the  third  appellant
    submitted a family and private life dependent child application.

 3. In the application form, the first appellant raised the  issue  of  the
    risk of kidnapping in Nigeria:-

         "My husband, [second appellant] lost his dad who was kidnapped  and
         grotesquely murdered in Nigeria in 2017 while he  was  studying  at
         the Glasgow University.  The unfortunate incidence about my father-
         in-law happened in part to extort  money  from  dependants  (as  is
         usually  reoccurring  prevalent  cases  in  Nigeria).   Though   we
         initially thought he was randomly kidnapped in [second appellant's]
         dad's case, it became a lucrative venture for the assailants due to
         the discovery that their victim's son ... is away in  the  UK  with
         his family.  In Nigeria, it is considered a source  of  wealth  for
         people to have loved ones living abroad, such people are  potential
         targets for high yields and are often preyed upon."

 4. In an appendix to the application, the first appellant  made  reference
    to "the prevalent high cases of child kidnapping  happening  in  almost
    everywhere in Nigeria, and  the  lacklustre  efforts  of  the  Nigerian
    government and agencies to be on top  of  the  cases  and  protect  the
    rights of its citizenry especially little children.  In some instances,
    these agencies are even complicit".

 5. Another appendix to the application  raised  the  issue  of  the  third
    appellant's position as potential custodian in the service of a  family
    deity:-

         "Due to the prevailing threats and summons for me to ensure that my
         son [third appellant] is brought back home so that the proper rites
         can be performed for him to be groomed in  preparation  for  taking
         over the custodianship of the service of a family deity,  a  family
         tradition for which my late father was  the  chief  priest,  [third
         appellant] my son  will  suffer  adverse  educational  difficulties
         (western education).  If returned to  the  country  of  his  birth,
         integration in conformance with continuity of what he is  currently
         privileged to be enjoying currently in the UK will be  a  herculean
         and daunting task for [third appellant] in Nigeria.

         I will not be able to protect him enough from the weight and  force
         of these kind of traditions and customs.  Now  that  there  is  the
         need to perpetuate an on-going family tradition, like in  my  case.
         The pressure is surmounting me and my Son.  This way of life  is  a
         communal lifestyle that is  unfortunately  being  practiced  in  my
         family tradition in Nigeria.  Only civilization and modernity  will
         gradually help in phasing this out.  It is rather very  unfortunate
         that I  happened  to  be  come  from  such  a  family  where  these
         traditions are deeply rooted and adhered  to  religiously.   [Third
         appellant] cannot run and hide while he is in  Nigeria,  especially
         now that the so-called vacancy exists on the demise of  my  father,
         and by the line of  succession  (excluding  women),  my  first  son
         [third appellant] should be the next custodian.

         The  process  of  initiation  and  preparation  of  the  custodian-
         designate takes a long-time process on the child in question.  Such
         child, and in this  case,  [third  appellant]  is  expected  to  be
         educated traditionally since according to them he  belongs  to  the
         gods, and not to  the  western  education  system.   And  that  any
         western education he is seeking right  now  is  only  living  on  a
         borrowed time. If [third appellant] returns to Nigeria now, it will
         just be a matter of time for him to be identified  and  kick  start
         the process which my father's kinsmen have identified that  is  the
         route for my own child.  There will be no  protection  for  him  as
         such.  We will be helpless in trying to stop him from  being  taken
         that route if he happens to be within the confines of  the  country
         at this  his  childhood  age.   Usually  people  don't  fight  this
         tradition, but I cannot live by idly and conform to a statute  that
         I know is fetish and diabolical for my son."

 6.  On 4 June 2019, these applications were refused by the respondent. The
    respondent's decisions in each case constituted the refusal of a  human
    rights claim.  The refusal letter, addressed to each of the appellants,
    stated that  the  first  and  second  appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Paragraph 276ADE contains the requirements to be met  by  an  applicant
    for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life.  Sub-paragraph
    (1)(vi) contains a requirement that the applicant is 18  or  over,  has
    lived in the UK for less than 20 years and that  "there  will  be  very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".  Subject  to
    restrictions not here relevant, a person who satisfies the  requirement
    in sub-paragraph (1)(vi) is to be given leave to remain on the  grounds
    of their private life.

 7. The decision letter stated that the first and second  appellants  would
    not face "very significant obstacles to [their]  integration  into  the
    country [Nigeria] to which [they] would have to go if required to leave
    the UK".  Both the first and second appellants had resided  in  Nigeria
    into adulthood.  Each  would  have  retained  knowledge  of  the  life,
    language and culture of Nigeria.   Both  had  already  demonstrated  an
    ability to adapt to life in another country; namely, the United Kingdom
    which, on arrival "was a completely new environment to  you".   It  was
    considered that the first  and  second  appellants  would  be  able  to
    reintegrate into the culture and way of life  of  Nigeria.   The  third
    appellant's application fell for refusal on the grounds of suitability,
    as he had not lived in the UK for at least twenty  years;  nor  for  at
    least seven years.  It will be noted that the third appellant could not
    himself satisfy the requirement in sub-paragraph (1)(vi) by  reason  of
    his age.

 8.  Later  in  the  refusal  letter,  under   the   heading   "Exceptional
    Circumstances" we find the following:-

         "You [the first appellant] have told us that your father was  chief
         priest and the custodian of the  family  deity  "Okwu-Olusi".   You
         stated your father passed away and by tradition you cannot  be  the
         heir due to being female, so this will fall to  your  eldest  child
         [third appellant].  You state this is not  a  path  you  intend  to
         define for your son as you do not want him to grow up  in  a  messy
         toxic and unfavourable environment where his life will be  grounded
         to traditionalism and fetish voodooism.

         You state that [third appellant] will  suffer  adverse  educational
         difficulties if returned to Nigeria as he would be expected  to  be
         educated traditionally.  You claim there has been  growing  efforts
         made by your fathers kinsman to  ensure  that  you  do  not  derail
         [third appellant] becoming the chief priest and that  your  son  is
         brought to Nigeria for proper initiation rites.

         You also told us that your husband who is named as dependant spouse
         on this application lost his father who was kidnapped and  murdered
         in Nigeria in 2017.  You claim this  happened  in  part  to  extort
         money from his dependants.  You claim the assailants targeted  your
         husband's father after discovering that your husband was in the UK.
          You state in Nigeria it is  considered  a  source  of  wealth  for
         people to have loved ones living abroad and are then  preyed  upon.
         You claim that you fear yourselves and children may be targeted  if
         returned to Nigeria and are at risk of being kidnapped for ransom.

         You were offered the opportunity to make an Asylum claim on 21  May
         2019.  You chose to not make an asylum claim.   We  have  therefore
         considered your claim under the private life route only."

 9. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  refusal
    of their human rights claims.  Their appeals were heard in  Glasgow  on
    24 September 2019  by  Judge  J  C  Grant-Hutchinson.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 October 2019, she dismissed the appellants'  appeals.
    Having noted that "very significant obstacles" was unlikely to  be  met
    by mere hardship, difficulty, hurdles, upheaval or inconvenience,  even
    where  multiplied,  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  analysed  in  detail   the
    backgrounds and positions of the appellants.  She noted that the  first
    appellant had worked for the Inland Revenue in  Nigeria  and  had  been
    able to find work in the United Kingdom as a mortgage legal adviser and
    as a credit controller.  These were transferrable skills, in  the  view
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Although  the  first  appellant
    suffered from hepatitis B, there was no evidence as to  why  she  could
    not receive treatment for this condition in  Nigeria.   The  appellants
    were members of the Glasgow City Church,  and  involved  in  the  local
    community.  Again, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  there  was
    no reason why they could not join a church in Nigeria to continue their
    faith.

10. The second appellant had grown up in Nigeria, being educated to  degree
    level there.  He was 33 when he came to the United Kingdom to study for
    a PhD in Civil Engineering.  At paragraph 15, the judge made  reference
    to the kidnapping in July 2017 of the second appellant's father and the
    latter's subsequent murder.  The  second  appellant  was  diagnosed  as
    having symptoms in line with post-traumatic stress.   He  had  attended
    seven sessions of cognitive behavioural  therapy  and  compassion-focus
    therapy, in order to address  unresolved  grief,  anxiety  and  terror-
    related symptoms.  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  accepted  that  the  second
    appellant had health difficulties but there was  no  evidence  to  show
    that he could not, as a result, continue with  his  studies  or  indeed
    work.  There was no continuing duty on the United  Kingdom  to  provide
    mental health treatment for the second  appellant  at  public  expense.
    Although it was unfortunate that he might not be able to  complete  his
    PhD in the United Kingdom, the second appellant  himself  had  said  he
    would be able to get work as a civil engineer on return to Nigeria.

11. Judge Grant-Hutchinson then turned to the third appellant.   She  found
    that there was "no reason why  he  cannot  continue  his  education  in
    Nigeria as his parents have done" (paragraph 20).  Although  the  third
    appellant had been diagnosed with dyspraxia, he had responded  well  to
    treatment.  A speech  and  language  therapy  discharge  report  of  28
    October 2016 noted that the writer was "delighted with his progress and
    recognise that he no longer require  specialist  support".   The  judge
    accordingly found that there was no evidence that the  third  appellant
    required further treatment.

12. Beginning at paragraph 29, Judge Grant-Hutchinson addressed  the  issue
    of the third appellant's position as someone whom family members wanted
    to be initiated into the cult of the family/communal deity.

13. At paragraph 30, Judge Grant-Hutchinson noted that the first and second
    appellants had not made protection claims.   It  is  worth  interposing
    here that at page G1 of the appeal bundle, there is an email  dated  16
    May 2019 from  one  of  the  respondent's  officials  to  a  colleague,
    highlighting that the appellants' applications  relied  "heavily  on  a
    fear of  return"  and  specifying  the  issue  relating  to  the  third
    appellant.  The colleague replied on 21 May 2019 to say she had  spoken
    to the first appellant, who "does not want to claim asylum".

14. In paragraph 30, Judge Grant-Hutchinson made it evident that "I am only
    concerned with these appellants' private lives and the fact  that  they
    will be returning to Nigeria as  one  family  unit  to  continue  their
    family life there".  She continued:-

         "There is no reason why the Appellants  cannot  settle  in  another
         area of Nigeria away from the  first  Appellant's  family  members.
         The Appellants have  no  such  issue  in  relation  to  the  second
         Appellant's family members."

15.  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  then  explained  that  the  family  would  be
    returning together to Nigeria; they speak  English  fluently;  and  had
    been financially independent since coming to the United Kingdom.  There
    were no qualifying  children,  in  terms  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  thus  no  need  to
    consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  such  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The judge accordingly dismissed the appeals.

16. The appellants applied for permission to  appeal  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the grounds  of  application  read  as
    follows:-

         "3.  The detailed basis of the claim is more particularly  set  out
             in the statements of the appellant's supported by  documentary
             evidence set out and contained in the  appellant's  first  and
             second inventory of productions particularly as it relates  to
             the third appellant who will be at  risk  of  being  separated
             from  his  family,  compelled  to  undergo  tormenting  fetish
             initiation practice; condemned to a  life  of  separation  and
             servitude and deprived of his fundamental rights on return  to
             the country of origin Nigeria.  See paragraph 9 of  the  first
             appellant's statement and corroborating  evidence  i.e.  items
             31, 32,  33,  34  and  35  of  the  appellant's  inventory  of
             productions.

         4.   At the outset of the hearing, the FTT indicated that she  will
             not consider the issues and that if the appellant wish to have
             matters addressed, it is for them to make a protection  claim.
             See paragraph 30 of the determination.  FTJ expressly  refused
             to hear submission on  this  ground.   Consequently,  the  FTT
             failed  to  and  or  refused  to   take   into   account   the
             circumstances of the third appellant as referred to above  and
             the corroborating evidence of the third appellant as  referred
             to above and the corroborating evidence thereto as part of the
             paragraph  279ADE  and  the  proportionality  assessment.   In
             failing/refusing to do so,  the  FTT  significantly  erred  in
             law."

17. Paragraph 9 of  the  grounds  submitted  that  the  option  to  make  a
    protection claim did not justify exclusion of a relevant  fact,  as  it
    was entirely a matter for an appellant to  decide  whether  to  make  a
    human rights  claim  or  a  protection  claim.   Home  Office  guidance
    suggested that factors relevant to a protection  claim  "can  and  will
    invariably have  a  bearing  on  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacle[s] to integration.  It is  therefore  an  error  to  reject  a
    relevant fact on the grounds that it can form a basis for a  protection
    claim".

18. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal.   The  appellants
    then applied to the Upper Tribunal for permission.  They  continued  to
    rely upon the grounds put to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  addition,
    they submitted that the First-tier Tribunal in refusing  permission  to
    appeal had erred, by failing to take into account the circumstances  of
    the third appellant as a relevant factor  in  assessing  whether  there
    were significant obstacles to integration.  Reference was made  to  the
    case of HH v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] CSOH 11,
    in which Lord Bannatyne observed that there will be a degree of overlap
    in applying the test of  serious  harm  and  the  test  of  significant
    obstacles to integration, even though they were separate questions.  If
    there were a serious threat to a person's life on  return,  both  tests
    would be met.  However, there may be circumstances which  would  amount
    to very significant obstacles to integration, which would not amount to
    serious harm. We respectfully agree with all of this.

19. Permission to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 9 March 2020.
     The refusing judge considered that the First-tier Tribunal  had  taken
    "an entirely proper approach in finding that the appellant should raise
    her concerns about return to Nigeria  as  a  protection  claim  in  the
    prescribed manner rather than seeking to argue that claim in the  guise
    of an article 8 application".

20. The appellants petitioned the Outer House of the Court of  Session  for
    reduction of the Upper Tribunal's  decision  to  refuse  permission  to
    appeal.  Before the Outer House,  the  appellants  and  the  respondent
    agreed that the Upper Tribunal had erred in law  in  finding  that  the
    appellant should raise her  concerns  about  return  to  Nigeria  as  a
    protection claim, rather than seeking to argue that claim in the  guise
    of  an  Article  8  application.   The  parties  considered  that   the
    appellants were entitled to have the Article 8 claim considered, taking
    into account all  the  facts  presented  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    including those which could give rise to infringements of article 3  or
    constitute a basis for seeking refuge.  The Outer House having  reduced
    the Upper Tribunal's decision, permission to appeal was granted by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 2 November 2020.




 RELEVANT PRIMARY LEGSLATION

21. Section 82 (Right of  Appeal  to  the  Tribunal)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  creates  rights  of  appeal  against,
    respectively, a decision to refuse a protection claim, and  a  decision
    to refuse a human rights claim:-

         "82.  Right of appeal to the Tribunal

         (1)  A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-

             (a)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection
                  claim made by P,

             (b)  the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P, or

             (c)   the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                  protection status.

         (2)  For the purposes of this Part-

             (a)  a "protection claim" is a claim made by  a  person  ("P")
                  that removal of P from the United Kingdom-

                  (i)   would breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention, or

                  (ii) would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                      relation  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of
                      humanitarian protection;

             (b)  P's protection claim is refused if the Secretary of State
                  makes one or more of the following decisions-

                  (i)  that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not
                      breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                      Refugee Convention;

                  (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not
                      breach the United Kingdom's obligations  in  relation
                      to persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                      protection;

                  (c)  a person has "protection status" if  the  person  has
                      been granted leave to enter or remain in  the  United
                      Kingdom as a refugee or as a person  eligible  for  a
                      grant of humanitarian protection;

                  (d)  "humanitarian  protection"  is  to  be  construed  in
                      accordance with the immigration rules;

                  (e)  "refugee" has the same  meaning  as  in  the  Refugee
                      Convention.

         (3)  The right of appeal under subsection (1)  is  subject  to  the
             exceptions and limitations specified in this Part.]"

22. Section 84 (Grounds of Appeal), so far as relevant, provides:-

         "84.  Grounds of appeal

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal of protection claim)
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-

             (a)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                  Refugee Convention;

             (b)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation
                  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of   humanitarian
                  protection;

             (c)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                  1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
                  Convention).

         (2)  An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."

23. Section 85 (Matters to be considered) provides, so far as relevant:-

         " (4)    On an appeal under section 82(1) ...  against  a  decision
             [the Tribunal] may consider ... any matter which  [it]  thinks
             relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including  ...  a
             matter arising after the date of the decision.

         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless  the
             Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

         (6)  A matter is a 'new matter' if-

             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
                  section 84, and

             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of-

                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                  (ii) a statement  made  by  the  appellant  under  section
                      120.]"




DISCUSSION

24. In the present case, the appellants had made it plain that they did not
    wish to make a protection claim.  As can be seen from section 82(2),  a
    protection claim is one which necessarily involves the  assertion  that
    the person concerned is within the definition of a refugee in the  1951
    Convention;  that  is  to  say,  a  person  outside  their  country  of
    nationality or habitual  residence  who  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the grounds of race, religion,  nationality,  membership
    of a particular social group or political opinion  and  is  unable  or,
    owing to such fear, unwilling to avail themselves of the protection  of
    that country.   Such  a  person  is,  however,  excluded  from  refugee
    protection if they fall within Article 1C, D, E or F.

25. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules explains that a person will  be
    granted humanitarian protection if the respondent is  satisfied,  inter
    alia, that the person concerned does  not  qualify  as  a  refugee  and
    substantial grounds have been shown for believing that, if returned  to
    the country of return, they would face a real risk of suffering serious
    harm,  being  unable  or,  owing  to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail
    themselves of the protection of that country; and  that  they  are  not
    excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.  Again, it is evident
    from the history of the appeals that the appellants have not  indicated
    any wish  to  be  granted  humanitarian  protection.   So  far  as  the
    respondent is concerned, there is no indication that she considers  the
    appellants, or any of them, to be a refugee or  a  person  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection.

26. Where, as here, a human rights claim is made,  in  circumstances  where
    the respondent considers the nature of what is being  alleged  is  such
    that the  claim  could  also  constitute  a  protection  claim,  it  is
    appropriate for the respondent to draw this to  the  attention  of  the
    person concerned, pointing out they  may  wish  to  make  a  protection
    claim.  Indeed, so much would appear to be required of the  respondent,
    in the light of her international obligations  regarding  refugees  and
    those in need of humanitarian protection.

27. As Mr Ndubuisi pointed out, however, there is no obligation on  such  a
    person to make a protection claim.  The person concerned may, as in the
    present case,  decide  to  raise  an  alleged  risk  of  serious  harm,
    potentially falling within Article  3  of  the  ECHR,  solely  for  the
    purpose of making an application for leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom that is centred on the  private  life  aspects  of  Article  8,
    whether by reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) or outside  the  Rules.
    If so, then, as in the present case, the "serious harm" element of  the
    claim falls to be considered in that context.

28. We also agree with Mr Ndubuisi that what  we  have  just  said  is  not
    affected by the procedures the respondent has for assessing  protection
    claims, including the need for a person  making  such  a  claim  to  be
    interviewed about it.  Where, in the context of a  human  rights  claim
    involving  a  "serious  harm"  element,  the  respondent  considers  it
    necessary to do so, she can make arrangements for the applicant  to  be
    interviewed about it.

29. This is not to say, however, that the failure of a  person  to  make  a
    protection claim, when the possibility of doing so is (as  here)  drawn
    to their attention by the respondent will  never  be  relevant  to  the
    respondent's and, on appeal, the First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    the "serious harm" element of a purely human rights  appeal.  Depending
    on the circumstances, the  assessment  may  well  be  informed  by  the
    refusal to subject oneself to the procedures that are inherent  in  the
    consideration of a claim to refugee or humanitarian protection  status.
    The appellant may have to accept that the respondent and  the  Tribunal
    are  entitled  to  approach  this  element  of  the  claim  with   some
    scepticism, particularly if it is advanced only late in the  day.  That
    is so, whether or not the element constitutes a "new  matter"  for  the
    purposes of section 85(5) of the 2002  Act.   On  appeal,  despite  the
    potential overlap we have noted at paragraph 18 above, a person who has
    not made a protection claim will not be able to rely on the grounds set
    out in section 84(1), but only  on  the  ground  specified  in  section
    84(2).

30. The decision letter in the present  case  was,  therefore,  correct  to
    state that, in the absence of an "asylum claim" (which we can take  for
    present purposes to  be  coterminous  with  a  protection  claim),  the
    respondent would consider the human rights  claim  "under  the  private
    life route only".  But the decision letter did not, in fact, go  on  to
    consider  the  claims  relating  to  the  third  appellant's   position
    regarding the family deity, or the issue of kidnapping, when addressing
    the  issue  of  whether  there  would  be  significant   obstacles   to
    integration of the adult appellants in Nigeria.

31.  That error was not, however, repeated by Judge  Grant-Hutchinson.   As
    we have seen, at paragraph 30 of her decision, she specifically engaged
    with the alleged threat to the third appellant from the family  members
    of the first appellant.  She held that there  was  no  reason  why  the
    appellants could not settle in another area of Nigeria, away  from  the
    first appellant's family members.  When pressed by the  Upper  Tribunal
    on this matter at the hearing, Mr Ndubuisi  had  to  accept  there  was
    nothing in the grounds of application for permission to appeal  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  challenged   this
    important finding.  Although the judge did not,  in  terms,  apply  her
    finding to the issue of kidnapping, it is in our view manifest that her
    conclusion on internal relocation encompassed that issue as well.  Were
    the appellants to relocate to a large city such  as  Lagos  (well  away
    from their previous place of abode), there was no evidence  before  the
    judge that began to show those who had kidnapped the second appellant's
    father would come to know that the appellants  had  returned.   In  any
    event, the evidence was that the father had been kidnapped as a way  of
    extorting money because the second appellant was known  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and, therefore, that the family was relatively well off.
     This factor would, of course, disappear once the  appellants  were  in
    Nigeria.

32. Mr Ndubuisi sought to argue that Judge Grant-Hutchinson had not brought
    all relevant matters to bear, including the  medical  evidence  earlier
    mentioned, in the context of her finding that the family might need  to
    relocate in Nigeria.  There is no merit  in  this  submission.   It  is
    plain that the judge considered all  relevant  matters  in  detail  and
    collectively.  So far as relocation is concerned, the  respondent  had,
    in the decision letter,  cogently  pointed  out  that  the  family  had
    successfully relocated to the United Kingdom and  that  the  first  and
    second appellants have, by any standard, good transferrable skills.

33. The day after the hearing, the Upper Tribunal received a  letter  dated
    26 March 2021 from Mr Ndubuisi. There is no indication that the  letter
    has been copied to the respondent's presenting officer. In the  letter,
    Mr Ndubuisi apologies "for having to write into the Panel post  hearing
    to address matters which could reasonably have been  addressed  at  the
    hearing yesterday". The letter makes reference to statements and  other
    materials in the appellants' inventories of  production,  which  it  is
    said limit the appellants' ability to live in another part  of  Nigeria
    than that from which they come. The  letter  then  submits  that  Judge
    Grant-Hutchinson failed to undertake the  requisite  "broad  evaluative
    exercise ... to be carried out on the merits".

34. It is inappropriate for a party, after the hearing,  to  seek  to  make
    submissions  that  could  have  been  made  at  that  hearing.  In  the
    circumstances, there is no  requirement  to  consider  the  submissions
    contained in the letter. In any event, having considered the letter  de
    bene esse, the passages in the inventories to which  the  letter  draws
    attention add nothing  material  to  the  description  of  the  alleged
    threats described in the application materials, as set out  above.  The
    inventories were, of course, before Judge Grant-Hutchinson,  who  would
    have had them in mind when making  her  findings,  including  those  at
    paragraph 30 of her decision. The first appellant's claim at  paragraph
    9g of her first statement, that, if the  third  appellant  were  to  be
    returned to Nigeria, "it will just be a matter of time for  him  to  be
    identified (no matter how well we try to hide him or evade  them)"  and
    that the parents "will be helpless in trying to stop him being  dragged
    down this route" is unsupported by any credible evidence.

35. The letter also makes reference  to  FCDO  foreign  travel  advice  for
    Nigeria, contained in  the  first  inventory,  which  counsels  against
    travel to the North East Zone and to  "rivers  in  the  South  states",
    owing to insurgent  activities  and  kidnapping;  with  only  essential
    travel being recommended to most North West and North  Central  states.
    The cult of the first appellant's family deity is said  to  be  located
    somewhere in the South East area of the country. None of  this  affects
    the point made to Mr Ndubuisi by the Tribunal  at  the  hearing  on  25
    March; namely, that one obvious place for the family to live  would  be
    Lagos, which is in the South West of Nigeria and which would plainly be
    a suitable location for a professional engineer,  such  as  the  second
    appellant, and someone with the work experience of the first appellant.

36. The letter references the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ  813,  which
    calls for a broad evaluative judgment of  the  ability  of  someone  to
    reintegrate. That is  what  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  undertook  in  the
    present case. The submission  here  is  merely  a  belated  attempt  to
    mischaracterise a pure disagreement with her as an error of law on  her
    part.

37. For these reasons, we find that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Grant-Hutchinson, such as to make it  appropriate  to
    set that decision aside.  These appeals are accordingly dismissed.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

                      Mr Justice Lane


                      29 March 2021


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
