
AN (Only loser can appeal) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 00097
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 9 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  05/05/2005
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)


Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr T Grieg, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          No appearance

Under the 2002 Act and the 2003 Rules, an appeal to the Tribunal  only  lies
if the party appealing seeks the reversal of the Adjudicator's  decision  to
allow or dismiss the appeal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   He
     has been granted permission to appeal against the determination of  an
     Adjudicator, Mr R D Crawford, dismissing the appeal of the  Respondent
     (whom we shall call the Claimant), a citizen of  Afghanistan,  against
     his decision on 21 September 2003 to give directions for  his  removal
     as an illegal entrant after refusing asylum.

  2. In reaching his determination, the Adjudicator said this, at paragraph
     35:

           "I address my first attention to the Appellant's age.   He  says
           he is sixteen.   The  Home  Office  dispute  this.   No  medical
           evidence  has  been  submitted.   I  do  not   have   sufficient
           information to reject  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  he  is
           sixteen.  I therefore must approach this case on the basis  that
           he is sixteen and still a minor."

  3. He then went on, as we have indicated, to  dismiss  the  appeal.   The
     Secretary  of  State  sought  permission   to   appeal   against   the
     Adjudicator's determination on the ground that the  Adjudicator  erred
     in law in his approach to the Claimant's age:   he  had  reversed  the
     burden of proof.

  4. The Vice President who gave permission to appeal wrote this:

           "It is no more than arguable that in section 101.1 of  the  2002
           Act '...  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the  adjudicator's
           determination ...' includes a right of appeal against  decisions
           on incidental points such as age, irrespective of the result."

  5.  The  Claimant  himself  did  not  appeal  against  the  Adjudicator's
     determination and has made no contribution to these proceedings.  Mr D
     O'Callaghan, counsel who happened to be in court  on  another  matter,
     gave us valuable assistance in resolving the issues arising  from  the
     grant of permission.  Before resolving that issue,  we  should  record
     our firm opinion that the  Adjudicator  did  err  as  alleged  in  the
     grounds of appeal.  It is for the Claimant to establish any fact  upon
     which he relies.  In this appeal, the Claimant claimed that because of
     his minority he should not be removed from the United Kingdom: it  was
     his  task  to  establish  his  minority.   The   Adjudicator   clearly
     approached the issue of the Claimant's age on the basis that once  the
     Claimant had made an assertion, it was for the Secretary of  State  to
     adduce sufficient evidence to reject the assertion.   That  cannot  be
     right.  No doubt a matter can be proved simply  on  the  basis  of  an
     assertion, but it is  for  the  Adjudicator  to  decide,  on  all  the
     evidence, whether the assertion is to be trusted.

  6. As we say, we are confident that the Adjudicator erred in law  in  his
     approach to deciding the Claimant's age.  What is much less  clear  is
     whether the Adjudicator did make any decision on  the  issue.   It  is
     more than arguable that the Adjudicator reached  no  firm  conclusion,
     but merely structured the rest of his determination  around  what  the
     position would be if the Claimant were aged sixteen.

  7. Whether or not the  Adjudicator's  determination  is  to  be  read  as
     including a firm decision on the Claimant's age, the crucial  question
     in this appeal is whether, given  that  the  Claimant  failed  in  his
     appeal to the Adjudicator, the Secretary of State  has  any  right  of
     appeal to the Tribunal.  To put that question more concisely, can  the
     winner appeal?  A court's first reaction to  that  question  might  be
     that a  winner  has  no  need  to  appeal:   but  the  issue  in  this
     jurisdiction is not so clear.  That is demonstrated by the decision of
     the Court of Appeal in R v SSHD ex parte Danaie [1998] INLR  124.   In
     that case, the Court of Appeal held that if  the  Secretary  of  State
     proposed to ignore a finding of fact made by  an  Adjudicator,  or  to
     proceed on  a  different  basis,  he  should  explain  why;   it  also
     restricted the circumstances in which he could do so  to  cases  where
     the Adjudicator's decision either  was  demonstrably  flawed  or  made
     without reference all  the  relevant  evidence  now  available.   Even
     though the Adjudicator's treatment of the issue of age was, as we have
     indicated, demonstrably flawed in this case,  one  can  see  that  the
     Secretary of State would want  to  take  advantage  of  the  appellate
     process for setting aside any incidental determination of fact  by  an
     Adjudicator that was adverse to the Government, whatever  the  outcome
     of the appeal.  It is, however, very far from clear that the  decision
     of the Court of Appeal in Danaie has the force which it had.   At  the
     time Danaie was decided, there was an unrestricted right of appeal  to
     the Tribunal, subject only to obtaining leave to  appeal.   An  appeal
     could be brought by either party, and the grounds of appeal  were  not
     restricted to errors of  law.   Thus  the  Secretary  of  State  could
     challenge any incidental findings of fact by appeal to  the  Tribunal.
     One can well understand the unwillingness of the courts to  allow  the
     Secretary of State to ignore such findings of fact, when he had had  a
     proper opportunity to challenge them by appeal.

  8. That is not the position now.  The provision in both the 1971 and 1999
     Acts allowing "any party dissatisfied with  the  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator" to appeal to  the  Tribunal  was  replaced  by  different
     wording in the 2002 Act:  and that Act also restricts the jurisdiction
     of  the  Tribunal  to  cases  where  the  Adjudicator's  determination
     disclosed a material error of law.

  9. We must now consider the statutory scheme for appeals to the  Tribunal
     under the 2002 Act.  Sections 82 and 83 of that Act  set  out  various
     decisions which can be appealed to an Adjudicator.  Section 84  lists,
     comprehensively and exclusively, the grounds upon which an appeal  may
     be brought.  Section 85 provides that, where an appeal is brought,  it
     should be treated as including an appeal against any other decision in
     respect of which the Appellant has a right of  appeal,  and  that  the
     Adjudicator shall consider any grounds the  Appellant  has  given  for
     remaining in the United Kingdom pursuant to a s120 ("one-stop") notice
     in addition to other grounds of appeal.

 10. Section 86 is as follows:

           "86.  Determination of appeal


           (1)   This section applies on an appeal under section  82(1)  or
           83.


           (2)   The adjudicator must determine-
                 (a)   any matter raised as a ground of appeal  (whether  or
                       not by virtue of section 85(1)), and
                 (b)   any matter which section 85 requires him to consider.

              3) The adjudicator must allow the  appeal  in  so  far  as  he
                 thinks that-
                    a) a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is
                       treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with
                       the law (including immigration rules), or
                    b) a discretion exercised in making a  decision  against
                       which the appeal is brought or is  treated  as  being
                       brought should have been exercised differently.

              4) For the purposes of subsection (3) a decision that a person
                 should be removed from the United Kingdom under a provision
                 shall not be regarded as unlawful if  it  could  have  been
                 lawfully  made  by  reference  to  removal  under   another
                 provision.


              5) In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the adjudicator
                 shall dismiss the appeal.

              6) Refusal to depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure  from
                 immigration rules is not the exercise of a  discretion  for
                 the purposes of subsection (3)(b)."

 11. Section 87 permits an Adjudicator who has allowed an appeal to give  a
     direction for the purpose of giving effect to his decision, and s87(4)
     provides that such a direction  should  be  treated  as  part  of  the
     determination of the appeal for the purposes  of  s101.   Section  101
     itself allows a party to an  appeal  to  an  Adjudicator  (subject  to
     permission) to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the  Adjudicator's
     determination on a point of law.

 12. Section 106 contains the rule-making power including the following:

           "106. Rules


           (1)   The Lord Chancellor may make rules-
                 (a)   regulating the exercise of the right of appeal  under
                       section 83, 83 or 101;
                 (b)   prescribing procedure to be  followed  in  connection
                       with proceedings under  section  82,  83,  101(1)  or
                       103."


 13. The Rules are the Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules
     2003.  Rule 17(3) of those Rules is as follows:

           "17(3)      The grounds of appeal must-
                 (a)    identify  the  alleged  errors   of   law   in   the
                       adjudicator's determination;  and
                 (b)   explain why such errors made a  material  difference
           to the decision."

 14. There is no definition of "determination" in the Act, nor is there any
     such definition in the Rules.  We  were  referred  to  no  authorities
     bearing on the issue.

 15. Rule 17 clearly envisages that the determination may be something that
     is different from the Adjudicator's decision.  Section  86  also  uses
     the word  "decision",  but  there  it  is  confined  to  the  original
     immigration decision against which the appeal is brought.  So  far  as
     the Adjudicator's process is concerned,  the  distinction  in  s86  is
     between the  process  of  determining  (s86(2))  and  the  process  of
     allowing or dismissing the appeal (s86(3) and (5)).  Having determined
     (presumably made his determination of) the matters raised  as  grounds
     of appeal or otherwise required  to  be  considered,  the  Adjudicator
     proceeds to allow or dismiss the appeal.  The next step, if he  allows
     his appeal, is to make any appropriate order.  At that point, we  have
     clearly passed beyond what Parliament regarded as implicit in the word
     "determination" for otherwise s87(4) would not be necessary.

 16. The wording of s86, taken  by  itself,  does  not  indicate  that  the
     determination is anything other than the  decision  on  those  matters
     mentioned in s86(2).  But the title of that  section  shows  that  the
     draftsman had something larger in mind, and the fact that  the  appeal
     to the Tribunal is against a determination would seem to suggest  that
     the word includes at least the outcome (in the sense  of  whether  the
     appeal was allowed or dismissed), because otherwise there would be  no
     avenue for appealing the outcome.

 17. It would not normally be right to use  subordinate  legislation  as  a
     guide to the  interpretation  of  the  principal  Act,  but  the  2003
     Procedure Rules are in a special  position  because  of  the  explicit
     terms of s106(1).  Those statutory provisions make it clear  that  the
     right of appeal to the Tribunal is exercisable only in accordance with
     rules made under that section.  It follows that the  right  of  appeal
     against a determination, given by s101, can be  understood  only  when
     the provisions of the Act are read in conjunction with the  provisions
     of  the  Rules.   As  we  have  said,  the  Rules  do  not  define   a
     "determination", but they do  lay  down,  amongst  other  things,  the
     method by which a person applies  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal against an Adjudicator's determination.   We  have  indicated
     above the terms of Rule 17(3), which is one of the  conditions  to  be
     fulfilled by an Applicant.  As we read the Rules, a person  who  makes
     an application whose grounds do not both identify  alleged  errors  of
     law and explain why such errors made  a  material  difference  to  the
     decision is (whatever s101 might otherwise imply) not entitled to have
     permission to appeal and so cannot appeal to the Tribunal.

 18. Rule 17(3) only deals with the grounds of  appeal:   it  may  well  be
     that, even if permission is granted, the grounds are in  the  end  not
     found to be made out.  But what does appear from Rule  17(3)  is  that
     the grounds of appeal must incorporate an argument that  the  decision
     of the Adjudicator (which, in context, can mean nothing other than the
     decision to allow or dismiss the appeal) should have been a  different
     decision.  This does not of itself rule out the possibility  that  the
     successful party might chose to appeal on the ground that he ought  to
     have  been  the  unsuccessful  party:   but  it  does  rule  out   the
     possibility of applying to the  Tribunal  for  permission  to  appeal,
     relying on grounds which seek to preserve the  decision  to  allow  or
     dismiss the appeal.

 19. There is no doubt in our minds that the concept of "determination"  in
     the 2002 Act is a concept which is somewhat larger than  the  decision
     to allow  or  dismiss  the  appeal.   The  requirement  in  s86(2)  to
     "determine" matters on the way to allowing or dismissing the appeal is
     sufficient to demonstrate that.  But the combination of ss101 and  106
     and Rule 17(3) shows that however wide  the  statutory  concept  of  a
     "determination" is, nobody  can  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  unless  he
     challenges the eventual decision.

 20. In this case, the Secretary of State was perfectly  satisfied  by  the
     Adjudicator's decision to dismiss the appeal.   He  did  not  seek  to
     challenge that.  Although he was able to point to an arguable (and  in
     our view unarguable) error of law in the Adjudicator's  determination,
     he has not explained why that error made a material difference to  the
     decision, and he has never sought to provide any such explanation.  On
     the contrary, he would seek to assert that,  despite  the  error,  the
     decision itself should be maintained.

 21. An application for permission to appeal on  such  grounds  should  not
     have been granted.  The statutory  framework  prohibits  the  Tribunal
     from dealing with an appeal in which the person appeal to the Tribunal
     does not seek to have the Adjudicator's decision reversed.  Permission
     having been granted, however, this appeal must now be dismissed.   The
     Adjudicator's determination accordingly stands as the determination of
     the Claimant's appeal.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
