


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



      MF (Rule 60 - correction - R1 procedure) Palestinian Territories
                             [2007] UKAIT 00092



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |                                |
|On 21 August 2007               |                                |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     MF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:            Ms J Sachdev of Counsel
For the Respondent:       Mr K Wood, Home Office Presenting Officer


1. Rule 60(1) can be  used  to  correct  substantial  errors  and  omissions
   provided they can    properly be categorised as clerical  or  accidental.
   The corrected determination supersedes the original determination.

2. Such errors can be corrected after reconsideration has been ordered.

3. The issue of an R1 notice inviting the parties to agree that there  is  a
   material error of law and to consent  to  an  appeal  proceeding  to  the
   second stage  of  the  reconsideration  is  only  an  indication  of  the
   Tribunal's provisional view.  It does not give  rise  to  any  legitimate
   expectation that the Tribunal will take that course.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.      This is the reconsideration of an appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 12 July 2006 to give directions  for  the  appellant's
    removal following the refusal of his claim for asylum.  His appeal  was
    dismissed following a hearing before Designated Immigration Judge Reeds
    on 31 August 2006.  The appellant is  a  Palestinian  resident  in  the
    Occupied Territories.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 May  2006
    travelling on a false passport and claimed asylum the same day.


Background


2.      The background to the appellant's claim can  briefly  be  summarised
    as follows.  He was born on 1 April 1968 in Jenine Refugee Camp in  the
    West Bank in Palestine.  In  2002  Israeli  forces  attacked  the  camp
    destroying a large part of it including his  grandfather's  house.   In
    April 2003 the appellant was working as a car mechanic  when  the  camp
    was attacked by helicopters.  In October 2003 he found  a  job  in  the
    Israeli Occupied Territories and would travel  from  Jenine  on  Sunday
    morning and return every Thursday.  He had to travel  through  a  small
    checkpoint.  In November 2004 he was approached by a group of  men  who
    asked him to help them take things from Jenine to Israel.  He was given
    the impression that they were from Hamas and that he was being asked to
    carry explosives.  He did not wish to do so and decided  to  leave  his
    job.  His employer was surprised and asked him if there was  a  problem
    and whether he had been offered more money.  The  appellant  said  that
    there was no problem but his employer asked  him  to  work  one  week's
    notice until he could find a replacement.

3.      On 25 November 2004 he was approached by Israeli soldiers and  taken
    in for interrogation.  He was held in prison until  12  December  2004.
    He claims that he was tortured and ill-treated.  To avoid further  ill-
    treatment he told them why  he  wanted  to  leave  his  work  and  also
    disclosed the names of the three men who were from Hamas.  He was  told
    that he could go but his wife told him not to return home as Hamas were
    looking for him.  His employer said he would help him  and  his  family
    leave Palestine and arrangements  were  made  with  an  agent  for  the
    appellant to travel to Jenine to meet his wife.  His family  were  able
    to leave at that stage but the appellant remained working for the  same
    employer until 23 May 2006 saving money  so  that  he  could  join  his
    family.  He finally left on 24 May  2006  travelling  by  air  to  this
    country where he claimed asylum.




The Procedural Issue


4.      The judge's determination was issued  on  21  September  2006.   She
    dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds, but  even
    the most cursory examination of the determination indicates that it was
    an incomplete document.  Paragraphs 16, 19, 20, 22 and 23 refer to tape
    sections A-E respectively.  The appellant applied  for  reconsideration
    which was ordered on 2 October 2006 in the following terms:

               "Unfortunately  the  determination  appears  to  have   been
         promulgated with large parts of the intended text missing (there is
         reference instead to the tape - presumably an  instruction  to  the
         typist).   As  a  result  it  is  impossible  to   understand   the
         determination and there are no reasons given for  the  decision  as
         asserted in the grounds.  On this basis there is a clear  error  of
         law."

5.      The senior immigration judge following the R1/R2 procedure  directed
    that  a  notice  should  be  served  on  the  parties  indicating   her
    provisional view that there was a  clear  material  error  of  law  and
    asking  the  parties  whether  they  agreed  to   the   reconsideration
    proceeding straight to the second stage.  Meanwhile, as is  clear  from
    the appeal file the original judge  became  aware  that  an  incomplete
    determination had been issued.  She notified a senior immigration judge
    about this. Her fax is on the appeal file and confirms that  the  wrong
    file  was  attached  when  the  decision  was   sent   for   electronic
    promulgation. The  correct  determination  was  then  issued  dated  16
    October 2006 and headed "Amended Determination and Reasons (pursuant to
    rule 60 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005)".  The appellant then applied for an order for reconsideration of
    this amended decision firstly on the basis  that  once  reconsideration
    had been ordered the determination could not be subject to a rule 60 re-
    promulgation, the grounds arguing that the slip rule  is  not  designed
    for this purpose and cannot be used to correct a failure to determine a
    case properly and secondly the grounds seek to challenge the  substance
    of the decision.  Reconsideration was ordered on  both  grounds  on  16
    November 2006.


Rule 60


6.      I will deal firstly with the issues arising from the  fact  that  an
    incomplete determination was promulgated,  but  subsequently  corrected
    under the provisions of rule 60.  Ms Sachdev's submissions are  firstly
    that it was not open  to  the  judge  to  use  rule  60  to  amend  the
    determination.  She argued that there could be no  guarantee  that  the
    amended determination contained  the  tapes  as  originally  typed  up.
    There had been a major error which could not be corrected by  the  slip
    rule.  Secondly, the appellant had been offered the  opportunity  of  a
    full re-hearing at a stage two reconsideration and he had a  legitimate
    expectation that this was going to take place.  The  Tribunal  had  not
    been entitled to take a different view on the way  the  reconsideration
    should proceed following the issue of the amended  determination.   She
    submitted thirdly that once reconsideration had  been  ordered  it  was
    wrong to resort to using the slip rule.  In substance  the  appeal  had
    moved from a first instance hearing to  the  equivalent  of  an  appeal
    hearing.  The first instance judge should not have  sought  to  correct
    her determination in these circumstances.

7.      Mr Wood submitted  that  rule  60  clearly  applied  as  there  were
    omissions from the determination.  An error had been  identified  which
    had been properly corrected.  The appellant had not  been  deprived  of
    any legitimate expectation.  His expectation  and  entitlement  was  to
    receive the full determination  of  the  Tribunal,  not  an  incomplete
    determination.  It has been  open  to  him  to  challenge  the  judge's
    findings and reasoning in the amended determination: he had done so and
    had been granted an order for reconsideration.

8.      Rule 60 of the 2005 Procedure Rules which is headed  "Correction  of
    orders and determinations" provided at the relevant time as follows:

         "60.  (1) The Tribunal may at any time amend an order,  notice  of
             decision or determination to correct a clerical error or other
             accidental slip or omission.


                  (2) Where an order, notice of decision or determination is
             amended under this Rule -


                  (a) the Tribunal must serve an amended  version  on  the
                  party or parties on whom it served the original; and


                  (b) if Rule 10(8) and (9), Rule 23(5)  and  (6)  or  Rule
                  27(5)(b) - (d) applied in relation to the service of  the
                  original, it shall also apply in relation to the  service
                  of the amended version.


                  (3) The time within which a party may apply for permission
             to  appeal  against,  or  for  a   review   of,   an   amended
             determination runs from the date on which the party is  served
             with the amended determination."


9.      This rule contains a power which may be used at any time  but  which
    is limited to correcting a clerical error or other accidental  slip  or
    omission.  It is all too clear from the first determination  issued  in
    this appeal that there had been an accidental omission of parts of  the
    determination identified as the contents of tapes A-E.  The  fact  that
    an omission is substantial and includes all the relevant parts  of  the
    determination does not prevent it being  an  omission.   The  issue  is
    whether the omission was accidental.  In  the  present  case  this  can
    properly be  inferred  from  the  determination  itself  as  originally
    issued, but in any event it is clear from a note sent by the judge to a
    senior immigration judge confirming that the  wrong  determination  was
    sent for  electronic  promulgation.   I  am  satisfied  that  in  these
    circumstances it was open to the judge  to  correct  her  determination
    under the provisions of rule 60.  There is no reason  to  believe  that
    the determination as amended did not reflect the judge's original draft
    and no substance in the argument that the appellant cannot be sure that
    the  determination  is  not  as  originally  drafted.   There  was   an
    accidental omission which was properly corrected.

10.    Ms Sachdev also argued  that  it  was  not  appropriate  for  such  a
    correction to be made  once  an  order  for  reconsideration  had  been
    granted.  This argument cannot succeed.  The rule itself provides  that
    the correction may be made "at any time" and  there  is  no  basis  for
    limiting this phrase to a time up until  the  grant  of  an  order  for
    reconsideration, not least as in many cases it is the  application  for
    review which brings to light the fact that there has  been  a  clerical
    error or  accidental  omission  and  no  purpose  would  be  served  by
    preventing  the  correction  of   an   error   after   the   grant   of
    reconsideration.  It would make no sense for there to be any inhibition
    on the correction of such errors.  The Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals
    (Procedure) Rules 2003 enabled the Immigration Appeal Tribunal to amend
    an Adjudicator's determination where there was a  clerical  error.   It
    was provided by rule 59 of those rules:

         "59.   (1) An Adjudicator or the Tribunal may at any time amend an
             order or determination to correct a clerical error or other
             accidental slip or omission.


                  (2) The power in paragraph  (1)  includes  power  for  the
             Tribunal to amend an order or determination of an Adjudicator,
             after consulting the Adjudicator concerned ..."


          There is no reason to take the view that the single tier  Tribunal
    should  not  also  have  the  power  to  use   the   slip   rule   once
    reconsideration has been ordered and I am satisfied that providing  any
    amendment falls properly within the provisions of rule 60(1) there  can
    be  no  possible  objection  to  the  amendment  taking   place   after
    reconsideration has been ordered.  To take a different view would be to
    permit matters of form to triumph over matters of substance.

11.    The appellant has also sought to  argue  that  he  had  a  legitimate
    expectation  of  a  re-hearing  following  the  issue  of  the   notice
    indicating the judge's provisional view that there was a material error
    of law and inviting the parties to consent to the matter proceeding  to
    the second stage.  That notice gives  the  parties  an  opportunity  of
    indicating their view: it does not commit the Tribunal to  directing  a
    second stage reconsideration although in the absence of submissions  to
    the contrary, this is the step which would normally be taken.  However,
    it is always  open  to  the  Tribunal  in  the  light  of  any  further
    information to direct that the matter is set down  for  a  first  stage
    reconsideration in any event.  The notice did not give the appellant  a
    legitimate  expectation   of   a   re-hearing   at   a   second   stage
    reconsideration.

12.    I am therefore satisfied that the judge was  entitled  to  amend  her
    determination under the provisions of rule 60(1).  The  effect  of  the
    amendment is that the corrected determination supersedes  the  original
    one and the time limit for applying for a review runs from the date  on
    which the amended determination is served.  The appellant has exercised
    that right and has been granted an order for reconsideration.   He  has
    not lost anything or suffered any detriment by  the  use  of  the  slip
    rule: he has received what he was always entitled  to,  the  Tribunal's
    completed determination.


The Substantive Appeal


13.    In the grounds it is argued on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    judge erred in law by dismissing the expert evidence in relation to the
    treatment of Palestinians. The expert confirmed that  non-members  were
    recruited by Hamas but the judge had dismissed  this  evidence  without
    any objective backing for her finding.  It  is  also  argued  that  the
    judge had applied too subjective a test in relation to her  credibility
    findings.  In  her  submissions  Ms  Sachdev  sought  to  support  this
    submission by pointing to the judge's comments in  paragraph  65  where
    she said that she did not believe that three men in  the  circumstances
    described by the appellant would put their safety at risk when only one
    need have done so and therefore she  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account or the circumstances in which he claimed Hamas  had  approached
    him.  The context of this comment was the appellant's evidence that the
    three men who approached him were guarded about their identity and  the
    nature of the materials they wanted him to carry.  The  appellant  said
    that they made it clear that they were from Hamas whilst  not  directly
    stating this.  The judge said that she did not accept  that  three  men
    would have approached him in this manner identifying them all with  the
    Hamas group.

14.    Ms Sachdev also referred to the following findings by the judge.   In
    paragraph 66 of her determination the judge commented that it  was  the
    appellant's case that he had not said whether or not he  was  going  to
    help Hamas and had asked for a period of two weeks to  think  about  it
    but then he gave up his well paid job rather than directly refusing  to
    help Hamas.  Ms Sachdev submitted that there was no evidence of his job
    being well paid and the choice for the appellant was stark, his life or
    his money.  In paragraph 74 the judge said that  she  did  not  believe
    that the appellant would have risked a journey back to Jenine  to  pick
    up his wife and children, only then to return back  to  Israel.   There
    would be no reason for him to take such a risk or make such  a  journey
    as the agent could have collected the  family.   Ms  Sachdev  submitted
    that this failed to take account of the  appellant's  culture  and  the
    fact that his obvious concerns about his family's safety would make  it
    understandable why he might put himself at risk.  In paragraph  76  the
    judge commented  on  a  document  said  to  emanate  from  Hamas.   The
    appellant had said that his employer had obtained  it  because  of  his
    contacts in the Jenine camp.  It was argued by the  Presenting  Officer
    that if that was how the document  had  been  obtained,  the  appellant
    would  have  asked  his  employer  about  it.   The  judge  found   the
    appellant's evidence to be wholly unsatisfactory when he stated that he
    did not care about how his employer had  obtained  this  document.   Ms
    Sachdev submitted that the judge had erred by not  considering  whether
    the appellant would have asked such a question.

15.    The final challenge to the determination relates  to  the  fact  that
    the  judge  found  that  the  evidence  in  the  appellant's  case  was
    inconsistent with evidence which had been given  by  his  wife  in  her
    appeal.  Her claim had been based on a second-hand account in the sense
    that it related to what had happened to the appellant  and  Ms  Sachdev
    submitted that it could not be expected that two people  would  recount
    facts in exactly the same way.  In any event the judge had only  relied
    on the discrepancies identified in paragraph 72 of  her  determination:
    the appellant's wife  had  said  that  her  husband  had  informed  his
    employer about what had happened in the mosque  and  that  it  was  the
    employer who brought Israeli agents to the appellant.

16.    Mr Wood submitted that the judge had taken the expert  evidence  into
    account.  On the issue  raised  in  the  grounds  the  judge  had  been
    entitled not to adopt the views of the expert and she had  given  clear
    and sustainable reasons for her finding.  The judge's findings of  fact
    were properly open to her.  It was not arguable that she had applied  a
    subjective approach as argued on behalf  of  the  appellant.   She  was
    entitled to  take  discrepancies  into  account  and  to  draw  adverse
    inferences as to credibility.


Is There a Material Error of Law?


17.    The judge has set out her assessment of the evidence  comprehensively
    in paragraphs 52-82 of her determination.  The basis of the appellant's
    claim is summarised at paragraph 51: he was considered by Hamas to be a
    collaborator  or  informer  for  the  Israelis,  having  informed   the
    authorities in Israel of the names of three members of  Hamas  who  had
    asked him to smuggle packages  containing  explosives  or  bomb  making
    equipment into Israel.  Having reviewed the evidence  the  judge  found
    that the appellant had not given a credible account  and  she  rejected
    his evidence that he had ever been asked or approached by Hamas men  to
    transport explosives into Israel.  She did not believe that he had ever
    been arrested by the Israeli authorities and rejected the factual basis
    of his claim.

18.    It is argued that the judge erred  in  the  way  he  dealt  with  the
    expert  evidence  and  in  particular  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    recruitment  of  Palestinians.   The  specific  criticism  relates   to
    paragraph 60 of the report of Mr Joffe dated 16 December 2005 where  he
    says:

              "Hamas, like all other groups, does make use  of  non-members
         to take materials,  including  explosives,  into  Israel.   In  one
         recent case, the carrier was a 15 year old boy who  was  discovered
         by Israeli soldiers carrying two pipe bombs at a  checkpoint  close
         to Nablus."

19.     The  judge  referred  to  this  passage  in  paragraph  59  of   her
    determination and again in paragraph 60.  She said  that  she  did  not
    believe that Hamas would have sought to recruit someone in the position
    of the appellant when they would not know if he  was  in  fact  someone
    they could trust or whether he was a  collaborator  with  the  Israelis
    (paragraph 60).  When dealing with the evidence about the 15  year  old
    boy used to carry two pipe  bombs  into  Israel,  she  said  that  this
    related to one case only.  It set out that the  young  boy  was  not  a
    member of Hamas but it did  not  say  that  he  had  no  connection  or
    sympathy with that group or whether he was reluctant to carry out  such
    a task.  She took the view that the thrust of the  information  in  the
    report and other objective material demonstrated that there  were  tens
    and thousands of supporters and  sympathisers  of  Hamas,  whereas  the
    appellant was not a member, nor did he have any sympathy or support for
    that group.  She considered it more likely  that  Hamas  would  recruit
    from its many supporters  rather  than  apply  pressure  to  those  who
    expressly refused to show any visible  signs  of  allegiance  to  their
    cause.  I am satisfied that these were findings of fact  properly  open
    to the judge.  She took the expert evidence  into  account,  reached  a
    decision properly open to her on the evidence and has given sustainable
    reasons.

20.    I am not satisfied that there is any substance in the  challenges  to
    the judge's assessment of credibility of the  appellant's  evidence  or
    the argument that the judge has adopted too subjective an approach.  Ms
    Sachdev has made a number of specific criticisms which I  have  already
    identified.  These were questions of fact for the judge  to  assess  in
    the light of the evidence as a whole.  This is not  a  case  where  the
    judge has failed to consider the  appellant's  account  in  its  proper
    context. She has given clear  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    evidence.  These grounds are in substance an attempt to re-argue issues
    of fact.

21.    It is also argued that the  judge  was  wrong  to  attach  weight  to
    discrepancies in the evidence given by  the  appellant's  wife  in  her
    appeal which had been dismissed by an immigration judge in  June  2005.
    An order for reconsideration was made but it was held that there was no
    material error of law.  The judge has identified in  paragraph  72  the
    differences in the accounts given by the appellant and his wife.   They
    related to events central to the basis of the  appellant's  claim.   It
    was for the judge to decide as an issue  of  fact  whether  an  adverse
    inference as to credibility could properly be drawn from them.

22.    In summary I am not satisfied that the judge made any material  error
    of law.  Her findings and conclusions were properly open to her for the
    reasons she gave.

Decision

23.    The original Tribunal did not make a material error  of  law  and  it
    follows that the original determination shall stand.


Signed
       Date: 7 September 2007


Senior Immigration Judge Latter


