
ZN (Warlords - CIPU list not comprehensive) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 00096


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 26 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  03/05/2005

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                Mr B D Yates


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representatives: Mr S Ouseley,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
appellant; Ms S Kalim, Legal Representative of Ashgar & Co.  (Southall)  for
the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State.  His  appeal  is   against  a
      determination of Adjudicator, Mr P.B. Afako, notified on  10  December
      2003 allowing the appeal of the respondent (hereafter "the  claimant")
      against a decision giving directions for his removal following refusal
      to grant asylum.

   2. The Adjudicator accepted that the claimant was a  Pashtun  whose  home
      region was Charikar. He had joined the   Hizb-e-Islami  in  the  early
      1990s.  A split had later developed between the group of   Haji  Pacha
      Mir (who was  also   the  claimant's  cousin)  and  a  Jamiat-e-Islami
      faction led by a commander called Jan  Ahmed. In 1996 the claimant and
      his cousin had been ambushed  by  Jan  Ahmed's  men.  In  the  ensuing
      exchange the claimant was injured.  His cousin  and  six  others  were
      killed. Three people on Jan  Ahmed's side had been killed. In  October
      1999 the  Taliban  captured  and  tortured  the  claimant  along  with
      others.  After a month, the area had been recaptured by  the  Northern
      Alliance and he was freed. In fear of Jan  Ahmed, the claimant fled to
      Kabul. In November 2001, after the Northern Alliance   triumphed  over
      the Taliban, Jan  Ahmed resurfaced as part of the government in Kabul,
      while retaining control of the army in the province of  Charikar.  Jan
      Ahmed had sent his men to raid and arrest a brother of the  claimant's
      cousin. They were also to arrest the claimant,  but  he  eluded  them.
      Whist he was in hiding elsewhere they raided his house several  times.
      He then fled the country.

3.    The Adjudicator concluded:

             "The appellant's fear is of reprisals from Jan Ahmed  and  his
             men, who are pursuing a vendetta  arising  from  events  which
             took place in the province of Charikar."

4.    He accepted that there was adequate protection available for  most  in
      Kabul, including most Pashtun, but concluded:

             "The appellant's  case  is  beyond  a  generalised  ethnic  or
             political risk. A  vendetta  by  a  powerful  "warlord"  is  a
             different class of risk from a general fear  of  opportunistic
             targeting, and it is the former that the appellant invokes."

5.    The grounds of appeal contended, firstly, that the  Adjudicator  erred
      in allowing the appeal on the basis which he  did,  as  there  was  no
      objective evidence to support the claimant's contention about a person
      called Jan Ahmed.  "It is submitted  that,  if  a  person  called  Jan
      Ahmed were closely connected to the state and the machinery  of  power
      in   Afghanistan,  there  would  be  objective  evidence  about  him".
      Secondly, they maintained that the Adjudicator's  finding  that  there
      would be a failure  of  state  protection  towards  the  claimant  was
      contrary to recent October  2003 CIPU information at paragraph 5.68.

6.    At the outset of the hearing Miss Kalim  conceded  all  she  had  been
      able to find when searching for references to Jan  Ahmed in  objective
      sources was a reference to a General  Almas who was  described  on  an
      Afghan website in an item dated 25 November 2004 as the  commander  of
      goleurdu of Porwan in the government of President Hamid Kharzai.   She
      conceded that there was no obvious  reason  to  consider  this  was  a
      reference to Commander Jan Ahmed.

7.    Even given the fact that no evidence has come to light concerning  the
      existence of Commander Jan Ahmed, we  see  no  error  of  law  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination. The grounds of appeal did  not  challenge
      the Adjudicator's positive credibility findings and at paragraph 6 the
      Adjudicator gave clear and adequate reasons for finding  the  claimant
      wholly credible. We note that at several points he considered to  what
      extent  the  claimant's  account  was  consonant  with  the  objective
      evidence.

8.    Part and parcel of the evidence   thus  accepted  by  the  Adjudicator
      was that the claimant had come to the adverse attention of  Jan  Ahmed
      both in his home area of Charikar and in Kabul.

9.    The lack of any positive identification of Jan Ahmed in the  objective
      evidence is of course a lacuna in the claimant's story.   However,  we
      repeat, there has been no challenge to the claimant's credibility.  It
      is an axiom of refugee determination that it is not necessarily  fatal
      to an asylum claim that it is not corroborated.  Furthermore, this  is
      not a case where the  Adjudicator  relied  solely  on  the  claimant's
      evidence without  placing  that  in  the  context  of  the  background
      materials. He refers at various points to the  CIPU  Report,  a  Human
      Rights Watch report and a Voice of America news report.

10.   There is some albeit limited force in the point raised in the  grounds
      that one would expect to find some reference to Jan  Ahmed if  he  was
      in fact  closely connected to the  Northern Alliance. We  observe  too
      that the Secretary of State in the grounds stated that there  was  "no
      trace of a Jan  Ahmed in the objective materials".  However,  we  also
      note that the  "objective materials" relied on were far from  being  a
      wide-ranging set of  sources.   The  CIPU  October  2003  Report  does
      contain lists of persons prominent in the Northern  Alliance,  but  it
      does not purport to be exhaustive.  As  we  understand  it,  this  and
      other main sources on Afghanistan fully recognise that even under  the
      Kharzai regime, the political and military  landscape  in  Afghanistan
      remains dominated by a shifting and  uncertain  array  of  commanders,
      warlords or other chiefs.  Even within Kabul it does not  appear  that
      the authorities are able to entirely  prevent  warlord  activities  in
      connection with individual  cases.  This  is  not  a  case  where  the
      Secretary of State, in support of his appeal  adduced  evidence,  e.g.
      from an expert or from a comprehensive list  stating  positively  that
      there was no local  commander in  Charikar  with  connections  to  the
      Northern Alliance called Jan Ahmed.   In our view, in the  context  of
      objective evidence which lacked real comprehensivity and, in the light
      of the continuing state of political and military flux in Afghanistan,
      it was not sufficient for the Secretary of State merely to rely on the
      failure of the claimant to prove his case on the  basis  of  objective
      materials.





11.   We consider our analysis accords with principles set out by the  Court
      of Appeal in respect of the s.101 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 and its limiting  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  to  a
      material error of law, e.g. in the recent Court  of  Appeal  judgment,
      Ndlovu [2004] EWCA Civ 1567 in which it was held that the  Adjudicator
      did not make an error of law in his  assessment  of  the  evidence  in
      relation to food availability and distribution. Their lordships  noted
      that there was no specific background evidence showing that  merchants
      had been instructed  to  sell  food  only  to  card  carrying  ZANU-PF
      members. However, the Adjudicator clearly accepted and relied  on  (i)
      the claimant's own evidence, as distinct from the background evidence;
      (ii) the background evidence which was consistent with the claimant's,
      insofar as it showed that the ruling party used food distribution as a
      tool against potential political adversaries. The findings made by the
      Adjudicator were based first on what the  claimant  herself  said  and
      secondly on the background material.


12.   There was also no error of law, the Court held, in  relation  to  the
      Adjudicator's finding as to persecution. The Adjudicator was  "obliged
      and entitled to form his own evaluation on all the facts and  all  the
      evidence".   The  Adjudicator  had  placed  heavy  reliance   on   the
      claimant's particular evidence and was held to be  entitled  to  reach
      the conclusions he did.  More recently, the Court of Appeal in  Mlauzi
      [2005] EWCA Civ 128 in which Brooke, LJ  stated  at  paragraph  42  by
      reference to the Tribunal's error of law jurisdiction under s.101:

             'If it is simply an issue of fact which the Adjudicator had to
             determine on  the  facts,  including  the  factual  background
             evidence before him/her, appeals from a reversal  by  the  IAT
             are going to be less easy to resist ...'

13.   In  our  view  the  position  is  very  similar  in  this  case.   The
      Adjudicator relied heavily on the claimant's  evidence.   Although  he
      had no specific evidence of the existence of Jan Ahmed (apart from the
      claimant's  evidence)  he  plainly  saw  the  claimant's  account,  in
      particular the history he recounted of incidents that had occurred  in
      his life since 1996, to be consonant with the background material,  to
      which he did have regard. The background materials before him did  not
      contain any detailed list of warlords. He was  therefore  entitled  to
      accept the credibility of the existence of Jan Ahmed without reference
      to any positive objective evidence, because there was  a  good  reason
      why Jan Ahmed  might  not  be  mentioned  in  that  material.  Another
      adjudicator might, permissibly, have reached a different view, but his
      assessment was not legally flawed. His was a rational  approach  to  a
      variable situation where there was no comprehensive background.

  14. Mr Ouseley, in urging us to take a different view, sought  to  support
      his argument by reference  to  AF  ('Warlords/commanders'  -  evidence
      expected) Afghanistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00284. This is a case which  was
      promulgated   some   time   after   the   Adjudicator   notified   his
      determination. Following CA [2004] EWCA Civ  1165  that  prevents  any
      account being taken  of  it  by  us  insofar  as  deals  with  factual
      materials that were not  by  Mr  Afako.  However,  even  a  subsequent
      Country Guideline case  can  be  referred  to  if  it  exemplifies  or
      explains an error of law intrinsic to the decision.

15.   Can it be said, in this way, that AF exemplifies an error  of  law  on
      the part of the Adjudicator in this case? We think not.


16.   In AF at paragraphs 6 and 7 the Tribunal stated:


      'The responsibility  for  obtaining  evidence  under  our  adversarial
      system is of course that of the parties; but that in our view does not
      absolve  the  Adjudicator  from  considering   what   evidence   might
      reasonably be required in a given set of circumstances  to  confirm  a
      given fact or situation;  nor did Mr Bild seek to argue otherwise.  It
      is one thing to accept a claimant's personal  ("subjective")  history,
      where by the nature of things (see UNHCR Handbook p.197) there may  be
      little evidence available to confirm it);  but quite another to accept
      his account as evidence of a general situation, not supported by  such
      background ("objective") evidence as might reasonably be expected.'


      The passage we have set out from the Adjudicator's paragraph 59 in our
      view falls into this category. The Adjudicator was  well  entitled  to
      find that the claimant had, on his own account, a "subjective" fear of
      Qazavi; but to find on  an  "objective"  basis,  that  Qazavi  held  a
      "position of power" in the current administration, without any attempt
      to enquire how that might reasonably have been confirmed  (beyond  the
      rather vague observation about commanders coming and  going),  was  in
      our view a mistake, and, for the reasons we have  given,  one  of  law
      which would require us to intervene. That means the Home Office appeal
      would have to be allowed, unless Mr Bild  were  able  to  support  the
      Adjudicator's decision on some other evidence, or some other basis.'

17.   From the above passages it would appear firstly that  the  Adjudicator
      in the AF case was considered to have relied solely on the appellant's
      own account. Secondly, the Adjudicator was seen not to be entitled  to
      accept the credibility of the  existence  of  Qazavi  because  of  his
      alleged position in the administration, since rationally references to
      it could have been expected to be in the background if true. We do not
      know precisely what background material was under consideration by the
      Tribunal in AF, but  to  what  extent  coverage  could  rationally  be
      expected of the existence of Qazavi was clearly something the Tribunal
      in AF was entitled to reach a view about.

18.   Thus we consider that there is no significant difference  between  the
      view expressed in AF and  the  view  we  take  here.   If  it  can  be
      realistically expected that an individual warlord be referred  to,  an
      Adjudicator should regard that as a negative factor  in  the  balance,
      for  consideration  and  weighing.  But  equally  if  an   appellant's
      particular  account  (which  includes  reference  to  a  warlord)   is
      consonant  with  the  background  material  in  other   respects,   an
      Adjudicator should regard that as a positive factor  in  the  balance,
      also for consideration  and  weighing.  An  Adjudicator  can  properly
      reject a case where the background evidence is silent but  might  have
      been expected to  contain  references,  but  it  all  depends  on  the
      particular circumstances and the  coverage  contained  in  the  actual
      background materials.

19.   As already noted, we cannot in the absence of a material error of  law
      consider post-promulgation evidence in the case  before  us.  However,
      for completeness we would observe that the April 2004 CIPU Report  put
      before us by Mr Ouseley in this  case  by  way  of  information  about
      warlords, cannot be seen as giving full details of  current  warlords.
      Annex C on prominent people is confined to a small number of very  key
      players.  Annex D is confined to  de  jure  members  of  the  national
      Transitional Government.  Annex E deals only  with  Deputy  Ministers.
      Annex F deals only with former Taliban Ministers. In short,  there  is
      no specific  "Warlords" register.

20.   It may be, in the light of the lack of any detailed  list  of  current
      warlords that the Tribunal may in future Country Guideline cases  have
      to look again at this issue of fact, but, to the  extent  that  AF  is
      consistent with the Court of Appeal principles identified earlier,  it
      remains guidance properly to be followed.

21.   Turning to the second limb of the grounds of appeal, we   consider  it
      to be weak.  The CIPU reference to a UN Security  Council  report  did
      not establish that the authorities in Kabul were capable of  affording
      adequate protection against a real risk of  serious  harm  from   non-
      state actors in every case.  There is nothing  in  this  report  which
      contradicts the Adjudicator's assessment that it remains possible  for
      certain categories of persons to fall through protection gaps,  albeit
      the  latter  have  been  significantly  reduced:  see  para  8.    The
      Adjudicator made very clear that he did not dispute that, in the light
      of the objective evidence, the authorities, supported  by   ISAF  were
      able  to  ensure  protection  for  the  generality  of  its  citizens,
      including the generality of Pashtuns.  What he relied upon was  rather
      that they would be ill-placed to afford protection to this  particular
      claimant. We think that this was a finding which on the  evidence  was
      entirely open to the Adjudicator, particularly given that Jan  Ahmed's
      men had already been  able  to  attack  persons  associated  with  the
      claimant and to raid the  claimant's  house  with  apparent  impunity.
      There  was  no  improper  application  of  Horvath  [2004]  INLR   239
      principles in this case.

22.   We would add that we do not consider  the  Tribunal  in  reported  and
      guideline decisions such as WK (Credibility - Hizb-e-Islami - Pashtuns
      - Kabul) Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT 00280, in - AF (Warlords/ commanders
      - evidence  expected  Afghanistan)  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00284  (already
      mentioned), and  S  [2003]  UKIAT  00088  has  ever  considered   that
      protection in Kabul in the post-Taliban era  has  ever  been  entirely
      free of gaps.

23.   We would accept that right at the end of the determination,  there  is
      a passage in which the Adjudicator appears to go slightly further  and
      assert  that  where  "influential  armed  pursuers"   are   concerned,
      protection has been partial and inadequate in Kabul (it  would  appear
      the Adjudicator meant to say "always" rather than  "never"  after  "in
      Kabul has").  If his reasoning hung on the validity  of  this  broader
      proposition, we would have had greater misgivings. But we do not think
      his essential  reasoning  does  in  fact  turn  on  this.  In  earlier
      paragraphs he very carefully explained that his assessment  was  based
      very much on the particular circumstances  of  this  claimant's  case,
      including the history of persistent and aggressively motivated  visits
      to his Kabul home in his absence.

24.   For the above reasons we consider that the Adjudicator  did  not  fall
      into any material error of law in his determination. The Secretary  of
      State's grounds of appeal   are  not  made  out.    Accordingly,  this
      appeal is dismissed and the determination of the Adjudicator stands.





                                DR H H STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT





-----------------------
      1


