
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 27 - 29 October 2008                       |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                      Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane
                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins



                                   Between

                                     AM
                                     AM

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants: Mr R  Toal  of  Counsel  and  Mr  S  Sayeed  of  Counsel
instructed by South Manchester Law Centre and Wilson & Co
For the Respondent: Miss E Laing QC and Miss D Rhee instructed by the
Treasury Solicitor


1. When considering the question of whether a person is eligible for
refugee protection on the basis of exposure to armed conflict, Adan [1998]
2 WLR 703 does not permit decision makers to reject their claims per se.

2. A person may be able to succeed in a claim to protection  based  on  poor
socio-economic or dire humanitarian  living  conditions  under  the  Refugee
Convention or Article 15  of  the  Qualification  Directive  or  Article  3,
although to succeed on this basis alone the circumstances would have  to  be
extremely unusual.

3. In the context  of  Article  15(c)  the  serious  and  individual  threat
involved does  not  have  to  be  a  direct  effect  of  the  indiscriminate
violence; it is sufficient if the latter is an operative cause.

4. The Opinion of the Advocate General in  Elgafaji,  9  September  2008  in
Case C-465/07 does not afford an adequately  reasoned  basis  for  departing
from the guidance given on the law in the reported cases of the Tribunal  on
Article 15(c), namely  HH  and  others  (Mogadishu:  armed  conflict:  risk)
Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00022  and  KH  (Article   15(c)   Qualification
Directive) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00023.

5. Before the Tribunal will take  seriously  a  challenge  to  the  historic
validity of a Tribunal country guidance  case,  it  would  need  submissions
which seek to adduce all relevant evidence, for  or  against,  the  proposed
different view. The historic  validity  of  the  guidance  given  in  HH  is
confirmed.

6. However, as regards the continuing validity of the guidance given in  HH,
the Tribunal considers that there  have  been  significant  changes  in  the
situation in central and southern Somalia, such that  the  country  guidance
in that case is superseded to the following extent:

    (i)There is now an  internal  armed  conflict  within  the  meaning  of
    international humanitarian law (IHL) and Article 15(c) of  the  Refugee
    Qualification Directive throughout central and  southern  Somalia,  not
    just in and around  Mogadishu.  The  armed  conflict  taking  place  in
    Mogadishu currently amounts to indiscriminate violence at such a  level
    of severity as to place the great majority of the population at risk of
    a  consistent  pattern  of  indiscriminate  violence.  On  the  present
    evidence Mogadishu is no longer safe as a place  to  live  in  for  the
    great majority of returnees whose home area is Mogadishu;


    (ii) Assessment of the extent to  which  internally  displaced  persons
    (IDPs) face greater or lesser hardships,  at  least  outside  Mogadishu
    (where security  considerations  are  particularly  grave,)  will  vary
    significantly depending on a number of factors;


    (iii) For those whose home area is not  Mogadishu,  they  will  not  in
    general be able to show a real risk of persecution or serious  harm  or
    ill treatment simply on the basis that they are a civilian  or  even  a
    civilian internally displaced person (IDP) and from  such  and  such  a
    home area, albeit  much  will  depend  on  the  precise  state  of  the
    background evidence relating to their home area at the date of decision
    or hearing;


    (iv) As regards internal relocation, whether those whose home  area  is
    Mogadishu (or any other part of central and southern Somalia)  will  be
    able to relocate in safety and without undue hardship  will  depend  on
    the evidence as to the general circumstances in the relevant  parts  of
    central and southern Somalia and  the  personal  circumstances  of  the
    applicant. Whether or not it is likely that relocation will  mean  that
    they have to live for a substantial period in an IDP camp, will  be  an
    important but not necessarily a decisive factor;


     iv) As a result of the current conflict between the TFG/Ethiopians and
    the insurgents, the Sheikhal clan (including the Sheikhal  Logobe),  by
    virtue of the hostile attitude taken towards them by Al Shabab, is less
    able to secure protection for its  members  than  previously,  although
    both as regards their risk of persecution and serious  harm  and  their
    protection much will depend on  the  particular  circumstances  of  any
    individual clan member's case.

7. Where a  particular  route  and  method  of  return  is  implicit  in  an
immigration decision it is within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal  to  deal
with issues of en route safety on return: see AG (Somalia) [2006]  EWCA  Civ
1342. But in the context of Somali appeals currently, the method  of  return
is far too uncertain and so any  opinion  the  Tribunal  expresses  on  such
issues can only be given on an obiter basis.


                        DETERMINATION[1] AND REASONS

1. Just over ten years ago in one of the  first  major  cases  dealing  with
refugee issues to come before our most senior court, the House of  Lords  in
Adan [1998] 2 WLR 703 was concerned with the case of an applicant   who  had
fled from Somalia in June 1988 owing to a well founded fear  of  persecution
at the hands of the then government. Addressing  the  applicant's  claim  to
have a current fear of persecution Lord Slynn of Hadley referred  at   p.705
A-D to the situation being one where "law and order  has  broken  down"  and
"where...every group seems to be fighting some other group or groups  in  an
endeavour to gain power". Their lordships did not find that  the  nature  of
the conflict meant that Mr Adan qualified for  refugee  protection.  Looking
at the situation in Somalia today, it would be easy to think  not  much  has
changed. Yet whilst violence and conflict have continued to  be  endemic  in
that country, owing to the different forms it  has  taken  (and  perhaps  to
developments in the law)  in  the  intervening  years  real  questions  have
arisen about whether broad categories of  Somali applicants  face  either  a
real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill treatment. They  arose  just
over a year ago in HH & others (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk) Somalia  CG
[2008] UKAIT 00022 (hereafter "HH"). They arise again today.

The Appeals

2. The first appellant, whom we shall call AM1, is  a  national  of  Somalia
born on 6 January 1977. He arrived in the UK on  4  June  2005  and  claimed
asylum soon after.  His application was refused  and  on  6  September  2005
Immigration Judge (IJ) Gladstone dismissed his appeal against that  refusal.
He went to Ireland and claimed asylum there.  Having  been  sent  back  from
Ireland by the Irish authorities on 2  February  2006,  he  made  a  further
claim for asylum on 3 February 2006. He was again  refused  and  his  appeal
came before IJ  Glossop  who  dismissed  it  on  22  December  2006.   Quite
unusually the respondent then accepted a further claim made by AM1 on 9  May
2007.  The decision of the respondent dated 10 November 2007 to refuse  that
application and to remove AM1 as an illegal entrant led to a further  appeal
which resulted in a determination by IJ D N Harris sent on 18 February  2008
dismissing his appeal. Reconsideration was ordered on 6 March 2008 and on  4
August 2008 Senior Immigration  Judge  (SIJ)  Storey  decided  there  was  a
material error of law: the text of that decision is set out at Annex 1.


3. The second appellant, whom we shall call AM2, is a  national  of  Somalia
born on 1 January 1986 who claimed to have arrived in the UK on  28  October
2003. His asylum claim made on the same day was refused on 25 November  2003
but thereafter the respondent accepted an application  by  him  for  further
leave made on 15 June 2005. That was refused on 25 April  2007.  His  appeal
against that refusal was dismissed by IJ Beg on 8  August  2007.   Following
an order for reconsideration made that same month, SIJ Jordan in a  decision
dated 23 January 2008 found a material  error  of  law.  The  text  of  that
decision is contained in Annex 2.

Procedural History

4. At the  outset  of  the  hearing  Mr  Toal  asked  us  to  admit  further
"subjective" evidence in respect of both appellants.  In  the  case  of  AMI
this consisted in a statement from him dated 2 October  2008  (sent  to  the
Tribunal a day later) and, in the case  of  AM2,  two  statements  dated  18
September 2008 and 22 October 2008.  Although  Miss  Laing  did  not  oppose
their admission we have decided not to take them into account. As  was  made
abundantly clear  in  the  directions  the  Tribunal  sent  to  the  parties
following the Case Management Review (CMR) hearing on  29  July  2008,  both
cases proceeded on the basis of the findings of fact made by the IJ  at  the
appeal hearing. Neither appellant was found credible in  relation  to  their
claimed past experiences in Somalia.  In the case of AMI  the  grounds   for
reconsideration (drafted by  Mr  Toal)  raised  no  challenge  to  the  IJ's
adverse credibility findings and both the order for reconsideration and  the
decision finding a material error of  law  (made  on  4  August  2008)  were
confined  to  general  issues.   In  AM2's  case,  whilst  the  grounds  for
reconsideration did challenge the IJ's adverse  credibility  findings,  that
challenge was rejected by SIJ Jordan in  his  decision  finding  a  material
error of law, dated 23 January 2008.  It is true that  the  latter  decision
did confirm that a certain, very  limited, number of facts relating  to  AM2
had been accepted (we will return to this subject in a moment),  but  in  no
manner was anything said to indicate  that  the  Tribunal  at  second  stage
reconsideration was to  revisit  the  findings   made  in  relation  to  the
appellant's history.

5. Furthermore, neither at the CMR hearing on 29 July 2008  nor  within  the
time period specified for  further  evidence  to  be  submitted,  did  those
representing either appellant express any disagreement  with  the  basis  on
which the second stage reconsideration was ordered to proceed.

6. As the Court of Appeal has made clear, a reconsideration hearing  is  not
intended as an opportunity to revisit findings of fact  untainted  by  legal
error save in  exceptional  circumstances:  see  Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
10456, DK (Serbia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1747 and HF  (Algeria)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
445. We recognise that Mr Toal saw the further statements as an  attempt  to
bring matters appertaining to each appellant up to date, but in  cases  such
as these two, where strong adverse credibility findings have been made,  new
subjective evidence is not to be admitted unless it  relates  to  points  of
evidence  that  are  uncontroversial.  The  statements  produced  for   both
appellants do no fall into that category.

7. In relation to AM2, however, there are a limited number  of  facts  which
the IJ did accept, namely that he  is  Somali,  a  member  of  the  Sheikhal
(sometimes spelt "Shekhal") Logobe clan, someone from the Hammar Jahid  area
of Mogadishu and someone who at the date of hearing before the IJ  (20  July
2007) was still in contact with his mother and brother and indeed  with  the
clan members with whom the latter were staying in Mogadishu  and  from  whom
they were  receiving  protection.  These  further  findings  were  expressly
confirmed by SIJ Jordan as ones the IJ had made.   We  consider  SIJ  Jordan
also accepted, although less emphatically, that the appellant's brother,  J,
was killed in 1999 by the USC and that his father was killed in  2001,  also
by the USC (see the IJ's  determination,  paras  11  and  12).   Miss  Laing
confirmed that the respondent was content to accept  that  these  were  also
findings of fact which had been properly made.

8. The only point  taken  by  Miss  Laing  concerned  whether  the  accepted
findings of fact relating to AM1 should be treated  as  including  that  his
home area was Jowhar. She pointed out that the appeal before IJ D  N  Harris
was the appellant's third appeal and that it had  been  directed  at  a  CMR
hearing in January 2008 that (on  Devaseelan [2003]  Imm  AR  1  principles)
the appellant could not go behind the  findings  of  fact  previously  made.
That was  pertinent,  she  said,  because  previously  IJ  Gladstone  (on  9
September 2005) had not believed  he  was  from  Jowhar.   By  appearing  in
paragraph 25 to accept that the appellant was from Jowhar,  IJ  D  N  Harris
overlooked his own self-direction and  SIJ  Jordan  had  simply  echoed  the
original mistake.

9. With the greatest respect to Miss Laing, we do  not  think  it  would  be
right at this stage to depart from what was stipulated as a  given  fact  in
relation to AM1 by both SIJ Jordan in January 2008 and SIJ P R Lane  at  the
CMR hearing of 29 July 2008 and which has been  accepted  without  demur  by
the respondent at least until a few days before this hearing. The  materials
before us betoken that both parties have taken great  care  to  prepare  for
this appeal and in our view the time  for  seeking  to  modify  the  factual
matrix agreed by both parties has long passed.

10. We should mention here that at the hearing the only  evidence  we  heard
was from Professor Chinkin on  the  relatively  discrete  issue  of  whether
Tribunal  country  guidance  on  returnees  being   able   to   make   prior
arrangements for armed militia escorts placed the United Kingdom  in  breach
of its international obligations. It is convenient if we come to that  after
having first set out certain other matters.

11. We should not forget to record our gratitude  to  the  parties  for  the
high quality of preparation they  and  their  legal  teams  put  into  these
appeals and into the production of relevant  materials,  country  background
and legal. We should also mention that whilst throughout  we  refer  to  "Mr
Toal's" and "Miss Laing's" submissions we do so as a shorthand  only,  since
Mr Sayeed on the one side and Miss Rhee on the other  were   joint  authors,
to a greater or lesser degree,  of many of  them.  We  have  not  sought  to
summarise either party's submissions in the one place, but rather to  refer,
where we deem it necessary, to  their  respective  positions  on  particular
issues as we come to them.

Scope of the Appeals

12. Mr Toal submitted that the Tribunal was obliged to consider the  appeals
of both  appellants  on  refugee,  humanitarian  protection  and  Article  3
grounds. The respondent urged that we take a  much  more  restrictive  view.
She submitted that the only issue in AM1's case was the Article 15(c)  issue
and the only two open in the case of AM2 were that issue plus the  issue  of
safety of travel from Mogadishu  airport  to  Mogadishu  city.  (As  in   KH
(Article  15(c)  Qualification  Directive)  Iraq  CG  [2008]   UKAIT   00023
(hereafter "KH"), we refer to provisions (such  as  Article  15(c))  of  the
Qualification Directive itself, rather than the implementing measures  under
UK  law,  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
Regulations 2006 (SI/2525/2006) (the "2006 Protection Regulations") and  the
amended Immigration Rules, para 339C(iv) in particular,  albeit  it  is  the
latter that we apply).

13. We find against the restrictive view. Dealing first with  AM1,  we  have
already made clear that the findings of fact made by IJ  Harris  (who  based
himself on the earlier  findings  of  fact  made  by  IJ  Gladstone  and  IJ
Glossop) are unaffected by legal errors and so are preserved. On  the  basis
of those findings, he is someone who has been  found  not  credible  in  the
account he  gave  of  his  past  experiences  and  to  be  someone  who  has
established nothing beyond the identity of his home area, Jowhar. We  accept
that the decision that there was a material error of law saw  the  focus  of
the grounds for reconsideration as being the Article 15(c)  issue.   On  the
other hand nowhere does that decision exclude refugee or Article 3  grounds.
What seems crucial to us is that the subject  matter  seen  as  requiring  a
fresh decision is whether for someone such as the appellant there  would  be
a serious and individual threat to the appellant's life or person by  reason
of indiscriminate violence in a situation of armed conflict. As  Miss  Laing
herself put it during  her  closing  submissions,  there  are  "no  hermetic
seals" between this issue and the  subject-matter  covered  by  the  refugee
protection and Article 3 grounds. It is apparent from the Tribunal cases  of
HH and KH that the subject matter of Article 15(c)  protection  is  seen  to
overlap heavily with the subject matter of refugee protection and Article  3
protection.

14. As with SIJ Storey's decision as to material error of law in respect  of
AMI, SIJ Jordan's decision as to material error in the case of  AM2  nowhere
excluded refugee or Article 3 grounds from  the  scope  of  reconsideration.
Further he  identified  the  reconsideration  as  being  one  in  which  the
guidance in NM and Others (Lone  women:  Ashraf)  Somalia  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
00076 (hereafter "NM")  needed  to  be  revisited  and  said  in  the  final
paragraph, in what by any reckoning were  very  general  terms,  that  "i[t]
will be open to the appellant to  deal  with  the  whether  members  of  the
Sheikhal can in general (as well as the appellant in  particular)  have  any
specific or different protection needs".

15. Given the  heavy  overlap  in  material  scope  we  think  it  would  be
artificial to shut out either appellant from receiving  a  decision  on  all
grounds available to him under s. 84 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 (hereafter "the 2002 Act").

16. It may be, depending on our eventual  conclusions  on  the  two  appeals
that dealing with all three grounds entails little  more  than  saying  that
for the same or similar  reasons  to  those  given  in  respect  of  refugee
protection both appellants win or lose under Article 15(c) as well as  under
Article 3 of the ECHR.  That is a matter of the merits. But the grounds  are
a different matter. In the original grounds  of  appeal  submitted  by  both
appellants all three grounds were raised and none have been subject  to  any
withdrawal or concession.

17. Having resolved the matter of scope,  we  can  proceed  on  the  footing
that,  in  accordance  with  the  underlying  logic  of  the   Qualification
Directive, we  first  consider   whether  either  appellant  is  a  refugee,
secondly  whether  either  is   eligible   for   subsidiary   (humanitarian)
protection;  and  thirdly  whether  either  is  eligible  for  human  rights
protection, Article 3 (or 2) ECHR protection in particular. It  is  for  the
appellants to prove their entitlement to protection but they  only  need  to
do so to the standard of reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  or  substantial
grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk.  Our  decisions  must  be
based on the entirety of the evidence.

18. We have already made clear  that  in  view  of  the  unimpugned  adverse
findings of fact made by the relevant IJ in each appeal, the  factual  scope
of these appeals includes very few individual details.  In  AM1's  case  the
only accepted facts are that he is a national of  Somalia  from  Jowhar.  In
AM2's case the accepted facts are slightly more in number:  it  is  accepted
he is a national of Somalia,  of  Sheikhal  Loboge  clan  origin,  from  the
Hammar Jahid area of Mogadishu and having some family  connections  in  that
area and elsewhere in southern Somalia. It  is  by  virtue  of  the  limited
nature of the positive findings,  however,  that  we  are  able  to  address
without more ado several generic issues that have  arisen  in  key  Tribunal
country guidance decisions on  Somalia  previously.   We  are  concerned  to
examine the current conflict in central and southern Somalia with a view  to
establishing which categories of enforced returnees, if any,  it  places  at
risk. The fact that in each appeal there is an accepted home area  -  Jowhar
in AM1's case and Hammar Jahid, Mogadishu  in AM2's case -  also  affords  a
proper basis  for some limited generalisations about safety in   a  person's
home  area  within  central  and  southern  Somalia.    As   an   inevitable
consequence of recent events in Somalia we are obliged to deal  specifically
with the position of internally displaced persons  (IDPs)  and  the  general
humanitarian situation in Somalia presently. We do also  give  our  opinion,
which for reasons stated later  we  give  purely  on  an  obiter  basis,  on
various matters relating  to  safety  of  en  route  travel  from  Mogadishu
International airport.

Internal relocation

19. We need to say something about the relevance  to  both  appeals  of  the
issue of internal relocation.  Whereas the respondent's stated  position  in
her skeleton argument was that "[n]one  of  these  appeals  is  an  internal
relocation case" (para 61), Mr Toal's position was  somewhat enigmatic.  The
respondent is  obviously  right  about  this  unless  either  appellant  can
satisfy us that there is a real risk of persecution or serious harm  in  his
home area.  But assuming we were satisfied about  this,   it  seems   to  us
that internal relocation is a real issue. The respondent has never  formally
conceded the issue  in  either  appeal.  Neither  of  the  decisions  as  to
material error of law excluded the issue. Further, it appeared  integral  to
the submissions made on both sides in relation to each  appellant  that  the
Tribunal had to  make  specific  findings  about  their  ability,  if  found
necessary, to move around Somalia as an internally  displaced  person.  That
is how Mr Toal put matters in  para  68  of  his  skeleton  and  Miss  Laing
devoted considerable effort  to persuading us to reject Mr  Toal's  argument
that the appellants would be  internally displaced  persons  (IDPs)  exposed
to ongoing risk wherever they went in  Somalia. Thus we do not  exclude  the
relocation issue as one we may have to address.

Safety of en route travel

20. In HH the  Tribunal  noted  that  it  was  "common  ground  between  the
parties" that in the light of the Court of Appeal judgment in  AG  (Somalia)
[2006] EWCA Civ 1342 (hereafter "AG") it was not relevant  to  consider  any
risk that the appellants "might  face  in  travelling  from  any  particular
point of return, such as the international airport near Mogadishu, to  their
home area".  In these appeals, however, both parties take a  very  different
tack.  Mr Toal contends  that  the  cases  of  AM1  and  AM2  are  factually
distinguishable from AG and that  both  AG  and  GH  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1182
recognise that in certain situations the AIT is obliged to consider  whether
there is a real risk of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-treatment  at  the
airport or on the way home.  Miss Laing for the respondent did not  go  that
far, but was prepared to state in paragraph 61(c) of her skeleton that:

         "In cases where the route of return is known or is implicit in  the
         decision which is subject to appeal, those issues may (probably) be
         considered by the AIT ..."

21. In our judgment, Mr Toal is right to say that neither  GH  nor  AG  says
that the Tribunal is never obliged to consider whether there is a real  risk
of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment at  the  airport  or  on  the  way
home.  At paragraph 29 of AG, Hooper LJ expressly repudiated  such  a  view.
Hooper LJ's summary of passages from the judgments of  Scott  Baker  LJ  and
Keene LJ in GH included this formulation from Keene LJ:

         "51.     It may be that there will exist cases where the  appellant
             may be able to make good this deficiency even in  the  absence
             of removal directions, because  the  Secretary  of  State  has
             committed himself through a policy statement or otherwise to a
             particular method and route of return. In such a case, it  may
             be implicit in the decision to remove from the United  Kingdom
             that a particular method and route would be adopted and, if so
             the safety of that method and route may be considered  by  the
             appellate  tribunal  as  being  part  of  and  parcel  of  the
             "immigration decision" under section 82(1) [of the 2002  Act].
             It would be open to an appellant to rely on ground  (g)  under
             section 84(1), just as he could if the Secretary of State  had
             chosen to give removal directions as part of  the  immigration
             decision.  Like Scott Baker  LJ  I  take  the  view  that  the
             wording of  section  84(1)(g)  is  wide  enough  to  give  the
             appellate tribunal jurisdiction to take into account  the  "en
             route" risks in such cases.

22.  Whilst Keene, LJ does not identify  which  passages  from  Scott  Baker
LJ's judgment he has in mind in the last sentence above, there  is  a  clear
reference by the latter at paragraph 45 to  the  fact  that  "there  may  be
circumstances where the Secretary of State adopts a  routine  procedure  for
removal and return, so that the  method  or  route  of  return  is  implicit
within the decision to remove."

23. Hooper LJ's subsequent analysis at  paragraphs  119-125  clearly  adapts
and builds very much on the above approach. We  must  confess  that  neither
this judgment nor  any  subsequent  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  contains  a
definitive statement of principle about this matter: presumably that is  why
Miss Laing adopts such tentative language. But it seems to us  clear  enough
that where the route and method of return are implicit  in  the  immigration
decision, the Tribunal is obliged as part of the  hypothetical  exercise  to
consider "en route" risk. The real question then is whether  what  is  known
about route and method of return is sufficiently precise and foreseeable  so
as to be properly understood as being "implicit" in the decision to remove.
24. Before we turn to what is known about the route and method of return  in
the two appeals  before  us,  we  need  to  say  something  more  about  the
circumstances in which, when the  route  and  method  are  implicit  in  the
decision, en route risk  can  become  a  relevant  dimension  for  assessing
whether  a  person  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  under   the
circumstances. More than one approach might  be  thought  possible.  On  one
approach consideration of en route risk is only valid in a case in  which  a
person has established a well-founded fear of persecution in his home  area.
If a person has not established a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  his
own area, he is not a refugee. He is able (notionally) to live  in  his  own
area, even if he cannot get there. At least under  the  Refugee  Convention,
he is  not  entitled  to  the  surrogate  protection  of  the  international
community because at home he would be safe. On this approach  it  is  to  be
presumed that the sending state can ensure a person  gains  access  by  some
route to the safe home area, if there is found to be one.
25. The other approach is to consider that even in the case of a person  who
fails to establish risk of persecution on return to his home  area,  it  can
still , albeit in  circumstances  which  will  of  their  nature  be  highly
unusual,  be necessary sometimes to consider risk at the airport on  arrival
or en route risk homewards.

26. In  our  judgment,  whilst  the  first  approach  will  often  serve  to
determine an appeal one way or the other,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  en
route risk is not capable in itself of giving rise to  a  well-founded  fear
of persecution.  Consider the following sequence: (1) it  has  been  decided
that a person can  live  safely  in  his  home  area;  (2)  the  immigration
decision against him clearly identifies (or has implicit in  it)  the  route
and method of return to his home area; (3)  but  there  is  strong  evidence
that return via this route and by this method would expose  him  to  a  real
risk  of  persecution.  It  seems  to  us  that  this  sequence  meets   the
requirement of Article  1A(2)  (at  least  as  regards  persecution),  since
although the risk to him only arises in part of the country of  nationality,
it will necessarily (by virtue of the known en route and method  of  return)
be to that part of the country to which he is returned  (or  has  to  travel
through) and, in that part of the country that risk will  arise.  Such  risk
can be at the airport  itself  or  en  route  from  the  airport.   Such  an
approach can be seen in many decisions of the Tribunal dealing with risk  on
return to the airport: e.g. AA (Involuntary returnees to Zimbabwe)  Zimbabwe
CG [2005] UKIAT 000144, AA (Risk  for  involuntary  returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG
[2006] UKAIT 00061, HS (returned asylum seekers) Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
00094.

27. We also consider that the latter approach is consonant with GH  and  AG.
GH was specifically concerned with the legal issue of  the  jurisdiction  of
the Tribunal under s.82(1) in the context  of  someone  who  had  failed  to
establish risk in his  home  area  (Suleymaniya  in  Iraq).  In  AG  it  was
accepted that AG was unable to show a real risk of ill-treatment  on  return
to his home area (Mogadishu). If the former approach was correct, GH and  AG
would have held that assessment of  en  route  risk  had  no  basis  in  law
whatsoever.

28. Turning then to route and method of return, the meaning  of  the  former
is plain: one looks at the point of arrival (airport or port)  and  then  at
any onward route proposed, "Method of  return"  is  less  straightforward  a
term, but must include, we think, matters such as the  time  of  the  return
and any arrangements made relating to it, e.g. travel documents, escorts  on
the plane or on arrival or later on, and arrangements with  the  authorities
in the receiving  state  or  others  (e.g.  International  Organisation  for
Migration  (IOM))  regarding  reception,  processing  on  arrival  and   any
considerations relating to safety of onward internal travel.

29. Having clarified the  legal  issues,  we  turn  to  consider  Mr  Toal's
submission that so far as route and method of return are concerned, the  two
appeals before us are factually distinguishable from GH and AG.

30. We can readily accept that at least one of these two cases is  factually
distinguishable in respect of route of return. The respondent has  confirmed
that the point of return will be Mogadishu  International  airport  and  has
been making returns there until very  recently.  In  the  case  of  AM2  the
onward route would be the main road from the airport  into  Mogadishu  city.
In the case of AM1 it would be to Jowhar either by going into  Mogadishu  or
skirting Mogadishu.  By contrast, there was no such clarity about  route  in
AG.  We cannot accept, however, that in the case of either AM1  or  AM2  the
method of return is sufficiently known.  In AG Hooper LJ concluded that:

    "... it is impossible for immigration judges  in  cases  of  this  kind
    (involving the safety of arrival at an  airport  and  of  journey  into
    Mogadishu) to deal with all  the  eventualities  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing ..."

31. The insuperable difficulty that besets Mr Toal's submission is  that  in
the context of Somali cases there are more uncertainties surrounding  method
than are  normally  to  be  found  in  the  context  of  removals  to  other
countries.  Even  if  he  is  right  and  there   are   nevertheless   fewer
"eventualities" uncertain now than was the case in the second half  of  2006
when AG was decided, they  are  still  very  significant  ones.   There  are
uncertainties (at least currently)  about  what  travel  documents  will  be
required and/or accepted; the timing of the return flights (so as to  ensure
parties to the conflict do not seek  to  fire  at  civilian  aircraft)  and,
crucially, about what arrangements need to be in place  to  ensure  safe  en
route travel. At the time of AG,  as  now,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that
ensuring such safety may  depend  on  returnees  at  least  having  had  the
opportunity to arrange an armed escort beforehand. All will  depend  on  the
situation at the actual time of any enforced removal.

32. We shall have cause later on to touch  further  on  the  extent  of  the
uncertainties surrounding the method of return  when  we  consider  (in  the
context of giving our obiter opinion, the evidence about what  is  happening
in the area of Mogadishu International airport  and  along  the  main  roads
leading from it into Mogadishu and to other points in central  and  southern
Somalia, principally Jowhar.

The Background evidence

33. We do not propose to set out  in  any  detail  the  background  evidence
placed before us in this case, which was voluminous.  A  list  of  items  is
contained  in  the  Appendix.  Quite  often  in  the   remainder   of   this
determination we shall refer to the COIS report of October 2008.  We  do  so
because it is very recent  and  also  refers  to  a  wide  number  of  major
sources, quite a few themselves very recent. In places we shall  also  refer
to "the Nairobi evidence", by which we mean the body of  evidence  assembled
by the appellant's representatives during early September  2008  (with  some
additions in mid-October) for the purposes of this appeal and consisting  in
witness statements from persons in Nairobi with particular knowledge of  the
situation in Somalia, including Alex Tyler,  the  UNHCR  Protection  Officer
for Somalia, Matt Bryden, a Somali analyst, Tony Burns  of  SAACID-Australia
and Catherine-Lune Grayson and Maja Munk  of  the  Danish  Refugee  Council.
Some of the witness statements from journalists, aid workers and others  are
anonymous, at their request because of fears for their own safety  and  that
of their families in Somalia. There are also a number of  interview  records
based on replies to a standard questionnaire from  persons  with  relatively
recent first-hand experience of the conflict in Somalia.  Otherwise  all  we
need to add here is a  brief summary of some of the most pertinent  features
of the current situation.

34. In a  country  whose  population  is  around  10.4  million,  there  are
currently around 3 and a half million dependent on food aid. The  number  of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) is variously estimated as being  between
1 -1.9 million (COIS, 7.09). The humanitarian crisis is widely  said  to  be
the worst in 17 years (COIS, D.1). Exacerbating it  have  been  rising  food
prices, Somalia having been worse hit  than  most  other  countries  in  the
world by the global recession (COIS  D.2).  At  the  same  time  Somalia  is
currently ranked as the "least clean" i.e. most corrupt  country  world-wide
(COIS,  B.19).  The  security  situation  is  widely  described  as   having
deteriorated considerably in 2008 (COIS, 28.18). From the position  in  2006
when the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) were in the ascendancy  and  that  in
2007 when the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)/Ethiopians  had  largely
displaced the UIC, a realigned insurgency, in which remnants of the UIC,  Al
Shabab (which is variously spelt in the background  sources  and  apparently
means "The Boys" in English) and the two factions of the ARS  (Alliance  for
the Re-liberation of Somalia),one Djibouti-based, the  other  Eritrea-based,
has succeeded (at least for the moment) in driving the TFG/Ethiopian  forces
out of much of southern and central  Somalia,  although  the  latter  remain
entrenched in  and  around  Mogadishu  and  very  recently  appear  to  have
recaptured three towns near Baidoa. The African Union  (AU)  forces,  called
AMISON, primarily perform peace  keeping  functions  in  the  areas  in  and
around Mogadishu and operate to protect key elements of  the  TFG.  Intended
to be 8,000 strong it is still only 2,500 or so strong. In recent months  it
has become a target for insurgent armed  attacks.  Since  the  beginning  of
2007 figures provided by the  Elman  Peace  and  Human  Rights  organisation
estimate 9,474 killed, including 2,716  killed  during  the  first  half  of
2008, although SAACID considers Elman's figures to be  an  underestimate  by
perhaps 50% (Nairobi evidence, p.37). In late October 2008 the  TFG  (headed
by President Abdullahi Yusuf) signed a ceasefire agreement in Djibouti  with
the ARS's Djibouti faction as a follow up to the 19  August  2008  "Djibouti
Agreement". That agreement envisages an increase in AU  peacekeeping  forces
and a commensurate withdrawal of Ethiopian troops from Somalia. However,  it
was immediately rejected  by  other  insurgent  groupings  and  appears  yet
another in a long line of deals which are in reality no more  than  tactical
moves in the ongoing fighting.  One  point  noted  by  UN  Humanitarian  Co-
ordinator for Somalia, Sir John Holmes, and by the author of  a  17  October
2008 letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Africa  Department,  is
that, due to the withdrawal in  recent  months  of  all  UN  personnel  from
Mogadishu and the biased and  inconsistent  nature  of  much  of  the  local
reporting, hard facts and figures about incidents of violence are very  hard
to come by.

The UN arms embargo against Somalia

35. In the light of our finding above that we are not  obliged  to  consider
the route or method of return in the case of Somali  appeals  currently,  it
is not strictly necessary for  us  to  address  the  evidence  and  detailed
submissions we received concerning  whether  country  guidance  relating  to
prior arrangement by  a  returnee  for  a  paid  militia  escort  would,  if
followed,  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of   its   international
obligations. However, we bear in mind Hooper LJ's  words  in  AG  about  the
desirability of the Tribunal seeking to give  its  obiter  opinion  on  such
matters: see AG, para 123. With that in mind we first of  all  set  out  the
evidence of Professor Chinkin and then our assessment of it. Since it  is  a
relatively discrete issue it is convenient to do this before  examining  the
appeals proper.

Evidence of Professor Chinkin

36. At the hearing we heard evidence from Professor  Christine  Chinkin  who
had earlier produced an expert opinion dated 3 September 2008. Professor  of
International Law at the London School  of  Economics,  her  suitability  to
give an  expert  opinion  on  the  specialised  area  of  international  law
involving the United Nations  is  beyond  question.  Her  report  states  at
paragraph 1 that:

    "The question I  have  been  asked  to  address  is  whether  requiring
    returnees to Somalia to pre-arrange a paid militia to escort them  from
    their place of arrival to an area of  Somalia where they  would  likely
    to be safe because of their clan membership would  incur  violation  of
    the arms embargo imposed  by  the  UN  Security  Council  (SC)  against
    Somalia."

37. She was asked to produce this report against the background that  in  AG
the Court of Appeal had given consideration to  the  view  expressed  in  NM
that involuntary  returnees  not  from  minority  clans  could  obviate  any
possible risk of being attacked en route from  the  airport  to  which  they
were flown by prearranging for a clan militia escort.

38. Her report goes on to  explain  that  the   SC  first  imposed  an  arms
embargo against Somalia on  23  January  1992  in  Resolution  733  and  has
reaffirmed and expanded it in a  number  of  resolutions  since,  including:
751, 24 April 1992; 767,  27  July  1992;   775,  28  August  1992;  794,  3
December 1992; 814, 26 March 1993; 837, 6 June 1993; 897, 4  February  1994;
1425, 22 July 2002; 1474, 8 April 2003; 1519, 16  December  2003;  1558,  17
August 2004; 1587, 15 March 2004; 1630, 14 October 2005; 1744,  20  February
2007; 1772, 20 August 2007; 1801, 20 February 2008;  1811,  29  April  2008;
1814, 15 May 2008; and 1831, 19 August 2008. All are aimed at  tackling  the
continued flow of arms and ammunition into  Somalia  that  undermines  peace
and security and political efforts at reconciliation.  They  had  been  made
under chapter VII of the UN Charter. Article 41 read together with  Articles
48, 25 and 103 of the latter establish  that  these  resolutions  impose  an
obligation  on  Member  States   breach   of   which   can   constitute   an
internationally wrongful act.  "Successive resolutions", she writes,   "have
expanded the scope of the arms embargo, clarified  its  terms  and  improved
and strengthened mechanisms for monitoring compliance  and  implementation".
As developed over  time,  the  arms  embargo  (the  longest-standing  in  UN
history) is comprehensive in  scope  and  permits  only  limited  exemptions
which are specified. The monitoring  mechanisms  set  up  under  various  SC
resolutions include a  Sanctions Committee, a team of experts,  a  Panel  of
Experts, and a Monitoring Group.  She highlights  the  significance  of  two
resolutions in particular. One  is  Resolution  1425,  22  July  2002.   She
states that it:

    "both clarifies the definition of the arms embargo ('financing  of  all
    acquisitions and deliveries of weapons  and  military  equipment')  and
    extends its scope, spelling out that it  covers  indirect  as  well  as
    direct action, and services as well as weapons and equipment, including
    financial assistance and training."

39. Another is Resolution, 1744, 20 February  2007.   It  was  adopted,  she
notes, in the aftermath of Ethiopian military  intervention  and  authorises
member states of the (AU) to establish a mission  (AMISON)  whose  functions
include providing assistance "with  the  free  movement,  safe  passage  and
protection" of those involved in the political  process  and  to  contribute
"to the creation of the necessary security conditions for the  provision  of
humanitarian assistance". This, states Professor  Chinkin,  "undermines  any
assumption of the  legality  of  unauthorised  armed  militia  carrying  out
security tasks, or of any support for  them  to  do  so".  She  goes  on  to
emphasise that by making  further  specific  exemptions  for  AMISON-related
activities, this resolution confirms that such exemptions "do not extend  to
the equipment of and supplies to unauthorised militia, or  to  the  indirect
financing of such militia".

40. In the course of explaining why she adjudges the prohibition  on  direct
or indirect financial assistance related to military activities to apply  to
payments for armed clan escorts Professor Chinkin observes that:

    "In April 2008 the Monitoring Group noted  that   'financing  for  arms
    purchases in violation of the embargo is  facilitated  by  sanctionable
    activities'. It lists various funding sources  including  the  payments
    that are demanded at roadblocks (UN Document. S/2008/274 para 187)  ...
    In these circumstances it seems reasonable to assume that  payments  at
    roadblocks constitute 'indirect financial assistance'  that  facilitate
    purchase of arms and contributes to the supply  chain.  Further  paying
    militia  for  escort  services  constitutes  business  and   commercial
    activities and generates revenues and thus  also  constitutes  indirect
    financial assistance for the making of such purchases ..."

41. Professor Chinkin's report also analyses  the  way  in  which  these  SC
resolutions have come to operate in UK law.   Section  1(1)  of  the  United
Nations Act 1946 provides that  if  the  Security  Council  calls  upon  His
Majesty's Government to apply any measures to give effect  to  a  resolution
His Majesty may by Order in Council make such provisions as appears  to  Him
to be necessary or expedient for enabling those measures to  be  effectively
applied. Two such Orders have been made: the United Nations  Arms  Embargoes
(Liberia, Somalia and the Former Yugoslavia)  Order  1993  and  the  Somalia
(United Nations Sanctions) Order 2002 (SI/2002/2518). (There  are  also,  we
note, two EU Regulations implementing the UN arms  Embargo  against  Somalia
in Community law - Council Regulation (EC) No  147/2003  concerning  certain
restrictive measures in respect of Somalia and Council  Regulation  (EC)  No
631/2007 amending Regulation EC No 147/2003 concerning  certain  restrictive
measures         in          respect          of          Somalia          -
                      but they do not affect the analysis made by  Professor
Chinkin).

42. She cites Article 5 of the 2002 Order which states:

    "Any person who except under the authority of a licence granted by  the
    Secretary of State under this article, directly or indirectly  provides
    to any person in Somalia any -
     (a)      technical advice;
    (b)  financial or other assistance; or
    (c)  training,
    related to military activities shall be guilty of an offence under  the
    Order, unless he proves that he did not  know  and  had  no  reason  to
    suppose that the technical advice, financial  or  other  assistance  or
    training in question was to be provided to a person in Somalia."

43. She then comments on Hooper LJ's treatment of the issue of the  legality
of militia to protect them on return to Somalia in AG [2006] EWCA Civ  1342.
At para 35 Hooper LJ had noted the  power  granted  by  Article  5  for  the
Secretary of State to grant a licence for what would otherwise be  a  breach
of this Order.  Reliance on such a step would, she stated,  be   "no  answer
to a breach of an international obligation, since  at  international  law  a
responsible state cannot rely on the  provisions  of  its  internal  law  as
justification for failure to comply with its international obligations."

44. Since  most  of  Professor  Chinkin's  oral  evidence  traversed  ground
already covered in  her  report,  we  need  only  note  here  that  she  re-
emphasised that SC resolutions on the arms embargo against  Somalia  had  to
be construed purposively so as to ensure its provisions pursued the goal  of
disarmament. The embargo's  provisions  clearly  covered  even  transactions
including relatively small amounts of money: such was evident from the  fact
that some of the resolutions, for example  Resolution  1474,  8  April  2003
para 3(e), made reference to violations, including transfers of  ammunition,
small arms and single use weapons. Whether a state was  responsible  for  an
internationally wrongful act in the form of a direct or indirect  breach  of
the arms embargo depended very much on the level of its knowledge as to  the
likelihood of a resultant breach. There was a spectrum. At  one  end  of  it
there would be case of direct financial assistance  activity  in  clear  cut
breach  of  the  embargo.  At  the  other  end  there  would  be  cases   of
acquiescence in indirect financing where there would only be  a  possibility
that it would lead to a breach. The focus of the embargo was on  prohibiting
state  involvement  in  the  supply  of  arms  into  Somalia  from  outside.
Arrangements made by a person in the United Kingdom with someone in  Somalia
(by phone or other means) to supply  an  armed  escort  could  constitute  a
breach of the embargo.

45. Miss Laing took Professor Chinkin to various  passages  in  NM  and  HH.
Professor Chinkin accepted  that  these  did  not  amount  to  the  Tribunal
"requiring" returnees to make prior arrangements for an armed  escort,  only
to them pointing out various possibilities.

46. Professor Chinkin  accepted  that  the  two  Orders  in  Council  giving
domestic effect to the  arms  embargo  against  Somalia  did  not  apply  to
actions which happened in Somalia with  no  UK  involvement.  An  individual
Somali within Somalia who pays money for an armed escort would not  normally
breach  the  embargo  unless  the  payment  arose  in  circumstances   which
encouraged business activities in breach.

47. Miss Laing asked whether  a  person  wishing  to  provide  himself  with
personal security or protection could be  said  to  be  engaged  in  actions
related to  military  activities.  It  very  much  depended,  the  Professor
replied, on who that person got security  from.  Armed  militias  were  non-
exempt non-state actors and were also outside the AMISON arrangement.  Their
activities could be said to relate to military activities because there  was
a heavy blurring in Somalia between security and military acts  and  between
criminal and military activities.

48. In re-examination Professor Chinkin said that if as a matter of  fact  a
Somali in the UK needed to pre-arrange an armed escort that could amount  to
a breach of the embargo if the UK state knew it  was  (highly)  likely  that
would happen. In reply to questions from the panel, she said that  depending
on the circumstances such an act would be analogous to  an  order  to  carry
out a specific operation. But if a state has neither endorsed nor  denounced
such an action that would be somewhere in the middle of the  spectrum.   She
accepted that for a person to pay for an armed escort could be seen  in  one
sense as a protective action but the terms of the embargo  clearly  saw  the
arming of  militias  as  working  to  undermine  peace  and  security.   The
exemptions  were  exhaustive.  Asked  if  she  herself  were  to  travel  to
Mogadishu International airport and there pay for an armed escort  in  order
to secure her personal protection for onward travel,  she  said  that  would
certainly violate the spirit of the embargo and her  tentative  opinion  was
that it would also violate its letter.

49. We also received a supplementary written opinion from Professor  Chinkin
in response to several questions on which the  panel  sought  clarification.
She reiterated her view   that the acts of individuals as well  as  entities
inside and outside Somalia are within the ambit of  the  arms  embargo:  she
cited SC Resolution 1425, 22 July 2002, para 8.   In  support  of  her  view
that the arms embargo resolutions applied against armed military  activities
generally, she highlighted the express concerns noted in Resolution 747,  24
July 1992 about the availability of arms and  ammunition  in  the  hands  of
militia and the prevalence of armed banditry throughout Somalia:

    "This indicates that attention is directed towards the form of conflict
    in Somalia, including the holding of weapons by militia and supplements
    the argument  relating  to  the  specific  mention  of  small  arms  in
    Resolution 1474..."

50. So far as concerns the attributability of acts  of  individuals  to  the
United Kingdom under the arms embargo  resolution  Professor  Chinkin  cited
the Tehran Hostages Case, (US v Iran) 198-0 ICT Reports paragraphs 63,  73-4
as authority for the proposition that returning a person to Somalia  knowing
that for them to be safe they must have an armed escort, might  be  seen  as
wrongful conduct in the form of failure to  take  all  reasonable  steps  to
prevent such wrongful conduct.

Our decision on the UN arms embargo issue

51. We have no difficulty in accepting that the existence of  and  operation
of the UN arms embargo against Somalia  is  a  significant  feature  of  the
background evidence relating to country conditions which we must  take  into
account.

52. We also have no difficulty in agreeing with  a  number  of  interpretive
observations made by Professor Chinkin in her evidence  regarding  both  the
UN and UK provisions in place to enforce the embargo (and we should  say  in
advance that nothing said below is intended to  criticise  her  efforts,  in
the context of a very speculative brief, to  assist  the  Tribunal  reach  a
correct answer). We accept,  for  example,  that  in  certain  circumstances
actions undertaken  by private individuals can  incur  state  responsibility
for wrongful acts; that the relevant SC resolutions identify that  the  acts
of individuals, as well as entities, can constitute a violation of the  arms
embargo; that money paid to a clan militia to obtain an armed  escort  could
possibly amount  to   "financial  assistance";  that  "military  activities"
could  include  activities  undertaken  by  militia  to  provide   an  armed
escort; and that payment made by A knowing that B would  or  might  use  the
funds to obtain arms from C could  come  within  the  meaning  of  "indirect
financial assistance". More  generally,  we  accept  that  both  the  UN  SC
resolutions and the EU and domestic  legislation  implementing  them  impose
certain mandatory requirements and stand to  be  construed  purposively.  We
also think Professor  Chinkin  is  right  to  regard  as  inconceivable  the
possible exercise by the Secretary of State under  Article  5  to  the  2002
Order in Council of the power  to  issue  a  licence  authorising  financial
assistance related to military activities in the  context  of  payments  for
armed escorts. To that extent it may be that the obiter comment  by   Hooper
LJ in AG at paragraph 35 needs to be treated with caution.

53. However, neither those nor any other points of  agreement  we  can  find
with  Professor  Chinkin's  opinion   help   us   overcome   several   basic
difficulties we have with her principal conclusions.

54. It is worth first of all reminding ourselves of the  root  reason  given
by Hooper LJ for rejecting very similar argument raised by Miss  Webber  for
the appellants in AG.  At paragraph 35, having set out her arguments and  Mr
Jay's counter-arguments, Hooper LJ said:

    "In any view this ground  is  unsustainable  but  for  another  reason.
    Until such time  as  arrangements  are  made  for  the  return  of  the
    appellant, it cannot be known whether there is even the possibility  of
    a breach ..."


55. It seems to us that, notwithstanding the submissions from  both  parties
on the internal travel issue, the above point remains valid.  It  cannot  be
anticipated  in  the  course  of  a  hypothetical   consideration   of   the
consequences of removal that the Secretary of  State  would  act  so  as  to
(indirectly) require  a  returnee  to  pre-arrange  an  armed  escort.  Even
accepting that certain key matters relating to method can and may  be  known
(e.g. that removal is by air, that the passenger will have emergency  travel
documents), we do not see that arrangements of this kind can. The  need  for
them and the circumstances in which they would be  needed  will  necessarily
be highly contingent on the situation at the time.

56. But even assuming we could treat such arrangements as  implicit  in  the
decision to remove, there are several other difficulties. To begin with,  it
is necessary to bear in mind what has to be considered in  a  case  alleging
state  responsibility  for  violation  of  an  arms  embargo.  According  to
Professor  Chinkin,  citing  from  J   Crawford,   The   International   Law
Commission's  Article  on  State  Responsibility:  Introduction,  Text   and
Commentaries, CUP, 125:

    "In every case it is by comparing the conduct in fact engaged in by the
    state  with  the  conduct  legally  proscribed  by  the   international
    obligation that one can determine whether there has been  a  breach  of
    that obligation. (Ibid, 125-6)."

57. Against that backdrop, let us  consider  the  number  of  links  in  the
alleged chain of  responsibility  arising  here.  In  that  context  several
things are immediately apparent.  First, it is not  suggested  that  the  UK
government or any authorised agent of the government would seek to make  any
payment; at best the contention is that the actions  of  the  UK  government
would be likely to cause a private individual to  act  in  breach.   Second,
the UK state (even accepting that for such purposes the judicial organs  can
form part of the state) is  not  requiring  -  at  least  in  the  sense  of
ordering or instructing - returnees  as  such  to  arrange  to  pay  for  an
escort; at most the decision to remove might be said to  make  it  likely  a
returnee would need to make such an arrangement.  Third,  whereas  the  main
aim of the embargo is described as to prevent the flow of arms into  Somalia
from outside, what is in contemplation here is arranging  for  a  particular
use of arms already in Somalia.  That already takes the  case  well  outside
paradigm cases, e.g. agents of a state other than Somalia  paying  for  arms
to be smuggled  into  Somalia.  Fourth,  the  payment  involved  is  not  to
purchase or obtain arms, but to  use  arms  already  in  the  possession  of
militia escorts. Fifth, the allegation also depends on it being likely  that
the militia enlisted is involved in military activities or  that  acting  as
an escort could constitute a military activity (supposing for example it  is
just two or three family friends with rifles). Sixth, it also depends on  it
being likely that the payment received will in  turn  be  used  to  purchase
arms in violation of the embargo (rather than,  for  example,  to  feed  the
militiamen's  families).    So   what   is   being   alleged   is   indirect
responsibility for an indirect act on the basis of indirect use made of  the
assistance provided.  Analysing Professor  Chinkin's  argument,  it  can  be
seen that not only does the allegation depend on  every  link  in  a  multi-
linked chain holding; but in respect of every  link  there  is  reliance  on
assumptions about what might or will happen: for example,  at  paragraph  51
she writes that  "it  is  reasonable  to  assume  [...payments  for  militia
escorts] will or might be used in such purchases".  In our view  such  links
are far too uncertain.

58. Let us turn from the alleged chain of responsibility to the question  of
the purpose behind the making of such arrangements. In  this  regard  it  is
important to consider the nature of the activity for which payment would  be
made. As already noted, it is for  a  particular  use  of  arms  already  in
Somalia and it is in order to secure  personal  protection.  Of  course,  in
some cases in order to secure a traveller's protection an armed militia  may
be compelled to use its arms and may  sometimes  even  kill  others  (or  be
killed) in the process.  But the raison d'etre of such an escort will be  to
achieve protection by ensuring as trouble-free a passage as possible.

59. Professor Chinkin does not dispute that this would be its  purpose.  Her
point is that it is a purpose which, by virtue of the means it uses for  its
realisation, is in conflict with  the  objects  and  purposes  of  the  arms
embargo and that it is only the latter which matter when  determining  state
responsibility. However, it is far from clear that what is in  contemplation
here  consists  in  conduct  contrary  to  those  purposes.  Certainly   the
principal purpose of the arms embargo is unambiguous: it is  (as  stated  in
the founding resolution, SC 733), "to contribute to peace and  stability  in
Somalia" in the context of a situation deemed by the  SC  to  constitute  "a
threat to international peace and security" within the  meaning  of  chapter
V11 of the Charter.  But in doing  so  the  SC  appears  to  recognise  that
security includes personal security: for example, in  Resolution  767,  1992
(para 7) it called upon all  "parties, movements  and  factions  in  Somalia
... to take  measures  to  ensure   their  security".   Furthermore  the  UN
Charter, of course, is based expressly on the principle of respect for,  and
observance of, human rights:  see  Article  55(c).  Whether  it  can  be  an
international wrong to act to respect a person's nonderogable  human  rights
(in this case, the right to life) is  heavily  to  be  doubted:  see  Yassin
Abdullah Kadi,  Al  Barakaat  International  Foundation  v  Council  of  the
European Union and Commission of the European Communities, joined  cases  C-
402/05 C-402/05 P and C-415/05 P judgment 3 September 2008.

60. It is Professor Chinkin's opinion that payment  for  a  military  escort
would work against the aims of re-establishment of peace and  security,  and
disarmament.  "Having  recourse  to  paid  armed  militia",  she  states  at
paragraph 51 of her report, "might contribute  to  increasing  tension,  the
militarisation of society and insecurity in Somalia".  That  is  a  credible
opinion and one to which we attach significant weight. However,  an  equally
credible argument could be put forward for saying that such  recourse  would
accord with the basic objects and purposes of the embargo. Take for  example
a Somali national lawfully settled in  the UK who  upon  learning  that  her
mother is critically ill and likely to die soon decides  that  in  order  to
protect  her own life on the journey  home to see  her  mother,  she  should
arrange for a paid armed escort. Let us  suppose  that  before  making  this
arrangement she contacts  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  to  check
whether it is lawful. As already noted, the right to life and to take  steps
to protect one's own life is both a peremptory  norm  of  international  law
and a fundamental human right guaranteed by the Charter  (Art  55).   Is  it
seriously to be suggested that the only lawful advice to give her  would  be
that such an act would be in breach of the UN arms embargo? It would  be  an
act intended to afford her personal security.

61. We accept, of course, that all that is taken issue with in this case  is
the prospect of paid protection. However it cannot be said that  payment  to
non-state actors for protection is intrinsically contrary  to  any  rule  of
law, national or international. Many states, including  the  UK,  allow  for
protection by private security services.

62. Indeed, it could well be argued that refusal to  permit  a  civilian  to
ensure protection though payment in a  situation  of  armed  conflict  could
itself constitute a violation of international law.  SC 1814, 15  May  2008,
states that the Security Council:

    "Reaffirms its previous resolution 1325 (2000)  on  women,  peace  and,
    security, and 1674 (2006) on  the  protection  of  civilians  in  armed
    conflict, and stresses the responsibility  of  all  parties  and  armed
    groups in Somalia to take appropriate steps  to  protect  the  civilian
    population in the country, consistent with  international  humanitarian
    law, human rights and refugee law, in particular the  avoiding  of  any
    indiscriminate attacks on populated areas." (see also Resolution  1801,
    20 February 2008)

63. Professor Chinkin averred in her report that  the  SC  resolutions  only
contemplate protective functions being carried out by   governmental  forces
(the TFG) or ANISOM and that this is borne out by the fact  that  there  are
specific exemptions to cover such functions. Thus she  writes  at  paragraph
54 of her report that:

    "While  the  functions  of  armed  escort  groups  could  come   within
    'protective use' (Resolution 1356, para 3) there is no suggestion  that
    their weapons are intended to be 'non-lethal' ...The exemption from the
    embargo on 'supplies and the technical assistance  by  States  intended
    solely for the purpose of helping develop security sector institutions'
    emphasises the importance the SC places  on  the  process  of  national
    security sector reform, not the continuation of multiple armed  groups.
    Payment to armed militia does not come within the exemption  and  there
    has been no decision from the Sanctions Committee  suggesting  that  it
    does."

64. We have some doubts that the arms embargo resolutions intend  to  define
exemptions exhaustively. For example, one of the most recent SC  resolutions
on  Somalia  emphasises  the  duty  on  all  states  to   "protect  merchant
shipping" against piracy (1772, 20 August 2007, para 18), but  there  is  no
exemption for financial assistance given to  provide  such  protection.  But
even assuming she is right  that  there  is  nothing  exempting  payment  to
militia escorts, neither is there anything in any of  the  resolutions  that
proscribes  the  carrying  of  arms  for  protective  purposes.  Indeed  the
resolutions could be said to be premised on the recognition that the  normal
protective functions of  the  government  authorities  have  largely  broken
down. The resolutions cannot  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  population  of
Somalia must either rely on protection from the  TFG  or  ANISOM  or  accept
that they are wholly unprotected.   'Scrupulous'  observation  of  the  arms
embargo cannot be understood to require  individuals  to  needlessly  expose
themselves to danger.

65. Lest it not be forgotten as well that what is  contemplated  here  is  a
number of small individual transactions amounting, at least on  costing  set
out by Professor Chinkin at her para 5 on the basis of the UK  Home  Office,
BIA, Report of  Information  Gathering  Mission,  27-30  April  200,  to  be
between $100 - $1,000 dollars for a 50-100km journey. Regardless of what  we
say above, such amounts may well  fall  foul  of  the  de  minimis  rule  in
international law (de minimis non curat lex). We  recognise  that  Professor
Chinkin took the view that the SC resolutions intended to cover  even  small
financial transactions. This could be inferred, she said, from the  coverage
given to transactions  involving  ammunition,  small  arms  and  single  use
weapons. But in our view such references are neutral as to the  question  of
the volume of arms involved in any one transaction. It may well be that  the
Sanctions Committee (see para 36 above) has  never  identified  any  concern
with very small-scale individual transactions because  such  would  have  no
discernible bearing on the state of peace and security in the country.

66. All in all we find the contention that taking account of the ability  of
returnees to pre-arrange armed militia escorts  would  be  contrary  to  the
Orders in Council and UN law to be untenable. In any event, as explained  at
the outset, because it goes to method of return, we do not consider that  it
is  an  issue  which  comes  within  our  jurisdiction  in  the  context  of
immigration decisions made against  nationals  of  Somalia  in  the  current
period.

67. Before turning to our assessment of the evidence relating to  conditions
in Somalia, we need to address certain other legal issues.

Protection Issues and Armed Conflict

68. Central to these appeals is whether it is possible  for  a  national  of
Somalia being returned to his or her home  area  to  establish  a  need  for
international protection or Article 3 protection.  As already indicated,  as
a result of the implementation of the Qualification Directive  in  the  2006
Protection Regulations and Immigration Rules, we  are  obliged  to  consider
such  a  person's  eligibility  for  refugee  protection,  eligibility   for
humanitarian protection and eligibility for Article 3 ECHR protection -  and
in that order.

Refugee Protection

69. As regards refugee protection  in  situations  of  armed  conflict,  the
leading authority is Adan [1998] 2 WLR 703, which, of  course,  concerned  a
claim made by a  national  of  Somalia  in  the  1990s.   The  Tribunal  has
continued to place strong reliance on this authority: see e.g. HH para  125.
 And indeed the respondent at para 23 of her skeleton relied on it  for  the
bald proposition that "[t]he killing and torture incidental to  a  clan  and
sub-clan based civil war  do  not  give  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution when the asylum seeker is  at  no  greater  risk  of  such  ill-
treatment by reason of her clan or sub-clan membership than others  at  risk
in the war."  In view of what we go on to say about  the  current  situation
in Somalia,  it  is  important,  however,  to  clarify  the  ambit  of  this
decision.  First, although their lordships formulated their  legal  guidance
in terms of "civil war", the very fact that what  they  contemplated  was  a
situation of "fighting between clans..." (p.711A) where "law and  order  has
broken down" and "every group seems to  be  fighting  some  other  group  or
groups in an endeavour to gain power" (705B) demonstrates that they did  not
intend to use "civil war" as a term  of  art  and  that  the  fighting  they
described amounted to (what some 10 years later, is now widely  accepted  as
better and more precisely described as)  a  situation  of  (internal)  armed
conflict.  Second, their legal guidance was not confined to a  situation  of
civil war/armed conflict in which there is no  government.  Their  lordships
very consciously sought to address, in the  light  of  academic  authorities
and leading overseas cases,  how  decision-makers  should  approach  refugee
claims brought by persons fearing return  to  situations  of  war  or  armed
conflict in general (704-705; see also the Court of Appeal's application  of
Adan's guidance  in  Romain  Kibiti  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2000] Imm AR 594, in which Buxton LJ on p.599  stated:  "In  our
judgment the current situation  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  is
properly to be described as 'civil  war',  and  within  the  ambit  of  that
description in Adan" (see also pp.600-601)). Third (and contrary to  one  of
Mr Toal's submissions) their lordships in Adan were not simply concerned  to
find that a situation of civil war/armed conflict did not  give  rise  to  a
Refugee Convention ground; they were clearly  concerned  also  with  whether
such situations gave rise to persecution: as Buxton LJ  put  it  in  Kibiti,
summarising Adan:

    "...
    (3) In a civil war situation, a person can only claim the protection of
    the Convention if he has a fear of  persecution  over  and  above  that
    attaching to his involvement in, or with, the civil war  and,  further,
    that that persecution is  for  a  Convention  reason"  (ibid,  p.  598)
    (emphasis added).

70. The other point is this.  The opinions of their lordships in  Adan  were
based on a distinction between two types  of  harm:  harm  inherent  in  the
ordinary incidents of civil war/armed  conflict  and  harm  involving  risks
over and above such incidents.  At p.705 Lord Slynn of  Hadley  stated  that
in a situation where law and order had  broken  down  and  every  group  was
fighting some other group or groups in an endeavour to gain power:

    "...what the members of each group may have is a well-founded fear  not
    so much of persecution by other groups as of death or injury or loss of
    freedom due to the fighting between the groups.  In  such  a  situation
    the individual or group has to show a well-founded fear of  persecution
    over and above the risk to life and liberty inherent in civil war."

(At p.713B Lord Lloyd  of  Berwick  used  the  words  "over  and  above  the
ordinary risks of clan warfare".)

71. At p.713B-C Lord Lloyd of Berwick noted Mr Adan's claim  that  males  of
his own sub-clan were particularly at  risk  because  they  had  attacked  a
militia stronghold of the main opposing clan, adding:

    "But I do not  consider  that  this  throws  doubt  on  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion that all sections of society in northern Somalia are equally
    at risk so long as the civil war continues.  There  is  no  ground  for
    differentiating between Mr Adan and the males of his own or  any  other
    clan."

72. Two observations are pertinent here.  We do not take their lordships  to
have been intending to say that in  a  situation  of  armed  conflict  there
could not be persecution solely  because  those  affected  were  equally  at
risk.  That they cannot have intended such a reading  is  clear  from  their
express recognition elsewhere in this decision that (citing Hathaway)  "[i]t
is not necessary for a claimant to show that he is more at risk than  anyone
else in his group, if the group as a whole is subject  to  oppression":  see
also p.710 G-H, 711 D-G, 713 A.  We accept that Lord Lloyd in one place  (at
p.712 A-C) appeared to suggest that group persecution can only  arise  in  a
country not in a state of civil war, but such a suggestion is not  supported
by any reason and runs counter to his  own  underlying  logic.   If  we  are
correct that disposes, it seems  to  us,  of  one  of  the  main  criticisms
levelled at Adan in some overseas cases (e.g. the  two  cited  by  Mr  Toal,
Refugee Appeal No.71462/99 (RSAA, NZ) and Minister for  Information  v  Haji
Ibrahim [2000] HCA 55), since that criticism depends on the view that  where
there is group persecution, it is erroneous to  require  a  person  to  show
harm  "over  and  above"  that  which  each  member  of  the   group   faces
collectively.  Adan acknowledges this.

73. The other observation is this.  Their lordships  appear  to  have  given
little thought  to  the  relevance  of  an  international  law  approach  to
assessing refugee eligibility in a country  of  return  afflicted  by  armed
conflict.  In seeking to brush  aside  attempts  by  Nicholas  Blake  QC  to
establish the relevance of such a framework, Lord Lloyd stated at p.711B:

    "What then is the critical factor which distinguishes persecution  from
    the ordinary incidents of  civil  war?   Mr  Blake  sought  to  draw  a
    distinction between the armed forces of  either  side,  who  would,  he
    said, be governed by the rules of war, and the targeting of  individual
    civilians or groups of civilians.  I doubt,  however,  whether  in  the
    context of clan warfare in Somalia, it is realistic to think  in  terms
    of rules of war, or the conventional distinction between civilians  and
    members of the armed forces.  Mr Adan's own evidence was that  most  of
    the population is armed."

74. This passage reminds us of the need for caution in seeking to apply  the
guidance in Adan over 10 years later.  Since Adan, the House  of  Lords  has
adopted a different approach to the concept of persecution (defining  it  in
Horvath [2000] Imm AR 552 (HL) in terms of severe violations of basic  human
rights) and since October 2006  we  must  now  apply  the  (highly  similar)
international human rights-based definition set out  in  Article  9  of  the
Qualification  Directive  as  implemented  in  Reg  3  of   the   Protection
Regulations.  Further, the notion that "ill-treatment" (to use  the  wording
of Adan) or  "...torture"  (to  use  the  word  given  in  the  respondent's
skeleton at para 23) cannot be persecutory simply because the  situation  is
one of wartime, not peacetime, is contrary not only to  international  human
rights law  but  also  to  domestic  law,  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  in
particular. According to the latter the only human  rights  guarantees  that
can cease to apply in time or war are derogable rights: see  Article  15  of
the  ECHR.   Whether  one   treats   international   humanitarian   law   or
international human rights law as lex specialis in  relation  to  situations
of  armed  conflict,  under  neither  legal  framework  can  violations   of
nonderogable human rights be permitted in wartime: see  NA v UK  Application
no. 25904/07 17 July 2008,  BE (Iran) [2008] EWCA Civ 540 and KA para 48.

75. In addition we must apply Adan knowing that the House of Lords  and  the
Court of Appeal have since applied the laws of war quite readily in  refugee
claims in the context of armed conflict (see Sepet and Bulbul [2003] UKHL  8
and Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69) as well as in  non-refugee  contexts:  see  R
(On the application of Al-Jedda) v Secretary of  State  for  Defence  [2007]
UKHL 58.  We have to apply Adan in the  context  that  since  then,  as  the
above cases reflect, there have been  important  developments  in  customary
international law and in international human rights law, with the  accretion
of considerable case law dealing with armed conflict by the ECtHR  in  cases
where breaches of Articles 2 and 3 are  at  issue  (e.g.  Isayeva  v  Russia
App.nos 57947/00, 57948/00 paras 168-200, building, inter alia,  on  Ergi  v
Turkey (66/1997/850/1057), 28 July  1998)  and  by  international  tribunals
dealing, inter alia, with  the  Former  Yugoslavia  and  Rwanda  and  Sierra
Leone,  and  now  the  International  Criminal  Court,  where  breaches   of
international humanitarian law and international criminal law are at  issue.
 It is inconceivable, in the light of these developments, that any court  or
tribunal would seriously suggest today in situations of armed conflict  such
as have characterised Somali  affairs  that  the  absence  of  "the  correct
distinctions between civilians and members of the  armed  forces"  precluded
application of peremptory norms of  international  law.   Nor  would  it  be
seriously suggested that the mere carrying of a weapon meant that  a  person
was a combatant and not a  civilian  (a  suggestion  carrying  the  alarming
implication that Somalia would be seen to have relatively  few  civilians!).
In  any  event,  even  as  early  as  1992,  SC  resolutions   on   Somalia,
establishing binding obligations on states,  have  all  been  predicated  on
Somalia being a situation in which there are large numbers of civilians  (or
"non-combatants") in need of protection against  armed  violence:  see  e.g.
Resolution 733, 23 January 1992 paras 8 and 11, Resolution 794,  3  December
1992, preamble.  In more recent years the resolutions have  made  abundantly
clear the SC view that the rules  of  war  do  apply  to  the  situation  in
Somalia. For example, Resolution 1772, 20 August 2007 stresses:

    "the responsibility of all parties and all armed groups in  Somalia  to
    take appropriate steps  to  protect  the  civilian  population  in  the
    country, consistent with international humanitarian law,  human  rights
    and refugee law, in particular by avoiding any  indiscriminate  attacks
    on populated areas."

76. The above developments also call in our view for a careful  analysis  of
what their Lordships in Adan should be taken to mean  by  referring  to  the
"ordinary risks of clan warfare".  Whilst it is  clear  that  they  did  not
have in mind specifically any distinction based on  the  laws  or  rules  of
war, we cannot avoid seeking to give ongoing  content  to  the  distinction.
Bearing in mind the aforesaid developments in international law (and in  the
Somali context, the clarification by the Security Council of  the  relevance
to Somalia of the rules of war),  we  consider  that,  compatibly  with  the
ratio in Adan, the most sensible content to be given to this distinction  is
between acts of armed conflict which accord with the laws of  war  and  acts
which do not.  Civilians caught in the crossfire between armed  groups  will
not normally face anything other than the ordinary incidents of  civil  war.
But  if,  for  example,  one  of  the  parties  has  deliberately  stationed
themselves next to a crowded marketplace and  the  other  side  knows  -  or
ought to know -  that, yet launches an attack,  then  there  is  a  risk  to
civilians in that marketplace over  and  above  the  ordinary  incidents  of
civil war.  In the latter type  of  situation,  there  is  a  real  risk  of
serious violations of peremptory norms  of  international  humanitarian  law
and human rights law.

77. It follows from the above analysis that when  considering  the  question
of whether either appellant is eligible for refugee protection on the  basis
of exposure to the armed conflict, Adan does not permit decision  makers  to
reject their claim per se.

Poor socio-economic conditions and refugee protection

78. In her  skeleton  argument  at  para  25  the  respondent  advanced  the
contention that it would be wrong "as a matter  of  principle"  to  consider
that a claim, based on a person's fear  of  being  compelled  on  return  to
subsist in an IDP camp, fell within the Refugee  Convention.   In  the  same
paragraph she added:

    "[T]he  prevailing  economic  conditions  in  a   society   which   are
    experienced either by all its members  or  a  section  of  its  members
    cannot  amount  to  persecution  for  the  purposes  of   the   Refugee
    Convention.  It is clear from a number of authorities that the  purpose
    of the Refugee Convention is  not  to  enable  people  to  escape  dire
    economic conditions, but to protect them from deliberate  ill-treatment
    on Convention grounds."

79. We disagree, at least insofar  as  this  argument  is  directed  at  the
meaning  of  persecution,  rather  than  the  requirement  under  the   1951
Convention  to  show  a  Convention  ground  or  reason.   The  meaning   of
persecution is set out at Reg 5 of the 2006 Protection Regulations  and  (we
repeat) in terms which in our view can  be  taken  broadly  to  mirror  that
which has been accorded  by  the  UK  courts  and  this  Tribunal  (and  its
predecessor) since Horvath [2000] Imm AR  552 (HL). Given  that  persecution
must be seen, therefore, as harm in the form of severe violations  of  basic
human rights, it could only be right "as a matter of principle"  to  exclude
claims based on forced subsistence in  an  IDP  camp  if  human  rights  law
precludes it.  But, as we shall go on to explain, human rights law does  not
preclude it.  Albeit holding that claims for protection against  refoulement
based on dire socio-economic circumstances are normally  not  decisive  when
considering Article 3 ill-treatment, the Strasbourg Court has  not  excluded
that in certain extreme circumstances, such circumstances  could  give  rise
to a violation of a nonderogable right:  see  below  paras            86-88.
Further, as has been made clear by the Court  on  many  occasions  (e.g.  in
Kalashnikov v Russia  [2002] ECHR 596) and by UK courts  and  the  Tribunal,
for ill-treatment to arise under Article 3, it does not necessarily have  to
be intentional or deliberate: see R (On the appellant of  Adam  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2005]  UKHL  66;  [2006]  1  AC  at  [55].
Hence, whilst there will always be heavy factual obstacles in the way  of  a
finding that socio-economic circumstances can constitute persecution,  there
is no reason of principle why a claim of this kind cannot succeed.

Refugee Convention reason

80. Mr Toal's submission was that if we found the appellants  faced  a  real
risk of persecution, we should find no difficulty in  concluding  that  they
would face such persecution for a  Refugee  Convention  reason.  Miss  Laing
disputed all his proposed reasons. We shall come back to  that  issue  later
on, since, quite properly, Mr Toal's proposed  reasons were tied  very  much
to the factual situation in Somalia.

Article 15(b) protection and Article 3 protection

81. In our view, rather similar observations to those just made in  relation
to persecution apply in relation  to  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
Directive and Article 3 of the ECHR, which both provide a guarantee  against
torture or inhuman or degrading treatment  or  punishment.   Unlike  Article
15(c),  neither  of  these  provisions  imposes,  as   a   requirement   for
eligibility for protection, that there be a  situation  of  armed  conflict.
They apply in any situation, whether one of war or  peace.   That  they  can
apply  in  situations  of  armed  conflict  is   clarified   by   Strasbourg
jurisprudence.  Although the latter deals with  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
ECHR, it is clearly a relevant source for interpreting the very  same  words
used in 15(b). It will suffice for present purposes to make  the  points  we
need, therefore, under the sub-heading below dealing with Article 3  of  the
ECHR.

82. Nothing arises in these appeals under Article 15(a). We shall deal  with
    humanitarian protection under Article 15(c) separately below.

Article 3 of the ECHR

83. One reason why we deal separately with the law on Article 3 of the  ECHR
is in order to address Mr Toal's submission that the Tribunal was  wrong  in
HH and KH to say  that  in  an  armed  conflict  situation  a  "differential
impact" had to be shown in order for a claimant to  show  not  only  a  real
risk of persecution (Adan) but also a real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment.
 In his skeleton argument, Mr  Toal  contended  that  none  of  the  leading
Strasbourg cases on Article 3 imposed a requirement to show  a  differential
risk (paras 41 - 57).  We disagree.  All of  the  leading  Strasbourg  cases
rely  in  part  on  a  principle  of  comparison  or  differentiation.    In
Vilvirajah v UK (1991) 14 EHRR 248 for example, the Court at  paragraph  111
stated:

    "The evidence  before  the  court  concerning  the  background  of  the
    applicants, as well as the general situation, does not  establish  that
    their personal position was any worse  than  the  generality  of  other
    members of the Tamil community or other  young  male  Tamils  who  were
    returning to their country" (Emphasis added).


84. The only proviso the Court attaches to reliance on such  a  differential
analysis is that, when a population or group faces such  a  degree  of  risk
that all members of the group are exposed to it individually, then there  is
no  need  to  show  by  comparison   any   other   personal   distinguishing
characteristics.   That is the proviso or  exception  which  is  cited  most
clearly in  NA v UK, paras 115-118.  In our view what the Tribunal  said  in
HH and KH as regards differential impact is  entirely  consistent  with  the
jurisprudence of the Court in such cases (see e.g.  para  306  of  HH).   We
should add that we found Mr Toal's further submission, that  a  differential
risk analysis was inconsistent with the  principle  of  non  discrimination,
entirely fanciful. Not only does the Court itself rely in  part  on  such  a
principle (see above),  but  Mr  Toal's  argument  confuses  the  difference
between levels of risk with the existence of illegitimate grounds for risk.

The ECHR  and situations of armed conflict

85. Mr Toal sought to argue that both appellants were entitled  to  succeed,
not just on refugee grounds, but also on humanitarian protection  and  human
rights grounds by virtue of principles established by  Strasbourg  in  cases
raising Articles 2 and 3 issues dealing with situations of  armed  conflict.
These principles established, he said, that in the absence of evidence  that
military operations were planned and conducted so  as  to  minimise  to  the
greatest possible extent possible recourse to lethal force and  to  minimise
risk to the lives of civilians when using such force, the  inference  should
be drawn that any civilian  deaths  were  unlawful  within  the  meaning  of
Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  (and  under  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
Directive). He prayed in aid, among  others,  the  case  of  Ergi  v  Turkey
[1998] ECHR 59 and Isayeva  v  Russia  [2005]  ECHR  128.  We  think  he  is
perfectly entitled to seek to rely on the potential relevance of such  cases
and we note that the respondent in KH took the view that such  cases  should
also form the main  interpretive  source  for  Article  15(c).  However,  we
cannot read them  without  taking  into  account  that  the  Court  was  not
concerned in them with refoulement issues (nor was  it  applying  the  lower
standard of proof apt for dealing with  such  issues  ("substantial  grounds
for believing...")). Moreover, whether such issues arise under Article 2  or
3 of the ECHR (for a case dealing with them under Article 3,  see  Muslim  v
Turkey [2006]  ECHR  16),  the  same  important  consideration  arises  when
seeking, as in these  appeals,  to  consider  whether  broad  categories  of
persons  having  no   distinguishing  characteristics   other   than   being
civilians or some sub-category of civilians, can be  said  to  face  a  real
risk of treatment contrary to nonderogable human rights. In this regard,  we
see no significant difference between UK case law on "real risk" as set  out
in Harari [2003] EWCA Civ  807  Batayav  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1489  and  AA  v
Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  149  (which
identify the need for there to be a "consistent pattern") on  the  one  hand
and  ECtHR jurisprudence on the other, and in particular what  was  said  by
the ECtHR recently in NA v UK at paras 116:

    "116. Exceptionally, however, in cases where an applicant alleges  that
    he or she is a member of a group systematically exposed to  a  practice
    of ill-treatment, the Court  has  considered  that  the  protection  of
    Article 3 of  the  Convention  enters  into  play  when  the  applicant
    establishes that there are serious reasons to believe in the  existence
    of the practice in question and his or  her  membership  of  the  group
    concerned (see Saadi  v.  Italy,  cited  above,  para  132).  In  those
    circumstances, the Court will not then insist that the  applicant  show
    the existence of further special distinguishing features if  to  do  so
    would render illusory the protection offered by Article 3. This will be
    determined in light of the applicant's account and the  information  on
    the situation in the country of destination in respect of the group  in
    question (see Salah Sheekh, cited above, para 148)." (Emphasis added)

Article 3 and poor socio-economic and humanitarian conditions

86. It is also necessary for us to address one particular submission  raised
by the respondent concerning Article 3 and poor  economic  and  humanitarian
conditions experienced by IDPs.  Much of what is  said  about  this  in  the
skeleton in uncontroversial.  At paragraphs 35 -  51  she  correctly  notes,
for example, that the Court observed in NA v UK that, whilst not wishing  to
detract from the:

     "acute pertinence of socio-economic and humanitarian considerations to
    the  issue  of  forced  returns  of   failed   asylum   seekers,   such
    considerations do not necessarily have a bearing, and certainly  not  a
    decisive one, on the question of whether the  persons  concerned  would
    face a real risk of ill-treatment contrary  to  Article  3"  (paragraph
    141).

 Earlier in the same judgment, the skeleton also reminds us, the  Court  had
said that "a general situation of  violence  will  not  normally  in  itself
entail a violation of Article 3 in the event of expulsion" (paragraph  114).


87. However, the way in which the respondent seeks  to  apply  such  general
principles to IDPs is much less free from controversy.  In paragraph  53  of
her skeleton, Miss Laing submits that "of and by itself,  poor  humanitarian
conditions in Somalia, even if in  an  IDP  camp,  would  not  establish  an
Article 3 breach".  In  our  view  this  resembles  her  earlier  submission
regarding such claims brought under the Refugee Convention and we reject  it
for similar reasons.  Whilst the Strasbourg Court has made clear  that  such
claims could only succeed in extreme circumstances,  it  has  expressly  not
excluded them entirely (see Pancenko  v  Austria  App.no.  40772/98  and  HS
(returning asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00044,  para  59).
Indeed, the approach taken by the Court in NA v UK, para 116,  when  dealing
with "situations  of  general  violence"  is  one  which  would  be  equally
applicable if one substitutes the words "poor humanitarian conditions":

    "The Court has never excluded the possibility that a general  situation
    of violence in a country ... will be of a sufficient level of intensity
    to breach Article 3.  Nevertheless the court would only adopt  such  an
    approach in the most extreme case of general violence, where there  was
    a real risk of ill-treatment simply by virtue of  an  individual  being
    exposed to such violence on return."

88. We also think Mr Toal is on stronger ground when he points out,  in  his
closing written submission, that the ECtHR has not  treated  the  categories
of "treatment" which can give rise to breaches of Article  3  as  closed  or
subject to exhaustive definition and, through a number of  cases,  has  made
clear that it applies it to a  diverse  and  disparate  range  of  acts  and
omissions: see e.g. Moldova v Romania (No.2) (2007) 44 EHRR  302,  Cyprus  v
Turkey (2002) 35 EHRR 30, Kurt v Turkey (19987) 27  EHRR  373,  Z  v  United
Kingdom (2002) 34 EHRR 3.

89. We shall have cause, later on, to examine how the Tribunal  has  sought,
and should now seek, to  apply  such  principles  to  persons  basing  their
claims on being compelled to subsist in an IDP camp.

Article 15(c)

90. Not surprisingly, in view of the  terms  of  the  two  decisions  as  to
material error of law, both parties made  detailed  submissions  on  Article
15(c).  We do not mean any disrespect  by  not  summarising  them  in  full;
indeed we found both very helpful.  But the Tribunal gave  a  very  detailed
analysis of Article 15(c) in KH, which in turn built on  HH.   The  parties'
submissions fell into two parts:  points  agreeing  and  points  disagreeing
with  KH.   (The  former  included  references  to  relevant  cases   before
international criminal tribunals.)  In our view  only  the  latter  requires
further treatment by us.

91. Dealing first with  Mr  Toal's  points  of  disagreement,  we  were  not
persuaded by them to depart from the reading given in KH to the  term  "life
or person".  The underlying logic applied in KH was that one has to look  to
the  meaning  given  by  customary  international  law  of  a  very  similar
provision in common Article 3(1)(a) of the 1949 Geneva Convention.  In  that
context, Mr Toal's appeal to what the  phrase  "life  or  person"  meant  in
Article 3(1)(c) or in other treaty provision  could  not  be  determinative.
The Tribunal in KH, by accepting at para 104 that the term  "must  encompass
the means for a person's survival" ensured the phrase "life or  person"  was
afforded a purposive meaning.  But giving  such  a  broad  reading  did  not
entail that it should be taken out of its 3(1)(a) context  and  elided  with
wider notions of physical and moral integrity,  humane  treatment  or  "full
respect for human dignity" found  in common  Article  3(1)(c)  or  in  other
treaty law.  We did not find helpful Mr Toal's proposal  that  we  interpret
the word "threat" in Article 15(c) as meaning a "likelihood of harm",  since
the latter notion appears to denote  a  standard  of  proof,  which  is  the
function of Article 2(c) of the Qualification Directive, not 15(c).

92. Mr Toal's submission on  the  meaning  of  the  word  "serious"  largely
repeated those made by Mr Raza Hussain  in KH and we  reject  them  for  the
same reasons. Indeed, Mr Toal's additional suggestion  at  para  36  of  his
skeleton argument,  that  "serious"  had  a  meaning  similar  to  "flagrant
breach" within human rights case law (he cited Ullah [2004] UKHL  26)  would
have the effect, if accepted,  of  erecting  a  threshold  of  gravity  much
higher than that set by KH.  With great respect, Mr  Toal's  submissions  on
the word "individual"  betray  a  misconceived  understanding  of  the  term
"differential impact" as used  by  the  House  of  Lords  in  Adan  and  the
Tribunal in HH (para 308) and  KH  (para  123).   Their  Lordships  in  Adan
clearly applied this text in the context of deciding  whether  there  was  a
real risk of persecution,  not  whether  that  risk  was  for  a  Convention
reason.  As Adan and KH make clear, if all members of a group  are  at  risk
of persecution or serious harm, they are able to show they face a risk  over
and above those of a group of individuals that does not face  such  a  risk.
Contrary to what Mr Toal's skeleton asserts, the ECtHR in NA v  UK  did  not
reject a comparative test: rather they simply pointed out one  exception  to
it: that when everyone in a group faces a real risk of  ill-treatment,  then
there is no need for any further personalisation of the risk.  In any  event
Mr Toal's own suggested  formulation  at  para  56  of  his  skeleton  comes
markedly close to the  reasoning  given  to  "differential  impact"  by  the
Tribunal in HH and KH (Mr Toal's says there that  the  test  should  be  "to
require the individual to demonstrate by means of individualised  assessment
of his claim for protection (see Art 4(3))  that  he  personally  faces  the
real risk of serious harm").

93. There is one point made by Mr Toal in relation to Article 15(c) that  we
wish, gratefully, to adopt.  It was not so much made as a correction to  KH,
but rather as an addition.  It concerns his proposed reading of  the  causal
requirement within Article 15(c),  for  a  person  to  show  a  serious  and
individual  threat  "by  reason  of  indiscriminate   violence".    KH   had
highlighted the importance of this requirement (see para  61)  but  had  not
offered any amplification: Mr Toal  noted  that  in  a  different  statutory
context Lightman J construed the same phrase ("by reason of") as meaning  an
effective  cause  (Prestige  Properties  v  Scottish  Provident  Institution
[2002] EWHC 330 (HC 395) 2 All ER 1145) and that in  the  field  of  refugee
law itself the UK courts had taken the same view  in  respect  of  the  very
similar phrase "for reason of", stating  that  the  causal  requirement  (to
show that persecution is on account  of  a  Refugee  Convention  ground)  is
satisfied if the ground is one, albeit not necessarily the  only,  operative
reason for the feared persecution.  He cited R (Sivakumar) v SSHD  [2003]  1
WLR 840 (the same point was made in Shah and Islam [1999] 2 AC 629 (HL)).

94. We find this is a helpful elaboration.  Within the  context  of  Article
15(c) Mr Toal submitted that this meant that the serious harm  involved  did
not have to be a direct  effect  of  the  indiscriminate  violence;  it  was
sufficient that there was a causal nexus of some kind.

95. At para 13 of his skeleton he wrote:

    "This represents a significant distinction  between  Geneva  Convention
    common Article 3(1)(a) which talks of 'violence to life and person' and
    [Article 15(c)] which talks of 'threat to...life or  person  by  reason
    of...violence'.  By  way  of  example,  indiscriminate  shelling  of  a
    civilian neighbourhood may  cause  death  and  wounding  to  civilians.
    Those deaths  and  woundings  would  plainly  be  'by  reason  of'  the
    indiscriminate violence.  Equally, it is submitted, if  in  consequence
    of that violence, the surviving civilian population was displaced to  a
    region in which it was likely to die of starvation and  disease,  those
    consequences  would  also  be  'by  reason   of'   the   indiscriminate
    violence..."

96. Earlier Mr Toal, when dealing with the  term  "indiscriminate  violence"
referred to the approach taken by the ICTY in the case of  Kupreskic  (2000)
IT-95-16-T to attacks on civilians which  are  cumulative.  It  was   stated
that single attacks on civilians, which if taken individually  do  not  fall
foul of the laws of war, may, if  repeated,  give  rise  to  a  "pattern  of
military  conduct"  excessively  jeopardising  the  lives  and   assets   of
civilians, contrary to the demands of humanity.

97. The only caveat we would make to Mr Toal's  elaboration  of  "by  reason
of" is that in order for the indiscriminate violence  to  be  an  "effective
cause", it clearly cannot extend to include consequences that are  connected
only remotely.

98. We should add, however, that we do  not  think  Mr  Toal  was  right  to
contend  (in  para  16  of  his  skeleton)  that  HH  adopted  an   approach
inconsistent with the use he advocated.  What was said at  para  345  of  HH
was intended as a convenient summary of the Article  15(c)  test;  elsewhere
HH clearly recognised the importance of the  causal  requirement:  see  e.g.
para 347.

99. Miss Laing's submissions on Article 15(c) were largely a summary of  the
Tribunal's case law in HH  and  KH,  although  she  did  indicate  that  the
Secretary of State reserved her position on the issue of whether  key  terms
in Article 15(c) were to be given an IHL reading.  On what  KH  saw  as  the
only point of difference between it and HH, relating  to  the  relevance  of
criminal violence, she urged us to follow KH.

100. A good deal of the submissions were comprised of  arguments  concerning
whether the conflict in Somalia was an  "internal  armed  conflict"  in  the
requisite international humanitarian law (IHL) sense. Since this was  almost
entirely  an  argument  not  about  the  legal  criteria  but  about   their
application, it is convenient if we deal with it later on.

Advocate General's Opinion in Elgafaji

101. Albeit Miss Laing in broad terms asked us to  follow  the  guidance  on
the reasoning of Article 15(c) given in  KH,  she  did,  in  response  to  a
direction from the Tribunal, outline  the  analysis  of  this  provision  as
given by the Advocate General (hereafter "AG") in Elgafaji, 9 Sept  2008  in
Case C-465/07 a case referred to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) by  the
Dutch Council  of  State.   We  are  disappointed  that  despite  our  clear
direction seeking both sides' views on whether as a result of  this  Opinion
the Tribunal should revise its own  analysis,  neither  party  raised  their
head above the parapet.  Miss Laing would not  be  drawn  and  Mr  Toal  was
content to submit that we should regard the Opinion as "confused".

102. It would be wholly remiss of us  to  ignore  the  AG's  Opinion  simply
because the parties chose (largely) not to engage with it.  The  opinion  of
an AG is not binding on the Court, but he is  a  full  time  member  of  the
Court and his (or her) opinion " is very influential, and in  fact  followed
by the Court in the great majority of cases." (P Craig and G  de  Burca,  EU
Law, 3rd Ed p.94).  At the same time, if in fact that Opinion is  consistent
with our national case law, there is little more that needs saying.

103. However, whilst most of the points made by the particular opinion  with
which we are concerned chime with our own case law, some  are  seemingly  at
odds.

Points of accord

104. Looking first at points of  accord,  the  AG's  Opinion  reaffirms  the
principle that the terms  of  Community  legislation  are  to  be  given  an
autonomous definition. At para 19 he states that:

    "Community provisions, irrespective of which provisions are  concerned,
    are given an independent interpretation  which  cannot  therefore  vary
    according to and/or be dependent on developments in the case law of the
    ECtHR".


105. Although  perhaps  obvious  enough,  this  comment  provides  a  timely
warning against any attempts  by  national  decision-makers  to  define  key
terms of the Directive by renvoi to national  law  or  to  treat  Strasbourg
jurisprudence as definitive of their meaning.

106. The Opinion acknowledges the need to draw on the case-law of  the  ECHR
which should be taken into account in the interpretation of  Article  15(c),
thereby indicating that the recommended approach is  to  build  on  existing
extra-Refugee   Convention   protection   principles   based   squarely   on
international norms. Again, if obvious enough, this clarification  does  act
to warn Member States against approaches to interpretation  based  primarily
on domestic  standards  (e.g.  as  to  the  meaning  of  serious  harm).  By
endorsing the validity of decision-makers continuing to draw on  ECHR  norms
as a source, the AG helps ensure they base themselves on objective  criteria
established in European and international law: to similar  effect,  see  KH,
para 39.

107. The AG also promotes a human rights approach to interpretation. In  the
same way as refugee jurisprudence has increasingly come to  give  key  terms
under the Refugee Convention a human rights reading (in order to provide  an
objective basis for making decisions), defining persecution for  example  in
terms of severe  violations  of  basic  human  rights,  so  his  recommended
approach to the concept of "serious harm" is  to  give  it  a  human  rights
reading. Once again, this promotes a  more  objective  basis  for  decision-
making  and  makes  clear  that  the  concept  of  international  protection
(consisting in refugee and subsidiary - or in the UK  context,  humanitarian
-  protection) is given a unitary interpretation. But we have  a  caveat  to
this point, which arises shortly.

108. Like HH and KH, the AG has chosen not to disregard  the  recital  which
complements Article 15(c), recital 26 (this states that "[r]isks to which  a
population of a country or a section of the population is generally  exposed
do normally not create  in  themselves  an  individual  threat  which  would
qualify as serious harm"). Several commentators,  including  UNHCR,  in  its
November 2007 study, Asylum in the European Union  and  in  a  January  2008
statement, "Subsidiary Protection under the EC Qualification  Directive  for
people threatened by indiscriminate violence", have called for  recital  26,
which complements Article 15(c), to  be  "read  down".  But  to  adopt  that
approach would cut across  existing  canons  of  construction  of  Community
legal  texts  which  regard  the  preamble  as  a  most  important  aid   in
determining the scope and purpose of a directive, and as being a  provision,
which, although having no legal force in itself, should only  yield  in  the
face of a contrary provision  of  the  directive  (Case  C-184/99  Grzelcsyk
[2001] ECR I-6193 para 44): to similar effect, see KH, para 26.

109. Another point of consonance is that the AG's Opinion resists giving  an
interpretation which would  have  been  vulnerable  to  the  criticism  that
Article 15(c)  was  essentially  otiose,  or  a  mere  particularisation  of
Article 15(b). That would have offended the EU  principle  of  effet  utile:
see KH, para 128. Although not for entirely the same  reasons  both  KH  and
the AG Opinion agree that Article 15(c) must have some  "added  value"  (KH,
paras 28-31) or scope "supplementary to" both Article 3  and  Article  15(b)
and (a) (AG's Opinion, para 27).

110. Another issue on which we discern no real difference between  our  case
law and the AG's Opinion  is  that  he  rejects  an  interpretation  of  the
concept of "individual threat" which would  require  a  person  to  show  he
faces being  singled out or uniquely or personally  targeted or has, in  his
words at para 28, "features particular to him". It also endorses the  notion
that a class of persons who are collectively targeted may sometimes  all  be
individually targeted. At para 34 he states that Art 15(c)  is  intended  to
cover "situations of indiscriminate  violence  which  is  [are]  so  serious
that, as the case may be, any individual within the ambit of  that  violence
may be subject to a real risk of serious harm to his person or life." As  he
puts it at para 35, "[t]he distinction between a high degree  of  individual
risk and a risk which  is  based  on  individual  features  is  of  defining
importance". Not only does that notion  accord  with  HH  and  KH,  it  also
accords with common sense and our sense of history, both recent  (Tutsis  in
Rwanda) and not so recent (Jews in Nazi  Germany).  We  would  add  that  we
consider his Opinion is particularly helpful in suggesting how the tests  in
Article 15(c) need to be applied depending on the  particular  circumstances
of an individual case. Our focus in these appeals is  on  alleged  risks  to
relatively broad categories, e.g. civilians per se. But in many cases  there
will be many more facts about an individual claimant that will  need  to  be
assessed. In this context what the AG proposes at para 37 is that:

    ".. the more the person  is  individually  affected  (for  example,  by
    reason of his membership of a given social group), the less it will  be
    necessary to show that he faces indiscriminate violence in his  country
    or a part of the territory which is so serious that there is a  serious
    risk that he will be a victim of it himself.  Likewise,  the  less  the
    person is able to show that he is individually affected, the  more  the
    violence must be serious and indiscriminate for him to be eligible  for
    the subsidiary protection claimed."


Points of possible discord

111. The ECJ judgment on Elgafaji is expected within the  next  few  months,
but that cannot relieve us of the need to clarify  why  we  find  difficulty
with, and do not follow, the AG's Opinion in its entirety.


112. It does not  surprise  us  that  his  Opinion  makes  no  mention,  for
example, of either the UK Tribunal cases, HH or KH, or the decision  of  the
Supreme Federal Administrative Court in Germany (Germany's  court  of  final
instance  in  asylum  matters,[2]  which  expressly  mentioned  and  broadly
approved the approach taken in KH), each of which has tackled Article  15(c)
in considerable detail. It  is  not  in  the  tradition  of  the  Luxembourg
process to refer to national cases, albeit it might  be  thought  desirable,
at least in the context of an entirely new area of  ECJ  jurisdiction,  that
an AG opinion at least show conversance  with  existing  national  case  law
approaches. The idea of  a  jurisprudential  blank  slate  is  not  easy  to
reconcile with the notion of the "European legal order" as  being  a  shared
responsibility between  the  ECJ  and  national  judges  (see  C-117/01,  C-
101/01). It may be that the fault here lies in part with the  ECJ  reference
process, which (unlike the Strasbourg process) does not  encourage  the  ECJ
judiciary to have regard to this dimension  since  it  is  only  the  Member
State executives and European institutions, including the Commission,  which
have a right to make submissions.  But  more  important  are  the  following
matters.

113.   Despite   highlighting   the   importance    of    "methodology    of
interpretation", the AG's approach to Article 15(c) is to seek to  interpret
two of  its  main  provisions  without  reference  to  the  wording  of  the
provision read as a whole. It focuses exclusively on the terms "serious  and
individual  [threat]"  and  "indiscriminate  violence"  without  giving  any
consideration to whether  understanding  of  the  proper  meaning  of  these
terms is to be gained by looking at the  other  key  terms:  "...threat"  or
"civilian's life or person" or "international or internal  armed  conflict".
It  also  says  nothing  about  the  causal  requirement   "by   reason   of
indiscriminate violence". This approach might be likened to a  house  survey
of a five bedroom house which inspects the living room and the  kitchen  and
then looks no further. It presupposes, for no  apparent  good  reason,  that
the provision is comprised of discrete, rather than interlocking,  elements.
Of course, as a matter of EU law, the approach to interpretation has  to  be
purposive or teleological, but by trying to define key  terms  in  isolation
from one another, it might be  said  that  the  AG  prevented  himself  from
considering the purposive implications of the provisions read  as  a  whole.
It may be that the (selective) terms of the Dutch reference have  encouraged
this (selective)  approach  (it  would  seem  the  Dutch  Council  of  State
considered the armed conflict  parts  acte  clair),  but  that  may  not  be
thought to resolve the apparent problem affecting such an approach.

114. It is acte clair that a person cannot come within the terms of  Article
15(c) unless he can show he faces a situation of  armed  conflict.  That  is
the most obvious  difference  between  it  and  15(b)  which  stipulates  no
situational requirement. Yet the AG's approach appears  to  proceed  on  the
assumption that the relevant norms on the terrain of 15(c) are solely  human
rights norms, norms that apply in the same way irrespective of  whether  the
situation is one of war or peace.

115. That is controversial for the  following  reasons.  First,  as  already
noted, wartime is a situation where  only  nonderogable  human  rights  have
application: see Article 15 of the ECHR. But since it may be that  the  AG's
reference to serious  violations  of  fundamental  rights  is  meant  to  be
confined to nonderogable human rights, we leave that  reason  to  one  side.
Second, the personal scope of such rights protection  depends  crucially  on
whether an individual is a combatant or a  civilian.   In  peacetime,  if  a
person is shot at by a tank, that is very likely to be a  serious  violation
of his basic human rights. But Article 15(c) is not about peacetime.  It  is
about wartime. And (at international law), it is not  in  itself  a  serious
breach of a person's basic human rights to be shot at by a tank if he  is  a
soldier or insurgent. It is only so if he is a civilian and even  then  only
if he is a civilian subjected to illicit acts of military violence. So  what
becomes crucial is knowing what  the  laws  of  war  allow  in  relation  to
civilians.  Seemingly  the  AG  has  overlooked   a   basic   principle   of
international law when one is dealing with armed conflict  situations:  When
the subject area is armed conflict the International Court  of  Justice  has
held that IHL is the "lex specialis" (Legality  of  the  Threat  or  Use  of
Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion of 8 July 1996 [1996] ICJ Rep 66) and,  to
the extent that the AG thinks it is all about fundamental rights, the  ECtHR
itself has consistently seen the ECHR as forming part of  a  wider  body  of
international law, with which  State  parties  must  comply  (see  Bosphorus
Airways, Application no. 45036/98 at  para  150,  Al-Adsani  v. the  United
Kingdom [GC], no. 35763/97, para 55, ECHR 2001-XI). It is true to say that
when dealing with situations of armed conflict, the  ECtHR,  notwithstanding
its declared fidelity to international law, has avoided  analysis  in  terms
of IHL, but, as noted in KH, para 48, when it has done so it  has  ended  up
articulating principles of proportionality and difference which are  closely
analogous to the laws of war: see e.g. Isayeva v Russia, paras 168-200.  The
AG's Opinion shows no sign of recognising the relevance of these.

116. Another way of putting the  above  is  that  the  AG's  adoption  of  a
framework based on international norms appears untenably  selective.  Simply
to treat international human rights norms as the "Grundnorm" overlooks  that
there are other co-existent peremptory international norms  and  that  these
are as binding on the Community legal  order  as  are  human  rights  norms.
International obligations (including  IHL  treaties  to  which  most  Member
States are a party) automatically form part of the  laws  of  Member  States
and the EU: see Case-540/03 Parliament v  Council.  The  rules  of  IHL  (at
least insofar as they constitute customary international law)  are  likewise
binding upon the Community institutions  and  form  part  of  the  Community
legal order: see C-162/96 Racke [1998] ECR 03655, paras 45-6.

117. This links  to  the  most  problematic  aspect  of  the  AG's  Opinion,
concerning his approach to  the  key  Article  15(c)  term,  "indiscriminate
violence". It is wholly sensible that the AG does not attempt any  technical
or exhaustive definition. But,  in  order  to  establish  his  own  proposed
interpretation, he appears to depend  upon  a  particular  approach  to  the
meaning of the concept of "indiscriminate violence". As his paras 34 and  36
make clear, his approach depends on this term meaning  violence  which  does
not have a discriminatory element. In para 36 he states:

    "...However, the  burden  of  proof  will  be  greater  in  respect  of
    demonstrating indiscriminate violence, which must  be  generalised  (in
    the sense of non-discriminatory) and so serious that it raises a strong
    presumption  that  the  person  in  question  is  the  target  of  that
    violence."


118. What  this  appears  to  entail  is  that  when  deciding  whether  the
violations of fundamental  rights  are  so  serious  that  every  individual
within their ambit is placed at real risk, the decision-maker can only  have
regard to one type of violence: the violence  which  has  no  discriminatory
element. He can only have regard to that because Art 15(c) imposes  a  quite
specific causal requirement: "serious and individual  threat  by  reason  of
indiscriminate violence". It does  not  say  "by  reason  of  all  violence,
including indiscriminate violence". Put another way, he must  disregard  all
(or at least all the direct) targeted violence. The difficulty here is  that
in most armed conflicts the overall level of violence will  be  made  up  of
various types of violence, targeted as well as indiscriminate (in  the  AG's
sense). Take the relentless shelling of  Sarejevo  in  the  early  1990s  by
Bosnian Serbs during the course of which hospitals,  schools,  shopping  and
commercial districts, religious sites  and  apartment  complexes  were  hit.
That was most certainly violence which had a  discriminatory  element,  that
of subduing the city's Muslim inhabitants. Take Iraq for example  (at  least
for most of 2007/early 2008). Some of the actors were targeting  each  other
because of religion (Sunnis versus Shias, Muslims versus  Christians),  some
because of race or nationality (Sunni extremists versus Kurds,  Palestinians
etc), some  because  of  membership  of  a  particular  social  group  (e.g.
patriarchal tribes against women seen to have committed crimes  of  honour).
In the course of these types of targeted violence, there are  civilians  who
get caught in the cross-fire and who  in  that  way  could  be  said  to  be
victims of indiscriminate  violence  in  the  AG's  sense.  There  are  also
insurgents who seek to spread terror without any real  regard  for  who  the
victims  are:  they  too  could  be  said  sometimes  to   be   victims   of
indiscriminate violence in the AG's sense. But overall, limiting oneself  to
indiscriminate violence in the AG's sense appears to  mean  leaving  out  of
the picture a huge amount of the violence going on.

119. Of course,  under  an  alternative,  IHL,  reading  of  "indiscriminate
violence"  such  as  that  given  in   KH,  there  is  also  an   inevitable
limitation, but it does not prevent counting in various  types  of  targeted
violence where the means or methods deployed offend the  IHL  principles  of
distinction and proportionality. Applied to  situations  in  countries  like
Iraq and Somalia, the IHL approach, we think, allows  for  a  more  flexible
and inferential approach to the types and levels of violence than the  AG's.
At the very least such an approach should be seen  to  inform  in  part  the
meaning of Article 15(c). We seek in this decision  to  identify  a  way  of
approaching the  causal  requirement  in  Article  15(c)  -  "by  reason  of
indiscriminate  violence..."  -  which  further  assists  in  deciding  what
violence in any particular society can be taken into account.

120. If we are right in our critique of the AG's Opinion,  then,  to  follow
the latter in full would mean ignoring relevant provisions of  international
law and would make it very difficult to take into account the  realities  of
modern armed conflicts, whose evils often  consist  in  the  combination  of
targeted and indiscriminate violence. In view  of  the  above,  we  are  not
persuaded that the AG's Opinion, whilst shedding valuable light on  the  way
in which Article 15(c)  is  to  be  applied  in  the  circumstances  of  any
particular case, offers a tenable or workable interpretation.  Save  in  the
respects identified, we would reaffirm the approach taken to  Article  15(c)
in KH and (with one exception) in HH.


OUR ASSESSMENT: General

121. In order to assess whether either appellant faces  risk  on  return  to
their respective home areas we need to set out our  general  conclusions  on
the situation of  violence  in  the  country,  the  nature  of  the  current
conflict and humanitarian situation and  the  extent  to  which  Somalia  is
still a clan-based society. Bearing in mind what we said earlier  about  the
en route travel issue, we will also  set  out  our  opinion,  on  an  obiter
basis, concerning the safety of certain routes from Mogadishu  International
airport.

122. Both Mr Toal and Miss Laing agree that since  the  Tribunal  heard  the
appeals of HH in  November  2007,  the  general  situation  in  Somalia  has
deteriorated.

Historic validity of HH

123. However, part of Mr Toal's submission was that even in relation to  the
situation before November 2007, the Tribunal's findings in  HH  were  flawed
since they failed to take adequate account of significant evidence  pointing
to the situation then being much worse than was accepted.  We  do  not  find
this part of his argument at all persuasive,  since  it  plainly  sought  to
rely on the assembling of only those items of evidence  pointing  in  favour
of his  alternative  view.   Before  the  Tribunal  will  take  seriously  a
challenge to the historic validity of a Tribunal country guidance  case,  we
would need submissions which seek to adduce all relevant  evidence,  for  or
against, the proposed different view. A submission which simply selects  all
the items of evidence pointing in favour of  one  view,  as  did  Mr  Toal's
skeleton argument, cannot pass muster.

 124. In any event it seems to us that in terms of the  factual  content  of
those further items, the Tribunal was well  aware  of  their  subject-matter
through other sources of evidence that were in  fact  before  it.  The  only
source  of  evidence  identified  by  Mr  Toal  in  his    closing   written
submissions which he suggests was not taken account of by the  Tribunal   in
HH was the Human Rights Watch Report: Shell Shocked: Civilians  under  siege
in Mogadishu, August 2007. However, as he  himself  notes,  the  report  was
before the Tribunal in HH, being listed in the Appendix and  also  mentioned
specifically in the course of summarising submissions on behalf of  HH:  see
HH paras 189-193 and 245. Further, its report was based on a  6  week  fact-
finding mission to Kenya and Somalia in April and May  2007  (see  p.112  of
the report)  and subsequent telephone research, whereas the Tribunal had  to
consider not only a great deal of other evidence covering  the  same  period
in Mogadishu but subsequent evidence. Just because  no  specific  assessment
was made of this report is no reason to infer the Tribunal did not  take  it
into  account,  particularly  not  in  the  context   of   a   lengthy   and
comprehensive determination. If Mr Toal's  submissions  were  correct,  then
Tribunal country guidance cases would have to give  "detailed  reasons"  for
accepting or rejecting every significant country report  placed  before  it,
even when such reports (as in HH and indeed here) are in their dozens;  that
in our view would be to mistake the wood for the trees.

HH now

125. The main thrust of Mr Toal's submissions, however, was a  challenge  to
the continuing validity of HH as country guidance.  Here, we think,  he  was
on stronger ground.

126. We are persuaded by the further evidence  before  us  that  there  have
been a number  of  significant  changes  in  Somalia  relevant  to  Tribunal
country guidance.

127. As a transition to our identification of  these  changes  it  is  first
necessary to consider whether there is an  armed  conflict  in  central  and
southern Somalia.

Armed Conflict

128. In HH the Tribunal found that, for IHL purposes, there was an  internal
armed conflict in Mogadishu and its environs: see paras 329, 379(3).

129.  Mr  Toal  submitted  that  the  conflict  in  Somalia  was   both   an
international and an internal armed conflict. He pointed to the  involvement
in the conflict of the Ethiopians. It might,  of  course,  make  a  material
difference to the material and geographic scope of the  applicable  laws  of
war if the conflict was international. However, during the hearing  Mr  Toal
did not seek to disagree with Miss Laing  when  she  pointed  out  that  the
Ethiopian forces had intervened in Somalia on the invitation  and  with  the
consent  of  the  TFG,  which   in   international   law   terms   was   the
internationally recognised government of  the  country:  see  HH,  paragraph
336. We note also that all the  UN  SC  resolutions  on  Somalia  since  the
Ethiopian intervention have proceeded on the basis that  their  presence  in
Somalia is consistent with  international   law.  We  find  that  the  armed
conflict in Somalia is not international.

130. Miss Laing submitted that we should find that the conflict was  not  an
internal armed conflict either. Drawing on the criteria  for  the  existence
of an armed conflict as set out in paras 82-84 of KH and  paras  320-330  of
HH, she contended that as a matter of fact the conflict  in  Somalia  failed
to meet  two  essential  requirements,  namely  requisite  organisation  and
sufficient level of intensity.

131. There is a (partially) extrinsic reason why  we  find  this  submission
unpromising, namely that the UN SC resolutions, in various places treat  the
existence of an internal armed conflict as a sine qua non for  the  measures
they mandate: see e.g. SC Resolutions 708, 715, 720.

132. As to organisation, Miss Laing accepted that although  the  parties  to
the conflict had access to a range of weaponry, "the TFG is an  increasingly
fragmented entity, and the various insurgent groups are  loose,  fluctuating
and opportunistic groupings" (para 88 of her skeleton  argument).  Initially
she had sought to argue that the organisation criterion  could  not  be  met
because that required the parties to the conflict to  have  the  ability  to
enforce IHL, which the current armed groups in Somalia plainly did  not.  At
the end of the hearing we asked her for a further submission on this  point,
which came in the form of an addendum. In  that  she  made  clear  that  the
suggestion was based, inter alia,  on  the  ICRC  Commentary  to  Additional
Protocol II, which refers to the party  in  revolt  against  the  government
having  "the means of respecting and ensuring respect for  the  Convention".
However, she went on in the addendum to  concede,  correctly  in  our  view,
that subsequent developments in treaty law  and  the  jurisprudence  of  the
ICTY have rejected any customary international law criteria relating to  the
ability to enforce IHL and she no longer sought to rely on this point.

133. Further on, her addendum helpfully drew attention  to  what  the  Trial
Chamber of the  ICTY said in Prosecutor v Ramush Haradinaj and Others,  Case
No. IT-04-84-&, confirming that state governmental forces  may  be  presumed
to dispose of armed forces that  satisfy  the  organisation  criterion.  The
Trial Chamber then saw the criterion, when applied to armed groups, as  best
considered in terms of several indicative factors, none of  which  were,  in
themselves, essential to its fulfilment:

    "Such indicative factors include the existence of a  command  structure
    and disciplinary rules and mechanisms within the group,  the  existence
    of headquarters, the fact that the group controls a certain  territory,
    the ability of the group to gain  access  to  weapons,  other  military
    equipments, recruits, and military training, its ability to  plan,  co-
    ordinate and carry out military operations, including troop moments and
    logistics; its ability to define a unified military  strategy  and  use
    military tactics, its ability to speak with one voice and negotiate and
    conclude  agreements such as a ceasefire or peace accords."

134. Her addendum stated that in  all  the  cases  considered  by  the  ICTY
"there was a considerable degree  of  organisation  in  the  relevant  armed
groups - a far greater degree, it is submitted, than that which  obtains  in
relation to the various insurgents in Somalia and increasingly the TFG".

135. We are not persuaded by this submission. We remind  ourselves,  as  did
the  Tribunal  in  KH  at  para  81,  that  the  Pre-Trial  Chamber  of  the
International Criminal Court in Prosecutor  v  Lubanga,  ICC-01/04-01/06-803
stated that to meet this criterion only  "some  degree  of  organisation  is
required". The March 2008 ICRC opinion states that an armed  conflict  "must
show a minimum level of organisation". In HH the Tribunal found  that  there
was the requisite degree of organisation for the   purposes  of  identifying
an armed conflict in and around Mogadishu, emphasising the sizeable  numbers
of combatants, the ability of the insurgents to  mount  various  attacks  on
the TFG/Ethiopians during 2007, and the strong inference  of  organisational
ability that could be drawn from the  figures  concerning  the  numbers  and
type of weaponry (paras 335-337). We  consider  these  findings  were  well-
founded  and  that,  if  anything,  developments  in  2008  (to  date)  have
strengthened the reasons for finding the organisation  criterion  satisfied.
We have in mind that whereas in HH it could not be said that the  insurgents
(the UIC and its "allies") had any identifiable territory  or  control  over
territory (para 337), the current position is that  they  have  now  secured
control, even if only on what may turn out to be a temporary basis, of  most
of central and southern Somalia: the Nairobi evidence contains reference  to
the TFG/Ethiopians  now  partly  controlling  Mogadishu:  "Rest  of  country
dominated by ICU on Al-Shabbab, plus freelance militias,  operating  outside
clans ...".  In their April 2008  report  the  UN  Arms  Embargo  Monitoring
Group stated that "insurgents such  as  the  Shabaab,  Islamic  Court  Union
(ICU) combatants and Muqawama  (Resistance)  have  systematically  increased
their control over the territory of Somalia".

136. We would agree with Miss Laing that the TFG/Ethiopians  have  undergone
splits and that the TFG has virtually collapsed as  a  government.   But  it
would be contrary to the evidence to infer from that that the  TFG/Ethiopian
forces lack a sufficient organisational capacity. For one thing  it  is  not
suggested that the Ethiopian troops, whose numbers are  estimated  currently
(they were much higher in late 2006/early 2007) as being between 2,500  (see
the October 2008 FCO letter, which refers to "2,500 to 3,000 mainly  located
within 50k of Mogadishu)  and  10,000  (see  COIS,  8.38),  are  not  highly
organised, and that alone suffices to establish organisational  capacity  on
the governmental side of the conflict.  For another,  the  evidence  is  not
that the TFG forces have disbanded, indeed their numbers were  estimated  in
November to be around 5,000-6,000 (COIS,  8.38)  and  there  is  nothing  to
indicate that there  has  been  any  reduction.  Rather  it  is  that  their
organisational hub has devolved to TFG commanders. Thus  the  2008  Menkhaus
report notes that the commanders refuse to answer  to  the  TFG,  constitute
autonomous armed groups and increasingly act like warlords.

137. What this conveys, in the words of the UN Monitoring Group  in  its  24
April  2008  report,  is  a  "concentration  of  clan-based   control   over
individual forces through allegiances with respective commanders".

138. We would add that according to the ICTY approach, encapsulated  in  the
Tadic test and echoed by the ICRC in their March 2008 opinion (at  para  2),
an armed conflict can exist even when the warring  parties  do  not  include
governmental  forces.  Turning  therefore   to   consider   the   level   of
organisation exhibited by the insurgents, we  remind  ourselves  that  their
armed  groups  have  recently  been  described  in  the  May  2008   Amnesty
International report, as comprised of:

     "remnants of the ICU, supporters of the ARS, and radical Shabab  youth
    militia. They also include clan, sub-clan and local  political  leaders
    and militias who have acted as bandits, perpetrating  raids,  robberies
    and other abuses against civilians, including rape and other  forms  of
    sexual violence..."

139. We would accept that the insurgents do not  fully  meet  the  criterion
noted by a leading IHL jurist cited by ICRC  in  their  March  2008  opinion
that the armed  forces  of  the  insurgents  should  be  "under  responsible
command". And in that regard we readily accept that  there  is  evidence  of
increased fragmentation. According to the September  2008  Menkhaus  report,
Al-Shabab is said to have broken with the ARS.  Although  now  the  dominant
group behind the insurgency, Al-Shabab is said to have no unified  structure
and in Mogadishu to consist in either jihadist cells  answerable  to  no-one
or clan militias simply using  the  name  without  in  practice  having  any
Islamist ideology.   However, we remind ourselves of what the ICTY  said  in
the case cited by Miss Laing (Haradinaj and others) that  identification  of
an internal armed conflict depends on a number of indicators and it  is  not
necessary to meet each one. Further, like the Tribunal in  HH,  we  consider
that a degree of collective and co-ordinated activity can be  inferred  from
the fact (now more evident than at the time of  HH)  that  in  a  relatively
short space of time the insurgency has been able to gain at least  temporary
control over much of central  and  southern  Somalia  and  has  done  so  by
driving out the TFG/Ethiopians  by  means  of  armed  engagements:  e.g.  Al
Shabab, whatever the precise nature of its presence in Mogadishu,  was  able
to take over Kismayo and  thus  secure  strategic  port  access.   The  UNSG
report of March 2008 also emphasises the ability of the insurgents to  mount
operations in various key locations: "The UIC  and  other  anti-governmental
elements", it states, "conduct frequent insurgency operations in  Mogadishu,
Kismayo, Jowhar, Beled Baidoa and Galgayo,  among  other  places,  targeting
mainly Ethiopian armed forces and the Wayne forces, the TFG, police  station
and governmental authorities". Whilst stating that the insurgent  groups  do
not have a recognisable command structure, the 17 October 2008  letter  from
the FCO acknowledges that they "do co-operate and share tactics".

140. We also reiterate the point noted in HH  that  in  the  context  of  an
armed conflict characterised by irregular fighting, the axis of much of  the
organisation inevitably arises at the level of  individual,  guerrilla-style
cells.  Whilst Al Shabab has conducted some concerted military  actions,  it
appears much of the time to favour more mobile,  small-scale  actions,  such
as "hit and run" raids on small towns. Miss Laing relies on recent  sources,
e.g. the May 2008 Amnesty International report, that describes  the  command
structure of many of the armed groups as  "opaque"  or  "invisible".   Being
opaque creates real problems of accountability but  opacity  or  lack  of  a
clear command structure is not to be confused  with  non-existence  in  some
shape or form. We also bear in mind that, in  terms  of  one  of  the  ICTY-
identified indicators of organisation, the ability of armed groups  to  gain
access to arms, and the type of arms  involved,  the  ongoing  conflict  has
seen the TFG/Ethiopians employ heavy artillery and both sides make  frequent
use of mortars.  The UNSC resolutions are a sad testament to the huge  range
and variety of weapons in use in Somalia and to the fact that,  despite  the
embargo (to the use the words of  the  UN  Secretary  General),  Somalia  is
"awash with arms".

141. It is very interesting, in our view, to see how matters are  viewed  by
the body with most knowledge of the use made of  arms  in  Somalia,  the  UN
Arms Embargo Monitoring  Group,  in  their  report  of  24  April  2008.  It
described ongoing militarisation by the principal actors  as  consisting  in
"the receipt of arms shipments, military training  activities,  the  receipt
of military material or logistics and overall efforts to  establish  command
and  control  capacity  combined  with  military  style  organisations   and
structures".

142. Miss Laing also  disputes  that  the  conflict  in  Somalia  meets  the
"protraction" criterion. Again, helpfully, she summarised the  treatment  of
this in Prosecutor v Ramush Haradinaj and Others in which the Trial  Chamber
of the ICTY concluded that the protraction test was  more  to  do  with  the
intensity of the armed  conflict  than  its  duration  and  that  indicative
factors included:

    "number, duration and intensity of individual confrontations; the  type
    of weapons and their military equipment used; the number and calibre of
    munitions fired; the number of  persons and type of forces partaking in
    the  fighting;  the  number  of  casualties,  the  extent  of  material
    destruction; and the number of civilians fleeing conflict  zones.   The
    involvement of the UN Security Council may also be a reflection of  the
    intensity of conflict".  (para 49)

143. Of course, if Miss Laing were  right,  then  the  conflict  in  Somalia
would fall merely into the threshold  immediately  below  that  of  internal
armed conflict, namely "situations of internal  disturbances  and  tensions,
such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence, or other  acts  of  a
similar  nature"  (a  formulation  which  has  become  part   of   customary
international law via Additional Protocol II, the  Rome  Statute  and  ICTY,
ICTR and ICC case law).  But to describe the conflict in  Somalia  in  terms
of that threshold would be purblind. Not only are all the  above  indicators
satisfied, but to find the protraction criterion not met would  fly  in  the
face of SC resolutions and UN  Secretary  General  observations.   Virtually
the only  factor  that  might  be  taken  to  indicate  lack  of  sufficient
intensity is the number of casualties  (estimated  by   Elman  to  be  6,501
civilians and 8,516 wounded and 2,716 killed in the first half of 2008)  but
even here, although the figures are far lower than  those  for  other  armed
conflicts in Africa (Sudan,  DRC  for  example),  they  are  still  sizeable
relative to  the  total  population  and,  as  is  contended  by  some  with
knowledge  on  the  ground,  subject  to  the  likelihood  of   considerable
underreporting. We  are  in  no  doubt  that  the  conflict  in  Somalia  is
protracted and meets that criterion for the existence of an armed conflict.

Geographical Scope of Armed Conflict

144. In HH the Tribunal concluded that the armed  conflict  in  central  and
southern Somalia was confined  to  Mogadishu  and  its  environs  (paragraph
341).  It is clear that by mid - 2008 it had spread  to  many  other  areas.
In his report of  14  March  2008  the  UN  Secretary  General  referred  to
frequent insurgency operations occurring  in  Kismayo,  Jowhar,  Beledweyne,
Baidoa and Galkayo.  The UN Arms Embargo Monitoring Report of 24 April  2008
noted "a dramatic expansion of the conflict" and noted further that  El  Bur
and Buulo Burte in the Hiraan region and Guriel in the Galgaduud region  had
fallen under insurgent control.  In July 2008 the UN Security General  noted
that major clashes had become more frequent in and around Baidoa  and  along
the Mogadishu Afgooye  -  Baidoa  highway.  We  find  that  a  situation  of
internal armed conflict now exists throughout central and southern Somalia.

Intensity of the Violence

145. In HH the Tribunal found  that  the  armed  conflict  taking  place  in
Mogadishu (between the  TFG/Ethiopians  and  the  UIC)  did  not  amount  to
indiscriminate violence at  such  a  level  of  severity  as  to  place  the
population of Mogadishu at risk of a consistent  pattern  of  indiscriminate
violence. To what extent has this situation changed, concentrating first  on
the general situation in central and southern Somalia?

146.  In early 2008 the UN  Secretary  General,  drawing  on  the  UN  fact-
finding mission to  Somalia  in  January  2008,  stated  that  the  security
situation in Somalia was "characterised by indiscriminate killings" and  has
continued so to describe it during 2008 until the present.  In March 2008  a
report by UN Somalia Humanitarian Overview,  made  reference  to  the  joint
statement by 44 international and local NGOs that the situation  in  central
and southern Somalia was deteriorating rapidly.  In  its  May  2008  report,
Amnesty International stated that  all  parties  to  the  conflict  directed
attacks at civilian populations (p.82).

147. Manifestly all significant armed parties to the conflict  have  engaged
in indiscriminate attacks. The Ethiopians were noted by Human Rights  Watch,
in their August 2007 report, Shell Shocked..., to use means of  war  (firing
inherently indiscriminate 'Katyusha' rockets in urban areas) and methods  of
warfare (using mortars and other indirect weapons without guidance in  urban
areas) that violated IHL (see COIS 8.39). Although the Tribunal  in  HH  did
not find the extent and level of the  indiscriminate  violence  sufficiently
severe to give rise to a  serious  threat  to  the  residents  of  Mogadishu
generally, the cumulative effect of subsequent  incidents  and  patterns  of
attacks  has  altered  the  picture.  In  its  May  2008   report,   Amnesty
International notes  an  alteration  in  the  conduct  of  Ethiopian  forces
towards  civilians  after  the  parading  of  Ethiopian  troops'  bodies  by
insurgents in Mogadishu in November 2007, leading  to  increased  violations
against civilians  (COIS  8.40).  In  the  same  report,  AI  documents  TFG
aggression towards civilians and states that  their  forces  are  frequently
reported to act "as if they believe they  are  immune  from  accountability,
investigation or prosecution, including for crimes under international  law"
(COIS, 8.32). The TFG, several sources note,  are  not  paid  or  only  paid
poorly and intermittently. AI also describes the insurgents as  perpetrating
raids, robberies, and other abuses against  civilians,  including  rape  and
other forms of  sexual  violence  (COIS  9.01).  Matt  Bryden  (see  Nairobi
evidence) observes that individuals have been killed by Al  Shabab  for  the
least transaction with the TFG or  Ethiopians:  "For  example,  people  have
been killed by them for selling cups  of  tea  or  soft  drinks  to  TFG  or
Ethiopian soldiers".

148. In a 1 September 2008  interview  submitted  as  part  of  the  Nairobi
evidence, Alex Tyler, Protection Officer, UNHCR Somalia  stated  that  since
January 2007 there have been dramatic shifts in the political  and  security
landscape in Somalia  and  that  Mogadishu  in  particular  has  experienced
arguably the worst period of violations of  international  human  right  and
humanitarian law, in terms of their scale and scope, which the  capital  has
seen since the early 1990s.  He is also recorded as saying that "[t]here  is
a clear correlation between the massive displacement form Mogadishu and  the
above mentioned military operations in civilian areas, estimated at  700,000
displaced in 2007 alone, indicating that the conflict between  the  TFG  and
Ethiopian forces and the insurgents has been conducted  with  little  regard
for the safety of the civilian  population."  The  most  recent  information
available to the IASC Protection Cluster has confirmed  Human  Rights  Watch
and Amnesty International concerns about:

    "indiscriminate bombardment of civilian areas;  indiscriminate  use  of
    roadside bombs and mortars from and in civilian  areas;  indiscriminate
    shooting in response to road side bombs; arbitrary arrest and detention
    of civilians, including children; forced evictions; forced recruitment,
    including of children; sexual and gender based  violence;  intimidation
    and assassination of journalists, aid workers and  civilian  officials;
    and extrajudicial killings. "

149. In a September 2008 statement (Nairobi evidence,  p.37-38)  Tony  Burns
of SAACID-Australia states that civilians are  directly  targeted:  "[t]here
are combatants to the current conflict that mortar markets,  and  particular
neighbourhoods, to suit their military goals...Looting, rape, extortion  and
murder are commonly carried out by all parties to the  conflict.  Collective
punishment (based on geographic area or fighting age  males)  is  also  very
common." On 3 October 2008 SAACID stated that "as pure a form of anarchy  as
is possible  now  prevails".  We  shall  need  to  return  to  the  specific
situation in Mogadishu shortly.

Deterioration in the Humanitarian Situation and IDPs

150. Coupled with the worsening security situation has been a  deteriorating
humanitarian situation characterised by mass displacement.  In his 14  March
2008 report, the UN Secretary General referred to there having:

    "never been so  many  people  in  Somalia  in  such  dire  humanitarian
    circumstances and there has never been such limited ability to  support
    them, mainly because of precarious security conditions."

151. At this point we think it right to remind ourselves  of  features  that
are known about IDPs in Somalia currently.  We do so  against  the  backdrop
that the respondent has taken particular issue with the view  that  IDPs  in
Somalia could face, or should ever be seen  as  facing,  harm  crossing  the
threshold  of  persecution,  serious  harm  or  ill-treatment.   In  HH  the
Tribunal found that a person displaced from  Mogadishu  who  was  likely  to
have to spend  any  significant  period  of  time  in  a  makeshift  shelter
alongside the road to Afgoye, for example, or  in  an  IDP  camp,  may  well
experience treatment that would be proscribed  by  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
(para 299).  That echoed what the Tribunal had earlier said in NM.

152. We have already noted that the  estimates  of  numbers  displaced  from
Mogadishu vary from around 400,000 to 750,000. As  recently  as  20  October
2008 the numbers of IDPs, along a  30km  stretch  of  the  Mogadishu-Afgooye
road, are estimated at between  250,000-4000,000  and  have  been  described
very  recently  by  a  Western  journalist  as  "a  concentration  of  utter
despair".  Since  HH,  of  course,  there  have  begun  to  be   significant
displacements from other towns to which the armed clashes have  spread.   In
the course of the reports  during  2008  to  date,  UNOCHA  has  noted  mass
displacements throughout central Somalia. Its  Monthly  Cluster  report  for
May 2008 states that for the first time the numbers  displaced  in  southern
and central Somalia exceeded  the  monthly  outflow  from  Mogadishu  (COIS,
4.06).

153. It is also the qualitative features  about  Somali  IDPs  (as  well  as
their numerical  and  geographical  distribution)  which  concern  us  here.
Three features stand out (in what  follows  we  draw  particularly  but  not
exclusively on the UNOCHA Reports for 2007  and  2008).   First,  they  face
particularly serious problems whilst  on  the  move.   Their  movements  are
impeded by hundreds of checkpoints manned by one side or the  other  to  the
conflict.   At  these  checkpoints  they  can   be   subject   to   threats,
intimidation, looting (and in the case of women and girls)  rape,  abduction
and harassment.

154. Second, in the places they arrive  at,  they  face  a  further  set  of
difficulties.  A significant number do not end  up  in  camps  or  makeshift
settlements  able  to  provide  an  adequate  level  of  security.   On  the
contrary,  they  face  a  struggle  to  obtain  shelter,  food,  water   and
sanitation, sometimes even having to pay for being able  to  sit  under  the
shade of a tree.  For women and girls there is a  risk  of  abduction,  rape
and harassment.  In March 2008 the ICRC reported that  many  IDPs  displaced
by violence in Somalia were surviving on  less  than  one  meal  a  day  and
spending a large proportion of their meagre income  buying  drinking  water.
The poor security situation was said to severely  hamper  the  work  of  aid
agencies seeking to deliver humanitarian assistance to those who needed  it:
as UNOCHA stated in  its  July  2008  report,  "the  security  situation  is
seriously restricting humanitarian operations".  Similar  observations  were
made by the UN SG in his July 2008 report.

155. Third, the effect of displacement appears  to  reduce  the  ability  of
IDPs to count on protection from their own clan.   Clan  protection  depends
normally on living inside the traditional area of the clan  (Danish  Report,
329).  Thus, for example, although (according to the first BIA Report)  most
IDPs from Mogadishu are from the majority Hawiye clan (and at  January  2008
around 82% were said to have migrated to areas of southern Somalia that  are
in dire need  (COIS,  28.13)),  displacement  means  that  a  person  cannot
automatically be protected by his or her clan.  In the  process  of  moving,
it appears that IDPs can face violence and intimidation  even  from  fellow-
clan members.  And once they have arrived at a location,  even  when  it  is
one inside a traditional area  for  that  person's  clan,  the  pressure  of
numbers and scarce resources can mean that newcomers may  not  be  supported
or absorbed by the local community (Danish report, 322 - 324).

Conclusions

156. The above does not, however, persuade us that the situation in  central
and southern Somalia generally has reached  the  threshold  where  civilians
per se or Somali civilian IDPs per se can be said to face  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3  ECHR.   We
reach this conclusion for two main reasons.  First, although  the  level  of
violence has increased  in  intensity,  the  numbers  of  those  killed  and
wounded (so far as they are  known)  are  not  of  great  magnitude.   Every
single death or injury is to  be  lamented,  but  what  we  have  to  decide
(subject to the need for caution which Mr Toal correctly reminded us  of  in
his skeleton argument at paragraph 72), is whether  persecution  or  serious
harm is  something  that  is  generally  happening  or  forms  a  consistent
pattern: see AA v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]  EWCA
Civ 149.

157. Secondly, whilst the  humanitarian  situation  is  dire,  it  does  not
appear that civilians per se face a real risk of denial of  basic  food  and
shelter and other bare necessities of life.  There are two aspects to  this:
many appear not to need humanitarian assistance and many  who  do  need  it,
get help of some kind. The Somali Humanitarian Overview for  September  2008
stated that in that month food aid organisations  distributed  monthly  food
rations to nearly 3 million people. As to the first aspect, as  catastrophic
as aspects of the situation are, it is important to bear in mind the  UNOCHA
figures, as given for example in their  August  2008  report,  where  it  is
estimated that the number of people in need of  assistance  in  Somalia  has
increased to 3.2  (up  from  2.6  in  April)  million  people  (43%  of  the
population [since the population  of  Somalia  is  estimated  at  around  10
million, we assume that what is meant here is the population of central  and
southern Somalia only]).  Although an increase of 77% from the year  before,
another way of putting this is  that  over  a  half  of  the  population  of
central and southern Somalia were not in need  of  humanitarian  assistance.
As to the second aspect, even though aid agencies can meet with  obstruction
and dangers in delivering aid to IDPs in need (as documented,  e.g.  in  the
COIS, 28.10) a significant percentage of those in need are reached. And  the
figures for those who are not reached have to be read in  the  context  that
(i) in the IDP camps, "most people there are  helped  by  Somalis  from  the
diaspora" (Nairobi evidence, p.25);  and  (ii)  traditional  clan  areas  to
which many IDPs flee do allow them to live in their  communities,  at  least
until their numbers become too high.

158. Thirdly, the evidence about attacks on  IDPs  has  to  be  put  in  the
context of the fact that there have been huge numbers of  people  displaced,
well over a million according to some estimates.  Seen in that  context,  it
would appear that the great majority of IDPs are able  to  travel  and  then
subsist in IDP camps or settlements without serious setbacks.  If this  were
not so the figures given in background reports dealing with attacks on  IDPs
would be markedly different.

159. It is significant in our view to note what was said by Alex Tyler,  the
Protection Officer for UNHCR, Somalia, in his 1  September  2008  interview.
After  reiterating  UNHCR's  previous  position  that  there  should  be  no
enforced returns to central and southern Somalia, he went on to say:

    "...it is possible that a returnee from abroad may  also  face  a  real
    risk of serious harm by virtue of being a returnee, although the  level
    of this risk is difficult to assess and would  depend  on  case  [sic].
    Although I would caution against awarding refugee status simply because
    of being a returnee, several factors, when  combined  would  add  other
    considerations in an applicant's  asylum  claim.  As  mentioned  above,
    there has been a dramatic increase in  criminality  in  Mogadishu,  and
    persons perceived as wealthy are  attractive  targets  for  robbery  or
    abduction - returnees would certainly attract attention and be  assumed
    to have money. If the individual has been  outside  of  Somalia  for  a
    significant period of time, he or she will not  possess  the  knowledge
    and experience necessary to be able to manage and  avoid  risk  in  the
    current situation. Al  Shabab  cells  are  likely  to  investigate  any
    newcomer  to  their  areas  to  determine  whether  the  individual  is
    connected with the TFG or otherwise opposed to them..."


 160. From this and other reports we discern that assessment of  the  extent
to which IDPs face greater or lesser hardships, at least  outside  Mogadishu
(where  security  considerations  are   particularly   grave),   will   vary
significantly depending  on  a  number  of  factors:  e.g.  IDPs  from  more
influential clans or sub-clans appear to  have  a  better  chance  of  being
tolerated in the area to which they have fled (Danish Report, p. 320);  IDPs
who have a traditional clan area they can travel to, especially if  in  that
area they have family, or friends, or close clan or  sub-clan  affiliations,
appear to have better prospects of finding safety and support, although  not
if the area concerned is  already  saturated  with  fellow  -  IDPs  (Danish
Report, pp. 320 - 329); those  who  lack  recent  experience  of  living  in
Somalia appear more likely to  have  difficulty  dealing  with  the  changed
environment in which clan loyalties have to some extent  fractured  (Nairobi
evidence); persons  returning  to  their  home  area  from  the  UK  may  be
perceived as having relative wealth and be more  susceptible  to  extortion,
abduction and the like as a result (Nairobi evidence);  those  who  live  in
areas not particularly affected by the fighting and which are  seen  as  not
important strategically to any of the main parties  to  the  conflict  would
appear less subject to security problems; whether the IDP is a  female  also
appears a significant factor, given the evidence  of  the  additional  risks
women and girls face of abduction, rape and harassment.  To  these  factors,
of course, one has to add the variables of age and  state  of  health.  Also
relevant will be the evidence about the prevailing  economic  conditions  in
the area, bearing in  mind  the  recent  history  of  cruel  droughts,  poor
harvests and rising food prices.

161. We do not present these as an exhaustive  list  of  factors,  but  they
are, we think, helpful indicators  for  making  a  proper  decision  in  any
particular case.

Clan Matrix and Loyalties

162. A principal contention of Mr Toal in these appeals is  that  there  has
been a significant change in the  clan-based  character  of  Somali  society
since the Tribunal evaluated such matters in NM and HH.  At  paragraph  111c
of his skeleton argument he stated:

    "The Tribunal should now find a reasonable likelihood that in  general,
    membership  of  a  particular  clan  does  not  by  itself  protect  an
    individual from serious harm."


163.  In support of this contention he cited a number of sources  suggesting
that a person could no longer expect to be protected by his or her own  clan
(as stated in the Danish Report, 329). He highlighted: that clans  and  sub-
clans are beginning to fracture under increasing economic stress  (COI  para
20.26);  that  the  intensification  of  the  armed  conflict  had  led   to
uncertainty about whom to trust, even at sub-sub clan level (ibid); that  in
areas most affected by  the  armed  conflict,  small  militias  increasingly
fight for their own narrow ends and answer  to  no  one  (USSG,  July  2008,
Danish Report, 5); and that there are now a  "multiplication  of  identities
unconnected with clan (including Islamist, pro or  anti  TFG;  pro  or  anti
western)"(paragraph 117 of his skeleton; see also COI paragraph  20.06).  He
also laid emphasis on the evidence,  highlighted  by  some  of  the  Nairobi
statements and interviews,  that  one  of  the  major  majority  clans,  the
Hawiye, had been disarmed by the TFG/Ethiopians.


164. We do not doubt that recent  events  have  altered  the  character  and
dynamics of clan  and  sub-clan  activities  in  Somalia  to  a  significant
degree.  We accept that as compared with the early 1990s clan protection  is
no longer as effective as it was. We are sure that Matt Bryden is right  and
that "[p]olitics and clan no longer converge to the  same  degree"  (Nairobi
evidence).  We  also  accept  that  conflicts  over  scarce  resources  have
complicated the situation and made it unpredictable.  But  we  cannot  agree
with Mr Toal that the clan or sub-clan has somehow ceased to be the  primary
entity  to  which  individuals  turn  for  protection.   Our   reasons   are
threefold.  First, the evidence he himself cites describes not  so  much  an
eclipse of clan protection as a restructuring or  devolution  down  to  sub-
units.  Indeed it would appear that this has been a trend which  began  some
time ago: it was the view of Menkhaus  back  in  2004  that  over  the  past
fifteen years Somali clan politics have "devolved  to  much  lower  (sub-sub
clan)  lineage  levels"  (Danish  Report,  442).   Second,  there  is  ample
evidence that in terms of the use of arms, the basic units  who  carry  arms
continue to be, at least on the  insurgents'  side,  clan-based  or  sub-sub
clan based militia.  Thus the UNSG Report of May 2008 on Children and  Armed
Conflict refers  to  the  rise  of  clan  militias.   In  May  2008  Amnesty
International noted that checkpoints and roadblocks outside  Mogadishu  were
operated by the TFG, TFG allied militia and  armed  clan  factions.   On  11
September 2008 the BBC Report noted inter-sub-clan fighting over control  of
farmland and the resumption of clan fighting condoned  by  elders.   Closely
inter-related is  the  emerging  evidence  of  a  resurgence  of  clan-based
militia activity. We must also bear in mind  that  in  certain  areas,  most
notably Kismayo, the conflicts   are  described  as  essentially  inter-clan
(COIS, 8.02). We think the preponderance of evidence is crystallised in  the
words of Matt Bryden  (see  Nairobi  evidence)  as  follows:  "Clans  remain
important but are no longer able to  provide  the  level  of  protection  or
support that they used to".

165. So far as concerns whether the Hawiye have been disarmed,  whilst  that
appears to have been the position for some period after December  2006,  the
most recent evidence  (from  SAACID)  relating  to  Mogadishu  is  that  the
civilian  population  has  now  largely  rearmed,  and  has  begun  stocking
ammunition (COIS, A.7). If the reality in most other areas  of  central  and
southern Somalia is that the TFG/Ethiopians have  been  driven  out  or  are
struggling to maintain a foothold, we think it  highly  unlikely  that  they
would any longer be in a position  to  prevent  local  populations,  or  key
sections of them, re-arming and doing so much of the time on a clan basis.

Minority clans and groupings

166. So far as the position of minority clans  is  concerned  neither  party
asked us to take a different view from that taken in HH, save in respect  of
their situation as civilians and/or IDPs. We would  only  note,  so  far  as
Mogadishu is concerned, that whilst it appears that a significant number  of
minority clan or group members have chosen to stay  on  in  Mogadishu  (some
from other areas have even moved to there), we go on to find below that  the
situation in Mogadishu for the great  majority  of  residents  is  currently
precarious. In our view the situation of minority clans in  Mogadishu  would
be a fortiori precarious.

Sheikhal Logobe

167. By virtue of the accepted fact that AM2 is from  the  Sheikhal  Logobe,
we must specifically address their general position. In doing so we bear  in
mind several  things.  First,  the  Danish  report  on  Minority  groups  in
Somalia, 17-24 September 2000 noted that in the  Arta  peace  conference  in
Djibouti around that period, "[a] few of the minority  communities  such  as
the Sheikhal Logobe have been included in the Hawiye clan-family's TNA  seat
allocation", which reflected the fact, noted in  some  other  sources  also,
that at that time the Sheikhal had been able to secure Hawiye patronage  and
protection.  According  to  the  information  gathered  by  the  Netherlands
Embassy in June 1999 the Sheikhal Logobe are  a  sub-clan  of  the  Sheikhal
(COIS Reply 2 September 2008).

168. Second, in a former country  guidance  case,  FK  (Sheikhal  Gandershe)
Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 000124 the Tribunal drew upon  an  earlier  decision
in which issues  relating  to  the  Sheikhal  had  been  considered  by  the
Tribunal in an earlier appeal in 2002:

    "13.  These  issues  were  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in   Mohammed
    [promulgated on the  29 November 2002].  That Tribunal  had  before  it
    the Minorities Report and evidence from Dr Luling.   Paragraph  19  of
    that determination reads as follows:


         "The Shekhal are  not  one  but  several  groups  not  necessarily
         related and with different cultures and  dialects.   The  word  is
         simply the plural of Sheikh and signifies the lineage who have  an
         inherited religious status.  They all trace descent from the  same
         ancestor Sheikh  Faqi  Cumar  who  travelled  around  Somalia  and
         married wives in each location.

     The Shekhal of Jasira and  Gandhershe  are  ethnically  distinct  from
         other groups such as the Shekhal Loboge.   Jasira  and  Gandhershe
         are  both  places  on  the  coast  between  Mogadishu  and  Merce.
         Shekhal  in  that  area  belong  to  the  light  skinned  Benadiri
         population of Arab descent who are found along the coast, like the
         Bravenese and the Reer Hamar of Mogadishu."

    14. Having reviewed all the evidence before it, the Tribunal  concluded
    that the Shekhal Gandhershe and the Shekhal Jasira were minority groups
    which were not protected by the Hawiye.  The respondent had  failed  to
    make an important distinction between the Shekhal  Gandhershe  and  the
    Shekhal Jasira on the one hand and the Shekhal  Loboge  on  the  other.
    The latter group were protected by the Hawiye.   The Shekhal  were  not
    one discrete sub-clan but were distinct and separate groups and as such
    ethnically distinct from the majority of  the  Somalis.   The  Tribunal
    found that members of the Shekhal Gandhershe were a minority group then
    at risk if returned to Somalia.  It went on to find that  a  member  of
    the Shekhal Gandhershe clan would be considered to be a Benadiri and as
    such among the groups recognised by the Home Office as  qualifying  for
    refugee status.  On that basis the appeal was allowed."

169. Third, however, we bear in mind that one of the more  recent  items  of
evidence we have is from a Mr CA who  described  himself  as  chief  of  the
Logobe sub-clan of the Sheikhal and was also a religious scholar.  There  is
a lengthy statement from him dated 5  September  2008.  Albeit  he  was  not
called as a witness or subjected to cross-examination,   we  consider  it  a
measured and thoughtful analysis. His evidence was  that  the  Sheikhal  are
neither Hawiye nor Darod. They are not a militarised  clan.  They  originate
from Arabia via the  Ogaden  region  of  Ethiopia;  they  have  a  scattered
presence in Somalia but their presence is greatest in middle and lower  Juba
regions. Due to the status attached to their knowledge of  Islam  and  their
education they had been able to forge relations with both the Darod and  the
Hawiye and even inter-marry with the Hawiye. The conflicts of the 1990s  saw
the Darod turn against his clan and their  own  relations  with  the  Hawiye
also fractured during internal fighting between the  Abgal  and  Habargidir.
By the end of the 1990s they could no longer rely on the protection  of  the
Hawiye and "became a minority clan in a sense."  He  as  a  clan  elder  had
sided with the TFG in 2003. During the subsequent fighting between  the  UIC
and the TFG, and then the insurgents and the TFG/Ethiopians,  his  clan  was
accused by both sides of supporting and assisting the  other.  He  had  been
forced to flee Mogadishu in mid-2007. The current position was that:

    "The whole of the Sheikhal/Logobe clan is believed by Al Shabab  to  be
    supporters of the TFG because of my part in the formation  and  support
    for the TFG. ...There is also a group of the  UIC  called  Alislah  and
    founders of this group are Sheikhal. Al Shabab sees Alislah as a threat
    to them and people associated to them...The Sheikhal Logobe are  mostly
    now in Dabaab Refugee Camp or Haragdhere Refugee camp..."

170. Considering the evidence  as  a  whole,  the  above  three  sources  in
particular, we consider that, as a result of the  current  conflict  between
the TFG/Ethiopians and the insurgents,  the  Sheikhal  clan  (including  the
Sheikhal Logobe), by virtue of the hostile attitude taken  towards  them  by
Al  Shabab,  is  less  able  to  secure  protection  for  its  members  than
previously, although both as regards their risk of persecution  and  serious
harm and protection much will depend  on  the  particular  circumstances  of
individual clan members.

Mogadishu

171. What we have said above about risk to civilians and  IDP  civilians  in
central and southern Somalia requires some modification in relation  to  the
situation in Mogadishu. The city  is  divided  into  16  districts.  Neither
party was able to give us a precise figure  for  the  normal  population  of
Mogadishu, although the sources they noted give figures in the  range  of  1
to 2 million. The International Crisis Group in January 2007 gave  a  figure
of 1.5 million. (COIS, 14.02).

172. As already noted the movements of population out of  Mogadishu  in  the
past two years have been  unprecedented.   UN  sources  have  estimated  (at
various times) that 400,000, up to as many as 750,000 (or around  one  third
to a half), of the population of Mogadishu have been displaced. An  8  April
2008 Voice of America report states that two thirds of Mogadishu  have  been
turned into an urban battleground. Since the beginning of  2008  there  have
been significantly fewer returns.   Whatever  the  precise  figures,  it  is
clear that the ongoing violence has forced substantial numbers to  flee  the
city more than once and flight seems an ongoing process: the IRIN report  of
29 September 2008 cites Elman estimates that  18,500  people  recently  fled
their homes due to the fighting and shelling (COIS, A  4).  The  COIS  Reply
dated 24 October 2008 states that: "[a]ccording to the  UNHCR  an  estimated
5,500 people were displaced from the city during the week  and  over  61,000
since  21  September  2008".  Armed  clashes  have  increasingly   destroyed
housing, market areas (Bakara market  has  been  deliberately  shelled)  and
infrastructure and the recent closure of  the  airport  is  likely  to  make
matters  in  Mogadishu  worse.  According  to  Grayson  and  Munk,  the  aid
community has been largely ineffective in providing  the  necessary  aid  to
those who have stayed in Mogadishu (Nairobi evidence 65).  They  also  state
that Mogadishu is a "ghost town" and that only the  most  vulnerable  remain
there.

173. We attach weight to the evidence indicating that in  certain  areas  of
the city, where the more affluent live,  they  are  able  to  afford  strong
personal protection. We accept also that there do appear to  be  some  small
numbers of persons who  have  fled  other  parts  of  central  and  southern
Somalia  and  gone  to  Mogadishu.  Sometimes,  following  fresh   fighting,
displacement is to safer districts within the city (15,000 in this  category
in September 2008, according to UNOCHA, 26 September 2008)  rather  than  to
places outside. There is also evidence to show that when  the  international
airport is open, passengers with business to conduct or  who  have  powerful
clan and/or armed group connections there, are able to  arrange  for  travel
to and/or from Mogadishu.  However, bearing in mind  that  since  late  2007
the main movements have been away from the  city,  we  think  it  unwise  to
attach great significance to  those  factors  and  wrong  in  particular  to
equate transient business visits to the city with normal residence.

174. In a situation many sources describe as "anarchical"  it  is  difficult
to gain a precise picture of the spread of violence in Mogadishu. For  sure,
however, things have changed a great deal from mid-2007 when  the  BIA  fact
finding mission estimated it as being "fairly low" (COIS,  8.03).  According
to the May 2008 Amnesty International report fighting was  taking  place  in
southern districts of the city such as Hodan,  Hodan/Waaberi,   Haal  Warang
and Wardingley. There is also mention of Boondhe and  Yaaqshid,  the  latter
which is in the north. In a June 2008 report IRIN  said  that  the  fighting
was "mostly concentrated in the districts of Wardingely  in  the  south  and
Yaqshid in north Mogadishu" (COIS 8.22). Other sources  also  mention  Hurwa
[Heliwa] and Hunair, Abdiziz and Al Hidayya mosque.   Whereas  the  northern
parts of the city, which are said to contain the  most  affluent  districts,
have been relatively unaffected, in January 2008  OCHA  reported  that  IDPs
were leaving areas of Mogadishu hitherto considered relatively  safe,  "such
as the large northern suburb of Daynille". Heavy fighting  in  Daynille  was
mentioned in a Press TV cutting of 2 October 2008.  Mention  has  also  been
made in April 2008 of conflict in "parts of Heliwa, Kaaraan and  Hawi-Wadaay
districts of northern Mogadishu as well" (COIS, 28.09).

175. Moreover, as  will  be  evident  from  the  references  we  gave  (when
analysing the nature of violence  in  central  and  southern  Somalia  as  a
whole) to the violence in Mogadishu (see above paras 150-160)  the  violence
in that city has exhibited  particularly  dire  features  over  a  concerted
period of time. Its nature has become  increasingly  indiscriminate  in  the
sense that the different armed groups involved  in  the  fighting  routinely
fail  to  distinguish  between  civilian  and  military  targets   and   use
disproportionate methods. The COIS at  A.3  notes  the  very  recent  SAACID
report of 3 October 2008 and its statement that:

    "The AU military response to opposition attacks  on  its  forces  -  by
    mortaring markets in Mogadishu (essentially following the Ethiopian/TFG
    practice of random murder as a collective punishment  response)  -  has
    now made the AU 'peacekeeping' intervention a complete anathema to  all
    Somalis from all clans as part of any proposed political solution  that
    Western and UN interests continue to aspire to."


The COIS at D.7-D8 details that:

    "One of the main security incidents in Mogadishu in August 2008 was the
    15 August 2008 bus massacres. The TFG/Ethiopian forces opened fire in a
    retaliatory attack on two buses outside Mogadishu, which left  over  40
    civilians dead. On the same day 56 people were killed and 80 wounded in
    incidents in and around Mogadishu.


    IRIN reported that schools are currently closed in  Mogadishu,  because
    they have been targeted in the latest  fighting  in  the  city.  Ninety
    percent of schools are affected. The targeting of schools  is  reported
    to be "unprecedented" in the past eighteen years' conflicts".

176. COIS at B.6 describes the conflict having "hit a  new  intensity"  with
the exchanges of fire on  Monday  22  September  2008.  TFG,  Ethiopian  and
AMISON forces were variously pitted against insurgent forces  around  Bakara
market (IRIN, 23 September 2008). Other reports have stated  that  at  least
33 civilians were killed in the  exchanges.  Grayson  and  Munk  state  that
civilians in Mogadishu are seen as part of the conflict and that  "[i]f  you
do not support the  TFG  or  the  Ethiopian  troops  you  are  perceived  as
supporting the opposition" (Nairobi evidence,67).  We  note  that  there  is
recent evidence, alluded to in the COIS Reply dated  15  October  2008  that
some TFG soldiers have been arrested and detained  in  Mogadishu  jails  for
crimes against civilians, but there is no evidence  that  this  has  altered
the conduct of TFG combatants still in the field. The overall  situation  as
seen by the UN Secretary General in his July 2008 and October  2008  reports
is that there continue to be "frequent attacks on civilians" and that:

    "the incessant level of harassment and intimidation by all  militarised
    actors in the city is making living conditions for the civil population
    intolerable".

177. Contrary to the position when the Tribunal  in  HH  considered  matters
(when although there were large  numbers  of  residents  fleeing  the  city,
there were also very significant number of returns), since  March  2008  the
UNOCHA reports show that there has been no large-scale  return  of  IDPs  to
the city.  In its May 2008 Report, Amnesty  International  stated  that  the
number of attacks on those fleeing Mogadishu "was reportedly  on  the  rise,
as was the level of violence exhibited  towards  those  already  vulnerable.
In particular, gender-based violence including rape, as well  as  shootings,
beatings and abductions were reported."

178. In light of the above,  we  accept  that  since  HH  the  situation  in
Mogadishu has  changed  significantly,  both  in  terms  of  the  extent  of
population displacement away from the city, the intensity  of  the  fighting
and of the security conditions there. On the present  evidence  we  consider
that Mogadishu is no longer safe as a place to live for the  great  majority
of its citizens.  We do not rule out that notwithstanding  the  above  there
may be certain individuals who on the facts may be considered to be able  to
live safely in the city, for example  if  they  are  likely  to  have  close
connections  with  powerful  actors  in   Mogadishu,   such   as   prominent
businessmen or senior figures in the  insurgency  or  in  powerful  criminal
gangs. However, barring cases of this kind, we consider that in the case  of
persons found to come from Mogadishu who are returnees  from  the  UK,  they
would face on return to live there a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious
harm and it is reasonably likely, if they tried  staying  there,  that  they
would soon be forced to leave or that they would decide not to try and  live
there in the first place.

179. It will be evident from the above findings relating to  Mogadishu  that
although we follow KH  (Iraq)  in  considering  that  Article  15(c)  has  a
protective scope additional to that afforded by the Refugee  Convention  and
Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive (and Article 3  of  the  ECHR),
it is unnecessary on the facts of this  case  to  rely  on  such  additional
scope, since return to that city for the great majority would  amount  to  a
real risk of persecution, serious harm and ill-treatment.

180. In assessing risk to IDPs who have fled from  direct  exposure  to  the
fighting, we have given careful consideration to Mr Toal's  submission  that
we should view  their  adverse  experiences  as  amounting  to  persecution,
serious harm (and ill treatment) by virtue of the clear correlation  between
that exposure and their subsequent plight. He urged us  to  find  that  such
consequences, albeit indirect, satisfy the "by  reason  of"  test  contained
within Article 15(c) in particular

181. We do not think that this argument assists any IDP from  cities,  towns
or areas other than Mogadishu, since, for reasons given  above,  we  do  not
find the evidence regarding them to establish a consistent  pattern  of  the
violence they have fled being indiscriminate and giving rise  to  a  serious
and individual threat.

182. In relation to IDPs who have fled Mogadishu in recent  times,  however,
we are prepared to accept that their plight is connected  to  what  happened
to them there, sufficient to meet the "by reason of" test  contained  within
Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

183. The question we have to decide, however, is how these  findings  assist
applicants for international protection or Article 3 protection who  are  in
the UK presently. If they are from Mogadishu, then, on our  earlier  finding
(that the great majority of persons facing return to Mogadishu would  be  at
real risk of persecution or serious harm there), in order  to  succeed  they
need only show that they have no viable internal relocation alternative.  We
shall come back to this scenario in a moment.

184. However, if they are not from Mogadishu, then  we  do  not  in  general
think they will be able to show their home area is  unsafe,  simply  on  the
basis that they are a civilian and from such and such a home area. We  would
accept that much  will  depend  on  the  precise  state  of  the  background
evidence relating to their home area at the date of decision or hearing.  If
such evidence indicates, as we think it does in respect  of  Mogadishu  (but
not elsewhere) currently, that the nature of  the  violence  in  their  home
area is such that there is a consistent pattern of  indiscriminate  violence
giving rise to a serious and individual threat,  then  a  person  from  that
area may well be able to establish a need for  international  protection  or
Article 3 protection, subject to establishing they have no  viable  internal
relocation alternative.

Jowhar

185. In March 2008 Reuters reported that Somali Islamists (UIC)  had  seized
Jowhar. During mid-2008 Jowhar was the scene of heavy fighting  between  the
UIC and  other  insurgent  factions;  however,  talks  were  ongoing.  On  2
September 2008 IRIN  reported  the  situation  in  the  "strategic  town  of
Jowhar"  as  tense  after  clashes  between  opposition  militia.  In  early
September the Sheikhal Logobe clan chief,  Mr  CA,  said  in  his  statement
taken  in  Nairobi  that  "the  Islamists  are  now  also  fighting  amongst
themselves in Jowhar".  On the latest evidence, however, Jowhar  has  fallen
under the control of the UIC insurgents. A Garowonline report of 23  October
2008 states that Jowhar is under the control of Islamic  Courts  rulers.  It
reports the Islamic Courts chief and regional  administrator,  Sheikh  Dahir
Addow Alasow announcing the imposition of a curfew to "ensure security".  It
states that "[t]here were also reports of nightime robberies inside  Jowhar,
where Islamist fighters maintain order". Taking this evidence together  with
that indicating that the Islamist insurgents have taken control of  most  of
central and southern Somalia,  we  consider  that  Jowhar  is  no  longer  a
theatre  of  major  conflict  either  between  the  TFG/Ethiopians  and  the
insurgents or the UIC insurgents  and  other  insurgent  factions,  although
routes to and from the town have roadblocks  manned  by  freelance  militias
who commit banditry. The evidence does not indicate that  since  March  2008
the  clashes  between  the  UIC  and  other  insurgent  factions  have  been
characterised  by  indiscriminate  violence  and,  so  far  as  the  present
situation is concerned, there is nothing to suggest that the  population  of
the town in general is exposed to persecution or serious harm  or  treatment
contrary to Article 3. The evidence does not indicate that the  TFG  or  the
Ethiopians are any longer in a  position  to  renew  fighting  there  or  to
recapture it.

Internal relocation

186. We turn then to internal relocation. We bear in mind here that  Article
8 of the Qualification Directive (para 339O of the  Immigration  Rules)  has
the effect of unifying the test for the  viability  of  internal  relocation
(protection) in refugee cases and under Article 15(b)  and  (c).  Article  8
imposes  a   safety   and   a   reasonableness   requirement.   As   regards
reasonableness, we remind ourselves of two propositions clarified  by  their
lordships in AH (Sudan) [2008] UKHL 49. First:

    "The decision-maker,  taking  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
    pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of  origin,  must  decide
    whether it is reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or  whether
    it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so...There is...a spectrum
    of cases. The decision-maker must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
    material  as  is  available,  where  on  the  spectrum  the  particular
    falls...All must depend on a fair assessment of  the  relevant  facts".
    (Lord Bingham at para 5, citing from himself in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5).

187. Second, that:

    "although the test of 'reasonableness' is a stringent one - whether  it
    would be 'unduly harsh' to expect the claimant to return - it is not to
    be equated with a real risk that the claimant  would  be  subjected  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment so serious as to meet  the
    high threshold set by Art 3 of the  European  Convention..."  (Baroness
    Hale, para 22)

188. It seems to us that if within  the  context  of  central  and  southern
Somalia a person is able to establish a real risk of persecution or  serious
harm in their home area, he or she may, depending on the  particular  facts,
be able to  show  that  they  do  not  have  a  viable  internal  relocation
alternative. We do not consider that in respect of Mogadishu  or  any  other
home area the evidence shows that a person  having  to  relocate  from  that
home area will necessarily have to become an IDP or that  there  is  even  a
reasonable likelihood of them becoming so. Even  in  respect  of  Mogadishu,
whilst many residents who have been displaced from there have  become  IDPs,
equally a sizeable number  appear  to  have  made  their  way  to  areas  of
southern Somalia where they have traditional  clan  connections:  see  above
paras 155-158.

189. At para 95 we set out the passage  from  Mr  Toal's  skeleton  argument
where he contended that if in consequence of (the threat of)  indiscriminate
violence a population is displaced to a region where it is likely to die  of
starvation and disease,  those  consequences  would  be  by  reason  of  the
indiscriminate violence. We accept  that persons  who  have  been  displaced
from Mogadishu in the period since late 2007 can be said to be displaced  by
reason of the indiscriminate violence in that city arising as  part  of  the
armed conflict. We also accept that persons whose  home  area  is  Mogadishu
who face return from the UK  involving relocation could  be  said  currently
to be placed in that position by reason of the  indiscriminate  violence  in
Mogadishu. But it is important to be aware of the  limited  consequences  of
accepting these matters. Those who end up in such a  place  will  have  been
driven there by the effective cause of the violence in Mogadishu,  but  that
does not as such have anything to  tell  us  about  the  risk  of  Mogadishu
residents in general ending up there or of risks they will face there.  When
dealing with internal relocation, the first issue is safety and that is  all
about risk. For the reason we have already  given  we  do  not  accept  that
those who end up (after relocating) in an IDP camp in general  face  a  real
risk of persecution or serious harm or ill treatment: the risk (as will  the
reasonableness of them having to live in an  IDP  camp)  will  depend  on  a
variety of circumstances.

190. Returning to the issue of relocation in respect of  persons  with  home
areas anywhere in central and southern Somalia, we agree with  the  Tribunal
in HH that if any person has to spend a substantial period  of  time  in  an
IDP camp that is likely to mean his relocation would be  unreasonable.   But
we would emphasise the great importance of a case-by-case approach. That  is
what is enjoined by the House of Lords in Januzi and AH (Sudan) and is  also
what is entailed by Article 8 of the Qualification Directive (see para  339O
of the Immigration Rules), which refers to having "...regard to the  general
circumstances prevailing in that part of the country  and  to  the  personal
circumstances of the applicant". Amongst the relevant general  circumstances
will be to what extent there are parts of central or southern Somalia  which
an applicant can access  where  there  is  not  the  prevalence  of  ongoing
fighting (because for example one side  has  established  or  re-established
territorial control). Amongst the relevant personal considerations  will  be
whether the applicant is reasonably likely to be  isolated  or  unprotected,
to what extent they have family connections and  whether  they  are  from  a
majority or minority clan. Their age, sex, health and whether they  have  to
look after children will be of particular importance.

Safety of en route travel from Mogadishu International airport

191. As noted earlier, we do not consider, in the context of Somali  appeals
currently, that it is possible to say that matters relating  to  the  method
of return are implicit in the immigration decision  and  on  that  basis  it
does not fall within  our  jurisdiction  to  assess  risk  relating  to  it.
However, we promised earlier to consider the issue of  safety  of  en  route
return from Mogadishu International airport (the accepted point  of  return)
on an obiter basis, as envisaged by Hooper LJ in AG, para 123. According  to
the COIS at 27.12, Mogadishu International Airport (MIA)  is  known  locally
(since July 2007) as the Aden-Adde International airport. Of  course,  there
are many other airports in the country, estimated at 61 in number,  used  by
private and chartered  aircraft  (COIS  27.10),  but  ,  as  noted  earlier,
returns to central and southern Somalia are accepted by  the  respondent  as
being to MIA. The airport is one  of  the  facilities  patrolled  by  AMISON
troops (COIS, 27.13). According to Somalia Humanitarian Overview,  September
2008, normally at least 5 commercial flights arrive and depart on  a  weekly
basis to and from the rest of Somalia, Kenya, Djibouti and Dubai.  The  COIS
Reply of 24 October 2008 notes that it is expected in the next month  or  so
that thousands will leave via MIA to perform Haj in  Saudi  Arabia.  At  the
time of HH, the airport was fully  operational  with  flights  arriving  and
departing regularly. However in  2008  the  situation  has  been  unsettled.
There were attacks of some kind in January 2008 and the downing of  a  plane
by a missile in March 2008  (COIS,  27.13).  The  airport  was  attacked  by
insurgents on 1 June 2008  as  the  President's  plane  left  for  talks  in
Djibouti. On 14 September 2008 a group identifying themselves as  Al  Shabab
threatened to shut the airport down,  although  a  counter-report  from  UIC
said that the Islamist forces did not intend to close it. It was  closed  on
16 September. On 28 September there were  mortar  attacks  on  it  upon  the
arrival of an AMISON military plane (COIS, A.2). A Press TV cutting dated  2
October 2008 states that 5  heavy  mortars  landed  inside  MIA  injuring  a
number of soldiers. The assailants apparently targeted  a  plane  trying  to
land. A COIS Reply dated 15 October 2008 reports  an  Al  Shabab  source  as
saying that on 9 October a civilian  plane  carrying  120  Somali  deportees
from Saudi Arabia managed to land  without  incident.  A  13  October  press
report refers to several mortar attacks on the airport. We were told by  the
respondent at the outset of  the  hearing  that  removals  to  Somalia  were
temporarily suspended because of travel documentation problems, but  it  may
well be, in the light of these recent developments, that for  the  immediate
future at least, there would be difficulties in  ensuring  safe  arrival  in
any event.

Roadblocks and Checkpoints in and around Mogadishu

192. In HH the Tribunal concluded that those  moving  around  Mogadishu  and
the  environs  would  in  general  not  be  at  risk  of  serious  harm   at
checkpoints, although it left open the possibility that the situation  might
be different if a person were  likely  to  encounter  a  non-TFG  checkpoint
alone, without friends, family  or  other  clan  members  (para  302).   The
Tribunal was particularly struck by the evidence from the BIA  fact  finding
mission of 2007 that there had been "a remarkable reduction in  checkpoints"
and from Dr Mullen that the TFG had cleared away most  militia  checkpoints.
The position now, contended Mr  Toal,  could  not  be  more  different.   We
agree.  From the second half of 2007  UNOCHA  estimates  of  the  number  of
roadblocks/checkpoints in central and  southern  Somalia  show  an  increase
from 238 in July 2007 to 400 in July 2008 and considerably  more  than  half
now being under the control of insurgents (COIS 27.04). The UN OCHA  Monthly
Cluster report for August 2008 estimated the number of roadblocks along  the
main roads to Mogadishu in South/Central Somalia as 325 (COIS, B.9).

193. However, even though the TFG appears by and large to have lost  control
of many of the roadblocks and checkpoints in central and  southern  Somalia,
the evidence continues to indicate that they  retain  control  of  the  main
road from the MIA into  Mogadishu.  One  of  the  international  aid  worker
witness  statements  (p.13  of   the   Nairobi   evidence)   describes   the
TFG/Ethiopians as having lost control of the  north  of  the  city  and  now
controlling only parts of the south including the roads to the  airport.  An
international aid worker in one of the Nairobi  evidence  statements  (p.15)
stated that the road from the airport to K4 (which  is  the  road  one  must
take to travel into the city) is patrolled  by  the  TFG/Ethiopians  and  is
swept on a daily basis for mines. However, the same source states  that  the
road does come under attack from insurgents on a daily basis.

194. Mr Toal urged us to find that this change in circumstances  meant  that
there would be a real risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment  to
returnees en route to Mogadishu (or elsewhere).  However,  even  aside  from
the evidence indicating apparent retention of TFG control over  this  route,
there is also evidence of continuing heavy traffic to and from the  airport.
The description given by the Voice of America in April 2008 was that  "[t]he
4 kilometre road from the airport to the  first  main  junction  is  clogged
with people, cars and trucks...Near the airport,  the  city's  main  seaport
also hums with activity."  More  recent  cuttings,  covering  September  and
October, e.g. that concerned with street children living  off  shoe  shining
along  this  road,  does  not  indicate  any  significant  change  to   this
description. Further, the evidence  we  have  about  what  is  left  of  the
business community in Mogadishu is that it continues to  be  able  to  exert
considerable influence with a view to ensuring persons on  incoming  flights
are able to travel to the capital without  serious  incident.   As  Mr  Toal
conceded, "they have the capacity to minimise risk".  For them the  flow  of
airport traffic is an economic imperative (just as for the city as  a  whole
it is an economic lifeline).  We accept  that  the  prime  interest  of  the
powerful businesses will be in protecting those coming to do  business  with
them, but it is a reasonable inference that they would do that by trying  to
ensure safe travel for all passengers. We note too the words of  Tony  Burns
of SAACID-Australia in his Nairobi evidence statement (p.36) that "[a]ll  of
the  police/military  checkpoints  in  and  around  Mogadishu  International
airport are operated for profit; with money being taken in exchange for  the
freedom of movement."  We also observe that despite  very  detailed  reports
about various incidents at checkpoints and roadblocks, there are  only  very
isolated  instances recorded of travellers from MIA to  any  destination  in
Somalia meeting with serious harm (the Nairobi evidence  contains  reference
to a Somali who came from Canada in 2008 being kidnapped and detained for  3
months by Al Shabab, whose release was secured  by  clan  elders  (p.27),  a
colleague of Tony Burns being murdered in April 2008 (p.36)  and  a  mention
by two security advisers to all NGOs of a Somali who arrived  from  the  USA
being kidnapped by the ICU "earlier this year". We are  prepared  to  accept
that travellers may well have to pay bribes (see the Nairobi evidence,  74),
but we do not consider that this in itself amounts to  persecution,  serious
harm or ill treatment.

195. In such  circumstances  we  consider  that,  whilst  the  situation  is
characterised by arbitrariness, the evidence does not demonstrate  that  for
travellers from MIA to Mogadishu there  is  a  real  risk  of  en  route  of
persecution or serious harm.

196. Mr Toal submitted that there was a separate dimension  to  the  problem
of en route travel.  In NM, he said the  evidence  was  that,  in  order  to
secure protection, failed  asylum  seekers  would  be  able  to  arrange  in
advance of returning to be met by  a  clan  militia  escort.   That  was  no
longer reasonably likely, he said, as the  Hawiye  had  been  disarmed,  the
dominant  Al-Shabab  were  too  ideological  and  whoever  manned  the  main
checkpoints - TFG/ Ethiopians or insurgents - would have  as  one  of  their
main functions to disarm any militia seeking to pass.  Among  the  items  of
evidence he cited in support were what was  said  by  an  international  aid
worker (p.14 of the Nairobi evidence) and also the recorded  words  of  Alex
Tyler, Protection Officer UNHC, Somalia in September 2008:

    "On arrival in  Mogadishu  last  year  [December  2006],  the  TFG  has
    attempted to enforce the disarmament  of  the  militias  in  Mogadishu.
    Consequently, anyone carrying arms in Mogadishu, including a protective
    militia escort, who is not part of the TFG, Ethiopian or African  Union
    forces could be perceived as an insurgent and targeted by  the  TFG  or
    Ethiopians, if travelling through the few areas they  control.  At  the
    same time, the TFG has failed to create a secure environment  in  which
    engagement of an armed escort is not necessary to achieve  some  degree
    of persons safety."

197. However, as we know from other evidence  (and  as  the  final  sentence
might be thought to hint at), there is  clearly  a  great  deal  of  ongoing
movement of people along the roads in central and southern  Somalia  and  in
and around MIA. We  have  a  general  puzzlement  about  the  state  of  the
evidence on this matter, much of which is merely evidence  of  what  various
persons (in statements forming part of the Nairobi evidence) think  happens,
not evidence of what has happened or is happening . Whilst  it  makes  sense
that those manning the roadblocks/checkpoints  would  seek  to  prevent  (if
they could) large armed bands or armed groups carrying or  seeking  to  move
sizeable arms or ammunition,  it  is  less  easy  to  see  in  general  that
disarming would extend to personal escorts consisting in no more than a  few
individuals, each with their own small arms weapon. But in any event we  can
find no clear evidence that armed men in vehicles escorting  passengers  are
disarmed. Significantly one of the  journalists  who  gave  a  statement  in
Nairobi in September 2008 (see pp.21-28) , despite noting  that  since  1998
he had paid 4 gunmen to protect him wherever he  went  in  Somalia  (costing
him about 40% of his income)  and who spoke of going to Mogadishu in  April-
June 2008, made no mention of his gunmen being disarmed.

Hammar Jahid

198. We have not been able to  find  any  specific  evidence  regarding  the
Hammar Jahid area of Mogadishu (where AM2 lived), but  since  it  is  in  or
very near to Mogadishu city itself  we consider that  for  our  purposes  we
can treat AM2 as someone facing return to Mogadishu.

En route travel from Mogadishu airport to Jowhar and other locations

199. The evidence relating to the safety of the  main  routes  from  MIA  to
locations in central and southern Somalia other than Mogadishu  is  somewhat
different in character inasmuch that there does not appear the same  ability
of any one power bloc, as one finds in respect of the business community  in
Mogadishu, to influence the warring parties to  ensure  relative  safety  of
travel. (In any event we consider that evaluation of the relative safety  of
en route  travel  to  any  particular  destination  -  even  in  respect  of
Mogadishu  -  would  require  assessment  of  the  particular  circumstances
prevailing at the relevant time.)

Jowhar

200. As regards Jowhar, it is stated in the Amnesty International  May  2008
report, that "one of the most dangerous routes is the  road  between  Jowhar
and Beletweyne, the main road north out of Mogadishu.."  (COIS,  27.06).  It
would appear that AM2's route from the airport would be  through  or  around
the outskirts of Mogadishu and then onto this  road.  An  international  aid
worker statement contained within the Nairobi evidence  (p.15)  states  that
travel from Jowhar road from Mogadishu was "very very dangerous...To  travel
to Jowhar you would need to leave the area from Tafig and  pass  through  an
area controlled by Al Shabab and also freelance militias..."  A  COIS  Reply
dated 24 October 2008 cited Garow  Online  reporting  that:  "[l]ocals  told
Radio Garowe that freelance militiamen have robbed civilians travelling  the
90 Km stretch of road linking Jowhar to the  national  capital,  Mogadishu".
On the basis of this evidence we consider that travel  from  MIA  to  Jowhar
would not be safe for involuntary returnees presently.

Refugee Convention reasons

201. Given our earlier finding that there is now a greater  risk  for  those
facing enforced removal to Somalia, at least for those from Mogadishu,  such
that it may often be the case that an individual can show  a  real  risk  of
persecution, we need to address whether either appellant can  establish  the
existence of the Refugee Convention reason and a causal nexus  between  that
reason and their persecution. Of course in the case of Somali claimants  who
are able to satisfy the respondent or the Tribunal that they  have  given  a
credible account of the existence of a risk personal  to  them,  there  will
often be little difficulty in showing a  Convention  ground  based  on  race
(clan) or religion (if pro-  or  anti-jihadist)  or  political  opinion  (if
perceived as pro- or anti-government or pro- or  anti-insurgents).   However
(excluding the fact that in the case of AM2 it is an accepted fact  that  he
is a member of the Sheikhal Logobe clan), our  focus  in  these  appeals  is
confined  to  persons  who  have  failed   to   show   any   personal   risk
characteristics beyond their nationality and home area.  Is it  possible  to
identify any Convention ground at this  level  of   generality?    We  think
not.

202. Mr Toal conceded at the hearing that he did  not  pursue  the  argument
that IDPs constituted a particular social group (PSG),  nor did he  seek  to
press  one  suggestion  made  in  pre-hearing  correspondence  between   the
parties, that of young men of military age. Although he did not mention  it,
the Tribunal in a reported case has  held  that  women  in  Somalia  form  a
particular group ( see HM (Somali Women: Particular  Social  Group)  Somalia
[2005] UKIAT 00040) and neither party said anything to  suggest  any  reason
why we ought to depart  from  this  finding.   In  practice,  therefore,  Mr
Toal's submission would only be necessary  to  support  the  cases  of  male
appellants or, if female, in respect of the question of causal nexus.

203. Regarding Refugee Convention reasons other  than  PSG,  we  cannot  see
they can exist in respect of those found  not  credible  as  to  their  past
history and personal circumstances. In his  closing  written  submission  Mr
Toal sought to argue that merely being a civilian  or  a  civilian  returnee
would mean that a person would have  a  political  opinion  imputed  to  him
because of being mistakenly believed to belong to one side or other  in  the
conflict. In support he referred to several  items  of  evidence  detailing,
inter alia,  round  ups  of  civilians   (predominantly  males),  murder  of
civilians  "likely  related  to  their  perceived   political   affiliation"
(UNOCHA, February 2008) and Mogadishu residents being defined  not  just  by
their clan but by their perceived political affiliation  (in  the  words  of
Alex Tyler, "either they are perceived to be for the TFG or with one of  the
insurgent groups").  However,  we  consider  that  the  very  few  items  of
evidence  he  identifies  fall  well  short  of   establishing   that   such
attribution is generally happening, particularly bearing in mind  that  none
of the major country reports portray the situation for civilians  as  having
become endemically politicised.

204. Doubtless recognising  the  difficulties  in  establishing  grounds  of
race, religion, nationality or  political  opinion  in  respect  of  persons
merely on the basis of being civilians or civilian returnees,  Mr  Toal  put
most  of  his  efforts  (see  his  skeleton  argument,  paras  58-61)   into
persuading us that the relevant Convention ground to  be  applied  in  these
cases was PSG,  with  the  PSG  identified  as  being  either  returnees  or
returnees known to have arrived from a Western  country.   He  advanced  the
view that this PSG met both limbs of the requirement contained in Article  9
of the Qualification Directive (Reg 5 of the 2006  Protection  Regulations):
they shared the immutable characteristic  of  being  persons  returned  from
abroad; as newly arrived persons "viewed with huge suspicion and  as  having
wealth returnees" they "are a clearly recognisable group from the  viewpoint
of the surrounding society".  (He in fact submitted that it  was  sufficient
to show either limb, but acknowledged that the Tribunal in a  reported  case
had not accepted such a reading: see SB (PSG - Protection Regulations -  Reg
6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002. We find no reason to depart from SB)

205. We reject this view. As regards returnees, it would  be  wrong  in  our
opinion  to  treat  as  a  group  sharing  an  immutable  characteristic   a
collection of people whose identity as returnees  depends  entirely  on  the
contingencies of travel. It would mean, for example, considering as part  of
the same category, the thousands of persons who each year  return  from  the
Haj pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia.   Such a category  could  also  be  said  to
render the need for a Refugee Convention reason of  PSG  otiose,  since  all
asylum-seekers hypothetically fall into this category.  Nor do  we  consider
that all returnees meet the second limb (known as  the  "social  perception"
test).  Although there is some evidence of returnees  being  the  target  of
banditry and violence, this appears to  be  an  incidental  feature  of  the
targeting by armed groups of travellers, including those recently  or  newly
returned, of all kinds.  It is to do  with  their  perceived  wealth  rather
than anything to do with their status: see  Montoya  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  620.
There is not even evidence (as  we  sometimes  have  in  relation  to  other
countries)  that  those  who  are  involuntary  returnees   are   separately
processed on return.  Not surprisingly in our view Mr  Toal  was  unable  to
cite any authority for the view that returnees - or wealthy returnees  -  to
any country have been found to be a PSG.

206. We do not rule out, however, that  where  on  the  given  facts  all  a
Somali claimant can point to is a particular clan identity, he may  be  able
to show a Refugee Convention reason consisting in either race or  a  PSG  or
even (imputed) political opinion.  We do not consider such  a  person  would
be able to do so simply by virtue of his being accepted as a  majority  clan
member.   That  is  far  too  amorphous  a  category  for  the  purposes  of
establishing any of the five Convention grounds.  But where a specific  clan
or sub-clan can be identified, even if it is one of the majority  clans,  we
consider that the ground of race may well be established, depending  on  the
evidence.

OUR ASSESSMENT: AMI

207. As noted earlier, the only accepted fact regarding AM1 is  that  he  is
from Jowhar. On the latest evidence the population of the  town  is  not  in
general exposed to serious harms and there  is  no  longer  any  significant
fighting there, as the insurgents have gained control of it  (as  they  have
of most of central and southern Somalia). Very recently, the UIC appears  to
have won the internal battle of control amongst  the  insurgents:  see  para
185 above. There is evidence that en route travel to  Jowhar  is  hazardous,
but, for reasons given earlier, that is not a matter  which  falls  for  our
consideration in the context of Somalia appeals  currently:  it  must  be  a
matter for the respondent,  as  and  when  removal  arrangements  are  being
finalised, to satisfy herself that there would be safe en route  travel  for
this appellant. Accordingly  the  appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  if
removed he would face a real risk of persecution, serious harm or  treatment
contrary to Article 3 ECHR. The decision  we  substitute  for  that  of  the
immigration judge (who  materially  erred  in  law),  is  to  dismiss  AM1's
appeal.

OUR ASSESSMENT: AM2

208. In relation to AM2, as we have already noted, he  is  from  a  part  of
Mogadishu. Although he is relatively young and able-bodied  we  see  nothing
to indicate that he is someone who would be likely to have connections  with
powerful actors in  Mogadishu,  such  as  prominent  businessmen  or  senior
figures in the insurgency or in  powerful  criminal  gangs.  He  had  family
members in the city at the time of the hearing of his case before IJ Beg  in
July 2007, but in view of the major displacement of  the  city's  population
since then we think it unlikely that, even if they  are  still  there,  they
are any longer in a position to protect him  as  they  did  previously.  The
fact that he and his family members  are  from  the  Sheikhal  Logobe  clan,
which is not as such a majority clan, further decreases the likelihood  that
he could achieve protection from serious harm in that city. In this  regard,
we attach significant weight to the evidence of  AC  that  as  a  result  of
events between 2003-2007 in Mogadishu the Al Shabab  has  come  to  perceive
the Sheikhal Logobe adversely  as  TFG  supporters.    Accordingly,  we  are
satisfied that in his home  area  he  faces  a  real  risk  of  persecution,
serious harm and treatment contrary to Article  3.  We  are  also  satisfied
that the risk of persecution in his home area  would  have  as  one  of  its
effective reasons, his race or ethnicity, in the form of his  clan  identity
as Sheikhal Logobe.

Internal relocation

209. There are two aspects of AM2's  situation  that  we  need  to  consider
here: safety and reasonableness. As regards safety, he is from the  Sheikhal
Logobe clan, which appears to have lost its ability  to  achieve  protection
from majority clans in  the  way  it  managed  previously.  It  particularly
concerns us that, as a result of events in Mogadishu between 2003-2007,  the
ascendant Al Shabab organisation  appears  to  have  come  to  perceive  the
Sheikhal Logobe as having sided with the TFG  and  also  to  distrust  their
historic position as a clan with particular  knowledge  of  Islam.  In  such
circumstances, whilst we do not think the evidence suffices to show  members
of that clan face targeting from Al Shabab as  such,  the  ongoing  risk  of
animus from Al Shabab  members  is  a  relevant  consideration.  Turning  to
reasonableness, AM2 is now in his early  20s  and  is  able-bodied  with  no
significant health problems. It was found by IJ Beg that he had  family  not
only in Mogadishu but also elsewhere  in  southern  Somalia.  On  the  other
hand, he is also someone who left Somalia when still a minor, who  has  been
out of Somalia for over 5 years and will be less adept than  persons  living
there currently at dealing with ongoing difficulties. It is also  reasonably
likely that it will become known he has  been  in  the  UK  and  that  as  a
consequence he will be perceived  as  someone  who  has  or  has  access  to
relative wealth. Whilst we do not  think  that  the  factors  we  have  just
identified  under  the  reasonableness  head  suffice  on   their   own   to
demonstrate that to expect  this  appellant  to  relocate  would  be  unduly
harsh, we do think, when adding to the overall picture,  the  likely  animus
from the ascendant Al Shabab in particular,  that  the  appellant  does  not
have a viable internal relocation alternative. Accordingly we are  satisfied
that the appellant if returned  would  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution,
serious harm and treatment contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR.  The  immigration
judge having materially erred in law,  the  decision  we  substitute  is  to
allow AM2's appeal on asylum grounds and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

210. For the above reasons we conclude:

The appeal of AMI is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and  human
rights grounds.

The appeal of AM2 is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey


         Annex 1: decision as to material error of law in the case of AM1 by
         SIJ Storey dated 4 August 2008


         "The appellant  is  a  national  of  Somalia.  In  a  determination
         notified on 18 February 2008 Immigration Judge D N Harris dismissed
         his appeal against a decision dated 10 November 2007 to remove  him
         as  an  illegal  entrant.  The  immigration  judge   made   adverse
         credibility findings.


         The grounds do not challenge the immigration  judge's  findings  of
         fact in relation to the appellant's history. They focus  rather  on
         the immigration judge's approach to the issue of whether or not the
         appellant  was   eligible   for   humanitarian   protection   under
         339C(iv)/Article 15(c) of the Refugee Qualification Directive.


         I consider that the grounds are correct in stating that  the  judge
         materially erred in law in his approach to the issue of eligibility
         under para 339C(iv)/Article 15(c). The determination fails to  give
         reasons for the conclusion that the appellant could not demonstrate
         eligibility for humanitarian protection because  there  is  not  an
         armed conflict in southern Somalia.


         The immigration judge's error was compounded by the  fact  that  he
         appeared to see the issue of whether or not the appellant could  or
         could not show  under  339C(iv)/15(c)  a  "serious  and  individual
         threat" as hinging in part on whether "... he would be particularly
         at risk ...on making the journey from Mogadishu to his home  town".
         However, the Court of Appeal in AG  (Somalia)  has  held  that  the
         issue of internal safety was not one which should form part of  the
         assessment of risk on return.


         Manifestly, these errors had a possible bearing on the  outcome  of
         the appellant's appeal.


         Since the IJ decided this case the Tribunal has reported two  cases
         dealing with Article 15(c), HH and others and KH (Iraq). The former
         gives specific guidance on the application of 15 (c) in the context
         of Somalia and that guidance is endorsed by KH (Iraq) except in one
         respect relating to threats from criminal violence.


         At the resumed hearing it is highly unlikely there will be any need
         to re-open the issue of whether or not there is an  internal  armed
         conflict  in  southern  Somalia  within   the   meaning   of   para
         339C(iv)/Article 15(c). There is. The focus will need to be on  the
         remaining requirements of this provision. Whilst on the strength of
         HH and others the appellant is unlikely to be able  to  succeed  in
         showing a serious and individual threat, he is at least entitled to
         have his particular circumstances considered on the  basis  of  the
         correct legal tests and it will be open to the parties, of  course,
         to adduce fresh evidence as to whether more recent developments  in
         Somalia require a different view being  taken  as  regards  Article
         15(c).


         I would re-emphasise, however, that there has been no challenge  to
         the immigration  judge's  findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's past experiences and those findings must be preserved."


         Annex 2: decision as to material error of law in the case of AM2 by
             SIJ Jordan, 23 January 2008
         "1.  This is  an  oral  determination,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Immigration Judge made a material error of law  as  identified
             in paragraph 5 of the grounds of application  settled  by  the
             appellant's Counsel.  This concerns  the  Immigration  Judge's
             handling of the risks that the appellant faces immediately  on
             arrival at Mogadishu International Airport and the journey  to
             Mogadishu where the Immigration Judge  found  members  of  his
             family were living.


         2.   It was submitted in paragraph 40 of the skeleton argument that
             the Home Office COIS report referred to a  mission  which  had
             been sent to Mogadishu in 2007 and a report published  in  May
             2007  which  suggested  there  was  a  substantially   changed
             situation for those returning.  In the grounds of  application
             specific  reference  is  made  to  the   European   Commission
             Delegation and the results of interviews that  were  conducted
             dealing with the area between the airport and  Mogadishu  City
             and the circumstances in which an appellant might travel  with
             sufficient safety to the centre of Mogadishu.  In my  judgment
             the Immigration Judge did not deal with this  element  of  the
             case.


         3.   It was argued on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  this
             was  not  a  material  omission  because  the  report  of  the
             information gathering mission of April 2007 was only concerned
             with single returnees and was not concerned with the situation
             of those who had got appropriate military or armed  assistance
             as the Immigration Judge found the appellant would have.


         4.   In my view, whilst there may well be differences  between  the
             position of a sole returnee unprotected  by  any  militia  and
             somebody who may be able to return to support to assist in his
             relocation  to  Mogadishu,  I  am  not  satisfied   that   the
             background material to which I  have  been  referred  suggests
             that there is a clear-cut means by which those  who  have  got
             militia support are able to leave the airport.  It seems to me
             that this is an issue which will have to  be  reconsidered  by
             the Tribunal.


         5.   I am conscious of  the  fact  that  the  decision  principally
             relied on by the Immigration Judge,  NM  [2005]  UKIAT  00076,
             offered guidance in relation  to  the  circumstances  as  they
             existed in 2005 and this is a swiftly changing situation.   It
             may well therefore be that the guidance  offered  is  somewhat
             out of date and should be revisited.  This, in my judgment, is
             sufficient to merit the second stage reconsideration.


         6.   The grounds of application also  contain  a  number  of  other
             grounds to which I should briefly refer.  In  paragraph  8  of
             the grounds it is asserted that the Immigration  Judge  failed
             to deal  with  the  question  of  humanitarian  protection  by
             reference to paragraph 339C(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
             395.  This now contains a definition  of  serious  harm  which
             includes the serious and individual  threat  to  a  civilian's
             life  or  person  by  means  of  indiscriminate  violence   in
             situations of international or internal armed conflict.  I  am
             aware of the fact that the  Tribunal  will,  in  a  relatively
             short time, be issuing guidance on the  proper  interpretation
             of the Immigration Rules which will have a bearing not  simply
             on the conditions in Iraq, to  which  I  understand  the  case
             immediately applies, but also in relation to  other  areas  of
             conflict upon the globe.   It seems to me, therefore, that  it
             is not possible for me to make  any  sustainable  findings  on
             what is the meaning of this  difficult  expression  until  the
             Tribunal has issued its guidance.


         7.   In these circumstances, the appropriate route is merely to say
             that I am unable and do not make any findings on this part  of
             the grounds of appeal and these will have to be argued at  the
             second stage of the reconsideration which will  occur  in  due
             course.


         8.   In addition, it is said in  paragraph  6  of  the  grounds  of
             application that the Immigration Judge was  wrong  in  law  in
             failing to recognise the fact that in using the help of  armed
             militia  the  appellant  will  be  complicit  in  breaches  of
             resolutions put forward by the UN Security Council made  under
             the provisions of the UN Charter.  I was asked by Mr Toal not
             to make any findings on this element  of  the  claim.   I  am,
             however, prepared to say that the questions  raised  in  AG  v
             SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1342 do not obviously  apply  to  a  case
             such as the appellant's.  In AG v SSHD  the  Court  of  Appeal
             decided that where the Secretary of State had not decided  the
             travel arrangements he intended to adopt for the return of  an
             appellant, it was not possible to make any findings  upon  the
             consequences of those travel arrangements and  the  associated
             travel  risks.   The  risks  could  only  be  identified  when
             specific plans for  removal  and  return  had  been  made  and
             notified to the appellant.   That decision would give rise  to
             an  appeal  or  review  by   the   Administrative   Court   on
             conventional grounds of irrationality or  illegality.   In  my
             judgment that cannot apply in relation to the appellant's case
             because there  is  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  will  be
             returned to Mogadishu International Airport and will then have
             to make his way to Mogadishu itself.


         9.   My decision is in line with the decision in AG v  SSHD  [2006]
             EWCA Civ 1342 and the practical good sense of making  findings
             on risk on return which are not hypothetical and  which  might
             be of assistance in formulating specific travel  arrangements.
             Hooper LJ said as much in the following passages:


                  29....I disagree with the  proposition  that  the  AIT  is
                      never obliged to consider whether  there  is  a  real
                      risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment at the
                      airport or on the way home. As to "guess  work",  the
                      AIT cannot just throw up its hands and not deal  with
                      relevant issues.


                  123.  Although Mr Jay is critical of NM in  the  light  of
                      GH, it seems to me that in a Country Guidance case it
                      may well be helpful for all  concerned  to  know  the
                      dangers inherent in a method of return that is likely
                      to be used, if known. Those dangers can  then  inform
                      the SSHD when (or if) removal directions are made.


             For these reasons I consider that the Tribunal in  due  course
             is required to grapple with the  issue  of  the  travel  risks
             associated with the appellant.


         10.  One of the other issues which is raised in paragraph 6 of  the
             grounds of application concerns the question  of  whether  the
             funding of armed militia is in breach of  the  United  Nations
             resolutions.  This issue may well be determined  by  reference
             to whether the actions of the individual by  taking  steps  to
             protect himself are lawful acts of  self  protection  or  self
             defence or whether  they  go  to  assisting  in  financing  or
             helping militias in circumstances which violate  the  embargos
             made by the United Nations  resolutions.  In  my  judgment  it
             cannot seriously be stated that an individual who merely takes
             steps to protect  himself  will  violate  any  United  Nations
             resolutions.   In  other  words  it  is,   in   my   judgment,
             inconceivable that ordinary  acts  of  self  defence  will  be
             covered by the United Nations embargo.   However, it is  clear
             that in the circumstances of any individual case it  might  be
             that the procurement of militiamen to assist in the relocation
             of an individual from the  International  Airport  to  a  safe
             haven will go beyond lawful self-help and  will  constitute  a
             violation  of  the  embargo  but  that  will  depend  on   the
             individual circumstances of a case.  This ground was raised in
             AG v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1342 and dismissed as  unsustainable
             by Hooper LJ in paragraph 35 of the Court's judgment.


         11.  In paragraph 2 of the grounds of application  (which  was  not
             otherwise pursued by Mr Toal), it is said that the Immigration
             Judge's adverse credibility findings were erroneous. It  seems
             to me that the Immigration Judge's findings in  paragraphs  22
             and 23 were properly open to the Immigration Judge and do  not
             amount to a material  error  of  law.   In  paragraph  22  the
             Immigration Judge recorded the fact that the appellant claimed
             that his brother was shot dead in 1999 and his father in  2001
             by the USC armed militia.   This followed the account that the
             appellant had given in his statement, paragraphs 5 and  6,  in
             which the appellant said,


                  "5. On account of my age I do not remember the exact dates
                      of many incidents I have described.   I  do  remember
                      that my brother Jamal was killed in 1999 this  was  a
                      major incident and I was a little older then.  He was
                      shot dead by the USC, I was at home at the  time,  he
                      went out one day and he was shot dead.  I do not know
                      why he was killed.


                  6.   My father was shot dead in 2001 by the USC  near  the
                      restaurant he worked at.  For some reason the militia
                      killed him but I do not know why".


         12.  The Immigration  Judge  in  dealing  with  this  part  of  the
             evidence said in paragraph 22,


                  "There is no credible evidence  that  they  were  targeted
                  because of their clan membership.  The appellant has given
                  very little information with regard to  the  circumstances
                  of their deaths.  The  appellant's  family  were  able  to
                  retain their home until it was sold.  The appellant claims
                  that the militia may not have  forcibly  taken  the  house
                  because they would not have been able  to  maintain  legal
                  ownership of it.  I find that if  the  appellant  and  his
                  family were deemed to be minority clan members without any
                  majority support it is highly  unlikely  that  they  would
                  have been able to retain their home in what  Mr  Toal  has
                  described as a no go area and a  very  dangerous  part  of
                  Mogadishu according to the reporting  of  the  information
                  gathering mission in April 2007.  I find that the  militia
                  could well have forced the appellant's mother to sign over
                  the legal deeds of  the  property  if  they  wanted  legal
                  ownership of the property in order to sell it on."


         13.  It seems to me that the Immigration  Judge  was  here  finding
             that if the appellant's account that he and  his  family  were
             able to conduct an orderly sale of the family home, this could
             not have happened if they were minority  clan  members.   This
             pointed to the fact that the  appellant  and  his  family  had
             sufficient  protection  within  the  community  to  avoid  the
             deprivation of their property  by  majority  clan  members  or
             militias supporting them.  There is  nothing  in  my  judgment
             which is irrational or perverse in that finding and  there  is
             nothing  that  amounts  to  improper  speculation  about   the
             exercise in which the Immigration Judge engaged.


         14.  Dealing with paragraph 3 of the grounds of application, it  is
             submitted that the Immigration  Judge  erred  in  law  in  his
             findings of fact.  This is a specific reference to the judge's
             findings in paragraphs 34 and 35  of  the  determination.   In
             paragraph 34 of the determination the Immigration Judge  found
             that the appellant could make appropriate arrangements  to  be
             received at Mogadishu Airport by clan members and also with an
             armed escort.  He found that the appellant was in contact with
             his mother and brother and indeed with clan members with  whom
             they are staying.  He found, therefore, the appellant did have
             what he described as clan protection in Mogadishu.  Similarly,
             in paragraph  35  of  the  determination  he  found  that  the
             appellant could take the opportunity to arrange to be  met  at
             Mogadishu Airport by his family and clan members together with
             an armed escort to  enable  him  to  safely  travel  from  the
             airport to his home area.  He found  that  the  appellant  was
             able to access clan protection in his home area in  Mogadishu.




         15.  These findings carry on from the Immigration Judge's  analysis
             of the evidence in relation to those issues.   It  was  always
             the case of the Secretary of State that the appellant was able
             to access support  and  assistance.   In  the  refusal  letter
             referred  to  in  paragraph  4  of   the   determination   the
             respondent's decision is set out.  As Somalia is  one  of  the
             poorest countries in the world, the Secretary of  State  found
             it highly unlikely that the appellant's mother would have been
             able to raise sufficient funds to pay both for his release and
             for his journey out of the country  unless  she  was  able  to
             access resources and protection.  The  respondent  also  noted
             that if the appellant's mother had been able  to  raise  money
             she would have used it to move all the family to a nearer safe
             country rather than just the appellant to the United  Kingdom.




         16.  It seems to me that  these  issues  which  were  not  directly
             addressed by the  Immigration  Judge  were  relevant  for  two
             purposes.   First, they were an indication as  to  whether  or
             not the appellant was a member of a minority  clan,  it  being
             clear that minority clan members  are  at  risk  of  arbitrary
             seizure of their possessions by  majority  clan  members;  and
             secondly, it was indicative of a person with sufficient wealth
             to  make  effective  arrangements  to  afford  the   appellant
             protection on return.  Those who have  used  their  wealth  to
             effect departure are at least liable to be deemed  capable  of
             using their wealth to affect a safe return.   In  the  present
             case the Immigration Judge made significant findings about the
             circumstances in which  the  appellant  left  his  mother  and
             brother in Mogadishu.  The appellant had stated that  he  last
             spoke to his mother at the end of 2006 when he  said  she  was
             living in Mogadishu in the accommodation  to  which  they  had
             moved for a period of seven or eight months.  He said that the
             clan members with whom the family were staying  were  attacked
             on a number of occasions but there were no  valuables  in  the
             house and the looters  just  took  other  items.   There  were
             shouts but no one was hurt.  In  these  circumstances  it  was
             open to the Immigration Judge to find that  the  circumstances
             of the appellant, his mother and brother  did  not  amount  to
             being at serious risk.


         17.  He made specific findings in relation to the contact  that  he
             had been able to maintain with his mother.  In paragraph 25 of
             the determination he said that he did  not  find  it  credible
             that the appellant would not make arrangements  to  remain  in
             contact with his mother after he had travelled to  the  United
             Kingdom and that he had made no effort  to  trace  his  mother
             since arriving in the United Kingdom.  In those  circumstances
             he found that the reasons for his doing this was that he  knew
             exactly where his mother and brother were staying and how they
             could  be  reached.  He  found  at  paragraph  26   that   the
             appellant's mother and brother were still in Mogadishu  living
             with clan members where the appellant  left  them.   He  found
             that the appellant had not  sought  to  find  his  mother  and
             brother because he already knew  full  well  where  they  were
             actually living.  It seems to me  that,  by  implication,  the
             Immigration Judge was also finding that they  were  living  in
             circumstances of sufficient safety for the  appellant  not  to
             wish to reveal this fact to the Immigration Judge.


         18.  In these circumstances, the Immigration Judge made sustainable
             findings  that  the  appellant  and  brother  were  living  in
             sufficient safety to avoid the immediate risk of serious harm.
              Although it has been submitted that this was  not  the  case,
             the Immigration Judge found in paragraph 31 that it was  clear
             that there are clan members willing and able to look after the
             appellant's mother and brother and indeed the appellant,  when
             he was there for about seven or eight months living with them.
              He found that the appellant's mother and brother continued to
             live with clan members in Mogadishu  and  that  the  appellant
             left his family in Somalia  in  the  knowledge  that,  in  the
             absence of his father, they had the protection of clan members
             with whom they were living.  In  my  judgment  those  findings
             were sustainable.  They cannot be classified as  perverse  and
             it may therefore be that the Immigration Judge was not  making
             any global findings that the appellant had clan protection  in
             a general  sense;  all  that  he  was  finding  was  that,  in
             circumstances which  the  appellant  had  failed  properly  to
             reveal, the appellant's mother  and  brother  had  managed  to
             effect safety mechanisms in Mogadishu which  enabled  them  to
             continue their life without being  at  risk.   That  obviously
             involved individuals who were either relatives or  members  of
             the same clan affording them with  protection.   Whether  that
             situation is the same as saying that the appellant has general
             clan protection in Mogadishu is not important.   It  seems  to
             me, however, the important issue is that  they  were  able  to
             access protection in the circumstances  in  which  they  found
             themselves in Mogadishu and it was on that basis that he found
             that protection was also available to him on return.


         19.  For these reasons I reject the criticisms which  are  made  in
             the grounds of  application  that  his  findings  on  risk  in
             Mogadishu were  perverse  or  illogical.   This  leaves  open,
             however, the real issue in this appeal and that is whether the
             appellant is able to access protection in the circumstances in
             which he finds himself on return  to  Mogadishu  International
             Airport.  In that event he will not be returning simply as  an
             unidentified individual, he will be returning as a  member  of
             the Sheikhal clan.  This is a clan which is  not  consistently
             dealt with in the background information.  It will be open  to
             the appellant to deal with whether  members  of  the  Sheikhal
             clan in general (as well as the appellant in particular)  have
             any specific or different protection needs."




                       Appendix: BACKGROUND MATERIALS

|      |           |FCO Africa Research Analyst comment on 'COI Project  |
|      |           |Somalia: Minority Groups'                            |
|      |           |Somali passport of CA                                |
|      |           |Certificate of participation of CA                   |
|      |           |Article on peace talks with CA photographed          |
|      |           |ID card of CA in respect of Somali National          |
|      |           |Reconciliation Conference                            |
|      |           |US Citizenship and immigration Services website -    |
|      |           |Information on Temporary Protected Status            |
|      |           |Rebuilding Somalia: issues and possibilities for     |
|      |           |Puntland WSPA Somali programme                       |
|      |           |Human Rights Watch Report                            |
|      |           |Witness statement of Consultant to EU and UN projects|
|      |           |in Somalia                                           |
|      |           |OCHA: South/Central Somalia                          |
|      |           |OCHA: Protection                                     |
|      |           |Somalia Situation Supplementary Appeal 2007 - 2008   |
|      |           |UN Security Council Resolutions on Somalia: 1991 -   |
|      |           |Present                                              |
|      |September  |Danish Immigration Service: Report on minority groups|
|      |2000       |in Somalia                                           |
|      |07/05/2002 |UNHCR Guidelines on Particular Social Group          |                                                     |
|      |25/07/2002 |Report on political, security and human rights       |                                                     |
|      |           |developments in southern and central Somalia,        |                                                     |
|      |           |including South West State of Somalia, and Puntland  |                                                     |
|      |           |State of Somalia - joint British-Danish fact-finding |                                                     |
|      |           |mission to Nairobi and Baidoa and Beletweyne         |                                                     |
|      |01/08/2002 |UNCU/OCHA: A study on minorities in Somalia          |
|      |13/03/2003 |29-AR54                                              |
|      |21/07/2003 |Letter to CA                                         |
|      |Circa 2004 |A Situational Analysis of Child trafficking in East  |
|      |           |Africa                                               |
|      |21/01/2004 |UNHCR - Advisory on the return of Somali nationals to|
|      |           |Somalia - January 2004                               |
|      |08/03/2004 |Judgment of Master Whitaker in Zahra Abdullah and    |
|      |           |other v Abdullahi Yusuf (HQ02X03221)                 |
|      |17/03/2004 |Human rights and security in central and southern    |
|      |           |Somalia - Joint Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and       |
|      |           |British fact-finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya       |
|      |20/09/2004 |Swiss Refugee Council: Somalia: Situation and Trend  |
|      |           |Analysis                                             |
|      |22/11/2004 |Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs - General    |
|      |           |country report - Somalia                             |
|      |13/03/2005 |Judgment of Treacy J in Zahra Abdullah and other v   |
|      |           |Abdullahi Yusuf [2003] EWHC 737 (Qb)                 |
|      |16/03/2005 |Final order in Zahra Abdullah and other v Abdullahi  |
|      |           |Yusuf                                                |
|      |02/11/2005 |UNHCR - Advisory on the return of Somali nationals to|
|      |           |Somalia - November 2005                              |
|      |15/01/2006 |African Security Review: An analysis and comparison  |
|      |           |of armed groups in Somalia                           |
|      |08/03/2006 |Ethiopia Landmine Monitor Report 2006                |
|      |19/05/2006 |OCHA: Fact Sheet May 2006                            |
|      |27/07/2006 |US Citizenship & Immigration Services - DHS Extends  |
|      |           |temporary protective status for Somalia for 18 months|
|      |November   |Gundel, G. The predicament of the 'Oday', Final      |
|      |2006       |report                                               |
|      |22/11/2006 |Report of the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia - 22nd  |
|      |           |November 2006                                        |
|      |29/12/2006 |World Security Network                               |
|      |20/01/2007 |ICG: Somalia: The tough part is ahead                |
|      |24/01/2007 |AFP: Somalia: Mogadishu airport attacked as US Envoy |
|      |           |meets top Islamist                                   |
|      |31/01/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |January 2007                                         |
|      |February   |UN Humanitarian situation in Somalia - Monthly       |
|      |2007       |Analysis                                             |
|      |19/02/2007 |Somalia - Displacement as of 19th February 2007 Map  |
|      |21/02/2007 |UPI: Vigilantes hired to help secure Mogadishu       |
|      |22/02/2007 |Reuters: Mortars hit Mogadishu airport in latest     |
|      |           |strike                                               |
|      |12/03/2007 |Somalia - Displacement as of 12th March 2007 Map     |
|      |12/03/2007 |United Nations Refugee Agency: Somalia - New         |
|      |           |Displacement in February                             |
|      |14/03/2007 |Hiraan Online: Somali woman says soldiers raped her  |
|      |23/03/2007 |Aviation Safety Network                              |
|      |30/03/2007 |Human Rights Watch: People fleeing Somalia war       |
|      |           |secretly detained                                    |
|      |31/03/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |March 2007                                           |
|      |           |United Nations: Humanitarian Situation in Somalia    |
|      |           |Monthly Analysis - March 2007                        |
|      |01/04/2007 |Crisis Watch monthly bulletin                        |
|      |01/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Fighting rages in Mogadishu,     |
|      |           |peacekeeper killed                                   |
|      |01/04/2007 |OCHA Regional Office for Central and East Asia -     |
|      |           |Humanitarian Newsmaker - April 2007                  |
|      |02/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Guns silent in Mogadishu,        |
|      |           |hundreds thought dead                                |
|      |02/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somalia: Somalis bury dead during|
|      |           |lull in battles                                      |
|      |02/04/2007 |OCHA: Somalia: Appeal to warring parties in Mogadishu|
|      |           |to act with humanity                                 |
|      |02/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Hundreds more Ethiopian troops |
|      |           |enter Somali capital                                 |
|      |02/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Mogadishu exodus grows, but no   |
|      |           |respite for refugees                                 |
|      |02/04/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: Almost 50,000 people flee Mogadishu  |
|      |           |since March 21; more expected                        |
|      |02/04/2007 |The Christian Science Monitor: Truce aims to stem    |
|      |           |Somalia's bloodshed                                  |
|      |03/04/2007 |United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for   |
|      |           |Human Rights: High Commissioner urges protection of  |
|      |           |civilians in Mogadishu                               |
|      |03/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somalia diplomatic players look|
|      |           |to replace Ethiopian forces                          |
|      |03/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somalia: The scars of battle in|
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |03/04/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: thousands have recently fled capital,|
|      |           |plight of those remaining becoming desperate         |
|      |03/04/2007 |European Union: EU High Representative Javier Solana |
|      |           |and Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid|
|      |           |Louis Michel appeal to all Somali parties to cease   |
|      |           |hostilities immediately                              |
|      |03/04/2007 |United States Department of State: Meeting of the    |
|      |           |International Contact Group on Somalia               |
|      |03/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somalia refugee crisis grows,    |
|      |           |some 'charged for shade'                             |
|      |03/04/2007 |IRIN: Kenya-Somalia: Border remains closed to asylum |
|      |           |seekers                                              |
|      |04/04/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: UN decries civilian deaths in         |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |04/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somalia: Mogadishu tries to    |
|      |           |bury its dead                                        |
|      |04/04/2007 |United Nations News Service: UN envoy cautions       |
|      |           |against forced disarmament before Somalia            |
|      |           |reconciliation congress                              |
|      |05/04/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Locals mobilised to assist displaced  |
|      |           |civilians                                            |
|      |07/04/2007 |Government of the United States of America: Assistant|
|      |           |Secretary Frazer visits Baidoa                       |
|      |07/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: In Somalia, refugees wait for  |
|      |           |aid                                                  |
|      |08/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: About 124,000 people flee      |
|      |           |fighting in Somali capital: UN                       |
|      |10/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: More than 1,000 killed in      |
|      |           |Mogadishu clashes: elders                            |
|      |10/04/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Afraid to return home despite         |
|      |           |prevailing calm                                      |
|      |10/04/2007 |United Nations News Service: Nearly three dozen more |
|      |           |refugees drown in doomed bid to reach Yemen - UN     |
|      |11/04/2007 |Medecins Sans Frontieres: MSF is responding to       |
|      |           |cholera outbreaks in Somalia                         |
|      |11/04/2007 |Yemen Times: Somali war causes more exodus to Yemen  |
|      |11/04/2007 |Medecins Sans Frontieres: MSF is responding to       |
|      |           |cholera outbreaks in Somalia                         |
|      |12/04/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Fighting threatens peace efforts in   |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |12/04/2007 |OCHA: Somalia: Fiercest fighting since 1991 takes    |
|      |           |humanitarian toll                                    |
|      |12/04/2007 |International Committee of the Red Cross: Somalia:   |
|      |           |Helping those forced to flee their homes             |
|      |13/04/2007 |UNHCR: UNHCR trucks 28 tonnes of aid to displaced    |
|      |           |people in Somalia                                    |
|      |18/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Fighting in Mogadishu kills at   |
|      |           |least seven                                          |
|      |19/04/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Displaced Somalis living rough near   |
|      |           |Kenyan border                                        |
|      |19/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: UN Somalia humanitarian chief    |
|      |           |warns of catastrophe                                 |
|      |19/04/2007 |UNHCR: UNHCR sends aid from Kenya to Somali town     |
|      |           |struggling with IDPs and disease                     |
|      |20/04/2007 |SOS-Kinderdorf International: Shells land in compound|
|      |           |of SOS Children's Village Mogadishu                  |
|      |20/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali deaths mount, refugee     |
|      |           |exodus grows                                         |
|      |20/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Latest Mogadishu violence kills  |
|      |           |21 people                                            |
|      |23/04/2007 |UNHCR: Thousands of desperate Somalis fleeing        |
|      |           |Mogadishu as aid agencies struggle to meet needs     |
|      |24/04/2007 |World Vision: Women, children fleeing Mogadishu      |
|      |           |clashes face high risk of disease, trauma, rape      |
|      |24/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Analysis: Somalia burns - but    |
|      |           |does anyone care?                                    |
|      |24/04/2007 |UNHCR: Gulf of Aden: More drowned by smugglers,      |
|      |           |others die of asphyxia and dehydration               |
|      |24/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: 65 die in Somalia fighting, car|
|      |           |bombs                                                |
|      |24/04/2007 |International Committee of the Red Cross: Somalia:   |
|      |           |ICRC Bulletin No. 01/2007                            |
|      |25/04/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Struggling to help displaced Mogadishu|
|      |           |residents                                            |
|      |25/04/2007 |UNHCR: Small Somali town struggling to cope with tens|
|      |           |of thousands of people displaced by fighting in      |
|      |           |nearby Mogadishu                                     |
|      |26/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali PM declares gains in      |
|      |           |Mogadishu war                                        |
|      |26/04/2007 |Reuters Foundation: All sides flouting humanitarian  |
|      |           |law in Somalia - UN                                  |
|      |27/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: US and UN slam Somali          |
|      |           |government's treatment of relief agencies: report    |
|      |27/04/2007 |United Nations Children's Fund: UNICEF condemns      |
|      |           |shelling of Mogadishu hospital and calls for full    |
|      |           |access for humanitarian aid to displaced families    |
|      |27/04/2007 |Trocaire: Impending humanitarian disaster in Somalia |
|      |27/04/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |           |Somalia: Report of Information Gathering Mission     |
|      |           |27-30th April 2007                                   |
|      |30/04/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-30th    |
|      |           |April 2007                                           |
|      |30/04/2007 |United Nations Security Council: Security Council    |
|      |           |expresses grave concern at renewed fighting in       |
|      |           |Somalia, condemns indiscriminate shelling in         |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |30/04/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Renegade Somali leaders vow    |
|      |           |deeper insurgency                                    |
|      |30/04/2007 |United Nations News Service: UN Security Council     |
|      |           |deplores rising civilian deaths in Somalia           |
|      |01/05/2007 |Crisis Watch Monthly Bulletin                        |
|      |07/05/2007 |Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation  |
|      |           |in Somalia - 7th May 2007                            |
|      |10/05/2007 |OCHA: Somalia: Protection, Fact Sheet - May 2007     |
|      |10/05/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Two foreign aid workers kidnapped|
|      |           |in Somalia                                           |
|      |10/05/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Habibo Muhammad, "No one could survive|
|      |           |Mogadishu"                                           |
|      |14/05/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Aid not reaching most Somali war |
|      |           |afflicted - UN                                       |
|      |15/05/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Gunmen attack UN health office in|
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |17/05/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Plea to help 12,000 displaced in      |
|      |           |Bardere                                              |
|      |18/05/2007 |Danish Refugee Council UNHCR Branch Office Somalia - |
|      |           |Report on Profiling of Internally Displaced Persons  |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |18/05/2007 |Danish Refugee Council: Report on Profiling of IDPs -|
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |19/05/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Ethiopia says 1,000 insurgents |
|      |           |killed in Mogadishu clashes                          |
|      |23/05/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Economic pressures rising with influx |
|      |           |of IDPs                                              |
|      |25/05/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |28/05/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Grenades thrown at Ethiopian     |
|      |           |troops in Somalia                                    |
|      |29/05/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali court officer gunned down |
|      |           |in Mogadishu                                         |
|      |30/05/2007 |Reuters Foundation: At least four dead in Somalia    |
|      |           |after convoy attack                                  |
|      |31/05/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st May|
|      |           |2007                                                 |
|      |01/06/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: Three quarters of those who fled     |
|      |           |Mogadishu have not returned                          |
|      |04/06/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Seven dead in Mogadishu attacks|
|      |04/06/2007 |Center for Strategic and International Studies:      |
|      |           |Fading hopes for Somalia crisis                      |
|      |05/06/2007 |European Parliament: Ethiopian Government's Stance on|
|      |           |Human Rights Attacked                                |
|      |12/06/2007 |US Department of State - Trafficking in Persons      |
|      |           |Report                                               |
|      |14/06/2007 |United Nations Security Council: Security Council    |
|      |           |gravely concerned by recent extremist attacks in     |
|      |           |Somalia, condemns attempts to use violence to        |
|      |           |undermine political process                          |
|      |14/06/2007 |Voice of America: Somalis sceptical of peace 'under  |
|      |           |occupation'                                          |
|      |15/06/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: At least nine people slain  |
|      |           |in Somalia blasts                                    |
|      |15/06/2007 |Food Security Analysis Unit: Somalia: Food security  |
|      |           |and nutrition situation in Shabelle region is rapidly|
|      |           |deteriorating                                        |
|      |15/06/2007 |OCHA: Somalia: Situation Report - 15 Jun 2007        |
|      |17/06/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somali grenade attack prompts  |
|      |           |curfew                                               |
|      |18/06/2007 |HJT Research: Ogaden Residents Say They Are Being    |
|      |           |Brutalised by Ethiopian Soldiers                     |
|      |18/06/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Blast strikes Mogadishu          |
|      |18/06/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Deteriorating food security in south  |
|      |18-25/06/20|World Health Organisation: Health Action in Crises   |
|      |07         |                                                     |
|      |20/06/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Government criticised over NGO raid   |
|      |20/06/2007 |Reuters Foundation: 8 killed in Somalia amid         |
|      |           |government, insurgent battles                        |
|      |21/06/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali authorities impose curfew |
|      |           |as killings mount                                    |
|      |22/06/2007 |USAID - Somalia - Complex Emergency                  |
|      |22/06/2007 |OCHA: Protection of civilians in armed conflict - UN |
|      |           |Security Council briefing by Emergency Relief        |
|      |           |Coordinator John Holmes                              |
|      |22/06/2007 |United Nations World Food Programme: WFP appeals to  |
|      |           |Kenyan authorities to allow food into Somalia        |
|      |25/06/2007 |Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation  |
|      |           |in Somalia - 25th June 2007                          |
|      |25/06/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali solider fires at crowd    |
|      |           |seeking food, 3 killed                               |
|      |26/06/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Returnees killed waiting for food     |
|      |           |distribution                                         |
|      |27/06/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: Thousands flee Mogadishu amid renewed|
|      |           |violence                                             |
|      |28/06/2007 |International Medical Corps: Somalia: Two slain in   |
|      |           |Somalia shooting                                     |
|      |28/06/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Doctor with US charity shot dead |
|      |           |in Somalia                                           |
|      |30/06/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-30th    |
|      |           |June 2007                                            |
|      |July 2007  |UN Humanitarian situation in Somalia - Monthly       |
|      |           |Analysis                                             |
|      |04/07/2007 |Human Rights Watch: Ethiopia: Crackdown in East      |
|      |           |Punishes Civilians                                   |
|      |05/07/2007 |Ethiopia:  Ogaden Crackdown Carries High Human Cost  |
|      |06/07/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |08/07/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somali troops shoot sesven     |
|      |           |civilians in Somali capital                          |
|      |12/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Six die in fresh Mogadishu       |
|      |           |violence - residents                                 |
|      |13/07/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Roundup: Attacks plague     |
|      |           |Somali capital ahead of peace meeting                |
|      |13/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Factbox - Somalia, a country torn|
|      |           |apart                                                |
|      |15/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali peace talks adjourned     |
|      |           |after mortar attack                                  |
|      |16/07/2007 |Ogaden Online: The World's Heart Beats in Ogaden     |
|      |16/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Violence flares day after Somali |
|      |           |peace meeting                                        |
|      |18/07/2007 |Agence France-Presse: UN opens new Somali refugee    |
|      |           |camp in Ethiopia                                     |
|      |18/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Deadly Mogadishu blasts          |
|      |           |overshadow peace talks                               |
|      |19/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Fighting erupts before Somali    |
|      |           |reconciliation talks                                 |
|      |19/07/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Livelihoods in jeopardy after poor   |
|      |           |rainfall                                             |
|      |20/07/2007 |UKBA - Report of Fact Finding Mission 11-15 June 2007|
|      |           |- Somalia                                            |
|      |23/07/2007 |OCHA: Somalia:  Insecurity in Mogadishu driving      |
|      |           |people out and restricting humanitarian relief       |
|      |23/07/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: IDPs in dire need as more flee        |
|      |           |violence                                             |
|      |24/07/2007 |United Nations Department of Public Information:     |
|      |           |Press conference by Emergency Relief Coordinator on  |
|      |           |humanitarian crises in Africa, Middle East           |
|      |24/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Battles around peace talks send  |
|      |           |Somalis fleeing again                                |
|      |26/07/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Eritrea sending missiles, arms to|
|      |           |Somalia, UN says                                     |
|      |29/07/2007 |BIA - Nationality, routing and documentation aid     |
|      |           |valid from 29th July 2007                            |
|      |31/07/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |July 2007                                            |
|      |31/07/2007 |Forced Migration Review, University of Oxford:       |
|      |           |Emergency within an emergency: Somali IDPs           |
|      |           |FAST Update: Somalia/Trends in Conflict and          |
|      |           |Cooperation April-July 2007                          |
|      |01/08/2007 |Reuters Foundation: U.N. says Mogadishu violence     |
|      |           |scaring returnees                                    |
|      |August 2007|Danish Refugee Council: Human rights and security in |
|      |           |central and southern Somalia                         |
|      |03/08/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: Another wave of departures           |
|      |03/08/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |03/08/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Call for agencies to scale up aid     |
|      |           |operations in capital                                |
|      |06/08/2007 |Xinhua News Agency: Roundup: Mogadishu violence      |
|      |           |continues as renewed exodus spills over to distant   |
|      |           |town                                                 |
|      |09/08/2007 |Barnes, Dr. C (SOAS): European CIO Seminar Country   |
|      |           |Report - Somalia                                     |
|      |10/08/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Five police stations attacked         |
|      |           |overnight in Mogadishu                               |
|      |12/08/2007 |OCHA: UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for   |
|      |           |Somalia strongly condemns the killing of two         |
|      |           |journalists, harassment of the media and calls for   |
|      |           |end to impunity                                      |
|      |12/08/2007 |Human Rights Watch: Shell-Shocked, Civilians Under   |
|      |           |Siege in Mogadishu                                   |
|      |13/08/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Reporters killed amid concerns over   |
|      |           |human rights abuses                                  |
|      |13/08/2007 |Human Rights Watch: Somalia: War crimes in Mogadishu |
|      |14/08/2007 |Food Security Analysis Unit Somalia - Press Release -|
|      |           |"Sudden On-set Humanitarian Emergency Breaks in the  |
|      |           |Shabelle Regions of Somalia Amid Escalating Civil    |
|      |           |Insecurity"                                          |
|      |14/08/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Violent day of fighting     |
|      |           |leaves at least 30 dead in Somalia                   |
|      |15/08/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: 'Life in Mogadishu is so bad we'll    |
|      |           |risk our lives to escape'                            |
|      |15/08/2007 |The Christian Science Monitor: UN faces calls for    |
|      |           |action in Somalia                                    |
|      |15/08/2007 |Xinhua News Agency: About 1.5 million need           |
|      |           |humanitarian assistance in Somalia                   |
|      |17/08/2007 |OCHA: Somalia South Central zone in state of         |
|      |           |emergency                                            |
|      |17/08/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |20/08/2007 |SOS-Kinderdorf International: Mortar shell hits SOS  |
|      |           |Hospital Mogadishu                                   |
|      |20/08/2007 |Medecins Sans Frontieres: Access to medical care     |
|      |           |dangerously scarce in and around Mogadishu, Somalia  |
|      |21/08/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Thousands flee central region after   |
|      |           |clash violence                                       |
|      |22/08/2007 |Order for Reconsideration                            |
|      |22/08/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Displaced people branded "terrorists"|
|      |           |by Mogadishu mayor                                   |
|      |24/08/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Nine killed in Somalia unrest  |
|      |24/08/2007 |Voice of America: Aid workers in Somalia fear        |
|      |           |government attack on camps near Mogadishu            |
|      |25/08/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somali Islamists vow to step up|
|      |           |drive against Ethiopians                             |
|      |27/08/2007 |Norwegian Refugee Council: Vast needs in Mogadishu   |
|      |31/08/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |August 2007                                          |
|      |31/08/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |           |Danish Joint Fact finding mission report - August    |
|      |           |2007                                                 |
|      |02/09/2007 |Agence France-Press: Fresh fighting rocks Mogadishu  |
|      |           |as security chiefs summoned                          |
|      |03/09/2007 |Xinhua News Agency: Journalists flee violence in     |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |03/09/2007 |Voice of America: 18,000 flee Mogadishu in August,   |
|      |           |50,000 since June                                    |
|      |03/09/2007 |18,000 flee Mogadishu in August, 50,000 since June   |
|      |04/09/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Displaced families overwhelm Lover   |
|      |           |Shabelle town                                        |
|      |05/09/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Several killed in clashes in     |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |05/09/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Six killed in Mogadishu        |
|      |           |fighting                                             |
|      |10/09/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somalia: Seven killed in       |
|      |           |Mogadishu attacks                                    |
|      |11/09/2007 |Xinhua News Agency: Security searches underway in    |
|      |           |Mogadishu market as violence continues               |
|      |12/09/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: UN staff member killed                |
|      |14/09/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |16/09/2007 |Associated Press: Saudi King oversees Somalia pact   |
|      |           |signing                                              |
|      |17/09/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Five killed in Somali violence |
|      |17/09/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: What have we done to deserve this?    |
|      |17/09/2007 |                                                     |
|      |18/09/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somalia warns humanitarian     |
|      |           |catastrophe 'imminent'                               |
|      |21/09/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Fighting makes Somalis fear more |
|      |           |than ever - UN envoy                                 |
|      |24/09/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Nadifo Gedi - I have never begged but |
|      |           |I am close to it now                                 |
|      |25/09/2007 |Terrorism Focus: Somali fighters focus on common     |
|      |           |Ethiopian enemy                                      |
|      |25/09/2007 |Jamestown Foundation: Terrorism Focus                |
|      |27/09/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Two Somalis killed in Mogadishu|
|      |           |violence                                             |
|      |28/09/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |30/09/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-30th    |
|      |           |September 2007                                       |
|      |30/09/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Eight killed in Somali violence|
|      |01/10/2007 |United Nations World Food Programme: Fleeing         |
|      |           |Moghadishu to Somalia's breadbasket                  |
|      |02/10/2007 |Human Rights Watch: Ethiopia and the State of        |
|      |           |Democracy: Affects on Human Rights and Humanitarian  |
|      |           |Conditions in Ogaden and Somalia                     |
|      |03/10/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Fierce fighting in Somali      |
|      |           |capital                                              |
|      |05/10/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Rising tension forces aid workers out|
|      |           |of project area                                      |
|      |08/10/2007 |IRIN: Somalia - Families flee escalating violence    |
|      |09/10/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somali Islamist leader vows    |
|      |           |holy war against 'Christian invaders'                |
|      |10/10/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: IDPs cause overcrowding in Galgadud   |
|      |           |towns                                                |
|      |10/10/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Violence kills another seven in  |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |12/10/2007 |Church World Service: CWS appeal: Somalia (Mogadishu)|
|      |           |humanitarian assistance                              |
|      |16/10/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Interview - Threats and death    |
|      |           |stalk Somali journalists                             |
|      |17/10/2007 |The Independent: Ethiopia's Own Darfur as Villagers  |
|      |           |Flee Government Backed Violence                      |
|      |19/10/2007 |United Nations News Service: Somalia: Aid delievery  |
|      |           |impeded by 'suspicion' from Government, other parties|
|      |           |- UN                                                 |
|      |25/10/2007 |UNHCR: Displaced women tell tales or rape and fear in|
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |29/10/2007 |Agence France-Presse: More Mogadishu residents flee  |
|      |           |as violence rages                                    |
|      |30/10/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Weekend fighting drove 36,000    |
|      |           |from Somali capital - UN                             |
|      |30/10/2007 |World Vision: International NGOs cannot adequately   |
|      |           |respond to the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe in |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |30/10/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia - Mogadishu violence sets off new wave|
|      |           |of displacement                                      |
|      |31/10/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |October 2007                                         |
|      |31/10/2007 |OCHA: 88,000 newly displaced by insecurity in        |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |31/10/2007 |Famine Early Warning System Network, Food Security   |
|      |           |Analysis Unit: Humanitarian emergency worsens in the |
|      |           |Shabelle regions of Somalia - as thousands of        |
|      |           |families flee Mogadishu in a new wave of displacement|
|      |November   |Landinfo Report on Security and human rights         |
|      |2007       |conditions in southern Somalia                       |
|      |01/11/2007 |United Nations Office of the Coordinator for Somalia |
|      |           |- Open Letter from the UN Resident and Humanitarian  |
|      |           |Coordinator for Somalia a.i. in response to the      |
|      |           |massive displacement of civilians from Mogadishu     |
|      |01/11/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Aid organizations in Somalia|
|      |           |warn of worsening situation                          |
|      |01/11/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Malnutrition increases as            |
|      |           |humanitarian emergency worsens in the Shabelles      |
|      |01/11/2007 |Voice of America: UN official says 1.5 million need  |
|      |           |assistance and protection in Somalia                 |
|      |02/11/2007 |51. IDP Population because of conflicts in Laas      |
|      |           |Caanood Map                                          |
|      |02/11/2007 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |02/11/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somalia: Mogadishu battles stoke |
|      |           |humanitarian crisis                                  |
|      |05/11/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Thousands more leave capital as troops|
|      |           |converge                                             |
|      |06/11/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: Inter-agency UN team finds displaced |
|      |           |living in extremely harsh conditions                 |
|      |06/11/2007 |Xinhua News Agency: Thousands displaced by floods in |
|      |           |southern Somalia                                     |
|      |07/11/2007 |Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation  |
|      |           |in Somalia - 7th November 2007                       |
|      |07/11/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Mogadishu residents trapped by        |
|      |           |violence - MSF                                       |
|      |08/11/2007 |Voice of America: Mounting violence around Mogadishu |
|      |           |displaces tens of thousands of Somalis               |
|      |09/11/2007 |Human Rights Watch: Somalia: Mogadishu clashes       |
|      |           |devastating civilians                                |
|      |09/11/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Somalia: Bloody Mogadishu   |
|      |           |clashes leave at least 51 dead                       |
|      |09/11/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Death tolls mounts as Mogadishu|
|      |           |violence flares                                      |
|      |09/11/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Ethiopian forces kill six      |
|      |           |civilians in Mogadishu: witnesses                    |
|      |10/11/2007 |SOS-Kinderdorf International - Four mortar shells hit|
|      |           |SOS Children's Village Mogadishu                     |
|      |10/11/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Thousands flee as fighting in  |
|      |           |Somali capital claims 59 lives                       |
|      |12/11/207  |Foreign & Commonwealth Office: Past and Current      |
|      |           |Levels of Armed Violence in Somalia                  |
|      |12/11/2007 |UKBA: Country of Origin Information Report Somalia   |
|      |12/11/2007 |UN OCHA: Somalia: Mounting bloodshed prompts police  |
|      |           |full help from Mogadishu                             |
|      |12/11/2007 |OCHA: Somalia displacement reaches new high, many    |
|      |           |killed                                               |
|      |12/11/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Mounting bloodshed prompts pleas for  |
|      |           |help from Mogadishu                                  |
|      |13/11/2007 |UNHCR: Somalia: UNHCR responds to exodus from        |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |15/11/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Fugitive Somali Islamist urges   |
|      |           |jihad on AU troops                                   |
|      |16/11/2007 |CAFOD: Somalia: Worst humanitarian crisis in Africa  |
|      |17/11/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Insurgents attack Ugandan troops |
|      |           |in Somali capital                                    |
|      |19/11/2007 |United Nations News Service: Concerned at conditions |
|      |           |in Somalia, Security Council urges end to violence   |
|      |19/11/2007 |IRIN: Somalia - The voice for the voiceless is no    |
|      |           |more                                                 |
|      |23/11/2007 |SOS - Kinderdorf International: Mortars hit the SOS  |
|      |           |Children's Village Mogadishu - five co-workers       |
|      |           |injured                                              |
|      |27/11/2007 |Norwegian Council for Africa: Somalia: Mogadishu     |
|      |           |mayor wants to silence independent reporting         |
|      |28/11/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Camps abound as Somalis flee   |
|      |           |Mogadishu violence                                   |
|      |28/11/2007 |Shabelle Media Network: Somalia: Corpses found at the|
|      |           |suburbs and the center of the capital Mogadishu      |
|      |29/11/2007 |sacbee.com: Ethiopia Accused of Civilian Abuse       |
|      |30/11/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somalia: Ten more killed in North|
|      |           |Mogadishu fighting                                   |
|      |30/11/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-30th    |
|      |           |November 2007                                        |
|      |03/12/2007 |SOS - Kinderdorf International: SOS co-worker killed |
|      |           |in the crossfire at the SOS Children's Village       |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |03/12/2007 |OCHA: USG visits newly displaced Somalis from        |
|      |           |Mogadishu on mission to Afgooye                      |
|      |03/12/2007 |GOAL: Somali statement                               |
|      |03/12/2007 |Human Rights Watch: UN: Atrocities fuel worsening    |
|      |           |crisis in Horn of Africa                             |
|      |04/12/2007 |UNOCHA: Somalia: Civilians caught in the cross fire  |
|      |04/12/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Civilians caught in the crossfire -  |
|      |           |UN humanitarian chief                                |
|      |04/12/2007 |UNOCHA: Somalia: Civilians caught in the cross fire  |
|      |06/12/2007 |BBC News: Images Back Ethiopia Abuse Claim           |
|      |07/12/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: UN: Rape is now "part of the|
|      |           |game" in brutal Somali conflict                      |
|      |07/12/2007 |DPA report                                           |
|      |08/12/2007 |Reuters report                                       |
|      |08/12/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Somali Islamists seize town from |
|      |           |government troops                                    |
|      |09/12/2007 |VOA News: Islamist fighters seize central Somali town|
|      |10/12/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Daily life in Mogadishu        |
|      |           |shrivels under incessant violence                    |
|      |11/12/2007 |Odenwald, M. and others: The Consumption of Khat and |
|      |           |Other Drugs in Somali Combatants: A cross-sectional  |
|      |           |study                                                |
|      |11/12/2007 |MSF report                                           |
|      |11/12/2007 |IRIN: Somalia: Aid appeal broadened to cope with     |
|      |           |massive displacement                                 |
|      |11/12/2007 |Agence France - Presse: 13 killed in Somalia         |
|      |           |violence: officials                                  |
|      |11/12/2007 |Medecins Sans Frontieres: Somalia: Displaced         |
|      |           |populations, fleeing war in Mogadishu face a dramatic|
|      |           |situation                                            |
|      |11/12/2007 |IRIN: Somalia:  Aid appeal broadened to cope with    |
|      |           |massive displacement                                 |
|      |14/12/2007 |New York Times: Ethiopia Turns to Civilian Patrols   |
|      |14/12/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Two women killed in fresh      |
|      |           |Somali violence: witness                             |
|      |14/12/2007 |Agence France-Presse: Somalia: Mogadishu civilian    |
|      |           |death toll reaches 19 after two days fighting        |
|      |14/12/2007 |BBC News: Sweden denies Mogadishu conflict           |
|      |15/12/2007 |New York Times: Ethiopians Said to Push Civilians    |
|      |           |into Rebel War                                       |
|      |18/12/2007 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Fresh fighting in Mogadishu |
|      |           |kills at least 17                                    |
|      |19/12/2007 |IRIN: Somalia - Zeinab Ali - Every day someone you   |
|      |           |knew had died                                        |
|      |20/12/2007 |USAID Report: Somalia - Complex Emergency            |
|      |31/12/2007 |Reuters report                                       |
|      |31/12/2007 |Reuters Foundation: Mogadishu violence kills 6,500 in|
|      |           |past year                                            |
|      |31/12/2007 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |December 2007                                        |
|      |           |UNOCHA - Humanitarian Situation in Somalia           |
|      |           |June-December 2007                                   |
|      |           |OCHA Regional Office for Central and East Africa -   |
|      |           |Displaced Populations Report - July - December 2007  |
|      |           |OCHA: Situation Reports September-December 2007      |
|      |           |FIDH/OMCT: Steadfast in Protection: Annual Report    |
|      |           |2007                                                 |
|      |           |SAACID: Emergency IDP Settlement Rehabilitation      |
|      |           |programme 2007/8                                     |
|      |Circa 2008 |SAACID: Results of the "SAACID Rapid Population      |
|      |           |Assessment of IDP Settlements in Mogadishu"          |
|      |02/01/2008 |United Nations: 2007 'one of the deadliest years' for|
|      |           |United Nations personnel, Staff Union says; at least |
|      |           |9 peacekeepers, 33 civilian staff members killed     |
|      |           |during year                                          |
|      |07/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: IDPs face eviction from camp          |
|      |08/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Calls for help for IDPs in Middle     |
|      |           |Shabelle                                             |
|      |10/01/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |10/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Clashes near IDP camps "causing more  |
|      |           |displacement"                                        |
|      |11/01/2008 |Danish Refugee Council: Essential help in Somalia    |
|      |11/01/2008 |Jane's Sentinel Country Risk Assessments             |
|      |16/01/2008 |Oxfam report                                         |
|      |17/01/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Heavy fighting erupts in Somali  |
|      |           |capital, 13 dead                                     |
|      |18/01/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Somali insurgents expanding    |
|      |           |area of attacks: African Union                       |
|      |21/01/2008 |Norwegian Council for Africa:  Somalia: New          |
|      |           |government lands in Mogadishu                        |
|      |21/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Anti-government activities spreading, |
|      |           |warns AU                                             |
|      |22/01/2008 |Newsweek: Ethiopia's Dirty War                       |
|      |27/01/2008 |VOA News: Mortar rocks Mogadishu airport as AU       |
|      |           |Commissioner visits                                  |
|      |28/01/2008 |Medecins Sans Frontieres: Three MSF workers killed in|
|      |           |fatal incident in Kismayo, Somalia                   |
|      |28/01/2008 |United Nations Secretary General: Secretary-General  |
|      |           |condemns killing of aid workers, journalist in       |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |28/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Food, water shortages hit Galgadud    |
|      |29/01/2008 |Voice of America: UN's Somalia envoy says country    |
|      |           |faces deepening crisis                               |
|      |29/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Kismayo's only hospital closes as aid |
|      |           |workers killed                                       |
|      |30/01/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Government seeks urgent help for      |
|      |           |drought regions                                      |
|      |31/01/2008 |FSAU press release                                   |
|      |31/01/2008 |Food Security Analysis Unit: More than a quarter of  |
|      |           |the population of Somalia are in humanitarian crisis |
|      |31/01/2008 |UNHCR Refworld - various items on Somalia            |
|      |31/01/2008 |allAfrica.com: Islamists vow to continue fight       |
|      |           |against Ethiopian troops                             |
|      |31/01/2008 |InsideSomalia.org: Somali MP wounded in Mogadishu    |
|      |           |overnight                                            |
|      |31/01/2008 |allAfrica.com: Mogadishu mayor appeals talks with the|
|      |           |opposition                                           |
|      |31/01/2008 |Amison troops settle a new base in Mogadishu         |
|      |01/02/2008 |allAfrica.com: Radical clerics take a softer stance  |
|      |           |on new premier                                       |
|      |01/02/2008 |Mail & Guardian Online, South Africa: Aid group pulls|
|      |           |international staff out of Somalia                   |
|      |01/02/2008 |www.simbanews.com: Uganda: Meseveni plans more troops|
|      |           |for Somalia                                          |
|      |05/02/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |05/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Two million face humanitarian crisis, |
|      |           |warn agencies                                        |
|      |06/02/2008 |SOS-Kinderdorf International: Mogadishu faces its    |
|      |           |most difficult time                                  |
|      |08/02/2008 |Voice of America: Somalia violence and displacement  |
|      |           |worsen                                               |
|      |12/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Lower Shabelle struggling to help IDPs|
|      |13/02/2008 |UN News Service report                               |
|      |13/02/2008 |United Nations News Service: Violence puts some 2    |
|      |           |million people in Somalia at risk, says UN           |
|      |13/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia - Shukri Gamadiid - This is not a life |
|      |14/02/2008 |UNICEF                                               |
|      |19/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Troops attack Mogadishu's largest     |
|      |           |market                                               |
|      |19/02/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Battles kill seven in Somali     |
|      |           |capital Mogadishu                                    |
|      |20/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Clashes force nomads out of           |
|      |           |south-central region                                 |
|      |21/02/2008 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |21/02/2008 |IRIN: A Somali girl's childhood ends in shelling,    |
|      |           |burns and terrible scars                             |
|      |24/02/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Somali Islamists wrest control |
|      |           |of southern township                                 |
|      |27/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Impunity "the root cause of crisis"   |
|      |27/02/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: IDPs march for help                   |
|      |29/02/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-29th    |
|      |           |February 2008                                        |
|      |           |UNOCHA report - March 2008                           |
|      |03/03/2008 |Human Rights Watch: UN: Rights council should tackle |
|      |           |Somalia crisis                                       |
|      |04/03/2008 |United Nations Country Team in Somalia: UN           |
|      |           |Coordinator for Somalia concerned population still   |
|      |           |being displaced                                      |
|      |04/03/2008 |Hiraan.com: UN Coordinator for Somalia concerned     |
|      |           |population still being displaced                     |
|      |11/03/2008 |US State Department report                           |
|      |13/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Interview - Somalia war creates  |
|      |           |20,000 refugees a month                              |
|      |14/03/2008 |Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation  |
|      |           |in Somalia - 14th March 2008                         |
|      |14/03/2008 |UN Secretary General Report                          |
|      |14/03/2008 |Voice of America: Somalia's humanitarian crisis      |
|      |           |worsens amid fears of widespread drought             |
|      |15/03/2008 |UKBA: Country of Origin Information Report Somalia   |
|      |16/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Interview - Somali Islamist      |
|      |           |leader rejects talks with govt                       |
|      |17/03/2008 |Report of the UNHRC Independent Expert               |
|      |17/03/2008 |United Nations General Assembly: Technical Assistance|
|      |           |and Capacity-Building                                |
|      |17/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Clan battles kill 10 in central  |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |17/03/2008 |Report of the UNHRC Independent Expert               |
|      |19/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Battles erupt in Somali capital  |
|      |19/03/2008 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Battles rage in Mogadishu:  |
|      |           |at least 12 killed                                   |
|      |26/03/2008 |NGOs' statement                                      |
|      |26/03/2008 |International Medical Corps report                   |
|      |26/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali Islamists seize key town  |
|      |           |of Jowhar                                            |
|      |26/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Factbox - Somalia, a country torn|
|      |           |apart                                                |
|      |26/03/2008 |International Medical Corps: Somalia crisis          |
|      |           |deteriorates, International Medical Corps warns      |
|      |26/03/2008 |International Medical Corps report                   |
|      |26/03/2008 |BBC News: Q & A Somali conflict                      |
|      |27/03/2008 |UN WFP report                                        |
|      |27/03/2008 |The Irish Red Cross Society: Red Cross concern over  |
|      |           |worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia          |
|      |27/03/2008 |United Nations World Food Programme: WFP warns       |
|      |           |Somalia sinking deeper into abyss of suffering       |
|      |27/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali Islamists plot more       |
|      |           |hit-and-run raids                                    |
|      |27/03/2008 |UN WFP report                                        |
|      |28/03/2008 |Oxfam report                                         |
|      |28/03/2008 |UNHCR: Somalia: 15,000 Somalis seek asylum in region |
|      |           |since beginning of year                              |
|      |28/03/2008 |Oxfam: Humanitarian emergency in Somalia             |
|      |31/03/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |March 2008                                           |
|      |31/03/2008 |Refugees International Bulletin                      |
|      |31/03/2008 |Human Rights Watch Report                            |
|      |31/03/2008 |Refugees International: Somalia: Proceed with caution|
|      |31/03/2008 |Refugees International: Somalia most neglected crisis|
|      |           |in the world                                         |
|      |31/03/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Death toll from Mogadishu market |
|      |           |blasts hits 17                                       |
|      |31/03/2008 |Refugees International Bulletin                      |
|      |31/03/2008 |Human Rights Watch Report                            |
|      |           |OCHA: Monthly Cluster Reports January-March 2008     |
|      |           |UNOCHA report, March 2008                            |
|      |03/04/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency report  |
|      |03/04/2008 |Agence France-Presse: At least 19 killed in Somali   |
|      |           |fighting                                             |
|      |03/04/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Clashes, many victims, hospital closes in Kismayo    |
|      |03/04/2008 |Refugee International report                         |
|      |03/04/2008 |MSF report                                           |
|      |03/04/2008 |AFP report                                           |
|      |03/04/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency report  |
|      |04/04/2008 |Refugees International Statement to UN Security      |
|      |           |Council                                              |
|      |04/04/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Kismayo, civilians and aid workers victims of        |
|      |           |violence                                             |
|      |04/04/2008 |Refugees International Statement to UN Security      |
|      |           |Council                                              |
|      |05/04/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Five killed in Mogadishu       |
|      |           |clashes                                              |
|      |06/04/2008 |AFP Report                                           |
|      |06/04/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Islamists seize Somali town    |
|      |           |after fighting: witnesses                            |
|      |08/04/2008 |Voice of America report                              |
|      |08/04/2008 |Xinhua News Agency: Suicide car bomb targets AU      |
|      |           |peacekeepers in Mogadishu                            |
|      |08/04/2008 |Voice of America: Number of displaced persons soars  |
|      |           |in Mogadishu                                         |
|      |08/04/2008 |Voice of America report                              |
|      |09/04/2008 |Reuters report                                       |
|      |09/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Islamist rebels seize key Somali |
|      |           |town again                                           |
|      |09/04/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Fahmo Aden: I would do anything to see|
|      |           |my boy normal again                                  |
|      |09/04/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Burundi peacekeeper dies as    |
|      |           |Mogadishu violence rages                             |
|      |15/04/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Harder times ahead as dry conditions, |
|      |           |insecurity persist                                   |
|      |15/04/2008 |insidesomalia.org: Somalia's govt to introduce new   |
|      |           |currency                                             |
|      |16/04/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Poor suffer most from currency woes   |
|      |18/04/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |18/04/2008 |allAfrica.com: 'We are fighting children in          |
|      |           |Mogadishu' says Somali leader                        |
|      |19/04/2008 |AFP report                                           |
|      |19/04/2008 |Agence France-Presse: At least 18 killed in Mogadishu|
|      |           |fighting                                             |
|      |19/04/2008 |AFP report                                           |
|      |20/04/2008 |Reuters report                                       |
|      |20/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: More than 80 die in Mogadishu    |
|      |           |fighting rights group                                |
|      |21/04/2008 |UN Political Office report                           |
|      |21/04/2008 |UN Secretary General Report                          |
|      |21/04/2008 |AFP report                                           |
|      |21/04/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Mogadishu: After weekend 'massacre', more tension in |
|      |           |north                                                |
|      |21/04/2008 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |21/04/2008 |United Nations Political Office for Somalia: UN      |
|      |           |Special Representative condemns 'senseless' violence |
|      |           |in Somalia                                           |
|      |21/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Death-toll in Somalia battles    |
|      |           |rises to 85                                          |
|      |21/04/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Weekend clashes claim dozens of lives |
|      |22/04/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |22/04/2008 |Reuters report                                       |
|      |22/04/2008 |Voice of America: Mogadishu residents express outrage|
|      |           |after Ethiopian troops attack mosque                 |
|      |22/04/2008 |Voice of America: UN warns Somalia faces humanitarian|
|      |           |catastrophe                                          |
|      |22/04/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Intervention needed to avoid          |
|      |           |"impending catastrophe"                              |
|      |22/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somalia death toll nears 100 with|
|      |           |fresh fighting                                       |
|      |22/04/2008 |McClatchy Washington Bureau: Brush with death forces |
|      |           |Somali journalist to flee his homeland               |
|      |23/04/2008 |UN Human Rights Council report                       |
|      |23/04/2008 |Amnesty International Press Release                  |
|      |23/04/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |23/04/2008 |British Red Cross: Rising insecurity brings new      |
|      |           |challenges for humanitarian reporting                |
|      |23/04/2008 |United Nations Human Rights Council: Independent     |
|      |           |expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia   |
|      |           |denounces the killing of civilians, appeals for calm |
|      |           |and immediate cease fire                             |
|      |23/04/2008 |UN Human Rights Council report                       |
|      |24/04/2008 |Report of the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia - 24th  |
|      |           |April 2008                                           |
|      |24/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Ethiopia denies Amnesty mosque   |
|      |           |killings accusation                                  |
|      |24/04/2008 |ENOUGH: 15 years after Black Hawk Down- Somalia's    |
|      |           |chance?                                              |
|      |24/04/2008 |United Nations Human Settlements Programme:          |
|      |           |Communities make things work in war-torn Mogadishu   |
|      |25/04/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |25/04/2008 |UNHCR: Somalia: Renewed fighting in Mogadishu sparks |
|      |           |fresh exodus                                         |
|      |28/04/2008 |SOS-Kinderdorf International: Somalia: SOS Children's|
|      |           |Villages condemns attacks on civilian facilities     |
|      |29/04/2008 |MISNA report                                         |
|      |29/04/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Beledweyne occupied, army prepares for clash         |
|      |29/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Inflation adds more hardship to  |
|      |           |war-weary Somalis                                    |
|      |29/04/2008 |United Nations Security Council: Security Council    |
|      |           |condemns continuing flow of arms to Somalia as it    |
|      |           |adopts resolution authorizing six-month extension of |
|      |           |Monitoring Group's mandate                           |
|      |30/04/2008 |Food Security Analysis Unit Somalia: Rapidly Rising  |
|      |           |Food Prices and Deepening Drought: More than 2.6     |
|      |           |Million People Are in Crisis                         |
|      |30/04/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali insurgents target seat of |
|      |           |parliament                                           |
|      |30/04/2008 |SOS-Kinderdorf International: SOS Children's Villages|
|      |           |Somalia mourns the death of a co-worker              |
|      |30/04/2008 |International Committee of the Red Cross: Somalia:   |
|      |           |ICRC Bulletin No. 02/2008                            |
|      |30/04/2008 |IRIN: Somalia - Fadumo Hussein: Staying home meant   |
|      |           |certain death                                        |
|      |30/04/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-30th    |
|      |           |April 2008                                           |
|      |30/04/2008 |US Department of State - Country Reports on Terrorism|
|      |           |(Africa Overview)                                    |
|      |02/05/2008 |United Nations News Service: UN says humanitarian    |
|      |           |situation in Somalia is deteriorating                |
|      |02/05/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali rebels defiant after al   |
|      |           |Qaeda chief killed                                   |
|      |02/05/2008 |UNOCHA report                                        |
|      |05/05/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Mogadishu rocked by food         |
|      |           |demonstrations                                       |
|      |05/05/2008 |allAfrica.com: Somalia: Amid Insurgent Attacks,      |
|      |           |Violent Riots Over Food Prices                       |
|      |06/05/2008 |Terrorism Focus: Strategy of Somalia's Islamists     |
|      |           |Survives Death of Militant Leader                    |
|      |06/05/2008 |Amnesty International                                |
|      |06/05/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Hundreds displaced in fighting over   |
|      |           |water and pasture                                    |
|      |06/05/2008 |Trocaire: Somalia's steep decline continues          |
|      |06/05/2008 |Amnesty International: Killing of civilians now      |
|      |           |routine in Somalia                                   |
|      |06/05/2008 |Amnesty International report                         |
|      |06/05/2008 |Amnesty International: Routinely Targeted - Attacks  |
|      |           |on Civilians in Somalia                              |
|      |06/05/2008-|Alex Strick van Linschoten - narratives              |
|      |10/05/2008 |                                                     |
|      |07/05/2008 |CNN: Discord drives Somalis to Yemen in record       |
|      |           |numbers                                              |
|      |08/05/2008 |AFP report                                           |
|      |12/05/2008 |Letter from UK Border Agency to Wilson & Co          |
|      |20/05/2008 |Terrorism Focus: Jihadi website interviews new leader|
|      |           |of Somalia's Shabaab al Muhahideen                   |
|      |21/05/2008 |The Christian Science Monitor: Somalia violence      |
|      |           |flares in the wake of US airstrike                   |
|      |23/05/2008 |Garowe Online: Islamist rebels in secret deal with   |
|      |           |Kismayo port militia                                 |
|      |27/05/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Mogadishu attack death toll    |
|      |           |rises to 18                                          |
|      |27/05/2008 |www.hornofafrica.de: Somalia on the verge of         |
|      |           |collapse, aid officials and resident say             |
|      |28/05/2008 |Amnesty International annual report                  |
|      |30/05/2008 |Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation  |
|      |           |in Somalia - 30th May 2008                           |
|      |30/05/2008 |Action Against Hunger - USA: Conditions deteriorate  |
|      |           |in Somalia, threaten humanitarian crisis             |
|      |31/05/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st May|
|      |           |2008                                                 |
|      |01/06/2008 |Garowe Online: Somalia: Islamic Court opened near    |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |01/06/2008 |Officials: Somali president escapes mortar attack on |
|      |           |airport                                              |
|      |06/06/2008 |United States Agency for International Development:  |
|      |           |Horn of Africa: Complex Emergency Fact Sheet #1 (FY  |
|      |           |2008)                                                |
|      |06/06/2008 |OCHA: Situation Report                               |
|      |09/06/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Dozens killed, thousands displaced in |
|      |           |renewed fighting in Mogadishu                        |
|      |11/06/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Gunmen kill humanitarian chief,|
|      |           |driver in Mogadishu: aid worker                      |
|      |12/06/2008 |IPS: Ethiopia: Western Allies Ignoring Government    |
|      |           |Abuses Report Says                                   |
|      |12/06/2008 |Collective Punishment:  War Crimes and Crimes Against|
|      |           |Humanity in the Ogaden Area of Ethiopia's Somali     |
|      |           |Regional State                                       |
|      |12/06/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali airport shelled as        |
|      |           |president flies out                                  |
|      |12/06/2008 |Garowe Online: Somali insurgents target Mogadishu    |
|      |           |airport as president flies out                       |
|      |12/06/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Violations against Children on the    |
|      |           |increase, UN                                         |
|      |13/06/2008 |Javno.hr: West Fails to Condemn Ethiopia Rights Abuse|
|      |13/06/2008 |United Nations World Food Programme: WFP-contracted  |
|      |           |driver killed by gunmen in southern Somalia          |
|      |16/06/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency: Floods |
|      |           |devastate Mogadishu refugee camps                    |
|      |17/06/2008 |International Crisis Group: Beyond the Fragile Peace |
|      |           |Between Ethiopia and Eritrea: Averting New War       |
|      |17/06/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Conditions getting worse for IDPs in  |
|      |           |Kismayo                                              |
|      |19/06/2008 |European Parliament resolution on the routine killing|
|      |           |of civilians in Somalia                              |
|      |20/06/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali battles kill 38 since     |
|      |           |Djibouti 'peace pact'                                |
|      |22/06/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Somali activist assassinated, UN |
|      |           |boss kidnapped                                       |
|      |23/06/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Mogadishu displaced dying from starvation            |
|      |24/06/2008 |Terrorism Focus: Emerging Cracks in Somalia's        |
|      |           |Islamist Insurgency                                  |
|      |26/06/2008 |Reuters: Somalia conflict kills more than 2,100 this |
|      |           |year                                                 |
|      |27/06/2008 |United Nations General Assembly, Human Rights        |
|      |           |Council: Promotion and protection of all human       |
|      |           |rights, civil, political, economic, social and       |
|      |           |cultural rights including the right to development   |
|      |28/06/2008 |California Chronicle: Ethiopia: State Specialised in |
|      |           |Extrajudicial Killings, Rape, Child Molestation and  |
|      |           |Torture                                              |
|      |28/06/2008 |Agence France-Presse: Kidnapped Danish, Swedish aid  |
|      |           |workers freed in Somalia                             |
|      |30/06/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-30th    |
|      |           |June 2008                                            |
|      |30/06/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Thousands displaced following attack  |
|      |           |on central town                                      |
|      |           |Somalia: Humanitarian Overview reports February-June |
|      |           |2008                                                 |
|      |01/07/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Five aid workers kidnapped in    |
|      |           |Somalia-group                                        |
|      |02/07/2008 |Freedom House Report                                 |
|      |02/07/2008 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Fierce fighting leaves more |
|      |           |than 50 dead in Somalia                              |
|      |09/07/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Families displaced after homes        |
|      |           |destroyed                                            |
|      |10/07/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Fighting near Baidoa, civilians fleeing              |
|      |14/07/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Thousands flee Beletweyne as clash    |
|      |           |fears mount                                          |
|      |16/07/2008 |Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation  |
|      |           |in Somalia - 16th July 2008                          |
|      |16/07/2008 |American Chronicle: Terrorist, Barbaric Ethiopian    |
|      |           |Army Proven Worse Than Afghanistan's Taliban         |
|      |           |Extremists                                           |
|      |16/07/2008 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |17/07/2008 |Xinhua News Agency: Six die in renewed fierce clashes|
|      |           |in Mogadishu                                         |
|      |18/07/2008 |Report of the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia - 18th  |
|      |           |July 2007                                            |
|      |20/07/2008 |House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee -         |
|      |           |Somalia/Ethiopia Human Rights Annual Report 2007     |
|      |22/07/2008 |Extract from Hansard                                 |
|      |23/07/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Country months away from major crisis |
|      |29/07/2008 |Internal displacement monitoring centre: Somalia:    |
|      |           |Massive displacement and humanitarian need           |
|      |29/07/2008 |Terrorism Focus: New Strategy of killing aid workers |
|      |           |in Somalia - but whose strategy is it?               |
|      |29/07/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency: Clashes|
|      |           |in Mogadishu, displaced in camps without food or     |
|      |           |medicine                                             |
|      |30/07/2008 |Country of Origin Information Service (COIS) - Report|
|      |           |on Somalia report                                    |
|      |31/07/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |July 2008                                            |
|      |31/07/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Leaders decry killing, abduction of   |
|      |           |aid workers                                          |
|      |August 2008|US Department of State Bureau of African Affairs:    |
|      |           |Somalia Profile                                      |
|      |01/08/2008 |Aromia Times: Human Rights Abuse in the Horn of      |
|      |           |Africa                                               |
|      |01/08/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: IDPs out of food, more clashes in     |
|      |           |Beletweyne                                           |
|      |03/08/2008 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Terror bomb kills 20 in     |
|      |           |Mogadishu, political crisis deepens                  |
|      |05/08/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Mogadishu - Ethiopian military bomb homes, kill      |
|      |           |civilians                                            |
|      |07/08/2008 |UN: UN under-Secretary General for Humanitarian      |
|      |           |Affairs and Emergency Relief Co-Ordinator alarmed by |
|      |           |civilian casualties in Somalia                       |
|      |07/08/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Aid delivery problems for rural IDPs  |
|      |08/08/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Death threats as UN raises alarm over |
|      |           |increase in attacks                                  |
|      |11/08/2008 |Xinhua News Agency: Six civilians, two Ethiopian     |
|      |           |soldiers killed in Somalia                           |
|      |11/08/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Medicine needed in Mogadishu, as clashes continue    |
|      |           |everywhere                                           |
|      |13/08/2008 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |14/08/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Ethiopian troops kill civilians on minibus           |
|      |15/08/2008 |Reuters Foundation: About 50 people killed in        |
|      |           |separate Somalia attacks                             |
|      |16/08/2008 |allAfrica.com: 56 killed, 80 wounded in Somalia      |
|      |           |violence                                             |
|      |17/08/2008 |Agence France-Presse: UN says two employees feared   |
|      |           |dead in Somali kidnapping                            |
|      |20/08/2008 |Xinhua News Agency: Fourteen die in Somalia's        |
|      |           |escalating violence                                  |
|      |21/08/2008 |Voice of America: Somalia peace deal jeopardized by  |
|      |           |continuing violence                                  |
|      |22/08/2008 |allAfrica.com: Somalia's Islamists seize Kismayo     |
|      |25/08/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Thousands displaced as insurgents take|
|      |           |control of Kismayo                                   |
|      |25/08/2008 |In Somalia, it's all about the clans                 |
|      |26/08/2008 |Food Security Analysis Unit Somalia: More than 3.2   |
|      |           |Million People in Humanitarian Crisis                |
|      |26/08/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Conditions getting worse in IDP camps |
|      |27/08/2008 |Garowe Online: Ethiopian PM signals shift over       |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |27/08/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Violence forces MSF to close     |
|      |           |clinic in Mogadishu                                  |
|      |29/08/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: IRIN interview with Mark Bowden, the  |
|      |           |UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator             |
|      |30/08/2008 |Miraya FM: UN envoy to Somalia urges for help        |
|      |31/08/2008 |UNHCR - Somalia - New displacement Map - 1st-31st    |
|      |           |August 2008                                          |
|      |31/08/2008 |Garowe Online: Divided over Djibouti Agreement,      |
|      |           |Islamists fight                                      |
|      |31/08/2008 |Somalia Online: New Islamic Court opened in central  |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |           |UNOCHA - Monthly Cluster Reports January-August 2008 |
|      |           |UNOCHA - Somalia Humanitarian Overview January-August|
|      |           |2008                                                 |
|      |           |UN: Somalia Humanitarian overview - September 2008   |
|      |           |Witness Statement of Matt Bryden - September         |
|      |           |2008...(Nairobi evidence)                            |
|      |Sept. 2008 |COIS Information Requests and Answers with source    |
|      |           |material                                             |
|      |Sept. 2008 |UKBA policy document: Operational Guidance Note on   |
|      |           |Somalia - v16.0                                      |
|      |01/09/2008 |Summary of Conversation with Alex Tyler...(Nairobi   |
|      |           |evidence)                                            |
|      |02/09/2008 |Report from a meeting with a senior official of a UN |
|      |           |agency...(Nairobi evidence)                          |
|      |02/09/2008 |Interview with a member of an international agency in|
|      |           |Nairobi who is a senior Somali expert...(Nairobi     |
|      |           |evidence)                                            |
|      |02/09/2008 |Witness statement of an international aid            |
|      |           |worker...(Nairobi evidence)                          |
|      |02/09/2008 |Witness statement of a journalist...(Nairobi         |
|      |           |evidence)                                            |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi - List of|
|      |           |Questions...(Nairobi evidence)                       |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 1...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 2...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 3...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 4...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 5...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 6...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 7...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 8...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 9...(Nairobi evidence)                     |
|      |02/09/2008 |Evidence from interviews conducted with Somali       |
|      |           |nationals in East Leigh District of Nairobi -        |
|      |           |Interview 10...(Nairobi evidence)                    |
|      |02/09/2008 |Deutsche Presse Agentur: Aid agency closes clinic in |
|      |           |violent Mogadishu area                               |
|      |03/09/2008 |Report of Conversation with UN Special Representative|
|      |           |Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah...(Nairobi evidence)           |
|      |03/09/2008 |Report of a meeting with 2 Security Advisors to all  |
|      |           |NGOs operating in Somalia...(Nairobi evidence)       |
|      |03/09/2008 |Menkhaus, K (ENOUGH): Somalia - A Country in Peril, a|
|      |           |Policy Nightmare                                     |
|      |03/09/2008 |Garowe Online: 9 Somali police officers 'slaughtered'|
|      |           |in Mogadishu                                         |
|      |04/09/2008 |Witness statement of a Humanitarian Worker...(Nairobi|
|      |           |evidence)                                            |
|      |04/09/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: IDPs plead for help in southern town  |
|      |04/09/2008 |Security Council statement on signing of Djibouti    |
|      |           |agreement                                            |
|      |04/09/2008 |CIA World Factbook - Somalia                         |
|      |05/09/2008 |Witness statement of CA                              |
|      |06/09/2008 |Witness statement of a Somali journalist working for |
|      |           |an international news agency...(Nairobi evidence)    |
|      |06/09/2008 |Statement of Hon. Professor Mohamed Omar             |
|      |           |Dalha...(Nairobi evidence)                           |
|      |09/09/2008 |Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary|
|      |           |General for Children and Armed Conflict: Changing    |
|      |           |nature of warfare makes children more vulnerable     |
|      |10/09/2008 |Famine Early Warning System Network; United States   |
|      |           |Agency for International Development - Somalia: Food |
|      |           |Security Alert 10 Sep 2008 - Decreasing humanitarian |
|      |           |access exacerbates already extreme food insecurity   |
|      |10/09/2008 |USAID: Somalia - Complex Emergency                   |
|      |11/09/2008 |United Nations News Service: Attacks on Somali       |
|      |           |students, teachers and schools draw condemnation from|
|      |           |UN                                                   |
|      |11/09/2008 |UNICEF: Somalia: latest                              |
|      |11/09/2008 |Afrol News: Somali women more angaged in             |
|      |           |decision-making                                      |
|      |03/05/2008-|Behind the Mask - cuttings                           |
|      |11/09/2008 |                                                     |
|      |12/09/2008 |Missionary International Service News Agency:        |
|      |           |Ethiopian troops open fire on civilians              |
|      |15/09/2008 |Reuters: Somali insurgency escalates, 15 civilians   |
|      |           |die                                                  |
|      |16/09/2008 |Witness statement of Tony Burns...(Nairobi evidence) |
|      |16/09/2008 |Witness statement of Muhunthan                       |
|      |           |Paramesvaran...(Nairobi evidence)                    |
|      |16/09/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Nearly 9,500 Somalis die in      |
|      |           |insurgency-group                                     |
|      |18/09/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Families forced into camps by drought |
|      |19/09/2008 |OCHA: Horn of Africa Alert Over review and resource  |
|      |           |gaps                                                 |
|      |19/09/2008 |DPA: Somali insurgents attack African Peace keeping  |
|      |           |flight                                               |
|      |19/09/2008 |UN - Press Conference by the Secretary General for   |
|      |           |humanitarian affairs and Relief Co-Ordinator John    |
|      |           |Holmes on food crisis in Horn of Africa              |
|      |19/09/2008 |Email from Alex Tyler, UNHCR Protection Officer      |
|      |19/09/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Battles rock Mogadishu, Islamists|
|      |           |show strength                                        |
|      |19/09/2008 |Deutshce Presse Agentur: Somali insurgents attack    |
|      |           |African Union peacekeeping flight                    |
|      |19/09/2008 |pr-inside.com: Ethiopia Starving Somalis in Ogaden   |
|      |21/09/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Mogadishu rocked by worse shelling yet|
|      |21/09/2008 |UNHCR Refworld - various items on Somalia            |
|      |22/09/2008 |DPA: At least 6 Somali civilians die in attack on    |
|      |           |peace keepers                                        |
|      |22/09/2008 |Reuters: Somali insurgents take Mogadishu, 23 dead   |
|      |22/09/2008 |MISNA: Mogadishu: Civilians killed in attack on      |
|      |           |African peace keepers                                |
|      |24/09/2008 |DPA: At least 13 civilians dead in heavy Somali      |
|      |           |clashes                                              |
|      |24/09/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Hospitals "swamped" as clashes        |
|      |           |continue                                             |
|      |24/09/2008 |MISNA: Mogadishu: exodus of civilians out of city    |
|      |25/09/2008 |UN Agency UN News service - Thousands of Somalis flee|
|      |           |capital after fresh fighting this week               |
|      |25/09/2008 |Reuters: Analysis - Insurgents take upper hand in    |
|      |           |Somalia                                              |
|      |26/09/2008 |US Aid: Horn of Africa - Complex emergency           |
|      |26/09/2008 |Xinhua Newsagency: Ten die in escalating fighting in |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |26/09/2008 |Government of Norway: Lack of security is            |
|      |           |exacerbating crisis in Somalia                       |
|      |26/09/2008 |UNOCHA: Somalia situation report No 38               |
|      |26/09/2008 |UNHCR: Fresh exodus from Mogadishu, thousands        |
|      |           |reaching Kenya                                       |
|      |26/09/2008 |Xinhua Newsagency: Ten die in escalating fighting in |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |26/09/2008 |Official AFP: Crows loot food from trucks in Somalia |
|      |26/09/2008 |ICRC: Somalia: ICRC urges all sides to respect       |
|      |           |international humanitarian law                       |
|      |28/09/2008 |BBC News: US destroyer nears Somalia pirates         |
|      |28/09/2008 |allAfrica.com: 10 killed in Mogadishu's Bakara Market|
|      |           |Shelling                                             |
|      |28/09/2008 |Garowe Online: Somalia MP accuses AU peacekeepers of |
|      |           |'massacre'                                           |
|      |29/09/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Fighting forces 18,500 to flee        |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |29/09/2008 |allAfrica.com: Fighting forces 18,500 to flee        |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |29/09/2008 |Al Shabab are criminals: Somalia opposition official |
|      |30/09/2008 |Garowe Online: Opposition feud over Ethiopia pullout |
|      |           |of central Somalia                                   |
|      |Oct 2008   |UKBA policy documents: Operational Guidance Note on  |
|      |           |Somalia - v. 17.0                                    |
|      |01/10/2008 |Oromia Online: Ethiopian Agression of the Border Town|
|      |           |of Moyale, Kenya                                     |
|      |01/10/2008 |Africa Programme - Piracy in Somalia, threatening    |
|      |           |global trade, feeding local wars                     |
|      |01/10/2008 |VOA News: Red Cross: Life in Mogadishu remains       |
|      |           |precarious                                           |
|      |01/10/2008 |Garowe Online: 9 killed in Somalia market bombardment|
|      |02/10/2008 |MSF: Somalia: MSF sees surge in wounded and displaces|
|      |           |as violence increases in Mogadishu                   |
|      |03/10/2008 |(COIS) - Country of Origin Information Report on     |
|      |           |Somalia report                                       |
|      |03/10/2008 |UN OCHA: Somalia: Situation report No 39             |
|      |03/10/2008 |Reuters: Somalia is the missed war - Western Aid     |
|      |           |Agency                                               |
|      |03/10/2008 |UN Radio: 80 dead, more than 100 wounded in Somalia  |
|      |           |fighting                                             |
|      |03/10/2008 |SSACID weapon and currency tracking charts for       |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |06/10/2008 |BBC News: Somalia : Ghost city wracked by war        |
|      |06/10/2008 |BBC News: Somalia is most ignored tragedy            |
|      |06/10/2008 |Statement by 52 NGO's on a rapidly deteriorating     |
|      |           |crisis in Somalia Save the Children Alliance         |
|      |06/10/2008 |MISNA: More violence in Mogadishu, growing concern   |
|      |           |for civilians                                        |
|      |06/10/2008 |Reuters: Violence sends 37,000 Somalis fleeing       |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |06/10/2008 |MISNA: More violence in Mogadishu, growing concern   |
|      |           |for civilians                                        |
|      |06/10/2008 |Xinhua News Agency - Nine civilians die in new       |
|      |           |shelling in Mogadishu                                |
|      |07/10/2008 |MISNA: After Bomb UN withdraws personnel from Merca  |
|      |07/10/2008 |Transcript of Press Conference by Secretary General  |
|      |           |Ban Ki-Moon at UN Headquarters                       |
|      |07/10/2008 |IRIN: Somalia: Poor rains intensify human suffering  |
|      |           |and deprivation - report                             |
|      |07/10/2008 |UKBA policy document: Operational Guidance Note on   |
|      |           |Somalia - v17.0                                      |
|      |07/10/2008 |UN: SC/9467: Security Council asks                   |
|      |           |Nations...to...fight piracy...                       |
|      |09/10/2008 |UN OCHA: Somalia: Floods add to IDP misery in lower  |
|      |           |Shabelle                                             |
|      |13/10/2008 |Reuters: Insurgents attack African Union troops in   |
|      |           |Mogadishu                                            |
|      |14/10/2008 |Witness statement of Catherine-Lune Grayson and Maja |
|      |           |Munk, Danish Refugee Council                         |
|      |16/10/2008 |MISNA: More fighting in Mogadishu                    |
|      |16/10/2008 |Xinhua Newsagency: Heavy fighting near Mogadishu     |
|      |           |airport                                              |
|      |17/10/2008 |MISNA: High death toll from Mogadishu to Baidoa      |
|      |17/10/2008 |MISNA: Heavy toll: Thousands flee as corpse collected|
|      |20/10/2008 |UNWFP: The Living Nightmare of Afgoye                |
|      |20/10/2008 |Reuters Foundation: Fact Box - Violence against Aid  |
|      |           |workers in Somalia                                   |
|      |20/10/2008 |MISNA: Mogadishu - Insecurity leaves thousands out of|
|      |           |school                                               |
|      |26/10/2008 |Garowe Online: Somali foes sign ceasefie deal in     |
|      |           |Djibouti                                             |
|      |25/11/2008 |BBC News: Q & A Somali conflict                      |

-----------------------
[1] Amended 21 December 2008 under Rule 60, Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005.
[2] BVerwG 10 C 43.07 (June 2008).

