
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

        MB (para 317: in country applications) Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00091

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House        Date of Hearing: 8 August 2006
                                             Promulgated on: 8 December 2006
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                        Senior Immigration Judge Warr

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Alam, instructed by Chakravorti & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

Where applications for leave to remain fall to be  decided  under  paragraph
317 of HC 395, the correct approach is  the  same  as  that  under  previous
versions of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant  needs  to  show  that  he
would meet the substantive requirements of paragraph 317 if  he  were  still
in his own country.  It is not sufficient to show that he is  able  to  meet
the requirements of the Rules whilst he is in the United Kingdom.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the appellant,  a  citizen
    of Bangladesh, against the decision of the respondent  on  23  February
    2005 refusing to vary her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  the
    dependent relative of  her  daughter,  the  sponsor.   The  refusal  is
    expressed as being under paragraph  319  with  reference  to  paragraph
    317(iii), because the appellant had, in the respondent's  view,  failed
    to establish her financial dependency on the sponsor.  No matters other
    than that one were  canvassed  before  the  Immigration  Judge  at  the
    hearing of the appellant's appeal on  6  April  2006.   He  heard  oral
    evidence and also  considered  certain  documents  said  to  assist  in
    establishing the appellant's case.  In his determination  he  wrote  as
    follows:

      "20.  It is common ground that the appellant came here as  a  visitor
             in 2004 and sought indefinite leave to remain four months after
             arriving in the UK.  At that point she had the benefit  of  the
             advice of solicitors and had been with her daughter and son-in-
             law and enjoying the company of her granddaughters for  several
             months.  This, I find, to be of some  significance  because  it
             means that she was not a frail old lady  without  legal  advice
             and family support.  Furthermore, the son-in-law  was  at  that
             time alive as he was for a year after the date the  application
             was made, and, indeed, for almost a year after she was notified
             of  the  reason  for  refusal,  namely  the  absence   of   any
             documentary evidence of monies sent.  Yet I am asked to find it
             plausible that no reference would be made to the payment  books
             now produced even  though  they  were  very  likely  to  be  of
             considerable evidential value if they really were  evidence  of
             payments intended for the appellant.  I am invited  to  believe
             that each of these ten payments  was  intended  for,  and  were
             received by the appellant, but I do not find this credible.  If
             the son-in-law wanted to send her money in this way it is  much
             more likely he would select just one person who  the  appellant
             knew, if only to avoid confusing an elderly person.  It  is,  I
             find, highly implausible that he would select  people  some  of
             whom the appellant did not  even  recognise.   Furthermore,  it
             makes no sense at all that he would on two of the  eight  dates
             send monies to two  different  people  intended  for  the  same
             beneficiary.  If this were a satisfactory way of getting  money
             to the appellant there is no explanation as to why there is  no
             record of even a single payment in the three and  a  half  year
             period between May 1997 and November 2000 during which there is
             documentary evidence of only one family member  having  visited
             Bangladesh (Mr Islam in July  1998,  August  1999  and  January
             2000).  It is, I find, highly implausible that  in  the  eleven
             months for which the son-in-law was  alive  after  the  refusal
             decision he would  fail  to  remember  and  draw  the  family's
             attention to the payment books if they were,  indeed,  evidence
             of payments made for the benefit of the  appellant.   When  all
             this is considered together I find that these payments are  not
             likely to have been intended for the benefit of  the  appellant
             and I find the appellant's evidence about this not credible.


      21.   The appellant does not have to  show  that  she  is  maintained
             exclusively by her relatives here and I accept that what may to
             those of us in the UK be a very small amount of  money  may  to
             many in Bangladesh be quite a large sum.  However,  apart  from
             Momtaz Islam, there is not one person who has provided evidence
             of delivering money to the appellant and although Ms Islam said
             she has helped maintain the appellant in the  last  two  years,
             she has provided no corroborative evidence  this  and,  in  any
             event, for almost all of that time the appellant  has  been  in
             the UK.


      22.   I accept that the  appellant  is  the  widowed  mother  of  one
             present and settled in the UK and probably could be  maintained
             and accommodated satisfactorily by her daughter with  the  help
             of  Momtaz  Islam.   However,  I  find   that   she   has   not
             demonstrated,  on  a  balance  of  probability,  that  she  was
             dependent wholly or mainly on her daughter her whilst  she  was
             in Bangladesh."

      The Immigration Judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

 2. The grounds for reconsideration raise two  principal  issues.   One  is
    that the Immigration Judge erred  in  his  assessment  of  credibility.
    That ground does not appear  to  have  found  favour  with  the  Senior
    Immigration Judge who ordered  reconsideration,  and  was  not  pursued
    before us.  We can see no conceivable basis on which it could  be  said
    that the Immigration Judge's conclusions on credibility were not in law
    open to him.  His findings of fact must  therefore  stand.   The  other
    ground is that the Immigration Judge in essence asked himself the wrong
    question.  He dismissed the appeal because he was  not  satisfied  that
    the  appellant  was  dependent  on  the  sponsor  whilst  she  was   in
    Bangladesh.   But,  it  is  said,  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule  is
    expressed in the present tense and this  is  an  in-country  appeal  to
    which s85(4) of the 2002 Act applies.  It is therefore argued that  the
    question the Immigration  Judge  should  have  asked  himself  was  not
    whether the appellant was dependent upon her daughter whilst she was in
    Bangladesh but whether she is dependent on her daughter at the  present
    time and now that she is in the United  Kingdom.   Reconsideration  was
    ordered specifically so that the Tribunal could give  guidance  on  the
    proper interpretation of the  Immigration  Rules  and  s85(4)  in  such
    circumstances.

 3. At the hearing before us Mr Alam expanded on the point in the  grounds.
    He asserted that paragraph 317(iii) is to be treated on  its  own,  and
    not by comparison with other elements of paragraph 317 or with the rest
    of the Immigration Rules.  He said  that  each  case,  and  hence  each
    question under the Immigration Rules, demanded an individual  decision.
    He referred us to a number of authorities, including R v IAT  ex  parte
    Bastiampillai [1983] 2 ER 844, Lana v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 17, R  v  SSHD
    ex parte Bamtefa [1995] Imm AR 610 and in In re Barretto [1994] QB 392.
     He placed particular emphasis on the last and on the entry under  "is"
    in Stroud's Judicial Dictionary in support of  his  submission  that  a
    requirement in the Immigration Rules that an applicant is dependent  on
    another must necessarily  refer  to  dependence  at  the  time  of  any
    relevant  decision.   As  we  said  at  the  hearing,  we  gain  little
    assistance from those authorities.  The Immigration Rules are not to be
    construed  as  a  statute,  and  in  our  view  every  element  of  the
    Immigration Rules needs to be  construed  in  context  rather  than  in
    isolation.  Mr Alam also referred to the preceding  Immigration  Rules,
    HC 251, and to the  Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions  which  he
    cited only in part and was not able to tell us about the content of the
    missing part.  Again, we found little assistance in these materials and
    it is fair to say that we think it extremely unlikely that the  missing
    part of the IDIs would have assisted us further.  Mr Alam further  told
    us, rather to our surprise, that he had not been able to  discover  any
    authorities more directly to the point.  He submitted that the  meaning
    of  paragraph  317(iii)  was  clear  and  that  the  question  for  the
    Immigration Judge was whether, at the date of the hearing  before  him,
    the appellant was dependent upon her sponsor.

 4. Mr Avery cited  no  authorities  but  made  submissions  based  on  his
    understanding of the purpose of the Rules.  He said  that  the  context
    was clear: the rule concerned those living abroad who needed help  from
    their United Kingdom relatives, and was not a rule intended to  promote
    choice.  If the requirements of paragraph 317(iii) were interpreted  in
    the manner urged by Mr Alam, the Rules would have a differential impact
    on those who actually were abroad.  That could not be right:  paragraph
    317 deals with both with those abroad and those in the  United  Kingdom
    and it cannot be intended that a Rule dealing together with individuals
    in those two categories should, by the use of the same words, apply  so
    differently to them.

 5. In reply, Mr Alam said that he  readily  accepted  that  paragraph  317
    applies to applications for entry clearance and for  leave  to  remain,
    but reminded us of s85(4).

 6. We do not think it is right to treat a single requirement of  paragraph
    317 in isolation.  The proper meaning of the requirements of the  Rules
    can be understood only by looking at the paragraph as a whole.   It  is
    as follows.

      "317  The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave
        to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as the parent, grandparent
        or other dependent relative of a person present and settled in  the
        United Kingdom are that the person:
             (i)  is related to a person present and settled in  the  United
                 Kingdom in one of thE following ways:
                  (a)  mother or grandmother who is a widow aged 65 years or
                  over; or
      (b)   father or grandfather who is a widower aged 65  years  or  over;
or
                  (c)  parents or grandparents travelling together  of  whom
                     at least one is aged 65 or over; or
                  (d)  a parent or grandparent  aged  65  or  over  who  has
                     entered into a  second  relationship  of  marriage  or
                     civil partnership but cannot look to the spouse, civil
                     partner or children of that  second  relationship  for
                     financial support; and where the person settled in the
                     United Kingdom is able and  willing  to  maintain  the
                     parent or grandparent and any spouse or civil  partner
                     or child of  the  second  relationship  who  would  be
                     admissible as a dependant; or
                  (e)  parent or grandparent under the age of 65  if  living
                     alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom   in   the   most
                     exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly
                     dependent financially  on  relatives  settled  in  the
                     United Kingdom; or
                  (f)  the son, daughter, sister,  brother,  uncle  or  aunt
                     over the age of 18 if living alone outside the  United
                     Kingdom  in   the   most   exceptional   compassionate
                     circumstances  and  mainly  dependent  financially  on
                     relatives settled in the United Kingdom; and
             (ii)      is joining or accompanying a person  who  is  present
                 and settled in the United Kingdom or who  is  on  the  same
                 occasion being admitted for settlement; and
             (iii)     is financially wholly  or  mainly  dependent  on  the
                 relative present and settled in the United Kingdom; and
             (iv)      can, and will, be accommodated  adequately,  together
                 with any dependants, without recourse to public  funds,  in
                 accommodation  which   the   sponsor   owns   or   occupies
                 exclusively; and
             (iva)     can, and will,  be  maintained  adequately,  together
                 with any dependants, without recourse to public funds; and
             (v)  has no other close relatives in his own country to whom he
                 could turn for financial support; and
             (vi)  if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid  United  Kingdom
                 entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

 7. It is absolutely clear that  (obviously  with  the  exception  of  sub-
    paragraph  (vi)  as  the  sub-paragraph   itself   makes   clear)   the
    requirements of paragraph 317 are the same for those seeking  leave  to
    enter as for those seeking leave to remain.  Mr Alam's argument is that
    the requirements of sub-paragraph (iii) are, because of the use of  the
    present tense, to be taken as referring to the literal position at  the
    time of any decision:  that  is  to  say  to  the  position  while  the
    applicant is abroad, if the application is for entry clearance, and  to
    the position whilst the applicant is within the United Kingdom  if  the
    application is for leave to remain.  We accept  Mr  Avery's  submission
    that that would make  a  completely  unwarrantable  difference  in  the
    meaning of the Rule as it applied to applications for  leave  to  enter
    and  applications  for  leave  to  remain.   Indeed,  in  most   cases,
    compliance with this part of the Rules would be virtually automatic  in
    cases of applications of leave to remain, because  the  applicant,  who
    had entered the United Kingdom for some other purpose, would  have  had
    to  demonstrate  access  to  sufficient  funds  for   maintenance   and
    accommodation, which, if the applicant  was  indeed  dependent  on  the
    United Kingdom relative (as required in general by paragraph 317) would
    be likely to amount to  financial  dependence  on  the  United  Kingdom
    relative whilst in the United Kingdom.

 8. There is, however, a further reason why  we  cannot  accept  Mr  Alam's
    submissions on the meaning  of  paragraph  317(iii).   We  can  see  no
    possible basis for interpreting the word "is" in that sub-paragraph  as
    having a different meaning from "is" in paragraph 317(i).  In that sub-
    paragraph the word introduces all the definitions of relatives who  can
    qualify under paragraph 317.   In  relation  to  the  fifth  and  sixth
    categories, the Rules require that the  applicant  "is"  related  as  a
    relative in specified categories "living outside the United Kingdom  in
    the  most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances".   If  Mr  Alam's
    interpretation of "is" were  accepted,  no  application  for  leave  to
    remain in that category could ever be successful, because the applicant
    would not be living outside the United  Kingdom.   Further,  the  third
    category refers to  relatives  "travelling  together".   Again,  it  is
    difficult to see how that requirement could be met  in  an  application
    for leave to remain, when the travel is already past.

 9. We agree with Mr Alam that, in applying paragraph 317  to  applications
    for leave to remain, the question is not what the position  was  before
    the applicant left her home country.  But nor is  it  simply  what  the
    applicant's position is now, whilst she is in the United Kingdom.   The
    correct question is what the applicant's position would be if,  instead
    of being in the United Kingdom, she were in her own country.   That  is
    the way in which the Rule is applied in equal terms to those who are in
    the United Kingdom and those who are not.  Not only does it  appear  to
    us that this reading of paragraph 317(iii) accords  with  common  sense
    and with its purpose: it is also consistent  with  authorities  on  the
    meaning of previous versions of this rule, including  Kaur  (4279)  and
    Uppal (11275), both decisions of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  and
    Pawar, a decision of the Court of Appeal on 29 July 1993.

10. It follows from what we have said that we consider that the Immigration
    Judge erred in considering solely what was the position in  Bangladesh.
    He should have considered what the position  would  have  been  if  the
    appellant had still been in Bangladesh.

11. Section 85(4) adds little to the appellant's advantage.  It makes clear
    that the Tribunal needs to consider evidence post-dating the  decision,
    if any such evidence relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision  is
    adduced before it.  Section 85(4) does  not  change  the  question  the
    Tribunal has to ask itself: it only changes the date at which it has to
    give the answer, and opens the door to newer evidence.

12. The Immigration Judge found that the appellant had not  discharged  the
    burden of proof on her to show financial dependency on the  sponsor  at
    any  time  when  she  was  in  Bangladesh.   There  is  accordingly  no
    conceivable evidential basis upon which he could have  found  that  the
    appellant would have been financially wholly or mainly  dependent  upon
    the sponsor if she had still  been  in  Bangladesh.   It  is  therefore
    inevitable that he would have dismissed the  appeal  if  he  had  asked
    himself what we have decided is the correct question.  For this  reason
    his error of law was not material.

13. For the foregoing reasons we affirm the  Immigration  Judge's  decision
    dismissing this appeal.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

