
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         KK and ors (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 & 7 July 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     KK
                                                             First Appellant

                                     Sp
                                                            Second Appellant

                                     sc
                                                             Third Appellant


                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the first and second appellants: Mr M Mullins, instructed by Gillman-
Smith Lee
For the third appellant: Ms M Phelan, instructed by Thompson & Co
For the Respondent: Mr S Kovats QC, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor


1.    Law

   (a)      For the purposes of determining whether a  person  is  "of"  or
        "has" a nationality within the  meaning  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the
        Refugee Convention, it is convenient to  distinguish  between  cases
        where a person (i) is (already) of that nationality; (ii) is not  of
        that nationality but is entitled to acquire it; and (iii) is not  of
        that nationality but may be able to acquire it.

   (b)      Cases within (i) and (ii) are cases where the person is "of" or
        "has" the nationality in question; cases within (iii) are not.

   (c)      For these purposes there is no separate concept of  "effective"
        nationality; the issue is the  availability  of  protection  in  the
        country in question.

   (d)      Nationality of any State is a  matter  for  that  State's  law,
        constitution and (to a limited extent) practice,  proof  of  any  of
        which is by evidence, the assessment  of  which  is  for  the  court
        deciding the protection claim.

   (e)      As eligibility for  Refugee  Convention  protection  is  not  a
        matter of choice, evidence going to a person's status  within  cases
        (i) and (ii) has to be on "best efforts" basis, and evidence of  the
        attitude of the State in question to a person who seeks reasons  for
        not being removed to that State may be of very limited relevance.

2.    Korea

   (a)      The law and the  constitution  of  South  Korea  (ROK)  do  not
        recognise North Korea (DPRK) as a separate State.

   (b)      Under South Korean law,  most  nationals  of  North  Korea  are
        nationals  of  South  Korea  as  well,  because  they  acquire  that
        nationality at birth by descent from a (North)  Korean  parent,  and
        fall therefore within category (i) in 1(a) above.

   (c)      South Korea will make rigorous enquiries to  ensure  that  only
        those who are its nationals are recognised as such but the  evidence
        does not show that it has a practice of refusing  to  recognise  its
        nationals who genuinely seek to exercise the rights of South  Korean
        nationals.

   (d)      South Korean law does not  generally  permit  dual  nationality
        (North Korean nationality being ignored for this purpose).

   (e)      South Korean practice appears to presume that  those  who  have
        been absent from the Korean Peninsula for more than ten  years  have
        acquired  another  nationality   displacing   their   South   Korean
        nationality; such persons therefore move from category (i), in  1(a)
        above, to category (iii).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. These appeals raise  issues  about  the  interaction  of  the  Refugee
      Convention  and  national  legislation  granting  or   allowing   dual
      nationality, specifically with reference  to  North  Korea  and  South
      Korea.  This determination makes observations about those issues,  and
      gives Country Guidance (summarised at paragraph 90(2)  below)  on  the
      circumstances in which North Koreans are nationals of South Korea.

   2. The United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees  (The
      Refugee Convention) provides surrogate  international  protection  for
      those who are outside their own  countries  for  fear  of  persecution
      there. Following amendment in 1967, the main part of the definition of
      a refugee for the purposes of the  Convention  in  Article  1A  is  as
      follows:

         "For the purposes of the present  Convention,  the  term  "refugee"
         shall apply to any person who:

         ...

         (2)      ...owing to well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for
             reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of   a
             particular social group or political opinion,  is  outside  the
             country of his nationality and is  unable  or,  owing  to  such
             fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection  of  that
             country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the
             country of his former habitual residence is unable or, owing to
             such fear, is unwilling to return to it.

             In the case of a person who has more than one nationality,  the
             term "the country of his nationality" shall mean  each  of  the
             countries of which he is a national, and a person shall not  be
             deemed to be lacking the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
             nationality if, without any valid reason based on  well-founded
             fear, he has not availed himself of the protection  of  one  of
             the countries of which he is a national."

   3. The latter paragraph operates to preserve the nature of  international
      protection as surrogate or of last resort. If a person has nationality
      of a country where he is  not  at  risk  of  persecution,  it  is  the
      protection of that country rather than of the international  community
      that he should seek. In such circumstances the international community
      of signatories to the Refugee  Convention  is  neither  bound  by  the
      Convention to offer him protection under it, nor even  concerned  with
      him: as  a  national  of  a  country  where  he  is  not  at  risk  of
      persecution, he ought not to be of any international concern.

   4. The phrasing of the references to nationality in Article 1A(2)  is  in
      the present tense: "has more  than  one  nationality";  "countries  of
      which  he  is  a  national".  It  may  be  necessary  to  draw   clear
      distinctions between three possible situations. The first is  where  a
      person has nationality of more than one country: that is to  say  each
      of the countries in question recognises him as a national. The  second
      is where a person is entitled to nationality of a second country: that
      is to say that recognition  of  his  nationality  will  depend  on  an
      application by him, but on the facts his nationality is  a  matter  of
      entitlement, not of discretion. The third is where  a  person  may  be
      able to obtain nationality of a second country: that is to say,  where
      it cannot be said that, on application, he would be  recognised  as  a
      national, but that he might be  granted  nationality.  The  difference
      between the first and the  second  situation  is  of  status,  not  of
      documentation. A person may be a national of a country  that  has  not
      yet issued him with any  documentation  evidencing  that  nationality.
      Such a person exemplifies the first situation, not the second.

   5. The Korean Peninsula is divided into two  States,  each  of  which  is
      recognised as such in international law and accordingly  has  its  own
      citizens. The northern state is the Democratic  People's  Republic  of
      Korea (which we shall call "North Korea"; some of the sources use  the
      abbreviation "DPRK"). The southern is the Republic of Korea (which  we
      shall call "South Korea"; some of the  sources  use  the  abbreviation
      "ROK"). For historical and political reasons South Korea  regards  all
      Koreans, including citizens of  North  Korea,  as  citizens  of  South
      Korea.

   6. The regime in North Korea has attracted  widespread  disapproval,  and
      citizens of North Korea who have left North Korea may have  relatively
      little difficulty in establishing a well-founded fear  of  persecution
      there. The question raised by these appeals is whether  South  Korea's
      attitude to them as citizens of South Korea as well deprives  them  of
      the status of refugees, unless they can show a risk of persecution  in
      South Korea too.

The appellants

   7. The three appellants have a number of features in common. Each of them
      came to the United Kingdom illegally, and claimed asylum on the  basis
      of nationality of North Korea. In each case, the Secretary of  State's
      starting position was that he did not accept  that  the  claimant  was
      from North Korea. Each  of  the  appellants  was  the  subject  of  an
      immigration decision giving notice of intended removal as  an  illegal
      entrant. The appellants appealed to Immigration Judges, who  found  in
      each case that they  were  North  Korean  nationals,  but  that  their
      nationality also of South Korea (where they had not  established  that
      they would be at any risk) prevented  them  from  being  refugees  and
      meant that their removal there would not put  the  United  Kingdom  in
      breach of  any  international  obligations.  Each  of  the  appellants
      sought, and obtained, an order for reconsideration. Under the Transfer
      of Functions of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  Order  2010,  the
      reconsiderations continue as appeals to this Tribunal.

   8. In earlier proceedings  in  each  case,  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal ruled that the Immigration Judge had erred in his approach to
      the question whether the appellant was properly to be  regarded  as  a
      national of North Korea. Our task is to re-make the decisions  on  the
      appellants' appeals.

   9. The first and second appellants are partners, each born in North Korea
      in  1978.  They  each  suffered  family  difficulties,  and  travelled
      illegally from North Korea into China, the first appellant in 1991 and
      the second in 1990. They met in  China  in  1995  and  started  living
      together in 2000. They had no status in China and were continually  at
      risk of raids by the authorities looking for North  Koreans  illegally
      in China. Following an incident in the village where they were living,
      in 2007 they left China, arriving in the United Kingdom on 15 December
      2007. They claimed asylum a few days later.

  10. Their claims were refused, and each was served on 28 April  2008  with
      notice of a removal decision. The proposed destination was China. As a
      result  of  discussions  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing   before
      Immigration Judge O'Flynn, the notice of decision was amended,  giving
      China and South  Korea  as  possible  removal  destinations,  and  the
      Immigration  Judge  accordingly  considered  the  first   and   second
      appellants'  positions  if  they  were  removed  to  either  of  those
      countries.

  11. The Immigration Judge made firm and clear findings that the appellants
      were to be regarded as credible in their claimed histories. There  was
      before him evidence of  an  expert  who  had  conducted  an  extensive
      interview with the first and second appellants  and  had  reached  the
      conclusion that their language and knowledge showed that they had been
      born and had lived for a while in North Korea, but that they had lived
      in China for many years. The Immigration Judge found  that  they  were
      North Korean nationals who had lived as children in North Korea.  They
      had crossed independently into China, the first appellant when he  was
      13 years old and the second when she was 11 years old, and  had  lived
      there illegally, met and formed a relationship, and had  continued  to
      live in China until they left for the United Kingdom in 2007. He found
      that they were at risk of persecution in North Korea  as  persons  who
      had left illegally and remained outside the  country.  He  found  that
      they could not lawfully be returned to China, because of the risk that
      from China they would be refouled to North  Korea.  But  he  dismissed
      their appeals for the following reason:

         "6.13    I  find,  from  all  the  evidence  before  me,  that  the
              appellants do have the option of "more than one nationality".
              They have the option of South Korea. Importantly, it is clear
              from the objective material that not only  could  they  avail
              themselves of the protection of  that  country  (alone,  that
              would not be enough for any number  of  countries  may  offer
              sanctuary) but South Korea  will,  or  may,  accept  them  as
              citizens. This, it seems to me, is the added ingredient which
              brings the appellants within Article 1A(2), paragraph  2,  of
              the 1951 Convention. It is  for  this  reason  that  I  would
              dismiss the asylum appeal. It is  of  fundamental  importance
              that I add the following. As I have found that the appellants
              originate from North Korea and that they face a real risk  of
              persecution in both North Korea and China, if, for any reason
              they do not successfully "pass" the screening procedures  for
              entry  to  South  Korea,   then   the   respondent   has   an
              international obligation to accept them as refugees."

  12. He dismissed the appeals on all grounds, because  he  considered  that
      the appellants' removal to South Korea would  not  breach  either  the
      Refugee Convention or Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights;  and  the  protection  available  to  them  in   South   Korea
      disqualified them from humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of
      the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC395.

  13. The third appellant was also born in North Korea in 1978.  Her  mother
      died in childbirth and she was raised  by  her  father.  She  and  her
      father left North Korea for China in 1986 or 1987.  They  lived  there
      together illegally until her father died in 1994,  and  she  continued
      thereafter to live on the farm at which her father had worked, and  to
      work there too. She received a share of the profit, which  she  saved.
      After living in China illegally for some 20 years, using  her  savings
      to pay for her passage and the arrangements for her illegal  entry  to
      the United Kingdom, she claimed asylum on 20 May 2008.

  14. On 4 July 2008 she was served with notice of a decision to remove  her
      as an illegal entrant. Although the Secretary of State did not at that
      stage accept that she was of North Korean  nationality,  the  proposed
      destination was North Korea. (This is a device often  adopted  by  the
      Secretary of State in cases  of  disputed  nationality,  in  order  to
      enable the question to come by way of appeal before the Tribunal.)  By
      the time the matter came before Immigration Judge Hodgkinson,  it  was
      clear on all sides  first,  that  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
      appellant was of North Korean nationality,  and,  secondly,  that  the
      proposed destinations for removal were China or South Korea.

  15. The Immigration Judge specifically found that the appellant had  lived
      illegally in China from about 1987 until  2008.  He  referred  to  the
      punishments in North Korea for those who leave the  country  illegally
      or remain outside it. He noted the Secretary of State's  disbelief  of
      the appellant's account of her raising  money  for  her  journey,  but
      observed that he needed to reach no concluded view  on  those  issues:
      the appellant could not be returned to China because of  the  risk  of
      refoulment to North Korea. But he decided that the appellant was, as a
      North Korean  citizen,  and  despite  her  long  absence  from  Korea,
      entitled to South Korean citizenship, and that her  removal  to  South
      Korea would not breach any  international  convention.  For  the  same
      reasons as applied to the first and second  appellants,  he  concluded
      that the third appellant was not entitled to  humanitarian  protection
      under paragraph 339C.

History

  16. The Korean Peninsula has a long history of civilisation  and  culture.
      The three kingdoms into which the peninsula was divided from the first
      century AD were essentially unified by  the  mid-seventh  Century  and
      subsequently governed as a single entity by the  Koryo  dynasty  (from
      which the name Korea is derived) and the Choson dynasty from  1392  to
      1910. Following the conclusion of  the  Russo-Japanese  war  in  1905,
      Japan forced Korea into a treaty under which Korea became a colony  of
      Japan.

  17. The defeat of Japan in the Second World War led to the division of the
      Korean Peninsula into separate occupation zones, divided by  the  line
      of latitude at 38 degrees. The northern half was  occupied  by  Soviet
      forces and the southern half  by  United  States  forces.  The  United
      States founded the Republic of Korea on 15 August  1948;  the  Soviet-
      backed  Democratic  People's  Republic  of  Korea  was  founded  on  9
      September 1948. The new leader of North Korea led an invasion  of  the
      South in 1950, in an attempt to  unify  the  peninsula  under  Soviet-
      backed communist rule. The ensuing war involved the forces of a number
      of other countries. An armistice  was  signed  in  1953:  South  Korea
      agreed to abide by its terms, but was not formally a party to it.  The
      peninsula remains divided between North Korea and South Korea: between
      them the border has  been  described  as  "one  of  the  most  heavily
      militarised places in the world".

  18. Both North Korea and South Korea joined the United Nations  in  August
      1991, and  are  recognised  as  separate  independent  states  by  the
      majority of other states, although North Korea is  not  recognised  by
      Japan or South Korea, and South  Korea  is  not  recognised  by  North
      Korea.

  19. The constitution of South Korea, adopted in 1948, has been  amended  a
      number of times. The version before us is that of October 29 1987. The
      relevant provisions are those in Articles 2 and 3:

         "Article 2: Nationality

         (1)      Nationality in the Republic of Korea is prescribed by law.

         (2)      It is the duty of the state to protect  citizens  residing
         abroad as prescribed by law.

         Article 3: Territory

         The territory of the Republic of Korea shall consist of the  Korean
         peninsula and its adjacent islands."

  20. Article 3 is the emanation of South Korea's non-recognition  of  North
      Korea. South Korea's constitution treats the whole of the peninsula as
      part of South Korea.

South Korean legislation on citizenship and nationality

  21. The Nationality Act of South Korea is before us in translation as most
      recently amended on 14 March 2008. With one  reservation,  it  is  not
      suggested that it would be misleading to read and apply the provisions
      as they appear from that translation. The Act provides  in  Article  2
      that a person falling in any of the following categories "shall  be  a
      national of the Republic of Korea at birth":

         "1.      A person whose father or  mother  is  a  national  of  the
             Republic of Korea at the time of a person's birth;

         2. A person whose father was a national of the Republic of Korea at
             the time of the father's death, if  the  person's  father  died
             before the person's birth;

         3. A person who was born in the Republic of Korea, if both  of  the
             person's parents are unknown or have no nationality."

  22. There are provisions for acquisition of nationality by acknowledgement
      and by naturalisation.

  23. There are also provisions prohibiting dual nationality, and  requiring
      a person who has dual nationality before attaining the age of majority
      to choose one  of  the  nationalities  at  that  time;  a  person  who
      voluntarily attains nationality of  a  foreign  country  automatically
      loses his South Korean  nationality;  but  a  person  who  acquires  a
      foreign nationality  by  marriage,  adoption  or  acknowledgement  may
      choose to remain a national of South Korea.

  24. This, we think, is a sufficient summary of Articles 10 and 12-15.  The
      reservation is, however, that having or acquiring citizenship of North
      Korea does not engage these provisions. That is because South  Korea's
      non-recognition of North Korea  as  a  state  entails  also  its  non-
      recognition of North  Korean  citizenship.  A  person  who  under  the
      Nationality Act is a national of South Korea is not regarded as having
      acquired a foreign nationality if he  is  also  a  national  of  North
      Korea. Such is apparent from the constitutional position, and  appears
      also to have been recognised by the Constitutional Court of  Korea  in
      at least two cases, of  which  we  were  able  to  obtain  an  English
      translation of one, case number 97Hun-Ka12. At paragraph B(2)  of  the
      judgement, we find this:

         "Our Constitution has stated since the Founding  Constitution,  the
         territory of the Republic of Korea  shall  consist  of  the  Korean
         peninsula and its adjacent islands. ...

         The Supreme Court has ruled accordingly that North Korea is part of
         the Korean peninsula and therefore subject to  the  sovereignty  of
         the Republic of Korea, and therefore that  North  Korean  residency
         should not interfere with the acquisition of the nationality of the
         Republic  of  Korea.  Therefore,  the  provisional   ordinance   on
         nationality (South Korean Provisional Government Act Number 11, May
         11, 1948) stated in Article 2(1) that a person  born  to  a  Korean
         father shall acquire the nationality of Chosun [which we understand
         in  the  context  to  mean  generic  Korean].  Then,  the  Founding
         Constitution, in Article  3,  stated  that  the  qualifications  of
         nationality of the  Republic  of  Korea  should  be  proscribed  by
         statute, and in Article 100, stated that all current laws and rules
         were effective unless  they  violated  the  constitution.  So,  the
         Supreme Court ruled that a person born  to  a  Korean  father  even
         though he or she had already acquired a  North  Korean  nationality
         according to the North Korean  law,  acquired  the  nationality  of
         Chosun according to the provisional ordinance  and  then  became  a
         national of the Republic of Korea  upon  the  promulgation  of  the
         Founding Constitution  on  July  17,  1948  (Kong  1996  Ha,  3602,
         96Nu1221, Supreme Court, November 12, 1996)."

  25. The Nationality Act contains a further relevant provision, Article 20:

         "Adjudication of nationality

         (1)      Where it is unclear whether a person has  attained  or  is
             holding nationality of the Republic of Korea, the  minister  of
             justice may determine such fact upon review.

         (2)      Procedures for  screening  and  determination,  and  other
             necessary matters under paragraph (1) shall  be  determined  by
             Presidential Decree."

  26. We have also been shown an English  translation  of  the  Act  on  the
      Protection and Settlement Support of  Residents  Escaping  from  North
      Korea, a South Korean statute of 1997, subsequently amended ("the 1997
      Act"). It appeared at the hearing that the version we had was not  the
      most up-to-date, but nobody has suggested that more recent  amendments
      are in any way material to the issue we have to consider. The 1997 Act
      replaced an earlier Act on the protection of North Korean repatriates.
      Article 1 of the Act gives its purpose:

         "The purpose of this Act is to provide  such  matters  relating  to
         protection and support  as  are  necessary  to  help  North  Korean
         residents escaping from the area north of the Military  Demarcation
         Line (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "North  Korea")  and  desiring
         protection from the Republic of Korea, as quickly  as  possible  to
         adapt themselves to, and settle  down  in,  all  spheres  of  their
         lives, including political, economic, social and cultural spheres."

  27. As Article 1 suggests, the Act sets up systems for  providing  support
      in a number of areas to those who are covered by it. We do not need to
      set out those  provisions.  We  do,  however,  need  to  set  out  the
      provisions of the Act that determine those entitled to its benefits.

         "Article 2 (Definitions)

         For the purposes of this Act,

         1. the term "residents escaping from North Korea" means persons who
           have  their  residence,  lineal  ascendants   and   descendants,
           spouses, workplaces and so on in North Korea, and who  have  not
           acquired any  foreign  nationality  after  escaping  from  North
           Korea;

         2.  the  term  "persons  subject  to  protection"  means  residents
           escaping from  North  Korea  who  are  provided  protection  and
           support pursuant to this Act;

         ...

         Article 3 (Scope of Application)

         This Act shall apply to residents escaping  from  North  Korea  who
         have expressed their intention to be protected by the  Republic  of
         Korea.

         ...

         Article 5 (Criteria for Protection, etc.)

         (1)      The criteria for  the  provision  of  the  protection  and
             support for persons subject to protection shall  reasonably  be
             determined in consideration of their age, members of a  family,
             school education,  personal  career,  self-supporting  ability,
             health conditions and personal possessions.

         (2)      The protection and settlement support prescribed  in  this
             Act shall, as a matter of principle, be provided on  the  basis
             of respective individuals....

         ...

         Article 6 (Consultative Council on Residents  Escaping  from  North
         Korea)

         (1)       There  shall  be  established  under  the   Ministry   of
             Unification the Consultative Council on Residents Escaping from
             North Korea  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "Consultative
             Council") to deliberate on and coordinate policies on residents
             escaping from North Korea and to  deliberate  on  such  matters
             relating to their protection and settlement support....

         ...

         Article 7 (Application for Protection, etc.)

         (1)      Any person who has escaped from North Korea and desires to
             be protected under this Act, shall apply for protection to  the
             head of an overseas diplomatic or consular mission, or the head
             of any administrative agency  (including  the  commander  of  a
             military unit of various levels; hereinafter referred to as the
             "head of an overseas diplomatic or consular mission, etc.").

         (2)      The head of an overseas diplomatic  or  consular  mission,
             etc.  who  receives  such  an  application  for  protection  as
             prescribed in paragraph (1) above shall  without  delay  inform
             the Minister of Unification and the  Director  General  of  the
             National Intelligence Service  via  the  head  of  the  central
             administrative agency to which he belongs of the fact.

         ...

         Article 8 (Decision on Protection, etc.)

         (1)      The  Minister  of  National  Unification  shall,  when  he
             receives such a notice as prescribed in Article 7  (3),  decide
             on  the  admissibility  of  the  application   for   protection
             following  the  deliberations  of  the  Consultative   Council:
             Provided, That in the case of a person who is likely to  affect
             national  security  to  a  considerable  extent,  the  Director
             General of the National Intelligence Service  shall  decide  on
             the admissibility of the application, and inform or notify  the
             Minister of Unification and the  protection  applicant  of  the
             decision without delay.

         (2)      Where the Minister  of  Unification  has  decided  on  the
             admissibility of an application pursuant to the  provisions  of
             the text of paragraph (1) above, he shall without delay  inform
             the head of an overseas diplomatic or  consular  mission,  etc.
             via the head of the relevant central administrative  agency  of
             the decision,  and  the  head  of  an  overseas  diplomatic  or
             consular mission, etc. informed as  such  shall  without  delay
             notify the applicant of the decision.

         Article 9 (Criteria for Protection Decision)

         In determining whether or not to provide protection pursuant to the
         provisions of the text of Article 8 (1), such persons as prescribed
         in any of the following subparagraphs  may  not  be  determined  as
         persons subject to protection:

         1. International criminal offenders involved in aircraft hijacking,
             drug trafficking, terrorism or genocide, etc.

         2. Offenders of non-political, serious crimes such as murder, etc.;

         3. Suspects of disguised escape;

         4. Persons who have for a considerable period earned  their  living
             in their respective countries of sojourn; and

         5.       Such other  persons  as  prescribed  by  the  Presidential
             Decree as unfit for  the  designation  as  persons  subject  to
             protection.

         ...

         Article 27 (Suspension and Termination of Protection)

             (1)  The Minister of Unification may, where a person subject to
               protection   is   involved   in   any   of   the   following
               subparagraphs,   suspend   or   terminate   protection   and
               settlement support  subject  to  the  deliberations  of  the
               Consultative Council:

                1.     In cases where he is sentenced to imprisonment  with
                   or without prison labor for not less than  one  year  and
                   his sentence is made irrevocable;

                2.     In  cases  where  he  intentionally  provides  false
                   information contrary to the interest of the State;

                3.     In cases where he is  judicially  declared  dead  or
                   missing;

                4.     In cases where he  attempts  to  go  back  to  North
                   Korea;

                5.     In cases where he violates  this  Act  or  an  order
                   issued under this Act; or

                6.     Such other cases as coming under grounds  prescribed
                   by the Presidential Decree.

             (2)  The local government head  may  request  the  Minister  of
               Unification via the Minister  of  Government  Administration
               and Home Affairs the suspension or termination of protection
               of or settlement support for persons subject  to  protection
               as prescribed in paragraph (1) above or the  curtailment  or
               extension of the period thereof as prescribed in the proviso
               of Article 5 (3).

             (3)  The Minister of Unification shall, where  he  suspends  or
               terminates protection and settlement support  as  prescribed
               in paragraph (1) above or curtails  or  extends  the  period
               thereof as prescribed in  the  proviso  of  Article  5  (3),
               specify the grounds and notify them to the person subject to
               protection involved, and inform the Minister  of  Government
               Administration and Home Affairs  and  the  local  government
               head of the fact."

  28. In the light of the evidence already tendered  in  these  appeals,  to
      which we refer in more  detail  below,  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      contacted the South Korean embassy in order to obtain further  details
      of the administration of the 1997 Act.  Shortly  before  the  hearing,
      when no reply had been received, the  Secretary  of  State  sought  an
      adjournment, which we refused. As it happens,  a  reply  was  received
      almost immediately thereafter, as follows:

         "The Embassy of the Republic of Korea  to  the  United  Kingdom  of
         Great Britain and Northern Ireland presents its compliments to  the
         Foreign and Commonwealth Office and has the honour of informing the
         latter of the Republic  of  Korea's  Policy  towards  North  Korean
         defectors.

         1. The Government of the Republic of Korea, in  principle,  accepts
             all North Korean defectors, who, of their own free  will,  wish
             to  resettle  in  the  Republic  of   Korea.   However,   their
             application may be rejected in exceptional  circumstances;  for
             example,  applicants  who,  once  the  screening   process   is
             complete, are  determined  to  be  or  have  been  spies,  drug
             dealers, terrorists, or other serious criminals may have  their
             asylum claims rejected.

         2. The first and most important criterion in the  determination  of
             offering protection and settlement support to North Koreans  is
             to ascertain whether the person in question desires to live  in
             the Republic of Korea. This is clearly articulated in the  "Act
             on the Protection and Settlement Support of Residents  Escaping
             from North Korea". As such, the protection of the Government of
             the Republic of Korea for North Koreans does not apply to those
             North Koreans who wish to seek asylum in a country  other  than
             the Republic of Korea.

         3. When a North Korean expresses his or her wish to resettle in the
             Republic of Korea, there will be a screening process  in  order
             to verify whether the person in question  is  a  genuine  North
             Korean.

         4. Once screening is complete and the asylum claimant  is  verified
             as being North Korean, a further determination takes  place  to
             see whether he or she  is  entitled  to  receive  a  settlement
             package under the domestic law of  the  Republic  of  Korea.  A
             typical settlement package comprises  accommodation,  financial
             support, remedial education and  job  training.  Claimants  who
             have lived for a considerable period in other countries may  be
             excluded from receiving a settlement package.

         The Embassy  of  the  Republic  of  Korea  avails  itself  of  this
         opportunity to renew the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  of  the
         United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland the assurances
         of its highest consideration."

  29. One feature of the 1997 Act and the letter from the  Embassy  is  very
      clear: neither of them refer in terms  to  South  Korean  nationality.
      Those who are or may be entitled to the benefits of the Act are  those
      who come from North Korea, who wish to be protected  by  South  Korea,
      and who have not acquired the nationality of  any  other  country.  It
      would therefore appear that the Nationality Act and the 1997  Act  are
      dealing with separate but related issues.  The  Nationality  Act  lays
      down provisions under which, because South Korea ignores the  division
      of the peninsula, many nationals of North Korea are also nationals  of
      South Korea. The 1997 Act provides benefits for those  who  come  from
      North Korea to South Korea for protection  purposes,  whether  or  not
      they are nationals of South Korea or, indeed, of North Korea.

  30. Further, it goes almost without saying that the benefits  provided  by
      the 1997 Act are not available to all nationals of  South  Korea,  nor
      even to all nationals of South Korea resident of  that  country.  They
      are available to a group of people, many of whom may be  nationals  of
      South Korea, but all of whom have a  North  Korean  background.  South
      Korean nationality does not provide a right to benefits under the 1997
      Act, and failure to attain benefits under that Act would not therefore
      appear to demonstrate that an applicant is not, or is not accepted  as
      being, of South  Korean  nationality.  And  the  fact  that  a  person
      succeeds in demonstrating his entitlement to benefits under  the  1997
      Act does not show that he is a South Korean national: it merely  shows
      that he has a North Korean background  and  seeks  the  protection  of
      South Korea.

  31. If that were the end of the matter,  determination  of  these  appeals
      would pose little difficulty. If the appellants are nationals of South
      Korea, there is no proper basis for  supposing  that  they  cannot  be
      returned there whether or not they may additionally be entitled to the
      benefits under the 1997 Act. If  they  are  nationals  only  of  North
      Korea, they are entitled to refugee status  whilst  they  are  in  the
      United Kingdom; their return to South Korea would be subject to  their
      application under the 1997 Act and their acceptance by South Korea.

Expert evidence

  32. The appellants adduce written evidence from a number of sources which,
      it is said, shows that that is not  the  right  way  to  look  at  the
      question.

  33. Professor Christopher Bluth, Professor of International Studies at the
      University of Leeds, has connections at various levels with the  South
      Korean government, and with those working with North Korean  refugees.
      He was asked to consider whether the appellants are entitled to  South
      Korean citizenship,  to  consider  the  procedures  by  which  persons
      claiming to be North Korean can enter South Korea, and  the  treatment
      of North Koreans in South Korea.

  34. In relation to citizenship, Professor  Bluth  states  in  his  written
      evidence that "in  principle,  there  is  an  entitlement  in  law  to
      citizenship of the Republic of Korea for a North Korean". But he adds:

         "Importantly, in relation to North Koreans that have  escaped  from
         or defected from the DPRK, the implementation of this principle  is
         in practice regulated by the Act on Protection. This is despite the
         fact that  in  principle  there  is  no  relationship  between  the
         entitlement to nationality and the  Act  on  Protection.  In  other
         words, were a North Korean to make an application to the government
         of  the  ROK  (either  in  country  or  through  an  embassy)  such
         application would  be  dealt  with  by  reference  to  the  Act  on
         Protection rather than simply applying the Nationality Act."

  35. He then refers to the exclusions in Article 2 and Article 9 of the Act
      on Protection, and offers a commentary on Article  9(4).  Taking  into
      account Professor Bluth's endnote with  some  additional  comments  on
      translation, what he says is as follows. There is no definition in the
      Act of the phrase "earned their living". In fact, the Korean  version,
      literally translated, would read "the person who  has  a  living  base
      (living space) in a  certain  state  for  more  than  ten  years".  In
      practice, Professor Bluth says, anybody who has  lived  outside  North
      Korea for more than ten years is treated as a person  who  has  become
      established in another country and will not be accepted  as  a  person
      entitled to protection or even as  a  South  Korean  citizen.  In  his
      elaboration of this theme, Professor Bluth  occasionally  goes  beyond
      his brief. At two points he purports to determine the  refugee  status
      of the appellants, and he also speculates on the possible consequences
      of the appellants not being found by  the  Korean  authorities  to  be
      Korean. But it is right to set out the  relevant  parts  of  Professor
      Bluth's opinion in full.

         "5.2.1      South    Korean    policy    towards    North    Korean
               refugees/defectors reflects a profound contradiction between
               the principles of the constitution and  the  law,  which  it
               cannot overtly renounce, and on the  other  hand,  practice.
               Put another way, the government of  the  Republic  of  Korea
               cannot publicly reject the notion of 'one Korea' even though
               it might in many ways be more appropriate to  recognise  the
               fact that North Korea is another country  whose  inhabitants
               happen to speak the Korean  language  and  its  citizens  by
               virtue of their culture and socialisation  have  nothing  in
               common with South Koreans. Consequently the manner in  which
               the South Korean authorities approach this 'entitlement'  to
               ROK citizenships has been to adopt a very selective approach
               to refugees and discourage defections as much  as  possible.
               This contradiction is usually  maintained  by  stealth,  but
               sometimes finds its way into public statements. In  response
               to an incident  in  1999  when  a  number  of  North  Korean
               refugees  were  returned  to  North  Korea  by  the  Chinese
               authorities, the then Minister of Unification  Lim  Tong-won
               responded to the public outcry in  South  Korea  by  stating
               that "the government is ready to accept all  North  Koreans,
               if they want to emigrate to the South...  It  is  the  basic
               principle of the  Seoul  government  to  welcome  all  North
               Korean   refugees..."   The   statement   was    immediately
               'clarified' by an official from the Ministry of  Unification
               to the effect that these remarks referred  to  "a  group  of
               North  Koreans  who  had  wrapped  up  all   the   necessary
               procedures for entry into  South  Korea  with  the  nation's
               overseas embassies."

         5.2.2    As Andrei Lankov has noted,  this  statement  in  practice
               excluded almost all the refugees in China, because they have
               no valid passports and  cannot  gain  access  to  the  South
               Korean embassy in Beijing or other South  Korean  consulates
               in China. In the event that North Korean refugees manage  to
               contact a South Korean consulate they  are  normally  denied
               assistance. In fact, Prof.  Lankov  has  found  hundreds  of
               reports in the South Korean press of North Koreans who  were
               unconditionally denied support by South Korean consulates in
               China and stated that he had 'never  seen  a  single  report
               about a defector whose escape was seriously assisted by  the
               China-based diplomatic staff unless such a person was a very
               high-ranking individual'. As a  consequence  the  number  of
               North Korean defectors that are eventually accepted  remains
               relatively small. They often escape to South Korea  assisted
               by professional smugglers (known as 'brokers'), usually  via
               a third country in South East Asia where they can  obtain  a
               ticket and travel  document  from  the  local  South  Korean
               consulates. However, even  then  the  policy  of  the  South
               Korean government remains to discourage refugees and not all
               'North Korean defectors' will be accepted as such.

         5.2.3    The appellants will of course have the relative  advantage
               of being in the  United  Kingdom  and  will  therefore  most
               likely be able to get access to the  South  Korean  embassy.
               However, for reasons which are outlined below,  even  should
               they wish to make an application to  the  embassy  and  were
               able  to  gain  access,  the  embassy  and  the  unification
               ministry have already signalled quite unmistakeably that  in
               such a case they will not provide assistance.

         5.3.1    The South Korean government feels it has to  accept  North
               Korean refugees because of  the  constitution.  However,  it
               wants  to  discourage  defections.  This  is  based  on  two
               factors. First of  all  the  defector  issue  is  a  serious
               irritant  in  relations  with  North  Korea  and  China  and
               especially the Kim Dae-jung  and  Roh  Moo-hyun  governments
               wanted to  avoid  exacerbating  such  irritations  in  their
               relations  with  North  Korea.  Secondly,  there   is   some
               resentment in South Korea regarding the costs  of  providing
               for refugees (even though the total amount is  not  a  great
               amount for South Korea) and North  Korean  refugees  do  not
               integrate very well with the rest of South  Korean  society.
               Consequently the policy is  to  do  everything  possible  to
               discourage North Korean refugees/defectors  from  coming  to
               South Korea unless they have valuable intelligence to offer.

         5.4.1    Even though in principle persons born in the DPRK  have  a
               right to the citizenship of the ROK, this right  has  to  be
               exercised by following certain procedures and is subject  to
               acceptance by the authorities of the ROK which can refuse to
               grant citizenship under certain conditions. It is  necessary
               for  a  person  to  make  an  application  to   be   granted
               nationality. If it is granted, then a person would  also  be
               eligible to apply for a South Korean passport.

         5.4.2    In practice, the essential requirements for being accepted
               as a candidate for citizenship of the Republic of Korea  are
               that a person can satisfy Article 2 of the  Nationality  Act
               and therefore is deemed to be Korean (i.e. the  parents  are
               not Chinese nationals or of other foreign  extraction),  has
               lived in Korea and has not been outside the territory of the
               DPRK for more than ten years, and wishes to become a citizen
               of the ROK.

         5.4.3    In principle, once a person  is  recognised  as  'Korean',
               there is no discretion to refuse or grant  ROK  citizenship.
               However, in practice, acceptance of all persons claiming  to
               be North Korean refugees/migrants is not automatic.

         5.4.4    The South Korean government will not accept and admit  the
               appellants to South Korea as a matter of course. In order to
               take advantage for their  entitlement  to  ROK  citizenship,
               North Korean refugees have to enter a South Korean consulate
               or embassy to seek  permission  to  enter  the  Republic  of
               Korea. They must request protection and their  request  will
               be communicated to  the  Minister  of  Unification  and  the
               Director of  the  National  Intelligence  Service  in  Seoul
               without delay. Candidates will  be  interviewed  by  trained
               officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade  to
               determine whether or not they are North Korean citizens, and
               whether the account of their life and their circumstances is
               credible. All details with respect  to  their  identity  and
               their account will be checked  and  verified.  If  they  are
               accepted as North Korean refugees and there are  no  reasons
               to deny permission to enter the Republic of Korea, they will
               be granted permission to enter the ROK. In your  appellant's
               case this  stage  would  take  place  at  the  South  Korean
               embassy.

         5.4.5    This is not yet full acceptance of their status  or  their
               North Korean nationality, which will be subject to a more in-
               depth review and interviews once they have arrived in  South
               Korea. Decisions on whether to grant protection or not  will
               be made on a case-by-case basis depending  on  the  ultimate
               approval of the Minister of Unification. When a North Korean
               arrives in South Korea, they are initially  detained  at  an
               Institute of  National  Intelligence  in  Sindaebang  (south
               Seoul) also known  as  the  Government  Joint  Interrogation
               Centre. After extensive interviews and background  checks  a
               decision will be made whether they are to be  recognised  as
               persons  entitled  to  protection  and  citizenship.   Those
               detained in Sindaebang have  no  recourse  to  South  Korean
               courts. Typical periods of detention are 1 to 3 months and I
               am aware of the case of one person who has been detained for
               three years without the case being  resolved.  There  is  no
               provision in ROK law for this  detention,  rather  it  is  a
               matter of state practice. There is also no  possibility  for
               the individual to have recourse  to  any  legal  process  to
               complain about detention. In practice everyone  is  detained
               until their application is determined.

            Persons whose applications are rejected on the basis  that  they
               are deemed to be Chinese-Korean can (and have been) deported
               to China.

            ...

         5.4.6    Assuming, however, that the person is  successful  at  the
               second stage,  thereafter,  North  Korean  refugees  seeking
               citizenship and residence in South  Korea  usually  have  to
               undergo a debriefing by  the  Ministry  of  Unification  and
               attend classes to prepare them for life in South  Korea  for
               60-75 days (known as Hanawon) -  at  a  centre  in  Anseong.
               Residence at this centre is compulsory and can be  deemed  a
               form of quasi-detention. At the end of this time  they  have
               to sign a document applying for citizenship of the ROK.

         5.4.7    The authorities of the Republic of  Korea  will  disregard
               any determination made  by  the  UK  government  as  to  the
               status, citizenship or origins of the appellants. They  will
               make their  own  determination  on  the  basis  of  in-depth
               interviews.  South  Korean  specialists  will  be  able   to
               determine the authenticity of  their  regional  accent,  any
               information   about   their   childhood   and   up-bringing,
               geographical, cultural and social references etc. They  will
               be very concerned to ensure  that  no  Chinese  citizens  of
               Korean descent are granted citizenship on  the  basis  of  a
               claim to be a North Korean.

         5.4.8    The South Korean authorities are aware of and used to  the
               fact that many North Korean do not have any documentation to
               prove  their  citizenship  or  any  other  part   of   their
               biography. Whilst therefore the fact that the appellants  do
               not have such documentation in principle should not  prevent
               them from being accepted  as  a  citizen,  in  practice  the
               length of their residence in  China,  their  connections  to
               that country, and would most likely cause their  application
               to be refused [sic]. These connections  to  China  create  a
               risk  that  the  ROK  government  will  consider  that   the
               appellants are Chinese and thus seek to deport her [sic]  to
               China  at  the  end  of  the  process  with  the   potential
               consequences that I have outlined above.

         5.4.9     The  Act  on  Protection  defines  who  is  entitled   to
               protection under the  act.  Specific  exclusions  exist  for
               person who have acquired another foreign  nationality  after
               leaving North Korea (Article 2), criminals,  terrorists  and
               spies (Article 9) and persons who have earned  their  living
               for not less than ten years in their respective countries of
               sojourn (Article 9). The term 'earned their living' does not
               exist in the Korean version of  the  Act  and  according  to
               officials in  the  Ministry  of  Unification  Article  9  is
               interpreted to apply to anyone who  has  lived  outside  the
               DPRK for more than 10 years.

            Indeed, I asked the relevant office at the Ministry  of  Foreign
               Affairs and Trade directly: 'Does the  ROK  government  have
               any  discretion  to  refuse  to  grant  or   recognise   ROK
               nationality for a person born in the territory controlled by
               the DPRK, and if so in what circumstances?' The answer given
               by the official was 'yes' with reference to article 9 of the
               Act on the Protection and Settlement  Support  of  Residents
               Escaping from North Korea.

         5.4.10   South Korean officials and  specialists  have  refused  to
               make a judgement on whether or not  the  Act  constitutes  a
               legal limitation on the constitutional  rights  of  a  North
               Korean person. Instead they refer to practice. The policy of
               the  South  Korean  government  has   been   to   discourage
               defections and limit the number  of  North  Koreans  seeking
               protection in the South, without violating the constitution.
               The  main  reason  for  this  policy  is  to  avoid  hostile
               reactions from the North Korean government.  But  the  South
               Korean  government  would  also  be  concerned  about  large
               numbers of North Koreans arriving in the South.  They  would
               pose a security risk (because they  are  targets  for  North
               Korean agents, or they might include North  Korean  agents),
               they constitute a financial burden on the  state  and  large
               numbers of North Koreans who don't integrate well  with  the
               South Korean population could threaten social cohesion.

         5.4.11   Moreover, the ROK  government  does  not  want  to  accept
               Chinese citizens of Korean  ethnicity  and  any  undesirable
               elements. This is  why  they  have  adopted  the  view  that
               persons residing outside the DPRK for more than ten years do
               not qualify for ROK  citizenship  and  do  not  have  to  be
               accepted. The UK Border Agency has interpreted both the  ROK
               constitution   and   the   Act   literally.    While    this
               interpretation is correct according to the manner  in  which
               the law is phrased, this is not how it is interpreted by the
               authorities of the Republic of Korea and the manner in which
               it is implemented differs from  a strict reading of the law.
               It is my view  that  the  South  Korean  authorities  do  in
               practice treat the matters set  out  in  Article  9  of  the
               Protection and Settlement Act  as  being  criteria  for  the
               acquisition of citizenship, not  just  the  eligibility  for
               "special protection", even though that does not appear to be
               the correct reading of the legislative provisions.

         5.4.12   The  Act  on  Protection  is  interpreted  as  giving  the
               government the right to decide who can be  admitted  to  the
               country and derive the  benefits  of  citizenship.  From  my
               conversations with Korean specialists  (such  as  Ambassador
               Prof. Kim Woo-sung, Prof Lim Eul-chul and Dr. Kim Chang-su),
               it is clear that in South Korea there is a different culture
               with respect to the meaning of law and the implementation of
               law cannot easily be separated from its  political  purposes
               or the political context which is more  important  than  the
               wording of the law itself.

         6.1      It is not possible to predict the result of an application
               for refugee status or citizenship in advance  with  absolute
               certainty. Nevertheless, it is my considered view  that  the
               appellants will most likely not be granted either refugee or
               citizenship by the Republic of Korea.

               There are three different reasons for this view.

         6.1.1    Consider the statements from the South Korean embassy  (Mr
               Ahn  Young-alp's  conversation  with  Ms.  Lee  (6  of  the
               Determination of the Tribunal) and a fax previously received
               from the embassy in response to similar  question.  Although
               it states that any person can be considered, the sub-text is
               clear. If a person makes it clear that they do not  wish  to
               reside in South Korea this will be a reason to deny  refuge.
               It is also clear the Act on Protection applies only to those
               who have expressed their intention to be  protected  by  the
               Republic of Korea (3).

         6.1.2    These statements clearly reflect the guidance that consuls
               receive from the South Korean government, as Mr. Choi  Kang-
               sok from the Inter-Korean Policy Division at the Ministry of
               Foreign  Affairs  and  Trade  of  the  Republic   of   Korea
               confirmed. He stated that they will only admit  persons  who
               wish to live in South Korea. If a person  indicates  at  any
               stage that they do not want  to  come  to  South  Korea  the
               process is terminated. This is a delicate issue  because  an
               official will not state categorically that persons  will  be
               'rejected'. First  of  all  Mr.  Choi  indicated  that  they
               respect the decision of the United Kingdom as to whether  or
               not to grant asylum or residence to a North Korean  refugee,
               but this has no bearing  on  their  own  decisions.  Then  I
               questioned Mr. Choi at length as  what  would  happen  if  a
               North Korean person were to apply for protection with a view
               to apply for citizenship and in the course of the  interview
               revealed that they did not really  wish  to  live  in  South
               Korea. His answer was that 'they would respect their  wish',
               meaning that they would  not  be  admitted  to  South  Korea
               regardless  of  any  decision  by  the  British  government.
               Repeated questioning from different perspectives on my  part
               did not change this answer and made it clear that under such
               circumstances it was the firm policy  of  the  South  Korean
               government that such persons would not be  admitted  to  the
               Republic of Korea and the entire process would be  concluded
               at this point.

            I obtained a similar response from Jo Jae-sop at the Ministry of
               Unification. He stated clearly that the policy of the  South
               Korean government was that North Korean refugees would  only
               be accepted in South Korea if they wished to live there  and
               that their wish must be respected.  He  confirmed  that  the
               South Korean government would not comply with a  request  by
               the UK government that a person  should  be  sent  to  South
               Korea against their wishes and  stated  that  this  sort  of
               thing has never happened in the past.

            I asked the same question again twice and Mr. Jo confirmed  that
               the government of the Republic of  Korea  would  resist  any
               effort by the government of the United Kingdom to remove any
               persons claiming to be from North Korea who did not wish  to
               come to South Korea.

         6.1.3    There are many reasons why North Koreans would not want to
               apply for RoK citizenship. North Koreans are brought  up  to
               believe that South Korea is their enemy in a civil war, that
               life in South Korea is a living hell and that North  Koreans
               are discriminated against and ostracized  from  society.  It
               should not be inferred that their  claims  of  North  Korean
               origin are untrue.

         6.1.4    It must be noted that the fax also makes it clear that the
               South  Korean  embassy   will   not   accept   the   British
               government's determination that  the  appellants  are  North
               Korean. Conversations with South Korean officials  in  Seoul
               (without revealing the identity of the appellants or details
               of the case) confirm the impression given in the embassy fax
               that the South Korean authorities will not  be  inclined  to
               accept that the appellants are North Korean citizens and are
               therefore entitled to protection of the  government  of  the
               Republic of Korea. The fact that they have lived outside the
               DPRK for more than 10 years is a  critical  factor  in  this
               determination.

         6.1.5    Daniel  Pinkston,  senior  analyst  of  the  International
               Crisis Group based in Seoul, stated in  correspondence  with
               me regarding this case:

         6.1.6    "Yes, the 10-year rule applies. The ROK  govt.  assumption
               is that the NK defector has settled in  another  country  by
               that time. Of course, the reality is that most countries  in
               Asia do not grant them citizenship, and they are essentially
               "stateless" ... the ROK government has a way  out  and  does
               not automatically have to accept  refugees  after  10  years
               have passed."

         6.1.7    I have even more authoritative sources for  this  view.  I
               made enquiries in Seoul with  the  Ministry  of  Unification
               section in charge of North Korean refugees. The answer  that
               I received  should  be  accepted  as  a  true  and  accurate
               statement of the policy of the government of the Republic of
               Korea:

            "The Korean government does not accept such persons as  refugees
               if they have lived outside the DPRK for more than ten years.
               It is not based on law or  regulations,  it  is  a  kind  of
               policy. Our government is judging that if  they  have  lived
               outside the DPRK for more than ten years, we don't  need  to
               accept them."

         6.1.8    The generic facts of the  case  under  consideration  have
               been discussed with the South Korean embassy in London,  the
               officials in charge of North Korean refugees in the Ministry
               of Foreign Affairs and Trade in Seoul, and a consultant  for
               the Ministry of Unification (without revealing the  identity
               of the appellants or the details of the case). In each  case
               the answer was the same, namely a  strong  signal  that  the
               appellants are unlikely to be accepted as a person  entitled
               to the citizenship and protection of the Republic of  Korea.
               The reason is that the appellants have  been  outside  North
               Korea for more than ten years.

            Finally, and for the reasons I have stated above there is a risk
               in this case that the ROK  government  will  find  that  the
               appellants are Chinese."

  36. In accordance with his instructions, Professor  Bluth  then  considers
      the position of North Koreans in South Korea. He records the  benefits
      received by North Koreans under the Act  on  Protection,  but  asserts
      that  North  Koreans  in   South   Korea   are   subject   to   severe
      discrimination. He does not indicate the  size  of  the  North  Korean
      population of South Korea, although he indicates that "since 2000  the
      vast majority of North Korean refugees have  come  from  the  northern
      provinces of the DPRK and have been mostly manual workers  or  farmers
      with a very poor level of education", which does not  indicate  to  us
      that the appellants will not readily form part of that majority.

  37. Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill is Professor of International  Refugee  Law
      in the University of Oxford. He was asked a  number  of  questions  on
      behalf of the third appellant, some of  which  do  not  appear  to  be
      germane to the issues we have to decide. It is, we think, fair to  say
      that Professor Goodwin-Gill's expressed opinions on the  other  issues
      do not advance the matter very much. He  says  that  North  Korea  and
      South Korea are separate States, which is common ground before us  and
      which, for the reasons we have given earlier  in  this  determination,
      cannot properly be the subject of dispute.  Paragraphs  13-50  of  his
      opinion, covering some 14 pages,  lead  to  the  following  conclusion
      about the meaning of Article 1A of the Refugee Convention:

         "In my Opinion, the  express  words  of  the  second  paragraph  of
         Article  1A(2)  of  the  1951   Convention   do   not   permit   an
         interpretation which would require the asylum seeker to take  steps
         to obtain a possible second nationality.  On  the  other  hand,  an
         asylum seeker who is recognised as possessing  another  nationality
         is obliged, in the absence of a well-founded fear of persecution in
         that other country, to take steps to avail himself  or  herself  of
         its protection."

  38. We have no difficulty at all in accepting that  conclusion.  We  would
      note, however, that in the case where an individual actually  has  (as
      distinct from able to obtain) more than one  nationality,  we  see  no
      basis  for  treating  either  or  any  one  of  his  nationalities  as
      subsidiary  to  the  others  for  the  purposes  of   refugee   status
      determination. We look again briefly at this issue  below,  under  the
      heading "effective nationality".

  39. Professor Goodwin-Gill then goes on to attempt to determine the  third
      appellant's nationality, albeit, as he accepts, without access to  the
      relevant statutory materials. The next  question  and  answer  are  as
      follows:

         "4.      Does [the third appellant], as a person who  has  not  yet
             been recognised as a South  Korean  citizen,  fit  within  the
             reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  in  MA  (disputed   nationality)
             Ethiopia [2008] UKIAT 00032?

         56.      Taking  account  of  the  approach  described  above,  the
             framework of analysis adopted in MA appears to have  departed,
             in my Opinion, from the text of the treaty to be  interpreted,
             and to have introduced concepts such as de  jure   nationality
             and "real  risk  of  denial"  which  are  unnecessary  to  the
             application of Article 1A(2)."

  40. We deal with MA below; it should be noted here that the description of
      the third appellant as a person who has "not yet been recognised as  a
      South Korean citizen" is not the subject of any comment  by  Professor
      Goodwin-Gill, although it is clear that it does not  readily  fit  the
      dichotomy identified by him in his paragraph 49, which we have set out
      above.

  41. The starting point for the fifth question is Article  4(3)(e)  of  the
      Qualification Directive,  2004/83/EC.  That  requires  states  of  the
      European Union  to  take  account  of  "whether  the  applicant  could
      reasonably be expected to avail himself of the protection  of  another
      country where he could  assert  citizenship".  Professor  Goodwin-Gill
      points out that the Qualification Directive is to  be  interpreted  in
      accordance with the Refugee  Convention,  and  suggests  that  Article
      4(3)(e) should therefore be read as though the words "of which he is a
      citizen" appeared, instead of "where  he  could  assert  citizenship".
      Nothing in the present appeal turns on this issue, although we  should
      note  that  Article  4  is  primarily  concerned  with  the  grant  of
      international  protection  within  the  European  Union,   under   the
      Directive, which may not be exactly congruent with the recognition  of
      refugee status under the Convention.

  42. The final question is whether the inclusion  of  South  Korea  in  the
      Asylum  (Designated  States)  Order  2010  is  consistent   with   the
      Convention: Professor Goodwin-Gill does not answer this question,  but
      instead makes observations on North Korean  asylum  seekers,  whom  he
      conjectures to be the only  individuals  to  whom  this  provision  is
      likely to apply.

Evidence about process at the South Korean Embassy

  43. We turn now  to  evidence  relating  to  the  dealings  of  the  third
      appellant, and those similarly situated, with the South Korean Embassy
      in London.

  44. Balvinder Samra, a solicitor employed by Thompson & Co. (who  formerly
      acted for the third appellant) says  that  the  firm  has  represented
      approximately 70 asylum applicants from North Korea over "the last 1-2
      years" (the statement is neither signed nor dated). In 14 cases  there
      has been an application for assistance from the South  Korean  Embassy
      in the United Kingdom. None of the 14 has been successful in obtaining
      citizenship or a passport. Some have been given reasons, such as  that
      they have been unable to provide documentary evidence of  nationality,
      or that they would not be entitled to South Korean citizenship as they
      have been absent from North Korea for  over  ten  years.  The  Embassy
      official dealing with the matter generally refuses to give either  his
      or her own name or written confirmation  of  the  decision.  Balvinder
      Samra is not aware that any of Thompson  &  Co.'s  clients  have  been
      recognised as South Korean citizens.

  45. The third appellant herself and Alexander Finch, a  trainee  solicitor
      employed by Thompson & Co., have signed witness statements  describing
      what happened when they went to the South Korean embassy in London  on
      16 January 2009. The third appellant states that she indicated at  the
      reception desk that she wanted to make an application for South Korean
      citizenship. She was told to wait; in due course an  official  arrived
      and spoke to Mr Finch in English before going away, apparently to take
      advice. She was then told that South Korea was not  prepared  to  give
      her citizenship unless her asylum application with the  UK  government
      was finished.

  46. Mr Finch states that he told the official that the  third  appellant's
      instructions to the firm were that she was a  North  Korean  national;
      she was an asylum claimant and had no durable  status  in  the  United
      Kingdom. Her asylum claim had been refused,  but  she  had  an  appeal
      pending. She did not have any documentary proof of  her  North  Korean
      nationality. He records the official's communication of  the  decision
      as follows:

         "9.      The position of the South Korean government was that  they
             were prepared to entertain her application only when her claim
             for asylum had been finally refused by the UK government.  The
             application process takes a long time, as the data would  have
             to be collected by the embassy, but then sent to  headquarters
             in South Korea for a final  decision.  [The  third  appellant]
             should return when her asylum appeal was finally determined."

  47. Mr Finch then asked the official some questions. Those which  elicited
      substantive answers are as follows:

         "Q: Have you received applications for protection from North Korean
         asylum-seekers  in  this  position   previously,   and   are   such
         applications accepted?

         A: Not 100% of the  time.  It  will  be  established  whether  they
         genuinely are from North Korea, and  South  Korean  authorities  do
         exercise some choice about who is accepted. If they have  committed
         crimes then they will not necessarily be accepted.

         ...

         Q: Where a person who has no evidence that they are  North  Korean,
         what is the chances that they would be admitted, and how would  the
         Republic of Korea determine their origin? For  example,  how  would
         she be distinguished from a Chinese Korean?

         A: An extensive investigation would be carried out.  North  Koreans
         have a distinctive culture and way of life. Korean intelligence  is
         aware of the position of North Koreans in China  and  we  would  be
         able to  question  her  to  determine  her  case  if  there  is  no
         documentary evidence."

  48. Siew See Lee, a barrister employed by Gillman-Smith Lee, who represent
      the first and second appellants, made a witness statement which we may
      summarise in the words of the Immigration Judge who  determined  their
      appeals:

         "On 11 June 08, Ms Lee received a telephone call from Mr Young  Alp
         Ahn, Consul General of the South Korean Embassy. He stated that, if
         the applicant is a genuine PRK defector and he wants to resettle in
         South Korea, the South Korean government is  open  to  accept  him.
         However, the personal preference and wish of the PRK defector  must
         be respected. If he wishes to settle in a third country his  choice
         should be respected. The process  for  resettlement  takes  a  long
         time. The South  Korean  authorities  do  not  accept  anyone  with
         criminal records. Other factors taken into  consideration  are  the
         length of stay in a third country which would  affect  whether  the
         applicant can still be classified as  a  PRK  defector.  The  South
         Korean authorities are also concerned about spies from the PRK and,
         therefore, a thorough  background  investigation  must  be  carried
         out."

Evidence from South Korean Lawyers

  49. There are two letters from In ho Song of  the  Somyoung  Law  Firm  in
      Seoul. In the first, dated 12 March 2010, the opinion  is  given  that
      Article 19 of the 1997 Act  enables  defectors  from  North  Korea  to
      acquire  South  Korean  citizenship  without  the  strict  acquisition
      process  that  the  citizenship  law  requires.  It  is   nevertheless
      necessary for the applicant to prove North Korean nationality.  In  ho
      Song confirms that the grant of South Korean citizenship to  nationals
      of North Korea is not discretionary:

         "It  is  not  discretionary  since,  in  principle,  North   Korean
         defectors  can  acquire  citizenship  when  he  was  confirmed  and
         verified that he is a North Korean citizen. North Korean  defectors
         can acquire South Korean citizenship by verification of  his  North
         Korean status without special requirements."

  50. Article 9 of  the  1997  Act  is  not  a  criterion  for  decision  on
      citizenship: it is a criterion going only to special protection.

         "[E]ven if  North  Korean  defectors  fail  to  receive  protection
         approval,  it  is  possible  for  them  to  acquire  South   Korean
         citizenship through acquisition process if they petition for  South
         Korean citizenship after entering South Korea. The  Article  19  of
         the Special Protection Act  for  North  Korean  defectors  directly
         allows North Korean  defectors  to  create  their  family  relation
         registration in South Korea with permission from Seoul Family Court
         without  particular  acquisition  process   such   acquisition   by
         recognition,  acquisition  by  naturalisation.  At   this   moment,
         according to literal interpretation of the Special  Protection  Act
         for North Korean defectors Seoul Family Court  should  grant  North
         Korean defectors South Korean citizenship when confirmed  of  North
         Korean status even if they fail to get approval for  protection  in
         the Special Protection Act for North Korean defectors."

  51. The letter ends with a question put on behalf of the  appellants,  and
      the answer as follows:

         "Is he [that is, In ho Song] aware of specific  cases  where  South
         Korean citizenship has been refused to a citizen of North Korea?

         As far as I know, there is no case that  the  court  refused  North
         Korean defectors to acquire South Korean citizenship when they  are
         confirmed of their North Korean status."

  52. The second letter is dated June 4 2010. It evidently  follows  further
      communications with its author, because it begins  by  asking  him  to
      confirm that proceedings in the Family Court for  the  acquisition  of
      citizenship as described in the first letter cannot be initiated by an
      applicant himself: there needs to be a reference by  the  Minister  of
      Unification.  The author of the letter says  that  "in  the  light  of
      practices until now" he will confirm that "the Minister of Unification
      is likely not to refer North Koreans refused protection under the 1997
      Act to the Family Court". Other than by way of the Family  Court,  the
      author of the letter confirms, as required, that  "the  only  recourse
      for a North Korean refused protection under the Act" is  to  apply  to
      the Minister of Justice. In answer to a question about how many  cases
      have been refused protection under the Act of Protection but have been
      granted citizenship, In ho  Song  says  that  the  precise  figure  is
      classified as confidential. He knows of two or three  cases.  He  then
      goes on  to  deal,  apparently  on  a  request,  with  the  particular
      circumstances of the first and  second  appellants.  He  confirms,  as
      requested, that they will not be eligible  for  protection  under  the
      1997 Act. He says this:

         "It is also important to know what policy the Minister  of  Justice
         has for granting citizenship to North Korean citizens who have been
         outside North Korea for more than ten years.

         Its official stance is that  once  proven  to  be  a  North  Korean
         defector, the grant is applicable. However, as I have explained  in
         the last report, it is extremely difficult in that in  practice  it
         demands strict proof of having North Korean citizenship."

  53. We may comment that neither the phrase "extremely difficult"  nor  the
      sentiment seems to appear in any "previous report" that we have seen.

  54. In ho Song goes on  to  deal  with  the  procedure  for  applying  for
      protection and citizenship. He says that where a North Korean  applies
      for protection from outside South Korea, the  application  has  to  be
      transmitted through the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade  to  the
      Minister of Unification, who is charged with making all  decisions  on
      granting protection. In the case of an  application  for  nationality,
      however, there is no regulation  in  the  1997  Act:  the  appropriate
      protections are in the Nationality Act. There is no special  procedure
      but the application will go through the Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs
      and Trade to the Minister  of  Justice,  who  will  make  a  decision.
      Although there is an obligation under the Protection Act  to  transmit
      applications to the relevant minister in South Korea, there is no such
      obligation under the Nationality Act; but In ho Song's  conclusion  is
      that, in the case of  a  protection  application,  if  the  diplomatic
      office does not cooperate, there is no other way to  send  it  to  the
      country.

  55. The person posing questions to In ho Song suggests that the  procedure
      at the South Korean Embassy in Canada  appears  to  parallel  that  in
      London, in that North Koreans are not automatically accepted as  South
      Korean citizens: they must demonstrate that they possess the "will and
      desire" to live in South Korea. In reply, In ho  song  says  that  the
      procedure from abroad is more complicated than  applying  from  within
      South Korea, because of the need to  secure  the  cooperation  of  the
      embassy in forwarding the application (whether for protection  or  for
      nationality) to the relevant minister.

         "Officially, there is no different  policy  towards  North  Koreans
         applying for citizenship from abroad. However, as explained in  the
         last email, diplomatic officers are controlling the number  of  the
         entry of North Koreans into South Korea, who are  expected  to  get
         approved  protection,  because  of   the   increasing   number   of
         application for entry into South Korea by North Koreans since  2005
         and the shortage of the temporary facility in housing  support  for
         them. Therefore, a person who are expected to be refused protection
         will be refused of even entering into the country.

         In that sense, in UK and Canada embassies, the consuls  might  have
         taken a position that  as  person  refused  protection  was  not  a
         candidate for South Korean citizenship.

         In strict legal perspective, it is a wrong interpretation which  is
         against  the  Protection  Act,  the  Nationality   Act,   and   the
         Constitution.  However,  since  the  authorities  and  particularly
         diplomatic offices are operating in such a way,  a  person  refused
         protection applying from abroad cannot submit the application forms
         to the Minister of Unification  or,  in  case  of  the  nationality
         decision, to the Minister of Justice, because of  the  interference
         of the diplomatic offices. Moreover, even if North  Koreans  manage
         to submit the application form, it is almost impossible for them to
         acquire South Korean citizenship for the strict approaches of  each
         office. Therefore, it is almost impossible for  North  Koreans  who
         have been outside North Korea for more than ten years  and  applied
         abroad to get approved entry into South  Korea  and  acquire  South
         Korean citizenship."

  56. In ho Song goes on to  say  that  he  agrees  with  Professor  Bluth's
      report, but adds:

         "However, there are also politicians (including member of  national
         assembly) who try to adopt the North Korean defectors more  openly.
         They want  to  press  the  authorities  concerned  (especially  the
         Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Trade),  but   did   not   get
         satisfactory results yet. In conclusion, as I said in the  previous
         answers, it is almost impossible for the North Korean defectors who
         have lived in certain state for more  than  ten  years  to  acquire
         South Korean citizenship."

  57. In ho Song concludes by giving his opinion  about  rights  of  appeal.
      There is no specific provision allowing a person refused protection or
      naturalisation to appeal against the decision. It would be possible to
      "file general administrative litigation", but In ho Song is unable  to
      find any "precedents". There is only a  very  limited  possibility  of
      reviewing the exercise of the governmental discretion.  The  right  of
      appeal can be exercised from  abroad,  but  only  in  the  case  of  a
      decision that has  actually  been  made:  therefore,  if  the  embassy
      refuses to accept the application at all, there is no  possibility  of
      an appeal.

Authorities

  58.  We  were  referred  to  a  number  of   authorities,   from   various
      jurisdictions. Amongst them were Stepanov v SSHD [2001] 01  TH  02850,
      MA (Ethiopia) [2008] UKAIT 00032 and [2009] EWCA Civ 289; Jong Kim Koe
      v Minister for  Immigration  [1997]  FCA  306,  SRPP  v  Minister  for
      Immigration [2000] AATA 878, NBLC v Minister  for  Immigration  [2005]
      FCA 1052, NAGV v Minister for Immigration [2005] HCA  6  and  MZXLT  v
      Minister for Immigration [2007] FMCA 799  from  Australia,  Katkova  v
      Canada [1997] 40 Imm LR (2d) 216 and Williams v Canada  [2005]  3  FCR
      429  from  Canada,  and  the  Nottebohm  Case  [1955]  ICJ  4  in  the
      International Court of Justice. We defer discussion  of  the  relevant
      authorities to the next section of this judgement.

Discussion

   (i) Foreign Nationality

  59. Whether a person is a national of any particular state is a matter for
      the law of that state. So far as we are  aware,  that  proposition  is
      uncontroversial. If authority for it is sought, it is to be  found  in
      Articles 1 and 2 of the 1930 Hague  Convention  on  Certain  Questions
      Relating to the Conflict of Nationality Laws, and in the judgement  of
      the ICJ in the Nottebohm Case at [20]. It follows  that  the  question
      whether the appellants, or any other  individuals,  are  nationals  of
      South Korea is a matter determined in accordance with  the  provisions
      of South Korean law. In a court of any part  of  the  United  Kingdom,
      South Korean law is foreign law and is a matter of fact, to be  proved
      by evidence. In such cases it is appropriate for the court to  receive
      evidence from experts, but it is for the court, not  the  experts,  to
      make the decision. It follows that,  in  taking  account  of  all  the
      evidence before it, the court is entitled to reject the opinion of  an
      expert, as Finkelstein J, applying similar  principles  in  Australian
      law, did in Lay Kon Tji v MIEA (1998) 158 ALR 681, cited  in  SRPP  at
      [93].

  60. The evidence, whether in the form of experts' reports or not, may deal
      with questions of practice and other issues, as well as  questions  of
      law. In SRPP, the court had at [104] to  consider  an  assertion  that
      what were apparently provisions of Portuguese law might be  overridden
      by provisions of the Portuguese Constitution. At a different level, it
      may be  that  clear  evidence  as  to  national  practice  may  be  of
      importance in determining the content of provisions of  national  law.
      On the other hand, evidence of practice, in order to  be  relevant  in
      this context, is likely to need to be of generality comparable to that
      of legal rules. In particular, and bearing in mind the possibility  of
      the manipulation or selection of evidence by a  person  who  seeks  to
      remain in a country where he is claiming asylum, it is, we think, very
      unlikely that the experience of one or a small number  of  individuals
      will be sufficient to show that the legal  rules  are  not  what  they
      appear to be.

  61. The power of each State to determine under its own  law  who  are  its
      nationals extends not merely to the making  of  legal  rules,  but  to
      their application on the facts of individual cases.  A  State  may  be
      expected to examine with some care the facts upon which any  claim  to
      its nationality is based. That will be particularly the case  where  a
      claimant comes from another State  and  does  not  have  documentation
      derived from the authorities of the State whose nationality he claims.
      That there should be detailed and rigorous investigation of claims  to
      nationality is a matter of no surprise.

   (ii) "Effectiveness" of nationality

  62. We heard a number of submissions on the notion of  "effectiveness"  of
      nationality. It is suggested on behalf of the appellants that in order
      for a nationality, particularly a second nationality, to count for the
      purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  that  nationality   must   be
      "effective".

  63. There is a full and informative treatment of the  issue  in  Jong  Kim
      Koe. The applicant,  who  was  from  East  Timor,  claimed  asylum  in
      Australia. It was argued on behalf of the government that  as  he  was
      also a national of Portugal, he was not entitled  to  refugee  status.
      The Refugee Review Tribunal accepted that argument, but,  on  judicial
      review, the Federal Court of Australia  set  the  Tribunal's  decision
      aside, holding that it had erred in law by taking  into  account  only
      the fact of nationality, without looking at its content.

  64. In its commentary  on  Article  1A(2),  the  UNHCR  Handbook  says  at
      paragraph 107:

         "In examining the case  of  an  applicant  with  dual  or  multiple
         nationality, it is necessary, however, to distinguish  between  the
         possession of a nationality in the legal sense and the availability
         of protection by the country concerned. There will be  cases  where
         the applicant has the nationality of a country in regard  to  which
         he alleges no fear, but  such  nationality  may  be  deemed  to  be
         ineffective as it does not entail the protection  normally  granted
         to nationals. In such circumstances, the possession of  the  second
         nationality would not be inconsistent with  refugee  status.  As  a
         rule, there should have been a  request  for,  and  a  refusal  of,
         protection before it can be established that a given nationality is
         ineffective. If there is no explicit refusal of protection, absence
         of a reply within reasonable time may be considered a refusal."

  65. The Court considered a passage from James  C.  Hathaway,  The  Law  of
      Refugee Status at [59], and noted that:

         "What is involved here is the proper construction of Article  1A(2)
         of the Refugees [sic] Convention. To  interpret  'nationality'  for
         the purposes of Article 1A(2) as something  of  a  'merely  formal'
         character (to use the language of Professor Hathaway),  instead  of
         something effective from the viewpoint of a putative refugee, would
         be liable to frustrate rather than advance the humanitarian objects
         of the Refugees Convention. Nor would such a construction  advance,
         in any practical way, another object of  the  Refugees  Convention,
         namely the precedence of  national  protection  over  international
         protection. That precedence has no obvious relevance where national
         protection is not effective; as the UNHCR Handbook puts it....

         Given the objects of  the  Convention,  it  can  hardly  have  been
         intended that a person who seeks international protection to which,
         but for a second nationality he or she would clearly  be  entitled,
         would, as a consequence of  a  formal  but  relevantly  ineffective
         nationality, be denied international protection and,  not  being  a
         'refugee', could be sent back to the country in  which  he  or  she
         feared, and had a real chance of, being persecuted."

  66. As the closing words reveal, the  risk  in  this  case  was  that  the
      appellant, having failed to establish that he was a  refugee,  because
      of his Portuguese nationality, would thereupon  be  returned  to  East
      Timor. The reasons for that, it appears,  were  that  there  was  some
      evidence (which, in the Court's view, the Tribunal should  have  taken
      into account) that Portugal  either  would  not  recognise  him  as  a
      national, or would require him to go  to  Portugal  to  establish  his
      nationality, leaving it unclear what  might  happen  to  him  then  if
      Portugal refused to recognise him as a national.

  67. Consideration of this issue is likely to require us to go further than
      was merited  by  the  submissions  before  us.  We  would  make  three
      observations. The first is that, in  principle,  an  Australian  court
      might properly decide that it was persuaded  that  the  applicant  had
      Portuguese nationality, and might  allow  him  to  be  removed  there,
      knowing that if Portugal did not accept him  as  a  national  Portugal
      could not return him to a country of nationality in  which  he  feared
      persecution for a Convention reason.  Those  considerations  might  be
      different if the country of return was not  a  party  to  the  Refugee
      Convention or some other convention of equivalent nature. Secondly, it
      is clear that the issue is  the  availability  of  protection.  If  an
      individual has protection available to him from a country of which  he
      is a national, the Refugee Convention is not engaged. That is not  the
      same as saying that a person of dual nationality  is  not  a  refugee.
      Such ought to be obvious. What is less obvious, but  clear  from  Jong
      Kim Koe, is that a country  of  nationality  which  is  not  itself  a
      country of persecution may nevertheless be  a  country  in  which  the
      applicant has a "valid reason based  on  well-founded  fear"  for  not
      availing himself of its protection. If  the  result  of  his  availing
      himself of the protection of that country is that he will find himself
      (for one reason or another) returned to the country in which he  fears
      persecution, that would appear to  be  such  a  reason.  Thirdly,  the
      individual occasions when a country will not accept the return of  its
      own nationals must be very rare and, as Jong Kim Koe also makes clear,
      the prospect of such treatment is a matter to be  established  on  the
      individual facts of the case. If it were  ever  to  be  shown  that  a
      country had a general practice of not  receiving  its  own  nationals,
      there would be likely to be pressure through diplomatic channels,  and
      perhaps litigation at the Hague.

   (iii) Proof of nationality or the lack of it

  68. As we have suggested above, it is possible  that  the  courts  of  one
      country might decide that  an  applicant  was  a  citizen  of  another
      country, but the other country might  not  recognise  the  applicant's
      citizenship. Thus, questions of the "effectiveness" of nationality are
      very closely linked to questions about what an applicant ought  to  do
      in order to secure evidence or acceptance of his  nationality  of  the
      other country.

  69. The applicant's own endeavours are obviously relevant. We must look in
      some detail at MA in the Court of Appeal. The appellant  was  born  in
      Ethiopia to parents of Eritrean ethnicity, and her nationality  was  a
      matter of some doubt. The headnote to the determination of the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal is as follows:

         "In any case of disputed  nationality  the  first  question  to  be
         considered should be: 'Is the person de  jure  a  national  of  the
         country concerned?'. This question is to be answered  by  examining
         whether the person fulfils the nationality law requirements of  his
         or her country. Matters such  as  the  text  of  nationality  laws,
         expert  evidence,  relevant  documentation,  the  appellant's   own
         testimony, agreement between the parties and Foreign Office letters
         may all legitimately inform the assessment. In deciding the  answer
         to be given, it may be relevant to examine  evidence  of  what  the
         authorities in the appellant's  country  of  origin  have  done  in
         respect of his or her nationality.

         If it is concluded that the person is de jure  a  national  of  the
         country concerned, then the  next  question  to  be  considered  is
         purely factual, i.e. 'Is it reasonably likely that the  authorities
         of the state concerned will accept the person, if returned, as  one
         of its own nationals?'."

  70. It will be recalled  that  Professor  Goodwin-Gill,  asked  about  the
      situation of the third appellant by reference to  that  determination,
      criticised the Tribunal's decision on the ground  that  it  introduced
      "concepts such as de jure nationality and "real risk of denial"  which
      are unnecessary to the application of Article 1A(2)".

  71. It is perhaps surprising that, giving  his  expert  opinion  in  March
      2010, Professor Goodwin-Gill was apparently unaware of the decision of
      the Court of Appeal in the same case, handed down on 2 April 2009,  to
      which he would otherwise certainly  have  made  reference.  The  first
      judgement was given by Elias LJ;  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  described  his
      reasons as "in substance the same" and Mummery  LJ  agreed  with  both
      judgements. At [41] - [43], Elias LJ said this:

         "41.     I would accept that the use of the concepts of de jure and
             de facto nationality did not of itself involve  any  error  of
             law, and indeed, as I have said, it  was  understandable  that
             the Tribunal should approach the matter  in  this  way,  since
             that is how this  court  analysed  matters  in  the  factually
             similar case of EB [2007] EWCA Civ 809. In so  doing  the  AIT
             was  simply,  in  my  view,  adopting   convenient   shorthand
             descriptions. De jure nationality was what the  appellant  was
             entitled to as a matter of law; de facto nationality  was  the
             status she would actually be afforded by the Ethiopian  state.
             I accept the submission of Ms  Giovannetti  [counsel  for  the
             Secretary of State] that the Tribunal was doing no  more  than
             saying  that  if  someone  like  the  appellant  has  de  jure
             nationality, then the onus will be on her  to  show  that  she
             would  be  denied  that  status  in  a   manner   constituting
             persecution  on  Convention  grounds.  In  my  judgment,   the
             language used by the AIT was not  erecting,  or  intending  to
             erect, any fresh conceptual legal analysis.

         42.      Having said that,  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  either
             necessary or desirable for these concepts to  be  employed  as
             they were. The issue in asylum cases  is  always  whether  the
             applicant has a well founded fear of  persecution  on  return,
             and she will have that well founded fear if there  is  a  real
             risk that she will face persecution. In this  case  the  issue
             was perceived to be whether she would face the risk  of  being
             denied her status as a national, it being  assumed  that  this
             would, if established, constitute persecution to the requisite
             standard. To have recourse to concepts of de jure and de facto
             nationality is likely to obscure  rather  than  to  illuminate
             that question. Indeed, it may have been the  reason  why  this
             experienced body applied the wrong test for  the  standard  of
             proof. That particular error in turn, as is  conceded  by  the
             Secretary of State, meant that the analysis of  what  the  AIT
             called the "hypothetical question", namely how she would  have
             been treated if returned to Ethiopia,  was  wrong  in  law.  I
             consider below the relevance, if any, of that error.

         43.      I also  accept,  as  Ms  Giovannetti  concedes,  that  the
             Tribunal should have dealt with  the  question  of  Ethiopia's
             attitude to return as part of its assessment whether there was
             a real risk of persecution. It is true that the Tribunal  will
             not generally be concerned about the process  of  removal;  it
             must determine asylum status without  regard  to  that  issue,
             which is a matter for the Secretary of State. So the fact that
             it may, for example, prove to be  impossible  in  practice  to
             return  someone  seeking  asylum  has  no  relevance  to   the
             determination of their refugee status. But where the applicant
             contends that the denial of the right to return is part of the
             persecution  itself,  the  Tribunal  must  engage  with   that
             question."

  72. Stanley Burnton LJ's conclusions on the process of determination where
      there are arguments about the practical  availability  of  the  rights
      relating to nationality were as follows:

         "78.     There was debate before us as to the standard of proof  to
             be applied in a case in which a person  contends  that  he  is
             unable to obtain in this country  the  passport  or  emergency
             travel document that is her right as a national of her country
             of origin. In my judgment, it is not the "real risk" test.

             The "real risk" test applies to the question whether the  fear
             is well-founded: it is well-founded if there is a real risk of
             persecution. Thus a person who is unwilling to return owing to
             a fear that is so justified is  entitled  to  refugee  status.
             Inability to return is not qualified in the Convention by  the
             words "owing to such fear", and like the majority of the Court
             of Appeal in Adan, Nooh, Lazarevic and Radivojevic I see  good
             reason why it is not. Inability to return can  and  should  be
             proved in the ordinary way, on the balance of probabilities.

         79.      There are, as Miss  Giovannetti  submitted,  good  reasons
             other than the wording of the Convention for this  conclusion.
             Most importantly is the nature of the risk.  If  a  person  is
             returned  when  there  is  a  real  risk  of  persecutory  ill
             treatment  on  his  return,  that  risk  may  eventuate   with
             commensurately serious consequences. To require a person  here
             to take reasonable steps to apply for  a  passport  or  travel
             document, or to establish her nationality, involves no risk of
             harm at all. I take into account that there may  be  cases  in
             which the application to the foreign embassy may put relatives
             or friends who are in the country of origin at risk  of  harm.
             If there is a real risk that they will suffer harm as a result
             of such an application, it would not  be  reasonable  for  the
             person claiming asylum to have to make it. The present is  not
             such a case.

         80.      Secondly, the application of a "real risk" test  leads  to
             absurdity. It would mean that a person could establish that he
             could not return to his country of origin by  showing  that  a
             significant number of persons in a similar position  had  been
             refused a travel document, even if the majority  had  obtained
             one and been able to return without fear of ill treatment.

         81.      The third reason why the "real risk" test is inappropriate
             is that it is easy for the facts in issue to  be  proved.  The
             person claiming asylum can give evidence of her application to
             her embassy or consulate, including any  application  made  in
             person and of the refusal or other response (or lack of it) of
             her embassy. Her solicitors can write to the  embassy  on  her
             behalf and produce the correspondence. By contrast, it may  be
             difficult for a person here to prove what is happening in  her
             country of origin, let alone what may happen  to  her  in  the
             future if she returns.

         82.      The fourth reason is that if leave to remain is refused on
             the ground that  the  applicant  can  and  should  obtain  her
             foreign passport and recognition of her  nationality,  and  it
             turns out that she cannot, she can make a fresh claim based on
             the refusal.

         83.      Lastly, refugee status is not a matter of choice. A person
             cannot be entitled to refugee status solely because he or  she
             refuses to make an application to her Embassy, or  refuses  or
             fails to take  reasonable  steps  to  obtain  recognition  and
             evidence of her nationality."

  73. An appellant is seeking a right to stay in  the  United  Kingdom,  not
      seeking to facilitate removal to another country. There is therefore a
      certain artificiality in enquiring what an appellant's position  would
      be if he or she  presented  himself  to  the  authorities  of  another
      country as a person wishing to enter and settle in it as  a  national.
      But it is that enquiry which must be undertaken. In  relation  to  the
      evidence in the present appeals, we note that  it  is  said  that  the
      South Korean authorities are unwilling to consider applications  while
      an individual has an asylum claim or appeal outstanding,  and  may  be
      unwilling to consider certain applications unless  a  person  shows  a
      wish to settle in South Korea. Those are factors on which in principle
      an appellant cannot rely, for the purposes of showing that he  or  she
      is not entitled to nationality or to documents evidencing nationality.
       This means that the evidence in the present  case,  relating  to  the
      experience of those who do not seek to settle in South  Korea,  is  of
      very little relevance. The question is what attitude the South  Korean
      authorities would take to a person who  wanted  recognition  of  South
      Korean nationality, not to a person who was trying to show that it was
      unavailable, and evidence of the latter should  not  be  taken  to  be
      evidence of the former. In the absence of clear  evidence  tending  to
      show that North Koreans who actually seek to  settle  in  South  Korea
      will not be recognised as South Korean nationals  in  accordance  with
      national law, we have no reason to suppose that South Korea  will  not
      comply with its own law and  its  international  obligations  in  such
      cases.

   (iv) North Koreans and South Korean Nationality

  74. We have no hesitation in finding as a fact, on the evidence before us,
      that the general position is that North Korean nationals are nationals
      of South Korea. More precisely, because South  Korean  nationality  is
      acquired at birth under the legislative provisions to  which  we  have
      referred, by those born to parents of South  Korean  nationality,  and
      because South Korea has never recognised  the  separate  existence  of
      North Korea but regards the whole of the Korean Peninsula as  its  own
      territory, the general position is that all members of  all  ancestral
      North Korean families are, like all members of ancestral South  Korean
      families, South Korean nationals. In particular, there is no doubt  in
      our mind, on the basis of the facts found by the  Immigration  Judges,
      that each of the appellants obtained South Korean  nationality,  under
      the provisions of South Korean law, at his or her birth.

  75. Nationality of South Korea so obtained by birth under  the  provisions
      of the South Korean Nationality Act is automatic; it is not subject to
      discretionary grant. But of course it does not follow that any  person
      who cares to apply for documents evidencing South  Korean  citizenship
      will be granted them: South Korea is entitled to, and on the  evidence
      will, conduct a rigorous investigation to ensure  that  the  applicant
      has South Korean nationality as he claims. The evidence before us  has
      referred to such examinations. Bearing in mind what we  have  said  in
      paragraph 73 about the evidence before us, we  do  not  consider  that
      anything that we have heard suggests  that  the  examinations  go  any
      further than would be proper in the circumstances, or that they are in
      general used to deny the rights of citizenship to  those  entitled  to
      it. Indeed, the clear evidence is that  South  Korea's  constitutional
      claim to the Korean Peninsula entails its treatment  of  North  Korean
      nationals as its  own;  and  although  the  1997  Act  does  not  deal
      specifically with nationality, the existence of it makes  clear  South
      Korea's continuing attitude to such issues. That South Korea would  do
      anything to deny the recognition  of  nationality  to  those  who  can
      demonstrate that they are its nationals because of their North  Korean
      background would be contrary to the evidence before us.

  76. Neither South Korea nor  any  other  State  is  obliged  to  recognise
      determinations as to its own nationality  made  in  or  by  any  other
      State. The assertion before us  that  South  Korea  would  not  regard
      itself bound by the determinations of this Tribunal are no  more  than
      statements of the general, and obvious position. But we know no reason
      to suppose that determination of nationality by  South  Korea  follows
      anything other than a rational process. South Korea  will  not  regard
      itself as bound by determinations of fact made by the Tribunal, but it
      will no doubt have regard to evidence similar to or the same  as  that
      relied on by the appellants before us. That evidence was  such  as  to
      persuade the Immigration Judges that the claimants were  very  clearly
      of North Korean ancestry and citizenship. It included, in the case  of
      the first and second appellants, evidence of an expert which  was,  we
      think we may say, compelling.

  77. It would clearly be difficult for the appellants, who have based their
      cases on their  being  North  Korean  nationals,  and  have  collected
      evidence of such strength to support that case, now to show  that  the
      evidence was such that when properly and rationally  assessed  by  the
      South Korean authorities, it would not  be  regarded  as  establishing
      their North Korean nationality. For our part,  we  see  no  reason  to
      suppose that there is anything in the  appellants'  cases  that  would
      cause any person charged with determining the issue to  reach  a  view
      other than that at their birth  they  were  each  nationals  of  South
      Korea.

   (v) The right to acquire nationality

  78. For the reasons we have given, we have reached the conclusion that the
      appellants, and the vast majority of nationals of North Korea, acquire
      South Korean nationality at birth. There is, therefore, no  subsequent
      process by which they obtain that nationality.  They  may  obtain  the
      documents evidencing it, but that  does  not  affect  their  juridical
      status as South Korean nationals. And the process by which they obtain
      documentation is not itself the acquisition of nationality.  A  person
      acquiring South Korean nationality by birth  may  have,  if  he  is  a
      national of North Korea, no  documents  evidencing  his  South  Korean
      nationality, but he is for present purposes and for  all  purposes  we
      can envisage, from his birth in law a national of South Korea. He  has
      South Korean nationality: he does not have merely a  right  to  obtain
      South Korean nationality.

  79. At the beginning of this determination  we  drew  attention  to  three
      possible scenarios in the interpretation of the  multiple  nationality
      provisions in Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.  A  person  may
      have the nationality in question;  or  he  may  not  have  it  but  be
      entitled to have it; or  he  may  be  a  potential  beneficiary  of  a
      discretion to grant him the nationality in  question.  The  appellants
      fall within the first category in relation to South Korea, and  it  is
      therefore not strictly necessary to consider the others. In the  light
      of the submissions we heard, however, it is right to  give  our  views
      briefly. We have little doubt that, where a  person's  acquisition  of
      nationality depends on the exercise of a discretion by the State whose
      nationality he seeks to acquire, he cannot be regarded without more as
      for the purposes of the Refugee Convention having the  nationality  in
      question.

  80. If support for that view is required, it can be found  in  the  Israel
      Law of Return Cases, MZXLT, NAGV  and  Katkova.  The  Law  of  Return,
      passed by the Knesset in 1950, gave all Jews a right  to  emigrate  to
      Israel, but does not make even those Jews who seek to settle in Israel
      nationals of Israel by that very act: there are  provisions  initially
      for the grant of visas and  then  for  the  determination  of  whether
      nationality is to be granted. The finding of McKeown J in Katkova  was
      that

         "the Law of  Return  confers  a  wide  discretion  on  the  Israeli
         Minister of the Interior to reject applications for citizenship".

      As a  result,  courts  have  found  (though  not  in  every  case,  as
      discussion in Katkova makes clear) that a person who may  be  able  to
      obtain nationality of Israel under the Law of  Return  is  not  to  be
      regarded as being a national of  Israel.  Similarly,  we  can  see  no
      general basis for treating persons as nationals of a  state  of  which
      they are not presently nationals, and of which they have presently  no
      entitlement to nationality.

  81. On the other hand, there may be  cases  where  the  acquisition  of  a
      nationality not yet obtained is a matter  not  of  discretion  but  of
      entitlement and of mere formality. Russian nationality was capable  of
      being acquired by right by the claimants in Bouianova v MEI (1993)  67
      FTR 74 and Zdanov v MEI (1994) 81 FTR 246. These were  Canadian  cases
      where the claimants were individuals who claimed to be stateless  but,
      as Rothstein J said in Bouianova at [76] (as cited  by  McKeown  J  in
      Katkova):

         "In my  view,  the  applicant,  by  simply  making  a  request  and
         submitting her passport to be stamped, becomes a citizen of Russia.
         On the evidence before me, there is no discretion  by  the  Russian
         officials to refuse her Russian citizenship. I  do  not  think  the
         necessity of making an application, which in these circumstances is
         nothing more than a mere formality, means that a  person  does  not
         have a country of nationality just because they choose not to  make
         such an application."

  82. In summary, for the purposes of the Refugee Convention, where a person
      already has a nationality (even if he has no documents to that effect)
      that is the end of the  matter:  he  is  a  national  of  the  country
      concerned. If he is entitled  to  nationality,  subject  only  to  his
      making an application for it, he is also to be regarded as a  national
      of the country concerned. But if he is  not  a  national  and  may  be
      refused nationality, he is not to be treated as being  a  national  of
      the country concerned. Subject to questions as to the  "effectiveness"
      of nationality, the same principle applies to entitlement to a  second
      nationality as to entitlement to a first.

  83. We  should  say  that  we  regard  that  summary  as  consistent  with
      authority, including Bradshaw [1994] Imm AR 359, and MA.  In  both  of
      those cases there is more than a suggestion (in Bradshaw it is  stated
      as a rule) that in order to establish a claim not to have a particular
      nationality,  a  person  ought  to  apply,  using  his  or  her   best
      endeavours, to obtain nationality of a country with which he or she is
      associated. But it seems to us that that must be a matter of  evidence
      rather than of legal principle. For example, if the evidence  is  that
      nationality will be acquired on application, a decision maker ought to
      be entitled without more to treat the person  as  a  national  of  the
      country in question, for the purposes of the Refugee  Convention.  If,
      on the other hand, there is evidence that the grant of nationality  is
      a matter of discretion, it is not easy to see why a  refugee  claimant
      should be regarded, to his disadvantage, as having a nationality  that
      he does not possess and may never possess.  There  may  be  borderline
      cases, and we would with respect strongly endorse  what  was  said  by
      Stanley Burnton LJ in MA at [83], as set out above.

   (vi) North Koreans in South Korea

  84. The evidence before us does not give any good  reason  for  concluding
      that the return of a North Korean, as a citizen  of  South  Korea,  to
      South Korea would expose him to risk of persecution or breach  any  of
      the other international obligations of the  United  Kingdom.  A  North
      Korean re-settling in South Korea may under certain  circumstances  be
      entitled to the benefits of the 1997 Act, but, even if he is not,  the
      circumstances under which North Koreans live in South  Korea  are  not
      shown to amount to persecution or other ill-treatment. That  was  also
      the conclusion of an Australian tribunal whose decision  was  examined
      in the Federal Court in NBLC.  There  is  evidence  of  some  societal
      discrimination and other difficulties but not treatment  reaching  the
      threshold of persecution under the Refugee  Convention,  serious  harm
      under the Directive 2004/83/EC, or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3
      of the European Convention on Human Rights.

  85. It follows that, in general, nationals of North Korea who claim asylum
      can lawfully be the subject of removal directions to South Korea.

   (vii) A special problem: absence for ten years

  86. The weight of the evidence before us was to the effect  that  a  North
      Korean national who was absent from Korea  for  more  than  ten  years
      would not be able to obtain the indicia of South  Korean  nationality,
      despite his acquisition of that nationality by birth.  Such  a  person
      falls in a distinct category, identified in the  written  evidence  of
      Professor Bluth (his paragraphs 5.4.11, 6.1.5  and  6.1.7,  citing  at
      least two, possibly three sources),  and  In  ho  Song  (paragraph  55
      above).  The  statements  to  this  effect  appear  to  be   in   flat
      contradiction to South Korean nationality law, and  are  difficult  to
      explain. The most likely explanation is, as  hinted  at  by  Professor
      Bluth and his sources, that there is a presumption that a  person  who
      has been in some other country or countries  for  so  long  must  have
      acquired a right to be there. It appears to us on  the  evidence  that
      after ten years the South Korean authorities must apply some  sort  of
      presumption of the acquisition of another citizenship, which would, in
      accordance with the terms of the South Korean Nationality Act, deprive
      the individual in question of his South Korean nationality, or at  any
      rate place upon him an additional burden of proof, which  in  practice
      it may be impossible to discharge. We accept that this is a hypothesis
      on our part: but we must do what we can with the evidence before us.

  87. On that basis, the effect is that a person who was a national of South
      Korea by birth, and who has no South Korean documents,  may  lose  his
      South  Korean  nationality  by  the  presumption  of  having  acquired
      another, and, as a result, will not be able to  acquire  South  Korean
      documents on the basis of entitlement to them.  Instead,  he  will  in
      practice become a  person  who  merely  can  apply  for  South  Korean
      nationality and, as we have explained above, for the purposes  of  the
      Refugee Convention, not a national of South Korea. He passes from  the
      first of our three categories to the third.

  88. We are not persuaded  that  we  should  connect  this  aspect  of  the
      evidence with generalised assertions that the South Korean authorities
      apply the 1997 Act to the  determination  of  nationality.  Those  are
      assertions which we do not think it would  be  right  to  accept.  The
      distinction between nationality and the acceptance  of  those  leaving
      North Korea, irrespective of nationality, is quite clear in the  South
      Korean legislation. But so is the provision for loss of  South  Korean
      nationality on the acquisition of another non-Korean nationality  and,
      as we have said, we think that the  latter  provision  is  the  proper
      basis of the "ten-year rule" which appears to be applied in practice.

Current tension between North Korea and South Korea

  89. In the period following the hearing  of  this  appeal,  there  was  an
      escalation in tension between North Korea and  South  Korea.  We  gave
      consideration to whether we ought  to  hear  further  submissions.  We
      decided that no further submissions were necessary, for the  following
      reasons. First, they could not affect the outcome  of  these  appeals.
      Secondly, there is not  the  slightest  suggestion  that  any  current
      tensions have affected the attitude of the South Korean authorities to
      individuals from North Korea, in particular those who have left  North
      Korea for fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  or  for  other
      reasons connected with distaste for the North Korean regime. There  is
      thus no basis for supposing that the most recent events in the  Korean
      Peninsula cast any doubt on  either  our  general  or  our  particular
      conclusions.

General conclusions

  90. We summarise our general conclusions as follows.

      (1)   Law

         (a)  For the purposes of determining whether a person  is  "of"  or
             "has" a nationality within the meaning of Article 1A(2) of the
             Refugee Convention, it is convenient  to  distinguish  between
             cases where a person (i) is  (already)  of  that  nationality;
             (ii) is not of that nationality but is entitled to acquire it;
             and (iii) is not of  that  nationality  but  may  be  able  to
             acquire it.

         (b)      Cases within (i) and (ii) are cases where  the  person  is
             "of" or "has" the nationality in question; cases within  (iii)
             are not.

         (c)      For  these  purposes  there  is  no  separate  concept  of
             "effective" nationality; the  issue  is  the  availability  of
             protection in the country in question.

         (d)      Nationality of any State is a matter for that State's law,
             constitution and (to a limited extent) practice, proof of  any
             of which is by evidence, the assessment of which  is  for  the
             court deciding the protection claim.

         (e)      As eligibility for Refugee Convention protection is not  a
             matter of choice, evidence going to a person's  status  within
             cases (i) and (ii) has to be  on  "best  efforts"  basis,  and
             evidence of the attitude of the State in question to a  person
             who seeks reasons for not being removed to that State  may  be
             of very limited relevance.

      (2)   Korea

         (a)      The law and the constitution of South Korea (ROK)  do  not
             recognise North Korea (DPRK) as a separate State.

         (b)      Under South Korean law, most nationals of North Korea  are
             nationals of South Korea as well, because  they  acquire  that
             nationality at birth by descent from a (North) Korean  parent,
             and fall therefore within category (i) in 1(a) above.

         (c)      South Korea will make rigorous enquiries  to  ensure  that
             only those who are its nationals are recognised  as  such  but
             the evidence does not show that it has a practice of  refusing
             to recognise its nationals who genuinely seek to exercise  the
             rights of South Korean nationals.

         (d)       South  Korean  law  does  not   generally   permit   dual
             nationality (North Korean nationality being ignored  for  this
             purpose).

         (e)      South Korean practice appears to presume  that  those  who
             have been absent from the Korean Peninsula for more  than  ten
             years have acquired another nationality displacing their South
             Korean nationality; such persons therefore move from  category
             (i), in 1(a) above, to category (iii).

Conclusion on these appeals

  91. The appellants acquired South Korean citizenship at birth, but each of
      them has been outside Korea for more than ten years. They remain North
      Korean nationals, but on the evidence before us we are satisfied  that
      South Korea would treat them as  persons  who  had  lost  their  South
      Korean nationality on the presumption of the  acquisition  of  another
      nationality. For that reason they have no subsisting  or  demonstrable
      entitlement to South Korean nationality documents: they would have  to
      apply to re-acquire South Korean nationality, and we see no reason  to
      suppose that it would be granted to them as a matter of routine.

  92. The appellants are therefore all persons with  one  nationality  only,
      that of North Korea. It is common ground that in that  case  they  are
      refugees. We allow their appeals.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                       VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL,
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER




