



                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Tanveer Ahmed Virk) v The Secretary of State for
the Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00094 (IAC)

                                                        Heard at Field House
                                                         On 5th January 2015



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                             TANVEER AHMED VIRK

                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Ms L Akande, counsel, for the applicant (instructed by Rashid and Rashid)
Mr V Mandalia, counsel, for the respondent (instructed by Treasury
Solicitor)

                                  JUDGMENT

   1. The applicant was granted permission to bring a judicial review of the
      asserted continuing  refusal  of  the  respondent  to  reconsider  her
      decision dated 29th September 2011 refusing him leave to remain in the
      UK, and failing to make and serve an appealable decision.


     2. The applicant arrived in the UK on 20th September 2006  with  entry
        clearance valid until 24th February 2007. He did not leave  the  UK
        on the conclusion of his leave to remain. On 19th August  2011  the
        applicant sought leave to remain. That application was refused  for
        reasons set out in a letter  dated  29th  September  2011.  On  7th
        October 2011 the applicant  asked  the  respondent  to  review  the
        decision. On 8th October 2011 he requested that removal  directions
        be set and he be given an in-country right of appeal if the refusal
        decision was maintained. On 31st July  2013  he  submitted  further
        representations  to  the  respondent  notifying  her  he  had  been
        diagnosed with and was receiving treatment for thyroid  cancer.  On
        19th August 2013 the applicant sent a Pre Action Protocol letter to
        the respondent and on 8th November 2013 issued the  these  judicial
        review proceedings. The grounds relied upon complained of  unlawful
        delay by the respondent in responding to the request for review  of
        the decision dated 29th September 2011 and relied upon his  claimed
        serious medical  condition  and  lack  of  family  and  support  in
        Pakistan. In her acknowledgment of service the respondent said:
                  5. The Claimant has made further human rights  submissions
                  by letter dated 31 July 2013.  The  SSHD  is  required  to
                  consider these decisions. However the delay in the SSHD in
                  considering  those  submissions  (3  months  at  time   of
                  judicial review Claim Form) and still less than 1 year, is
                  not so long as to make that delay unlawful. The SSHD  will
                  consider the further submissions within a reasonable  time
                  period (3 months absent special circumstances)
                  6.  The Claimant submits that he should be issued  with  a
                  removal decision in order that he is granted  a  right  of
                  appeal. The Defendant is not obliged to give a  notice  of
                  removal which would generate that  right  of  appeal  (see
                  Court of Appeal's judgment in Daley-Murdock v SSHD  [2011]
                  EWCA Civ 161)....
                  7. The Claimant does not fall within her  policy  in  this
                  regard....


     3. In granting permission UTJ MacLeman observed:
             In light of the rather vague statement  at  15  (sic)  of  the
             acknowledgment of service, the grounds are enough to call  for
             oral submissions on delay and absence of appealable decision.
     4. Before me the applicant did not  and  has  not  asserted  that  the
        decision dated 29th September 2011 failed to adequately address all
        the matters put forward to the  respondent  for  decision  at  that
        time. In that letter, in addition to considering the matters raised
        by the applicant upon which he relied  for  leave  to  remain,  the
        applicant was informed that if he wished to  rely  upon  a  claimed
        breach of the Refugee Convention or Article 3 then he should attend
        the Asylum Screening Unit and make an application  in  person.  The
        letters dated 7th and 8th October 2011 did not raise any new issues
        but merely requested a  review  of  the  earlier  decision  and  an
        appealable decision. It was not  until  31st  July  2013  that  the
        respondent was informed by the applicant that he had been diagnosed
        with Thyroid cancer.


     5. The respondent defends the claim on the grounds  firstly  that  she
        was under no obligation to review the 29th September 2011 decision;
        secondly that any challenge to that decision is  significantly  out
        of time; thirdly she acknowledged she was required to consider  the
        human rights application dated 31st July 2013 but she had said  she
        would do so and finally that she was under no  obligation  to  make
        and serve an appealable removal  decision.  By  letter  dated  20th
        November 2014 (7 months after  service  of  the  Acknowledgment  of
        Service  and  a  year  after  the  issue  of  the  judicial  review
        proceedings), the respondent rejected the applicant's further human
        rights application; again informed the applicant that if he  wished
        to claim that he was at risk of  persecution  or  that  his  future
        removal would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR then  he  should
        make an application for international protection in person and  she
        did not make and serve an appealable removal decision.

     6. Before me on 5th January 2015 the applicant relied firstly  upon  a
        claimed failure by the respondent to factor into her  decision  the
        delay in  reaching  the  decision  dated  20th  November  2014  and
        secondly that because the  applicant  had  made  a  request  for  a
        decision to remove him, the respondent was under a duty to consider
        that request and reach a decision whether to make such a  decision.
        Ms Akande acknowledged that the decision may not  necessarily  have
        been to make a removal decision but she asserted that at  the  very
        least the applicant was entitled to a decision on his request,  one
        way or the other.

     7. Dealing first with the claimed failure to factor into the  November
        2014 decision the delay about which the applicant complained, there
        is no merit in this submission. Until 13th July 2013 the  applicant
        had not submitted any details of any claim that he had to remain in
        the UK other than that which had already  been  considered  by  the
        respondent when she refused his application as  long  ago  as  29th
        September 2011. He had not challenged the content of  the  decision
        or asserted that it was wrong in law. His request for a review  had
        no merit and merely resulted in him remaining  in  the  UK  on  the
        basis that he was awaiting a response from  the  respondent  to  an
        unmeritorious   application.   His    application    for    further
        consideration made in July 2013 was the first  intimation  that  he
        had further information that he wished the respondent to  consider.
        To issue these proceedings on the basis of delay,  in  reliance  on
        the period of time that he has remained in the UK unlawfully is not
        a promising basis upon which to bring these  proceedings.  This  is
        particularly so because his claim to remain on  the  basis  of  the
        diagnosis of thyroid cancer itself was based on the claim  that  he
        required further treatment whereas the medical  evidence  submitted
        indicates this not to be the case (other than receiving the  "usual
        medication").  In  any  event  there  are  adequate  facilities  in
        Pakistan. The  claim  that  he  was  suffering  from  psychological
        problems was unsupported by any medical evidence whatsoever.


     8. The asserted delay of 14 weeks from the date of notification to the
        respondent of the medical  issues  and  the  issue  of  proceedings
        cannot by any  stretch  of  the  imagination  be  characterised  as
        unreasonable, unlawful or irrational in the circumstances. Although
        the respondent filed her acknowledgement of service out of time and
        failed to comply with the statement therein that she would reach  a
        decision on the October 2013 letter within three months, there  was
        no evidence that the applicant had suffered by that  delay.  It  is
        unfortunate that the respondent did not see fit  to  reach  a  more
        prompt decision but it  cannot  be  said  that  the  applicant  has
        suffered any detriment whatsoever.  He  has  continued  to  receive
        whatever treatment and follow up he  requires,  at  no  expense  to
        himself, and he was, of course, free to leave the UK at any time he
        chose to be reunited with his wife and children  in  Pakistan.  The
        delay from the issue of  proceedings  to  the  20th  November  2014
        letter cannot be characterised as unlawful or irrational. It cannot
        be concluded that  the  delay  has  in  any  way  operated  to  the
        detriment of the applicant or that his continued stay in the UK was
        in any way put at risk or adverse to his interests.


     9. In so far as the asserted failure  of  the  respondent  to  make  a
        decision on the request to make an appealable removal  decision  is
        concerned, there is no  merit  in  this  ground  either.  There  is
        nothing on the face of the documents submitted by the applicant  to
        indicate that he falls within the respondent's published policy  in
        respect of the circumstances in which a removal decision should  be
        issued. The applicant has received treatment  for  cancer,  has  no
        further need for specialist, frequent and  on-going  treatment  and
        there are no identifiable compassionate circumstances requiring him
        to be able to appeal against a decision to remove him. He  is  free
        to leave the UK at any time - as he has been since his  visit  visa
        expired in 2007. The applicant asserts that in accordance with  the
        guidance, where an application is made for a removal  decision  the
        respondent  is  required  to  engage  with  that  application.  The
        assertion that the respondent is required to  make  a  decision  on
        whether to make a decision in circumstances where it is evident  on
        the face of it that an applicant does not fall within the  guidance
        criteria is wholly unsustainable.

    10. For these reasons the claim must fail.

    11. This judgment was handed  down  on  12th  February  2015  at  which
        neither party was represented and no applications were made.

    12. I nevertheless considered whether permission to appeal to the Court
        of Appeal should be granted but find there is no arguable point  of
        law capable of affecting the outcome of the application and  refuse
        permission accordingly.

[pic]




Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

