

MA (Seven Year Child Concession) Pakistan [2005] UKIAT 00090

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing: 29 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               22 April 2005

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Dr H H Storey  (Vice President)

                                               Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)












                                       APPELLANT

                                                                       and




                                          Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department


                              RESPONDENT



Appearances: Ms A Weston of Counsel instructed by  George  Warsi  Solicitors
for the appellant; Mr P Deller, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant  is  a  national  of  Pakistan.  He  appeals  against  a
      determination of Adjudicator, Miss  Lynne  Thornton,  notified  on  14
      October 2003, dismissing his appeal against refusal of leave to  enter
      on human rights grounds.

2.    The appellant had first come to the UK in 1989 as a visitor. For  some
      period of time he had then held a multiple entry visit  visa.  On  the
      last of his return journeys in January 1999 when he was in  possession
      of what was described as a two month business  visa,  the  Immigration
      Officer  refused  him  leave  to  enter  and  granted  him   temporary
      admission. An appeal  against  the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  was
      subsequently  withdrawn.  On  21  June  1999  the  appellant  made  an
      application for exceptional leave to remain.

   3. In a document dated 15 July 2002 the Secretary of State concluded that
      to refuse this application would not interfere disproportionately with
      the right to respect for his private life  or  his  family  life.  The
      appellant appealed.

   4. The Adjudicator upheld this decision. She did not consider that  there
      were unusual or exceptional circumstances justifying  the  failure  of
      the appellant to comply with the Immigration Rules.  Furthermore,  she
      considered  that  the  respondent  had  properly  concluded  that  the
      appellant did not fall within the parameters  of  the  Long  Residence
      Concession (LRC) (DP 5/96) or the Seven Years Child Concession (SYCC).



5.     In  assessing  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim,  the  Adjudicator
      balanced in his favour that he had set up his company,  Eagelink  Ltd,
      in June 1991, bought a house in Rotherham in March 1996 and  that  all
      his children had been born and educated in the UK and had,  since  the
      refusal decision in 1999, lived in the UK  continuously.  She  further
      noted that the appellant had other relatives living in the UK, forming
      an extended family and there were  also  letters  of  support  from  a
      number of persons. She also appeared  to  accept  he  had  never  been
      involved in any form of criminal  activities  and  had  never  been  a
      burden on the state.

6.    She did not, however, consider these considerations  outweighed  those
      counting against him. She specified here the fact that  the  appellant
      used deception in order to obtain his multiple entry visa and the fact
      that he had been equivocal about his intentions, stating  on  the  one
      hand that there had never been any intention to establish  himself  in
      the UK, yet on the other  hand,  when  putting  his  Article  8  case,
      claiming that his family life  in  the  UK  was  well-established,  as
      evidenced in particular by his children being settled into  school  in
      the UK.

7.    The Adjudicator also considered  whether  delay  in  the  respondent's
      processing of the appellant's application was a factor weighing in his
      favour.  She decided it was not. She  noted  that  the  appellant  had
      withdrawn his appeal against refusal of leave to enter  in  June  1999
      and had not raised Article 8 until 25 April 2002.

8.    The Adjudicator also rejected the appellant's claim that the  decision
      was rendered disproportionate by the fact that removal of  the  family
      would prevent them from visiting the grave  of  his  wife's  stillborn
      child born in 1996.  In relation to the other children,  she  did  not
      accept that English was the only language they spoke at home  and  she
      considered that, by virtue of the fact that the elder children  had  a
      pattern of spending 8-12 weeks a year in Pakistan prior to 1999,  they
      had retained ties with that country.

9.    The appellant's business involvement was not seen to count very  much,
      if at all, in his favour. The appellant knew when he set it up that he
      did not have entry clearance to remain in  the  UK,  the  only  direct
      employee was his wife and the evidence that other  companies  depended
      on the work generated from Eagelink was mixed.  She also saw no reason
      why the appellant could not conduct his business from Pakistan.

10.   The grounds of appeal highlighted the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
      built up his business in the UK over fourteen  years,  his  speciality
      being to use his knowledge  of  particular  business  requirements  of
      companies abroad to find buyers of otherwise unsaleable  waste  paper.
      His company had been listed in the "Who's Who of British Excellence of
      2002". He was a taxpayer and a number of persons owed their employment
      to  the  business  generated  by  him.   The  grounds   disputed   the
      Adjudicator's finding that he had used deception in dealings with  the
      immigration authorities. He had come to the UK in 1989 as  a  visitor,
      had held a multiple entry visa for business purposes and  had  ensured
      on each occasion that he left the UK prior to the expiry of the  entry
      clearance period of  visitor  leave,  either  for  a  holiday  or  for
      business purposes.

11.   Against this  background,  the  grounds  contended  firstly  that  the
      Adjudicator had misdirected herself as to whether the decision of  the
      Secretary of State was  "in  accordance  with  the  law"  (within  the
      meaning of Article 8(2)); and secondly  that  her  conclusions  as  to
      proportionality were not reasonably open to her. In respect of both of
      these submissions it was further maintained that the  Adjudicator  had
      failed to make findings on all relevant matters of fact and had failed
      to take into account all relevant evidence.

12.   The first submission centred on the alleged error of  the  Adjudicator
      in considering that the appellant and his  family  could  not  benefit
      from the Secretary  of  State's  Seven  Years  Child  Concession.  The
      Adjudicator, submitted Ms Weston, had also wrongly applied a  test  of
      "unusual or extraordinary circumstances" for success under  Article  8
      on the part of someone who could not meet all the requirements of  the
      Immigration Rules.

13.   In support of her first  submission,  Ms  Weston  prayed  in  aid  the
      principle set out by the Court of Appeal judgment in D S  Abdi  [1996]
      ImmAR 148.
14.   We do not see that principles set out by the Court of Appeal  in  D  S
      Abdi have direct application in this case.   That  judgment  concerned
      the  "in accordance with the law" jurisdiction arising under  s.19  of
      the Immigration Act 1971 as amended and as subsequently maintained  in
      paragraph 21(1)(a) of Schedule 4 to the  1999 Act. By paragraph  21(2)
      of that same Schedule, that jurisdiction is made "subject to  ...  any
      restriction on the grounds of appeal". As Ms Weston properly conceded,
      the appeal in this case was brought solely under s.65 (1) and thus was
      restricted to human rights grounds.  Matters are of  course  different
      under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which  applies
      an "in  accordance  with  the  law"  requirement  to  all  immigration
      decisions: see s.84 (1)(e). But this was not an appeal under the  2002
      Act.

15.   Ms Weston's fallback submission was that D  S  Abdi  principles  still
      nevertheless applied directly in the context of the identically worded
      requirement set out in Article 8(2) of the ECHR that any  interference
      with a right protected under Article 8(1) be "in accordance  with  the
      law". Her argument here was in two stages. "Law" in the context of Art
      8 was, she said, a term which had to be given an autonomous and  broad
      definition. In addition, if the  Home  Office  failed  to  consider  a
      person under an applicable concessionary policy, the relevant decision
      could not be said to be "in accordance with the law".

  16. It is not necessary in this case to decide precisely what  points  of
      difference exist between paragraph 21(1)(a) of Schedule 4 to the 1999
      Act on the one hand and the relevant part  of  Article  8(2)  on  the
      other.  We can easily agree  with  the  first-stage  of  Ms  Weston`s
      argument that under both the term "law"  has  a  wider  meaning  than
      primary and  secondary  legislation  and  can  cover  extra-statutory
      governmental policies and guidelines: Silver v UK (1983) 5 EHRR  347,
      Malone v UK (1985) 7 EHRR 14, Govell v UK (14 January 1998); noted at
      [1999] EHRLR 121.


  17.  However,  the  second  stage  of  Ms  Weston`s  argument   is   more
      problematic. In Strasbourg jurisprudence the `in accordance with  the
      law` requirement has essentially been seen to embody the principle of
      legality, itself seen as comprising three rules: identification of  a
      basis in law, accessibility and certainty. As the Tribunal has  noted
      in KK [2004] 00268, the jurisprudence of the European Court of  Human
      Rights thus requires  that  governmental  policies  are  sufficiently
      accessible and precise so as to enable  citizens  to  regulate  their
      conduct by it. But we do not think she wished to argue that the Seven
      Years Child Concession lacked sufficient accessibility and precision.
      And  had  that  been  her  argument  we  would   have   rejected   it
      straightaway:  the  SYCC  was  a  published  policy  which  contained
      identifiable criteria: it was thus accessible and precise.
18.  Ms Weston's argument was  really  about  a  somewhat  different  point,
      namely that "in accordance with the law" under  Art  8(2)  encompassed
      the same principle of administrative law as set out in D S Abdi - that
      decision-makers were under a duty to apply the law (including  law  as
      founding the form  of  governmental  policies).  Here  there  is  this
      difficulty. We would accept it  is  arguable  that  the  principle  of
      legality includes the principle that decision-makers should apply  (as
      well as properly identify) the law in this broad sense. But we are not
      prepared to accept without more that Strasbourg has seen the principle
      of legality to extend that far in the context of Art 8(2).  Ms  Weston
      produced no authority in support of this contention. That being so, we
      do not accept that Art 8(2) can be said to encapsulate  precisely  the
      same principles as those set out in the context of UK Immigration Acts
      in D S Abdi.


19.   In any event, even were we to accept Ms Weston's submission we do  not
      see that it assists her case one jot. It is  perfectly  plain  in  the
      case of this appellant that the Home Office considered  the  appellant
      under both of the potentially applicable policies  DP  5(96)  and  the
      Seven Years Child Concession in particular.  Later on we will  explain
      why we were not persuaded by her submission that these  policies  were
      not extended to port cases.


20.   Furthermore, it does not seem to us that Ms Weston needs  to  rely  on
      her "in accordance with the law" argument in order to be able  to  run
      her principal argument, namely that the decision under appeal breached
      Art 8 because it failed to  appreciate  that  the  appellant  and  his
      family met the requirements of the Seven Years Child  Concession.   In
      our view although the terms of the refusal  letter  of  15  July  2002
      dealt separately with DP 5/96 and the SYCC considerations on  the  one
      hand and Art 8 considerations on the other, it effectively viewed  the
      latter as involving a balancing of the same kind of factors in  favour
      of the appellant (in particular the strength of his family and private
      life connections with the UK) and against the appellant  (his  history
      of immigration deception). It was certainly implicit in  the  decision
      that if the appellant could succeed in showing he met the requirements
      of the Seven Years Child Concession  he  would  be  also  entitled  to
      succeed on Art 8 grounds.

21.       Since the appellant's appeal turns largely  therefore  on  whether
      in fact he met the requirements of the Seven Years Child Concession it
      is appropriate to set out the text of this policy.  A footnote to  its
      text explains that it came into being on 24 February 1999 and that  it
      implemented  the  incorporation  of  old  DP   5/96   into   published
      caseworking instructions of the new Integrated Caseworking Directorate
      with the modification that references to ten years in DP 5/96 had  now
      to be read as references to seven years: hence  the  square  brackets.
      So far as we understand this footnote, it means that the extext of the
      SYCC is identical as that of DP 5/96 save for  the  (square-bracketed)
      alteration of the qualifying period from 10 to 7 years. It reads:


             'Deportation in cases  where  there  are  children  with  long
             residence:  Policy Modification announced  by  Under-Secretary
             of State for the Home Department Mr  O'Brien  on  24  February
             1999


             3.1 Whilst it is important that each individual case  must  be
                 considered on its merits, there are specific factors  which
                 are likely to be of particular relevance  when  considering
                 whether enforcement action should proceed or  be  initiated
                 against  parents  who  have  children  who   have   lengthy
                 residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  For  the  purpose  of
                 proceeding with enforcement action in a  case  involving  a
                 child, the general presumption is that we would not usually
                 proceed with enforcement action in cases where a child  was
                 born here and has lived here continuously  to  the  age  of
                 [seven] or over,  or  where,  having  come  to  the  United
                 Kingdom at an early  age,  they  have  accumulated  [seven]
                 years or more continuous residence. However, there  may  be
                 circumstances in which it is  considered  that  enforcement
                 action is still appropriate despite the  lengthy  residence
                 of the child, for example in cases where the parents have a
                 particularly poor immigration history and have deliberately
                 seriously delayed consideration of their case. In  all  the
                 cases the following factors  are  relevant  in  reaching  a
                 judgment on whether enforcement action should proceed:


                 - the length  of  the  parents'  residence  without  leave;
                   whether removal has been delayed through protracted  (and
                   often repetitive) representations or by the parents going
                   to ground;
                 - the age of the children;
                 - whether the children were conceived at a time when either
                   of the parents had leave to remain;
                 - -whether return to the parents' country of  origin  would
                   cause extreme hardship for  the  children  or  put  their
                   health seriously at risk;
                 - -whether either of the parents has a history of  criminal
                   behaviour or deception.


             3.2 It is important that full reasons are given  making  clear
                 that each case is considered on its individual merits.'

22.   There was also a Home Office press release  issued  on  1  March  1999
      concerning this statement: headed 'Immigrant Families Who  Have  Lived
      in the UK  for 7 Years will be allowed to stay', it reads:

             'A child who has spent a substantial, formative part  of  life
             in the UK should not be uprooted  without  strong  reason  and
             that is why we are changing the time-limit from ten  to  seven
             years for families with young children who have been unable to
             establish a claim to remain.


             We are committed to delivering a system of immigration control
             which is firm but also fair. Those who are not entitled to  be
             here should be removed.


             However for those who have been in this  country  for  a  long
             time  we  need  to  recognise  that  they  will  have   become
             established in their community.'

23.   We have  already  held  that  the  Secretary  of  State  consider  the
      appellant under the policy the Seven Years Child Concession.  However,
      it was part of Ms Weston's submission that in reality he had not  done
      so because he considered this policy only applied to  deportation  and
      removal cases, not to port cases.

24.   We see nothing in this part of her submission. It is true, that  in  a
      Supplementary Statement of 23 June 2003 dealing with the case of  this
      appellant the Secretary of State appeared  to  imply  that  the  Seven
      Years Child Concession, like the  Long  Residence  Concession  related
      solely to those who were the subject of enforcement action. (We  would
      also note that in  Dabrowski  [2002]  EWHC  2183  (Admin)  Rafferty  J
      rejected a contention that the Seven Year  Child  Concession  formally
      applied to port cases). However, the same statement had gone on to say
      that it was nevertheless the practice for the respondent to apply both
      policies when assessing whether to refuse  leave  to  enter.   To  all
      intents and purposes, therefore, the Secretary of State looked at  the
      appellant's  case  under  the  Seven  Years  Concession   policy.   In
      determining whether the respondent properly decided the appellant  did
      not meet the criteria of this policy, the Adjudicator in turn did  not
      treat the fact that the appellant's case was not an  enforcement  case
      as a disqualifying factor.

25.   Miss Weston's principal submission, however, was that  to  the  extent
      that the Secretary of State did consider the appellant under the Seven
      Years Child Concession, the Adjudicator should have recognised that he
      went about it in the wrong way.  In particular she submitted that  the
      Adjudicator had been wrong to agree with  the  respondent  in  finding
      that the appellant had failed to meet one of the requirements of  this
      policy by practising deception in his  dealing  with  the  immigration
      authorities. We resoundingly reject this submission. On  the  evidence
      before the Adjudicator  the  appellant's  lack  of  candour  with  the
      immigration authorities did amount to deception.

26.   Dealing first with those instances of lack of candour relied  upon  by
      the Adjudicator, we consider she was entirely justified in noting that
      he had failed to declare his or his family's ownership of  a  home  in
      the UK or the existence of his UK company and had failed  to  disclose
      when asked how long he would stay in the UK or  what  was  to  be  his
      family's actual UK address. There was also a failure to give  all  the
      dates and lengths of previous stays in  the  UK.     When  stopped  in
      January 1999 the  appellant  had  misrepresented  that  his  wife  and
      children accompanied him on all his business trips: it transpired that
      his children had been   born in the UK and his son attended school  in
      Rotherham.   The  Adjudicator  gave  careful  consideration   to   the
      appellant's explanations for these failures and justifiably found them
      wanting: see paras 19-21.

27.   The second main basis on which Ms Weston argued  the  Adjudicator  had
      wrongly  agreed  with  the  respondent's  refusal  to  find  that  the
      appellant and his family met the criteria of  the  Seven  Years  Child
      Concession   concerned   the   Adjudicator's    treatment    of    the
      proportionality issue. Her submissions ranged over a number of factors
      but can be summarised as: reliance upon the strength of  the  family's
      private and family life ties in the UK side-by-side with a  contention
      that there was no state interest in this case in  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration control.

28.   We consider that  all  the  arguments  reliant  upon  the  appellant's
      family and private life ties with the UK founder on his own attempt to
      maintain that he has always acted in accordance with the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules relating to visitors. Those rules  presuppose
      an intention to remain in a temporary capacity only. Thus for some ten
      years (between 1989 to January 1999) he himself  has  maintained  that
      everything he had his family did in the UK was with the  intention  of
      being  in  the  UK  only  temporarily  and  being  ready   to   depart
      periodically. Thus, his and  his  family's  links  with  the  UK,  his
      dealings  in  the  course   of   business,   his   family's   personal
      relationships with the community, his children's schooling - all these
      factors had to be viewed in this light. We would accept that  as  from
      January 1999 he and his  family,  when  they  were  granted  temporary
      admission, have been in the UK continuously.  But  he  and  they  have
      always known that their  immigration  status  rested  on  a  temporary
      basis.

29.   Ms Weston contended that the appellant and his  family  were  entitled
      to have weighed in their  favour  the  fact  that  that  there  was  a
      significant delay between the appellant's  application  for  leave  to
      remain based on Article 8 (made in June 1999) and the eventual refusal
      decision (made on 15 July 2002). In the grounds she cited  in  support
      the Court of Appeal judgment in Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233.

30.   Permission to appeal was not given in relation to the  Shala point  as
      such, but since we accept that in assessing proportionality delay  may
      in some cases be a relevant circumstance, we  shall  consider  whether
      delay should have been viewed as a significant factor  in  this  case.
      The Adjudicator addressed the issue of delay and found it  was  not  a
      significant factor. We agree.  There was no real case that  was  bound
      to succeed in 1999 but which was defeated by any  delay.  Furthermore,
      even if the entire period of delay were considered to be the fault  of
      the Secretary of State, it only amounted to just over three years.  In
      the context of what by June 1999 had become an  application  based  on
      consideration outside the Immigration Rules, we do not consider such a
      period was excessive  or  that  it  was  detrimental  to  any  of  the
      essential interests of the appellant protected by Article 8.

31.   The fact that the appellant and his wife had had to deal in  1996  and
      thereafter with  the  tragedy  of  a  stillborn  child  was  a  factor
      considered by both the respondent and the Adjudicator. Whether or  not
      the suggestion at one point by the  respondent  that  remains  of  the
      child be  re-interred  in  Pakistan  was  culturally  insensitive  (as
      alleged by Ms Weston), the Adjudicator was quite right to observe that
      the couple had known at the time that his wife  was  only  here  as  a
      visitor when she gave birth to the child.


32.   As regards the other children, the  text  of  the  Seven  Years  Child
      Concession specifies as a  relevant  factor  "whether  return  to  the
      parents' country of  origin  would  cause  extreme  hardship  for  the
      children or  put  their  health  seriously  at  risk."    Plainly  the
      Secretary of State did consider whether return of the children in this
      case met this criterion.  So did the Adjudicator.  In our view she was
      quite entitled to assess matters as she did. Even  were  the  fact  of
      their immigration difficulties to be put to one side,  we  cannot  see
      that she erred in concluding that they  were  still  of  a  relatively
      young age (she noted at paragraph 29 that at the date of  hearing  the
      two eldest were still only to be eleven and nine  on  their  birthdays
      that  month).  Plainly  they  were   therefore   of   adaptable   age.
      Furthermore, she found, properly in our view, that none of them  would
      have serious difficulties in adjusting to life in Pakistan, since  the
      elder children had spent some albeit short periods of time in Pakistan
      prior to 1999 but had also, on the evidence, acquired  and  maintained
      an ability to speak some Urdu at home.


33.   As regards the fact that the appellant's children had  become  settled
      in school and were thus settled  into  life  in  the  UK,  these  were
      developments which had taken place without the appellant taking steps,
      as he was required to do, to disclose to the UK authorities  that  his
      children were attending school in  the  UK  or  that  their  principal
      country of residence had become the UK.  Furthermore, any reference to
      their being `settled` had to be viewed in light of the appellant's own
      insistence that at all times he and his family intended only temporary
      stay in the UK. In any event it was not seriously arguable  that  they
      could not resume their education in Pakistan.

34.    As  regards  the  appellant's  reliance  on  his  own  private   life
      connections formed in the context of his business activities, we would
      first of all reiterate that these connections were plainly  only  able
      to develop as a result of  his  deceptive  conduct  vis-�-vis  the  UK
      immigration authorities.  In this regard it is important  to  bear  in
      mind the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  relating  to
      visitors, including business visitors. These state:


      'Requirements for leave to enter as a visitor
         40. For the purpose of paragraphs 41-46 a visitor includes a person
             living and working outside the United Kingdom who comes to the
             United  Kingdom  to  transact  business  (such  as   attending
             meetings and briefings, fact finding,  negotiating  or  making
             contracts with United Kingdom businesses to buy or sell  goods
             or services). A visitor seeking leave to enter or  remain  for
             private  medical  treatment  must  meet  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 51 or 54.


         41.   The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
             the United Kingdom as a visitor are that he:


            (i)  is genuinely seeking entry  as  a  visitor  for  a  limited
             period as stated by him, not exceeding 6 months;  and


            (ii)  intends to leave the United Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the
             period of the visit as stated by him;  and


            (iii)  does not intend to take employment in the United Kingdom;
              and


            (iv) does not intend to produce goods or provide services within
             the United Kingdom, including the selling of goods or services
             direct to a member of the  public;  and


            (v) does not intend to stay at a maintained school;  and


            (vi) will maintain and accommodate himself  and  any  dependants
             adequately out of resources available to him without  recourse
             to public funds or  taking  employment;   or  will,  with  any
             dependants,  be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately  by
             relatives or friends;  and


            (vii)  can meet the cost of the return or onward journey.


         Leave to enter as a visitor
         42.  A person seeking leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             visitor may be admitted for a period not exceeding  6  months,
             subject to a condition prohibiting  employment,  provided  the
             Immigration Officer is satisfied that each of the requirements
              of paragraph 41 is met.


         Refusal of leave to enter as a visitor
         43.  Leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor  is  to  be  refused  if  the
             Immigration  Officer  is  not  satisfied  that  each  of   the
             requirements of paragraph 41 is met.


         Requirements for an extension of stay as a visitor
         44.   Six months is  the  maximum  permitted  leave  which  may  be
             granted to a visitor.  The requirements for  an  extension  of
             stay as a visitor are that the applicant:


            (i)    meets the requirements of paragraph 41(ii)-(vii);  and
            (ii)    has not already spent, or would not as a  result  of  an
             extension of stay spend, more than 6 months in  total  in  the
             United Kingdom as a visitor.


           Any period spent as a seasonal  agricultural  worker  is  to  be
           counted as a period spent as a visitor.


         Extension of stay as a visitor
         45.   An extension of stay as a visitor may be granted, subject  to
             a condition prohibiting employment, provided the Secretary  of
             State is satisfied that each of the requirements of  paragraph
             44 is met.'

35.   From the above it is clear that the visitor rules  do  permit  persons
      to transact business whilst in the UK. Equally, however, they  plainly
      forbid a person in a visitor capacity  to  produce  goods  or  provide
      services within the UK. Yet that is precisely what the  appellant  did
      by setting up his own company and trading in the UK.  That he did  not
      make a secret of his business activities in  his  dealings  with  some
      official bodies in the UK (indeed had his company  listed  in  a  2002
      publication) does not alter the fact that  he  failed  to  disclose  a
      clear breach of the Immigration Rules to the immigration  authorities,
      contrary to the legal obligation on him to do so.  (We  would  observe
      that his wife also appears to have breached  visitor  requirements  by
      becoming employed in his business).

36.   Furthermore, as the Adjudicator properly  found,  he  had  adduced  no
      evidence as to any direct employees other than his  wife.  It  may  be
      that the Adjudicator should have recognised the indirect value of  the
      appellant's business activities to the  UK  economy  (alleviating  net
      loss of employment in a depressed area), but we cannot see that on any
      estimate these have  had  a  large-scale  impact.   In  our  view  the
      Adjudicator was entitled to consider that in any event  there  was  no
      reason why the appellant could not conduct his business from Pakistan.

37.   Essentially, therefore, the appellant did not have  strong  family  or
      private life ties in the UK of a nature entitling him  to  claim  that
      his removal from the UK would disproportionately interfere with  them.



  38.  Turning  to  the  other  side   of   the   balance   underlying   the
      proportionality test arising under Article 8(2), we do not  accept  Ms
      Weston's submission that this was not  a  case  in  which  there  were
      weighty reasons to do with the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
      control to be counted against the appellant.   Insofar  as  Ms  Weston
      sought to rely on  ex parte Jagot [2000] INLR 501 we are not persuaded
      in the first place that it is on all fours. In  that  case  the  issue
      before Moses J was whether there was a strong reason  under  [what  he
      thought  was]  the  Seven  Years  Child  Concession  to  disrupt   the
      applicant's existing and established ties with  his  grandparents  who
      had looked after him for most of his life  (see  para  38).   In  this
      case, by contrast, there has never been a question of a disruption  of
      the appellant and his family unit:  they either go together or stay in
      the UK together.

39.   Even if it were thought that ex parte Jagot had  application  to  this
      case, we do not consider that Moses  J  intended  to  say  that  under
      "policy  069/99"  the  requirements  of   immigration   control   were
      irrelevant.   We accept that he said at paragraph 39:

             'It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  the  requirements  of
             immigration control can play any significant part in adding to
             the strength of the reason for disruption. It is  inherent  in
             policy  069/99 that there has been  a  breach  of  immigration
             control.'

40.   But in the case before him there were no immigration  control  factors
      given in justification other than the normal interest of the Secretary
      of State in a firm  system  of  immigration  control.  In  this  case,
      however, there were immigration control factors  over  and  above  the
      normal: in particular,  there  was  the  history  of  the  appellant's
      deception.

41.   That Moses J's words are not to be read more widely is  confirmed,  in
      our view, by his own agreement at the outset of his judgment with  the
      overriding principles set out by the Court of Appeal in Gangadeen  and
      Khan [1998] INLR 206 which considered a policy known  as  DP  4/96,  a
      precursor to the Seven Years Child Concession. As Moses J noted:

             'The court concluded that in applying such a policy, which  it
             described  as  guidance  and  not  a  rigid  instruction,  the
             Secretary of State must conduct a balancing exercise in  which
             the considerations of the interests of the child  on  the  one
             hand and the considerations of immigration policy and  control
             on the other must be weighed... . It was of  the  view:   "...
             that the court should be very slow to interfere with the  Home
             Secretary's decision  not  to  grant  what  is  essentially  a
             concession on extra-statutory grounds.".'

42.   We would also observe that in our view Moses J  appears  not  to  have
      had his attention drawn to the actual text of the  Seven  Years  Child
      Concession. What he cites as "policy  069 99" is in fact a mere  press
      release (as noted in MD (14  years  not  disproportionate)  Bangladesh
      [2004] UKIAT 00208).  We have set out the  full  text  of  this  press
      release at paragraph 20. It is immediately  obvious  from  reading  it
      that it does not set out the criteria  of  the  policy  in  full.   In
      particular it makes no reference to the stipulation that there may  be
      circumstances in which it is considered  that  enforcement  action  is
      still appropriate despite the lengthy residence of the child.  So  far
      as we are aware, there has never been a "policy  069/99".   Plainly  a
      press statement cannot be read independently of the text of the policy
      which it describes.  As  can  be  seen,  the  latter  does  not  treat
      immigration control factors as irrelevant.

43.   In the light of that  feature  of   ex  parte  Jagot,  we  think  that
      parties would do well to exercise caution when seeking to rely upon it
      as an authority on the application of the SYCC.

44.   We consider  that  in  this  case  it  was  open  to  the  Adjudicator
      (following the Secretary of State) to assess that the relevant factors
      to  be  balanced  under  the  policy  did  not  justify  granting  its
      concession to him. Even if understood as creating a  presumption  that
      length of residence would qualify, that was clearly rebutted  in  this
      case the seriousness of the appellant's immigration deception.

45.   We would observe in passing that it is not even entirely clear  to  us
      that at the date of decision the appellant and  his  family  fulfilled
      other essential criteria for the  Seven  Years  Child  Concession.  In
      particular, it is not entirely clear that any of the children had  the
      requisite period of residence. Even if the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      exclude periods broken by absences in Pakistan (because they were less
      than six months), it remained the case that the relevant  period  that
      had to be considered was restricted to dates before  9  January  1999.
      The eldest child had been born in the  UK  on  28  October  1992;  the
      second eldest on 13 October 1994; and the two younger  had  been  born
      also in the UK on 12 December 2001 and 13 October 2004 respectively.

  46. But what about  the  position  at  the  date  of  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator?  Ms Weston submitted that in the context of Article 8  it
      was necessary to consider not just the length of residence at the date
      of decision, but that  which  had  accumulated  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing. In this regard she  relied  on  SK  (Return  -  Ethnic  Serb)
      Croatia CG* [2002] UKIAT 05613.


  47. Plainly we are not entitled except where there is a material error  of
      law to consider residence accrued since the Adjudicator  notified  her
      determination; this is an appeal under the 2002 Act and late facts are
      not relevant: see CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.

48.    We would accept that in the context of Article 8 the Adjudicator  was
      obliged by the terms of s.77 (4) to have regard to the further  length
      of residence acquired between the date of decision  and  the  date  of
      hearing.  However, that is what she did, concluding  at  paragraph  28
      that, even taking this into account, the residence  factor  was  still
      outweighed by other factors.  We see no error here.

49.   By the hearing there was clearly a further length of residence  to  be
      taken into account, but we do not consider it sufficiently lengthy  to
      overcome  the  weighty  interests  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
      immigration control arising out  of  the  very  extensive  history  of
      deception on the part of the appellant in this case.

50.   Mr Deller reminded us during his submissions  of  the  principles  set
      out in M (Croatia)* (Croatia) [2004] UNLR 327.  He submitted that in a
      case such as this, where the Secretary  of  State  had  conducted  the
      balancing exercise under Article 8, an Adjudicator could not interfere
      with his decision  unless  it  was  within  the  range  of  reasonable
      responses.  That is how we have approached this  case.  But  we  would
      point out that, even had we  approached  it  on  the  basis  that  the
      Adjudicator was entitled to undertake that balancing exercise herself,
      we would have reached the same conclusions. Indeed for the reasons  we
      have given we regard it as inconceivable that  the  Adjudicator  could
      have reached a contrary decision.

  51. Accordingly we do not consider that  the  Adjudicator's  determination
      discloses any material  error  of  law.  She  was  quite  entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant had  failed  to  show  that  the  decision
      refusing her exceptional leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds
      amounted to a disproportionate interference with his right to  respect
      for family and private life. The Adjudicator properly found  that  the
      appellant could not  benefit  from  the  terms  of  the  SYCC  whether
      considered at the date of decision or the date of hearing. Both  under
      the SYCC and under Art 8 there were no  exceptional  circumstances  to
      override the very considerable interest of the Secretary of  State  in
      effective immigration control being maintained in this case.


  52. We should mention finally that we have considered the position of  the
      appellant's children on the basis that, although born in the  UK,  the
      practical effect on them of the decision refusing the appellant  leave
      to remain is that they  will  return  to  Pakistan  along  with  their
      parents.  Ms  Weston  said  she  did  not  know  whether  there   were
      applications in train for the eldest two to  seek  to  remain  on  the
      basis of their birth in the UK, in combination with a ten year  period
      of residence; but even if there were, that is not  an  issue  in  this
      appeal.


53.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT


















-----------------------
      1


