
                     AA (Exclusion clause)  Palestine [2005] UKIAT 00104 | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  7 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 18 May 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Vice President)

Between:




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and







                                                 RESPONDENT






Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Lams, instructed by Fitzgrahams Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R  J
     Oliver, promulgated on 2 December 2003.   He  allowed  the  Claimant's
     appeal on asylum and human rights grounds  against  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision in July 2003 to refuse asylum  and  to  give  removal
     directions for Palestine.  The Secretary of State appeals against that
     decision.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  the  Vice  President
     commented that it was "surprising that  exclusion  under  the  Refugee
     Convention had not been raised".

  2. The Claimant is a Palestinian originally resident  in  Gaza,  born  in
     1975, who entered the United Kingdom in 1997 on a  student  visa.   He
     was given two months' leave to enter and claimed asylum after a month.
      He was not interviewed until June 2003.

  3. The Claimant's case was that when he was fourteen he  had  been  asked
     the join the "Jihad Islamic Movement", and had no choice but to  join.
     He underwent two years' intensive training in  Islamic  rules  and  in
     understanding those  governments,  including  Israel,  which  did  not
     adhere to Islamic precepts.  When he was sixteen,  he  was  taken  for
     specialist commando-style "army" training in using  guns,  and  making
     bombs;  he was selected for his fitness and strength.

  4. The Claimant denied that his asylum interview showed these  claims  to
     be false:  the delay of six years before the  interview  had  affected
     the detail of his memory;  and the  interpreter  had  been  unable  to
     translate accurately the technical language  which  he  used  to  name
     parts of guns, and her  general  level  of  competence  was  very  low
     because she came from  Sudan  and  spoke  a  different  dialect.   The
     Claimant  tried  to  elaborate  on  his  technical  knowledge  to  the
     Adjudicator in answer to questions from his own counsel.

  5. From the age of eighteen to twenty, he transported guns  as  required.
     But the Israeli inspired crackdown on Hamas in  1995  led  to  arrests
     being made by the Palestinian  authorities.   One  of  his  group  was
     arrested and, under torture, revealed the Claimant's name.

  6. In consequence, when on  his  way  to  carry  out  a  suicide  bombing
     mission, the Claimant  was  arrested  at  an  Israeli  checkpoint  and
     thereafter routinely and severely tortured for six  months.   He  gave
     away the names and details of the activities of those working with him
     for the Palestinian cause.  The torture then stopped but he  was  kept
     in detention for a further eighteen months.

  7. An agreement between Israel and the  Palestine  Authority  led  to  an
     exchange of prisoners.  The Claimant's good  conduct  led  him  to  be
     transferred to a Palestinian prison.  His time in detention caused him
     to rethink his ways and to decide to leave the Jihad Islamic Movement.
      But he knew that because arrests had followed the  information  which
     he had given under torture, he would be  regarded  as  a  traitor  and
     killed by the JIM.

  8. However, notwithstanding the good conduct which caused  his  transfer,
     the Israelis put his name on a list of thirteen men who were dangerous
     to the peace process, asking that the Palestine Authority expel him or
     jail him for at least twenty-five years.  He  accepted  the  expulsion
     option from the Palestine Authority;  he could  not  then  return.   A
     friend of his father in the Palestine Secret Service arranged for  him
     to receive a student visa from the British authorities  in  Jerusalem.
     He was released shortly before the visa was granted, and was given two
     weeks to leave the country.

  9. He claimed to be in  fear  of  persecution  now  because  between  his
     arrival on 23 July 1997 and the expiry of his  visa  on  22  September
     1997, he had converted from Islam to Christianity.  He was baptised on
     20 September 1997.  He  feared  execution  by  Muslim  fanatics.   His
     brother and sister had disowned him.

 10. He also claimed that his disclosure under  torture  of  the  names  of
     Palestinians involved with the JIM would mean that he would be seen as
     a traitor.  His mother was having a hard time because of  it,  and  he
     was being sought in Gaza.  An imam who had helped  to  train  him  and
     Secret Service men were looking for him.

 11. If he returned he would be detained for at least twenty-five years  or
     worse.

 12. He had had various jobs in  the  United  Kingdom,  mainly  in  private
     security firms including one involved in  aviation.   The  Adjudicator
     was not shown the CV supplied, if any, for those posts.

 13. The Secretary of State had wholly  rejected  the  credibility  of  the
     Claimant.  The Adjudicator found him to be "transparently  honest",  a
     "highly trained commando", detained when he was  about  to  attempt  a
     suicide mission.

 14. The Adjudicator was referred to and accepted background evidence  from
     Human Rights Watch which  was  said  to  show  that  Israeli  soldiers
     repeatedly used indiscriminate and excessive force, "killing civilians
     wilfully" and  used  Palestinian  civilians  as  human  shields.   The
     Adjudicator then referred to what he called "tit for tat"  attacks  by
     "armed Palestinians" on Israeli settlers in the Occupied Territories.

 15. He noted that "armed Palestinians" killed suspected collaborators with
     Israel and that there  were  internal  strains  in  Palestine  between
     various armed groups and with the Palestine Authority.  There  was  no
     effective  justice  system.   Israelis  could   enter   the   Occupied
     Territories at will to "retaliate against suicide  bombings  by  Hamas
     and the JIM on its territories with impunity".

 16. The Adjudicator accepted that the Claimant would be known in the Gaza,
     both to the Israelis and had enemies in Arafat's then government.   He
     would be arrested, and worse might follow.  The Adjudicator  concluded
     that return in those circumstances would breach Article 3.

 17. The Adjudicator then considered the background evidence about the  way
     in  which   in   Israel   and   the   Occupied   Territories,   Muslim
     "fundamentalists"  sought  to  dominate  over  Christian  Arabs,  that
     Christian evangelising was not permitted in the Occupied  Territories,
     where the Shari'a law against apostasy was  enforced  extra-judicially
     should anyone be sufficiently misguided as to convert from Islam.  The
     Adjudicator concluded that the Claimant would be  persecuted  for  his
     religious beliefs, adding that Article 3 would also be "encapsulated".

 18. As for Article 8 and private life, the Claimant had been in the United
     Kingdom for six years, had established  himself  with  a  church,  and
     employment.  Had the case  been  dealt  with  within  a  year  of  his
     arrival, he would have been granted indefinite leave to  remain.   But
     the fact that he had established himself and gained  employment  meant
     that it would be disproportionate to remove him.

 19. The Secretary of State appealed on three grounds.  First, the  failure
     of the Adjudicator to consider Article 1F of the Refugee Convention in
     the light of his findings  as  to  the  activities  of  the  Claimant;
     Gurung* [2002] UKIAT  04870,  [2003]  Imm  AR  115,  showed  that  the
     Adjudicator should have considered the exclusion provisions.

 20. Second, the findings of  the  Adjudicator  in  relation  to  religious
     persecution were  criticised  for  its  acceptance,  without  adequate
     reasoning, of the genuineness of the conversion, of  there  being  any
     risk generated by any preaching activities in the absence of  evidence
     of such a  need  to  preach,  and  of  there  being  a  real  risk  of
     persecution simply as a Christian convert.  No reasons were given  for
     any apparent acceptance of a risk of persecution by  Israelis  or  the
     Palestine Authority on account of his ethnicity as a Palestinian.

 21. Third, the proportionality assessment under Article 8 had ignored  the
     adverse significance of the Claimant's activities  with  the  JIM,  or
     Islamic Jihad.

 22. We can deal fairly briefly with most of the issues. As to  persecution
     on religious  grounds,  the  language  of  the  Adjudicator  makes  it
     difficult to tell to what extent his findings on this issue have  been
     affected by his conclusions that the Claimant would be persecuted  for
     his imputed political opinion or that he would be  treated  in  a  way
     which breached his rights under  Article  3  because  of  his  alleged
     Islamic Jihad activities, and the information he allegedly gave  under
     torture.  If the latter are justified and affected the conclusions  on
     risk of religious persecution, we  would  regard  the  conclusions  on
     religion as probably tenable.

 23. Viewed as independent grounds, they are more problematic.  Of  course,
     they start from the premise that the Claimant was a  credible  person.
     It is not necessary as a matter  of  law  that  the  Claimant  produce
     supporting evidence of the genuineness of his conversion.  There  were
     circumstances present here which could have created real  doubt  about
     the conversion's genuineness to many  a  rational  non-sceptical  eye:
     the rapidity of conversion  from  Islamic  radical  extremist  torture
     victim to Christian, is not far short  of  Damascene;  its  timing  is
     suspiciously  fortuitous;  there  was  every   opportunity   for   the
     successful church to identify itself and attest to the strength of the
     convert's continuing  devotion.   However,  we  cannot  overturn  that
     finding.  We ourselves would not agree  with  the  assessment  of  the
     background evidence by the Adjudicator.  The effect of the  background
     evidence does require attention to be placed on the degree of activism
     likely from an apostate on return, even though it showed  that  ethnic
     Christian Arabs  are  intimidated  and  harassed  in  Israel  and  the
     Occupied Territories by increasingly domineering and assertive Islamic
     groups.  Harassment and discrimination  are  in  evidence  as  is  the
     possibility,  but  no  more  than  that,  of   severe   extra-judicial
     treatment, against which the Palestine Authority would not  be  likely
     or able to offer protection.  There is no finding  that  the  Claimant
     would be active as leader, preacher or proselytiser or would  do  more
     than attend church.  A convert would be worse placed but it  does  not
     reasonably show a real risk of persecution by state agents, or  extra-
     judicially by Islamic radicals, for an ordinary convert.

 24. We regard the Adjudicator's conclusions as tenable in law only on  the
     basis that they are not free-standing findings but are related to  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions about the Claimant's  political  activities.
     His past would make his conversion all the  more  likely  to  lead  to
     severe difficulties.

 25. We conclude that there  were  errors  of  law  in  the  conclusion  on
     religious persecution, taken on its own, if that were the basis of the
     Adjudicator's analysis.  But it is not a material error of law because
     the conclusion on  Article  3  based  on  the  Claimant's  actions  in
     Palestine remains sound.  Nonetheless, we  consider  that,  for  other
     cases, the comments above need to be made.

 26. We regard the suggestion as to persecution  by  the  Israelis  or  the
     Palestine  Authority  on  ethnic  grounds  as  a  misreading  of   the
     Adjudicator's determination.  Such a finding would  have  been  wholly
     misconceived.  That  is  not  the  true  basis  of  the  Adjudicator's
     findings, which relate to the Claimant's potentially lethal activities
     for Islamic Jihad or JIM, his torture and proposed transfer  for  good
     conduct, coupled with the requirement that he be expelled for  twenty-
     five years at least.

 27. The Adjudicator's proportionality conclusions in relation to Article 8
     are untenable but do not amount to a material error of law.   This  is
     because his findings on Article 3 are not challenged and so the result
     of  the  Claimant's  success  on  human  rights  grounds  will  remain
     unaffected by the legal error in his Article 8 conclusions.  These are
     untenable first, because on no lawful approach to Article 8 viewed  in
     isolation from the Article 3 risks, could the fact that  the  Claimant
     had  spent  five  years  in  this  country,  gaining  employment   and
     establishing a life for himself, have made the interference  with  his
     private life through removal disproportionate, once the  interests  of
     immigration control had been allowed for.  He has no family life to be
     interfered with.  There was real and untoward delay in the  processing
     of his claim,  but  it  is  not  a  delay  which  occasioned  him  any
     significant disadvantage, beyond uncertainty.  The  Immigration  Rules
     and extra-statutory discretions or policies do not provide for someone
     to  stay  with  simply  those   characteristics   to   support   them.
     Adjudicators should recognise that the circumstances in  which  return
     would be disproportionate will be genuinely  exceptional,  and  return
     does not become remotely disproportionate because it may be  harsh  or
     unsympathetic.

 28. It is not clear, second, that the Adjudicator did view this  issue  in
     isolation from the Article 3 risks, because  of  his  conclusion  that
     delay was disadvantageous since indefinite leave to  remain  ought  to
     have been granted within a year of arrival.  But that depends  on  the
     Adjudicator's view of the substantive claim.  No subsequent change  of
     circumstances by 2003 was alleged to have removed the basis  for  that
     claim.  But, if the Adjudicator was not viewing Article 8 in isolation
     from those risks,  it  was  a  serious  error  not  to  put  into  the
     proportionality scales the activities for Islamic Jihad which had  led
     him into the difficulties he now faced.   Subject  to  the  overriding
     effect of Article 3, it is difficult to see that his return  could  be
     other than proportionate, in human rights terms.

 29. We recognise that the Adjudicator was hampered by the lack of  a  Home
     Office Presenting Officer in pursuing lines of enquiry which he  might
     otherwise have thought appropriate, but even  without  the  Tribunal's
     later commentary on the Surendran guidelines in WN (DRC) [2004]  UKIAT
     00213, those guidelines did not  prevent  proper  and  obvious  points
     being raised by Adjudicators,  particularly  those  contained  in  the
     Secretary of State's refusal letter.

 30. We now turn to Article 1F.  The conclusions here are not academic even
     though we do not  reject  as  legally  erroneous  the  conclusions  on
     Article 3, nor were we  asked  to.   They  are  not  academic  because
     recognition as a refugee within the Geneva Convention brings  with  it
     certain rights, eg family reunion, certain  social  security  benefits
     and travel documents, which lesser forms  of  humanitarian  protection
     may not provide.  Certain individuals are excluded from  those  rights
     and from recognition as a refugee.  If it becomes possible  to  return
     someone without breach of their Article 3 rights and  that  person  is
     not a refugee, the Geneva Convention cessation provisions do not  fall
     to be considered.  If the Claimant is not a refugee, on  the  material
     before the Adjudicator, lawfully appraised, it is only the risk of ill-
     treatment at a level breaching Article 3 which prevents his return.

 31. Article 1F comes within the definition section of the Convention.   It
     states:

           "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person
           with respect to whom there are serious reasons  for  considering
           that:


           (a)   he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or  a
                 crime against humanity, as  defined  in  the  international
                 instruments drawn up to make provision in respect  of  such
                 crimes;
           (b)   he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the
                 country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as
                 a refugee;
           (c)   he has been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes  and
                 principles of the United Nations."

 32. Mr Sheikh for the Secretary of State submitted that on  the  facts  as
     found by the Adjudicator, Article 1F,  and  (c)  in  particular,  were
     obvious points which he ought to have considered:  the Claimant was an
     intended suicide bomber and Islamic Jihad activist; he was an  Islamic
     Jihad member, trained, who had possession of weapons, transported them
     and undertook  missions.   Article  1F(b)  was  also  at  issue.   The
     Tribunal decision in  Gurung*  [2002]  UKIAT  04870  showed  that  the
     Adjudicator ought to have considered the issue.

 33. Mr Lams submitted that this issue could not be regarded  as  a  strong
     and obvious point of the sort envisaged in Robinson [1997]  3WLR  1162
     Court of Appeal, as requiring an Adjudicator to intervene.  The  issue
     had not been raised, even contingently, by the Secretary of  State  in
     his refusal letter, in case the Claimant were believed.

 34. He also submitted that Gurung, T v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 443, [1997] 2WLR
     766 House of Lords, and other cases showed that the Secretary of State
     first had to  decide  which  sub  clause  he  relied  on,  inform  the
     Claimant, and show that on the facts there was a strong case  so  that
     it could be said that the Adjudicator ought to have considered it.

 35. Mr Lams drew attention to the following factors as  showing  that  the
     facts were not sufficiently strong, for the operation of an  exclusion
     provision which the UNHCR  Handbook  showed  should  be  restrictively
     applied.  There was coercion about his recruitment into Islamic  Jihad
     at fourteen;  he had then been indoctrinated.  He  had  been  punished
     extra-judicially for his activities by detention and torture,  and  he
     had done nothing in the United  Kingdom  to  suggest  that  he  was  a
     continuing danger;  he had  no  continuing  involvement  with  Islamic
     Jihad and was, in effect, a reformed character.  His  activities  were
     not sufficiently obvious;  he failed in his suicide  bombing  and  his
     target might have been military rather than civilian.  Article 1F  was
     not a simple anti-terrorism provision, as Gurung had pointed out.  The
     crimes,  if  any,  were  not  obviously  "non-political",  within  the
     definition of political crimes set out in T.  There  was  a  cycle  of
     violence responding  to  violence  in  the  struggle  between  various
     Palestinian groups and Israel over the Occupied Territories.   Islamic
     Jihad was part of the politics of Gaza.

 36. Judges should beware the dangers of strong emotions  and  approval  or
     disapproval of the objects of the Claimant when applying  Article  1F,
     and heed what was said by Kirby J  in  Minister  for  Immigration  and
     Multicultural Affairs v Singh [2002] High Court of Australia 7.

 37. The Tribunal raised with both parties its decision in KK [2004]  UKIAT
     00101, which held that acts of terrorism  could  fall  within  Article
     1F(c).  KK concerned the exclusion from refugee status  of  a  Turkish
     separatist, who, whilst in the United Kingdom but before his claim had
     been determined, was involved in  two  politically  inspired  acts  of
     arson against legitimate Turkish businesses operating  in  the  United
     Kingdom.  These were petrol bomb attacks for which he was sentenced to
     four years imprisonment in total, following a trial.   Mr  Lams  alone
     provided written submissions on this case.  Mr Lams submitted that  KK
     had been wrongly decided;  he adopted the UNHCR position as set out in
     KK.  He drew attention to the UNHCR Background Note on the Application
     of  the  Exclusion  Clauses  which  accompanied  its   Guidelines   on
     International Protection of September  2003,  paragraph  49  of  which
     said:

           "Given the general approach to Article  1F(c)  described  above,
           egregious  acts  of  international  terrorism  affecting  global
           security may indeed fall within  the  scope  of  Article  1F(c),
           although only leaders of groups responsible for such  atrocities
           would in principle be liable to exclusion under this  provision.
           As discussed in paragraphs 41,  79-84,  terrorist  activity  may
           also be excludable under the other exclusion provisions."



 38. In submitting that KK had been wrongly decided, Mr Lams contended that
     it had not treated the UNHCR Notes and the Handbook as relevant to the
     question  of  what  the  UN  meant  by  "terrorism"  in  the   various
     Resolutions relied on in KK.  The UNHCR was charged  by  the  UN  with
     implementation  and  interpretation  of  the  Convention;    and   its
     Handbook, produced in pursuance of that aim, had been recognised as an
     important source of law in T at p 799F.  It was admissible as evidence
     of international practice, although Laws LJ in R v SSHD ex parte  Adan
     and others [1999] Imm AR 521 at 543 disavowed  a  role  for  it  as  a
     source of international law.  Elsewhere it has been treated as a guide
     to international understanding of the  way  the  Convention  has  been
     applied.  We point out that  in  context  Lord  Lloyd  in  T  was  not
     treating the Handbook as a source of law in the sense that it  created
     additional or alternative obligations; he meant that it was  a  guide,
     as were the other sources he was examining.

 39. This led  Mr  Lams  to  submit  that  the  UNHCR's  views  as  to  the
     application of the exclusion clause were as relevant to the meaning of
     "terrorism" as were UN Resolutions, and therefore that UN  "labelling"
     of activities as "terrorist" could not be automatically  determinative
     of  exclusion.   The  UN  Resolutions  left  open   the   meaning   of
     "terrorist",  as  to  which  there  was  no   internationally   agreed
     definition.   Those  excluded   from   being   refugees   were   those
     "responsible  for  serious,  sustained  or  systematic  violations  of
     fundamental human rights which amount  to  persecution  in  a  non-war
     setting".   Non-state  actors  might  possibly  be  included.    Broad
     definitions of exclusion were wrong, especially if they were motivated
     by  the  thought  that  Article  3  ECHR  would  provide   appropriate
     protection, for there were many countries which were  parties  to  the
     Geneva Convention which did not accept  such  complementary  forms  of
     international protection.  Exclusionary measures were required by  the
     UN to  conform  to  international  law,  which  included  the  Refugee
     Convention,  so  guidance  about  the  latter   must   influence   the
     interpretation of UN resolutions.

 40.  Article  1F(b)  and  (c)  should  not  be  interpreted  as  excluding
     expiation.  KK was  wrong  to  treat  expiation  as  excluded  by  the
     language of  Article  1F(b),  "committed".   Proportionality,  ie  the
     balance between the potentially exclusionary acts and the consequences
     of  a  refusal  of  asylum  were  also  relevant,  consistently   with
     international human rights law; KK was wrong to exclude that balance.

 41. Cases required individual consideration for such factors as the  lapse
     of time since the offence, the offender's age and attitude towards the
     offence, and his subsequent activities.

 42. Applying those  factors  to  the  Claimant's  circumstances,  Mr  Lams
     submitted that there were no strong  prospects  for  success  for  the
     reasons already given:  coercion into joining Islamic  Jihad,  age  at
     joining, the absence of any proof that the target  of  the  Claimant's
     suicidal endeavours were civilians, and even if  he  had  intended  to
     target  civilians,  those  actions  did  not   have   a   sufficiently
     international character to engage Article 1F.

Conclusions

 43. Our conclusions on Article 1F  are  as  follows.   First,  Gurung,  in
     paragraphs 151.4 to 151.5 states:

           "151.4      It would be  wrong  for  adjudicators  to  adopt  an
                 'exclusion culture' and go  searching  in  every  case  for
                 exclusion issues under Art 1F. Pragmatism  is  called  for.
                 However, the Exclusion Clauses are in mandatory  terms  and
                 where  obvious  issues  arise  under  them  these  must  be
                 addressed by an adjudicator, even if the Secretary of State
                 has not raised them expressly  or  by  implication  in  the
                 Reasons for Refusal letter. That may happen  prior  to  the
                 hearing, at the outset of the hearing or  during  it.  This
                 approach is subject only to the need to  ensure  procedural
                 fairness.
           "151.5      It is only necessary to consider exclusion issues in
                 cases obviously involving serious criminality as defined by
                 Arts 1F(a)-(c). However, once the case is identified as one
                 obviously involving serious criminality, there  is  nothing
                 wrong with an adjudicator  dealing  with  exclusion  issues
                 first."

 44. We find it very surprising  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  consider
     exclusion, of his own motion, under limbs (b) and (c) of Article 1F in
     view  of  his  findings.   Of  course,  it  can  be  said  with   some
     justification that the Secretary  of  State  should  have  raised  the
     matter on a contingent basis, in case  his  views  on  the  Claimant's
     credibility were successfully appealed, but that does  not  provide  a
     sufficient answer.  The Adjudicator did not consider  Gurung  at  all,
     even though it is a starred decision, not even to the  limited  extent
     of saying that the issues were not obvious.  That  decision  makes  it
     clear that an Adjudicator has  a  duty  to  consider  exclusion  where
     obvious issues arise, even though  not  raised  in  the  Secretary  of
     State's  refusal  letter.   Article  1F,  as  Gurung  makes  clear  in
     paragraphs 38 and 47, is in mandatory terms and if there  is  material
     which  sufficiently  obviously  brings  it  into  play,  it  must   be
     considered.  The exclusion clauses may give rise  to  difficulties  in
     application, but what matters is not that the answer  is  obvious  but
     that the question obviously arises.

 45. It is clear that questions arise under both  Article  1F(b)  and  (c),
     which merited proper consideration  on  the  facts  as  found  by  the
     Adjudicator.

 46. It would be difficult for the Claimant to argue that his activities in
     training to be  an  Islamic  Jihad  armed  militant,  smuggling  guns,
     undertaking missions and preparing  for  a  suicide  mission  did  not
     constitute serious crimes under  the  formal,  if  ineffective,  legal
     system or systems in Gaza.

 47. A more serious issue would  be  whether  or  not  such  offences  were
     political.  The test in T v SSHD is that the crimes would have  to  be
     sufficiently closely and directly linked to a political  purpose,  not
     too remote from it, by having regard to the nature of the target,  the
     risk of indiscriminate killing or injuring of members of  the  public.
     Acts of terrorism likely to cause indiscriminate injury to the  public
     fell within the scope of the exclusion clause.

 48.  These  issues  are  also  discussed  in  Gurung.   The   exclusionary
     provisions are to be applied restrictively, but they are of  mandatory
     application.  The standard of proof is  no  more  or  less  than  that
     conveyed by the words of Article 1F:  there must be  "serious  reasons
     for considering" that someone has committed  a  serious  non-political
     crime.  Although Article 1F(b) is not to be equated with a simple anti-
     terrorist provision, largely because of the difficulties  inherent  in
     such language and in its application to particular  cases,  membership
     of a particular organisation may itself suffice for exclusion if  that
     organisation's activities are "predominantly terrorist" (Gurung,  para
     105).  Specific reference was made to the UNHCR comment that belonging
     to an extremist international terrorist group  could  be  presumed  to
     amount to participation or complicity in the group's crimes; lists  of
     international  terrorist  organisations  should   be   drawn   up   at
     international  level;  the  position  of   the   individual   in   the
     organisation would be relevant.  The issues of  duress,  self-defence,
     political organisation and fragmentation are  usefully  considered  in
     the succeeding paragraphs of Gurung.

 49. We point out that the Claimant's case here was that  the  consequences
     of his activities was such that he was regarded so seriously by Israel
     that he was on a list of  the  thirteen  most  dangerous  men  in  the
     Occupied Territories and his enforced exile was acquiesced in  by  the
     Palestine Authority.  Islamic Jihad is also a proscribed  organisation
     under the Terrorism Act 2000 by virtue of the Proscribed Organisations
     (Amendment) Order 2000 SI 1261.  It may or may not  be  on  the  lists
     appended to various UN Resolutions on combating terrorism.  He  was  a
     would-be suicide bomber - even if his target had  been  a  checkpoint,
     that is a place where many civilians gather and queue.

 50. It is obvious that there  is  a  strong  case  to  be  considered  for
     exclusion  under  Article  1F(b)  on  the  Claimant's  own,  accepted,
     evidence.

 51. We turn to Article 1F(c).  There may well be a considerable degree  of
     overlap between (b) and (c) when the  serious  non-political  offences
     have what may generally be called a terrorist aspect  to  them.   This
     means that both have to be considered.

 52. The UNHCR Handbook,  paragraph  163,  states  that  the  purposes  and
     principles of the United Nations are  set  out  in  the  Preamble  and
     Articles 1 and 2 of its Charter.   These  are  said  to  regulate  the
     conduct of member states and so acts contrary to the principles of the
     UN can only be committed by someone  in  power,  instrumental  in  the
     infringement.  Its very general character meant that the clause should
     be applied with caution.

 53.  We  do  not  accept  this  reasoning  as  a  sound  basis   for   the
     interpretation of the Refugee Convention.  The purposes and principles
     of the UN are not confined to the particular provisions  referred  to;
     no  reason  is  given  for  that  limitation.   The  UN,  through  its
     Resolutions, may express its  principles,  and  affect  the  scope  or
     application of the exclusion clauses.  Those clauses are  intended  to
     prevent the claim of refugee status being made successfully  by  those
     whose  conduct  is  condemned  by  the  international   community,   a
     condemnation which can be expressed through UN  Resolutions.   If  the
     Refugee Convention  is  properly  seen  as  a  "living  document"  its
     adaptability to the needs  of  the  times  can  be  reflected  in  the
     development or elaboration of UN principles  affecting  exclusion,  as
     well as in the development of protection needs.

 54. The UN's recognition of the impact of  terrorism  on  individuals  and
     member states has found expression in its Resolutions recently.  These
     are set out in KK, together with relevant Articles of the Charter  (1,
     2, 24 and 48).  KK considers at some length the  relationship  between
     the  various  UN  Resolutions  on  terrorism  and  the  purposes   and
     principles of the UN.  Security Council Resolutions 1269 of 1999, 1373
     of  2001  are  legislative.   General  Assembly  Resolutions  are  not
     legislative, but are relevant.  The UNHCR's position on the  exclusion
     clauses is fully set out, taken from the Handbook and various  letters
     it wrote to KK's solicitors about Article 1F(c).

 55. In paragraphs 24 to 26 and 69,  it  concludes  that  the  Resolutions,
     referred to above briefly and set out  in  KK,  are  relevant  to  the
     content of the purposes and principles of  the  UN.   It  does  so  by
     reference to the powers of the Security Council in Articles 24 and 48,
     and to the general rule of interpretation of international treaties in
     Article 31 of the Vienna  Convention  on  the  Law  of  Treaties.   In
     paragraph 20  it  rejects  the  notion  that  Article  1F(c)  is  only
     applicable to the acts of state authorities.

 56. In paragraph 85, having dealt with Article  1F(b)  and  the  question,
     peculiar to KK, of how the exclusion provisions meshed  or  contrasted
     with Articles  32  and  33,  the  IAT  presided  over  by  the  Deputy
     President, Mr Ockelton, said:

           "On the other hand, however, there are some acts which,  despite
           being political or politically-inspired, do not depend for their
           criminality  on  the  individual  matrix  of  power   within   a
           particular state.  These acts, in our view, are those which  are
           intended to be covered by Article 1F(c).  That subparagraph does
           not apply to every crime, nor  to  every  political  crime.   It
           applies to acts which are the subject of intense disapproval  by
           the governing body of the entire  international  community.   An
           individual who has committed such an act cannot claim  that  his
           categorisation as criminal depends upon  the  attitudes  of  the
           very regime from whom he  has  sought  to  escape,  because  the
           international condemnation shows that his acts would  have  been
           treated  in  the  same   way   wherever   and   under   whatever
           circumstances they had been committed."


 57. KK recognised that more than one subparagraph of Article 1F  could  be
     applicable to the one individual's acts.

 58. As to proportionality, KK rightly points out not just the  absence  of
     any  such  provision  but  that  UK  authorities  have  excluded   it;
     paragraph 90.

 59. KK also rejected the notion that expiation, ie punishment,  pardon  or
     amnesty, and we add remorse or change of  heart,  is  a  basis,  as  a
     matter of Convention interpretation, for not  applying  the  exclusion
     clause; see paragraphs 91 to 92.  It said:

           "92.  Our conclusion is that we should reject all the  arguments
                 put before us for  applying  glosses  to  Article  1F,  and
                 should instead apply its words exactly as they are written.
                  We appreciate that in so doing we are adopting an approach
                 to the Refugee Convention which is somewhat similar to that
                 which we have  criticised  when  the  UNHCR  adopts  it  in
                 relation to the Charter of the  United  Nations.   But  the
                 difference is that, in relation to the Refugee  Convention,
                 we have been shown no  material  properly  leading  to  the
                 invocation  of  Article  31(3)(b)  or  (c)  of  the  Vienna
                 Convention.  So far from being supported  by  international
                 agreement as to the application of the Refugee  Convention,
                 the arguments made on behalf of the Appellant, although  to
                 an extent endorsed by the UNHCR, lack authority,  sometimes
                 lack coherence and occasionally lack consistency."

 60. The same reasoning applies to remorse or change of heart as expiation.

 61. The decision in KK points out that  it  is  not  necessary  to  define
     terrorism for the purposes of Article 1F, but rather it  is  necessary
     to ask what is the scope of the "purposes and principles of the United
     Nations" and how that body has used "terrorism"  in  its  Resolutions.
     The question therefore was defined as follows, and  the  same  applies
     here:

           "93.  We  therefore  simply  ask  ourselves  whether  there  are
                 serious reasons for considering that the Appellant has been
                 guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and  principles  of
                 the United Nations.  Although, as we have,  we  hope,  made
                 clear, the  characterisation  of  acts  as  "terrorist"  is
                 neither  necessary  nor  sufficient  for  exclusion   under
                 Article 1F(c), it is not irrelevant, because of  the  clear
                 view of the United Nations on certain sorts of terrorism.


           96.   As we read and interpret the Refugee  Convention,  Article
                 1F(c) admits no exceptions.  There are  no  acts  that  are
                 contrary to the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
                 Nations that do not cause exclusion  under  Article  1F(c).
                 Any person  guilty  of  such  acts  is  excluded  from  the
                 protection of the Refugee Convention."




 62. We do not accept the submission that KK is wrong; it reflects  to  our
     minds the proper scope  of  Article  1F(b)  and  (c).   We  adopt  its
     reasoning.

 63. KK deals with a number of United Kingdom and  foreign  authorities  on
     the scope of Article 1F.  It is not necessary to repeat them here.  It
     discusses the ascertainment of the Convention's autonomous meaning  in
     paragraphs 61 to 61.  It corrects one aspect of Gurung,  pointing  out
     that  whilst  a  restrictive  approach  should  be  adopted   to   the
     interpretation of  Article  1F,  there  was  no  justification  for  a
     restricted application of it; paragraphs 63 to 67.

 64. In paragraphs 69 to 70, KK deals with the  UNHCR  letters,  Guidelines
     and  Handbook,  specifically  pointing  out  their   inadequacies   of
     analysis, including their contradictions of the Convention.   This  is
     continued in paragraph 89 where KK points out that  expiation  is  not
     provided for in  Article  1F(b)  or  (c),  as  a  means  of  obviating
     exclusion.

 65. The UNHCR suggests in paragraph 157 of the Handbook that the fact that
     a  sentence  has  been  served,  pardoned  or  amnestied,  creates   a
     presumption that the exclusion clause is not to be applied.   This  is
     in contradiction of the Convention  which  says  no  such  thing.   It
     actually requires exclusion to be the result of the  commission  of  a
     serious non-political crime or acts contrary to the  UN's  principles.
     An examination of the offence is required; the  Convention  offers  no
     rehabilitatory or expiatory re-inclusion; see Gurung, paragraph 102 as
     well.

 66. We add that paragraph 155 elevates the  gravity  of  a  "serious  non-
     political crime" to "a capital crime or a very grave punishable  act",
     which is an unwarranted gloss on "serious".

 67. The UNHCR Handbook is a source of guidance as to the law and is not  a
     source of legal obligation.  It is not necessarily a  guide  to  state
     practice,  because  it  may  not  relate  to  state  practice  in  any
     particular  paragraph  but  more   to   UNHCR's   exhortations.    Its
     exhortations may also reflect the humanitarian perspective, wider than
     the Refugee Convention, which UNHCR sometimes adopts.   Interpretation
     or guidance from UNHCR is entitled to great respect but it may also be
     inaccurate or tendentious.

 68. To our minds, on the Claimant's own evidence as accepted, there is  an
     obvious case with strong prospects for consideration of his  exclusion
     under Article 1F(c), as well as (b).

 69. We do not consider that we can resolve the issues finally.  The  facts
     of what he did and why require to be examined more  closely.   In  the
     light of that examination, a view will need to be taken on whether the
     exclusion provisions  do  apply.   There  is  plainly  scope  for  the
     Claimant's acts to be  seen  to  have  both  an  international  and  a
     terrorist element, within those condemned by the Security  Council  as
     contrary to the purposes and principles of the UN, whether or not they
     come  within  any  other   internationally   accepted,   free-standing
     definition of terrorism.

 70. Accordingly this appeal is allowed to the extent that it is  remitted.
     We would have remitted it to the same Adjudicator for him to  consider
     the exclusion issues.   We  would  not  have  wanted  to  deprive  the
     Claimant of the benefit of this  Adjudicator's  consideration  of  his
     case and another might not have found it easy to reach conclusions  on
     the exclusion issues if in effect compelled to adopt the  findings  on
     the credibility of the story told.  There was a late  and  ineffectual
     challenge to those findings before us.

 71. However, it will be for the new AIT to decide the precise  format  for
     reconsideration.  The issues may merit consideration by a panel.   But
     that is for the AIT.  We could not and did not consider the effect  of
     Arafat's death on the operation of the Palestine Authority.

 72. This remitted appeal is reported for what we say about  the  operation
     of the exclusion clause.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
