
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R(on the application of Kumar and Another) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department (acknowledgement  of  service;  Tribunal  arrangements)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00104 (IAC)

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 20 January 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

            MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE IMMIGRATION
                  AND ASYLUM CHAMBER OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                       the Queen on the application of
                              (1) Rajeev Kumar
                           (2) Christopher Yeboah

                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For the Applicants:    Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel, instructed by Duncan
Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Patry, Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor

In the light of the continuing inability of the Secretary of State  to  file
acknowledgements of  service  in  immigration  judicial  review  proceedings
within the time limit contained in the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 and in the light of the general guidance given by the High  Court
in R (on the application of Singh and Others) v Secretary of State  for  the
Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC   2873   (Admin),   the   following   general
arrangements (which will be kept under review) apply in the Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal.

(1)    The  Tribunal  will,  in  immigration  judicial  reviews,  regard  an
    Acknowledgement of Service filed within six weeks  of  service  of  the
    claim on the Secretary of State as falling routinely for  consideration
    and will not undertake an initial consideration of the judicial  review
    application before the end of that six week period.

 (2)  The Tribunal  will  undertake  a  consideration  of  that  application
    earlier than the end of the period mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)  above
    ("the six week period"):-

       (a)    where the Tribunal considers it  appropriate  to  do  so,  in
       response to:-


            (i) an  application  for  urgent  consideration  filed  by  the
           applicant (on Form T483); or


            (ii) a notice in writing from  the  applicant,  copied  to  the
           Secretary of State, which states the need for  urgency  and  the
           proposed timescale for considering the application; and


       (b)  in response  to  a  request  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for
       expedition, pursuant to an arrangement between her and  the  Chamber
       President.


 (3)  Where a stay on removal or other form of interim injunctive relief  is
    sought, an application for urgent consideration on Form  T483  must  be
    made, complying with Practice Directions 11 and 12 and  accompanied  by
    any requisite fee.

(4)   In view of paragraphs  (1)  and  (2)  above,  the  Tribunal  will  not
    consider it necessary for the  Secretary  of  State  to  apply  for  an
    extension of the 21 day time limit in rule 29(1), unless she  considers
    she is unable to file an AoS and summary grounds before the  expiry  of
    the six week period. In such a case, the Secretary of State  must  make
    an application for extension  of  time,  on  72  hours  notice  to  the
    applicant, which satisfies the requirements set out by  Hickinbottom  J
    at [25] of Singh; that is to say,  there  must  be  compelling  reasons
    specific to the case as to why further time is needed, together with  a
    firm promise as to when the AoS and summary grounds will be filed.  The
    application should include the judicial review applicant's response (or
    lack of response) to the application for extension of time.

(5)  The Secretary of State should not make an application for an  extension
    of time for filing an AoS, which she knows cannot satisfy  the  'Singh'
    requirements.

(6)   In every case, not later than the end of  the  six  week  period,  the
    Secretary of State will be expected to  file  with  the  Tribunal  (and
    serve on the applicant) either a copy of the written  response  of  the
    Secretary of State to the applicant's  pre-action  protocol  letter  or
    written confirmation that no such written  response  was  sent  to  the
    applicant. This requirement does not absolve  the  Secretary  of  State
    from filing an AoS and summary grounds, where she wishes to  take  part
    in the proceedings.

(7)   Except as provided in paragraph (2) above or where  time  is  extended
    in response to an application by the Secretary of State  for  extension
    of time, the parties can expect the Tribunal to consider  the  judicial
    review application at any time after the expiry of the six week period.
    This will be so, whether or not an AoS and summary  grounds  have  been
    filed, unless the judge considering the application is of the view that
    there are particular reasons (such as potentially  significant  factual
    matters) why the Secretary of State should be specifically directed  to
    file an AoS and summary grounds.

(8)  As a general matter, the Secretary of State will be  vulnerable  to  an
    application for costs in respect of an oral hearing  held  pursuant  to
    rule 30(4) made by an unsuccessful judicial review applicant, where:-

        (a) the  application  to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings  was
       refused on the papers without the benefit  of  an  AoS  and  summary
       grounds; and


        (b) the Tribunal  considers  that,  had  those  grounds  then  been
       available, the application would have been recorded as being totally
       without merit.

(9)  Where permission was granted without the benefit of an AoS and  summary
    grounds, the Secretary of State will ordinarily be liable  to  pay  the
    applicant's costs, up to  the  point  when  the  Secretary  of  State's
    detailed grounds are filed, regardless of  the  ultimate  fate  of  the
    judicial review application.

                                  DECISION

1. Introduction

1.   On 1 November 2013, the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  assumed  jurisdiction  in  respect  of  a   wide   range   of
    applications for judicial review of immigration and  related  decisions
    taken (for the most part) by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department[1].  Pursuant to the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act
    2007 and various enactments and instruments made under it, the  Chamber
    has "original" judicial review jurisdiction in those  classes  of  case
    falling within the direction made by  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  on  21
    August 2013.  In addition, any application for judicial review  falling
    within those classes must, if filed with the High Court, be transferred
    by that Court to the Upper  Tribunal  (section  31A(2)  of  the  Senior
    Courts Act 1981).  The effect of the direction  was  such  that,  on  1
    November 2013, a large number of applications, originally made  to  the
    High Court, were transferred to this Chamber.

2.   On 17 September 2013,  Hickinbottom  J  gave  judgment  in  R  (on  the
    application of Singh and Others) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC  2873  (Admin)  ("Singh").   In  that  judgment,
    general guidance was given as to the approach the Administrative  Court
    could be expected to adopt where, in an  immigration  judicial  review,
    the respondent Secretary of State has not filed  an  acknowledgment  of
    service (AoS), accompanied by  summary  grounds  of  defence  ("summary
    grounds"), within 21 days of being served with  a  claim  for  judicial
    review.  CPR 54.8(1) provides that a defendant or other person  wishing
    to take part in a judicial  review  "must  file  an  acknowledgment  of
    service ..." and CPR 54.8(2)(a) requires this to be done "not more than
    21 days after service of the claim form".

3.   The need for guidance in Singh arose because, by the  summer  of  2013,
    it had become apparent that the Secretary of State  was,  in  practice,
    unable in very many instances to serve an AoS within the required  time
    limit,  even  though  she  wished  to  oppose   the   judicial   review
    application.  This, in turn, had led judges and deputy  judges  of  the
    High  Court  to  respond  in  various  ways,  including  granting   the
    respondent's applications for extensions of  time  to  serve  the  AoS,
    determining  the  judicial  review  application  without  the  AoS  and
    adjourning such applications into open court.

4.   The problems described in Singh  have,  since  1  November  2013,  been
    routinely faced by this Chamber.  Both of the cases before us are  ones
    where the respondent was unable to serve an AoS, either within 21  days
    of service  of  the  judicial  review  application  on  her  or  for  a
    considerable  period  thereafter.  The  cases  were  considered  to  be
    suitable for hearing argument on the general  approach  to  be  adopted
    where an AoS is not filed within the 21 day period, which is  also  the
    period specified  in  rule  29(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the Upper Tribunal Rules")  for  filing  an  AoS
    (see paragraph 6 below).

5.   On 20 January 2014, we heard  submissions  on  these  matters  from  Mr
    O'Callaghan, on behalf of the applicants, and Ms Patry,  on  behalf  of
    the respondent (hereafter the Secretary of State).  We wish  to  record
    our gratitude to Counsel and to those respectively instructing them for
    assisting the Tribunal, both in written and oral submissions.   In  the
    event, nothing specific requires to be said in this decision about  the
    cases of Mr Kumar  or  Mr  Yeboah,  save  that  each  application  will
    hereafter be considered on the papers by an Upper Tribunal judge.


2.  The relevant Upper Tribunal Rules

6.   For our purposes, the following provisions of the Upper Tribunal  Rules
    are relevant:-

         "1.  Citation, commencement, application and interpretation


         ...


         "applicant" means a person who applies for permission to bring,  or
         does bring, judicial review proceedings before the  Upper  Tribunal
         and, in  judicial  review  proceedings  transferred  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal from a court, includes a person  who  was  a  claimant  or
         petitioner  in  the  proceedings  immediately  before   they   were
         transferred ...
         ...


          "immigration judicial review proceedings"  means  judicial  review
          proceedings which are designated as an immigration matter:-


           (a) in a direction made in accordance with Part 1 of  Schedule  2
          to the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 specifying a class  of  case
          for the purposes of section 18(6) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
          Enforcement Act 2007; or


           (b) in an order of the High Court in England and Wales made under
          section 31A(3) of the Senior Courts Act 1981, transferring to  the
          Upper Tribunal an application  of  a  kind  described  in  section
          31A(1) of that Act.
         ...


         "party" means a person who is ... an applicant, a respondent or  an
         interested party in proceedings before the Upper Tribunal ...


         ...


         "respondent" means-


         ...


         (c)  in judicial review proceedings-


             (i)  in proceedings started in the Upper Tribunal, the  person
                  named by the applicant as the respondent;


             (ii)     in proceedings  transferred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  under ... section 31A(2) or (3) of the Supreme  Court  Act
                  1981, a person who was  a  defendant  in  the  proceedings
                  immediately before they were transferred;
             ...


         2.   Overriding objective and  parties'  obligation  to  co-operate
             with the Upper Tribunal


         (1)      The overriding objective of these Rules is to  enable  the
             Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


         (2)  Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-


             (a)  dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
                  the importance of the case, the complexity of the  issues,
                  the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;


             (b)  avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
                  the proceedings;


             (c)  ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
                  able to participate fully in the proceedings;


             (d)   using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  effectively; and


             (e)   avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with   proper
                  consideration of the issues.


         (3)  The Upper Tribunal must seek to give effect to the  overriding
             objective when it-


             (a)  exercises any power under these Rules; or


             (b)  interprets any rule or practice direction.


         (4)  Parties must-


             (a)   help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding
             objective; and


             (b)  co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally.


         ...


         5.   Case management powers


         (1)      Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act  and  any  other
             enactment, the Upper Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.
         (2)  The Upper Tribunal may give a direction  in  relation  to  the
             conduct or disposal of proceedings at any  time,  including  a
             direction amending, suspending or  setting  aside  an  earlier
             direction.


         (3)  In particular, and without restricting the general  powers  in
             paragraphs (1) and (2), the Upper Tribunal may-


             (a)  extend or shorten the time for complying with  any  rule,
                  practice direction or direction;


             ...


         7.   Failure to comply with rules etc.


         (1)      An irregularity resulting from a failure  to  comply  with
             any requirement in these Rules,  a  practice  direction  or  a
             direction, does not of itself render void the  proceedings  or
             any step taken in the proceedings.


         (2)  If a party has failed to comply with a  requirement  in  these
             Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Upper Tribunal
             may take such action as it considers just, which may include-


             (a)  waiving the requirement;


             ...


             (d)   ...  restricting  a   party's   participation   in   the
             proceedings.


             ...


         28.   Applications  for  permission  to   bring   judicial   review
         proceedings


         (1)      A person  seeking  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
             proceedings before the Upper Tribunal under section 16 of  the
             2007 Act must make a written application to the Upper Tribunal
             for such permission.


         (2)  Subject to paragraph (3), an application under  paragraph  (1)
             must  be  made  promptly  and,  unless  any  other   enactment
             specifies a shorter time limit, must be sent or  delivered  to
             the Upper Tribunal so that it is  received  no  later  than  3
             months after the date of the decision to which the application
             relates.


         ...


         (4)  The application must state-


             (a)  the name and address of the applicant, the respondent and
                  any other person whom the applicant  considers  to  be  an
                  interested party;


             (b)  the name and address of  the  applicant's  representative
                  (if any);


             (c)  an address where documents for the applicant may be  sent
                  or delivered;


             (d)  details of the decision challenged (including  the  date,
                  the full  reference  and  the  identity  of  the  decision
                  maker);


             (e)  that the application is for permission to bring  judicial
                  review proceedings;


             (f)  the outcome that the applicant is seeking; and


             (g)  the facts and grounds on which the applicant relies.


         ...


         (6)  The applicant must send with the application-


             (a)  a copy of any written  record  of  the  decision  in  the
                  applicant's possession or control; and


             (b)   copies  of  any  other  documents  in  the   applicant's
                  possession or control on which the  applicant  intends  to
                  rely.


         (7)  If  the  applicant  provides  the  application  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal later than the time required by paragraph (2) or  (3)
             or by an extension of time allowed under rule  5(3)(a)  (power
             to extend time)-


             (a)  the application must include a request for  an  extension
                  of time  and  the  reason  why  the  application  was  not
                  provided in time; and


             (b)   unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  extends   time   for   the
                  application under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend time)  the
                  Upper Tribunal must not admit the application.


         ...


         28A. Special provisions for immigration judicial review proceedings


         ...


         (2)  Within  9  days  of  making  an  application  referred  to  in
             paragraph (1), an applicant must provide-


             (a)  a copy of the application and any accompanying  documents
                  to each person named in the application as a respondent or
                  an interested party; and


             (b)  the Upper Tribunal with a written statement of  when  and
                  how this was done."


         29.  Acknowledgment of service


         (1)      A person  who  is  sent  a  copy  of  an  application  for
             permission under rule 28(8)  (application  for  permission  to
             bring judicial review proceedings) or rule 28A(2)(a)  (special
             provisions for immigration judicial  review  proceedings)  and
             wishes to take part in the proceedings must send or deliver to
             the Upper Tribunal an acknowledgment of service so that it  is
             received no later than 21 days after the  date  on  which  the
             Upper Tribunal sent a copy of the application to that person.


         (2)  An acknowledgment of service under paragraph (1)  must  be  in
             writing and state-


               (a) whether the person intends to oppose the application for
               permission;


               (b)  their grounds for any support or opposition under  sub-
               paragraph (a), or any other submission or information  which
               they consider may assist the Upper Tribunal; and


               (c) the name and address of any other person  not  named  in
               the application as a respondent or interested party whom the
               person providing the  acknowledgement  considers  to  be  an
               interested party.


        (2A) In  immigration  judicial  review  proceedings  a  person  who
             provides an acknowledgement of  service  under  paragraph  (1)
             must also provide a copy to-


               (a) the applicant; and


               (b) any other person named in  the  application  under  rule
               28(4)(a)  or  acknowledgement  of  service  under  paragraph
               (2)(c)


             no later than the time specified in paragraph (1).


         (3)  A person who is sent a copy of an application  for  permission
             under rule 28(8) but does not  provide  an  acknowledgment  of
             service may not take part in the application  for  permission,
             but may  take  part  in  the  subsequent  proceedings  if  the
             application is successful.


         30.    Decision   on   permission   or   summary   dismissal,   and
             reconsideration  of  permission  or  summary  dismissal  at  a
             hearing


         ...


         (3)  Paragraph (4) applies where  the  Upper  Tribunal,  without  a
         hearing-


             (a)   determines  an  application  for  permission  to   bring
                  judicial review proceedings and either refuses permission,
                  or gives permission  on  limited  grounds  or  subject  to
                  conditions; or


             (b)  in proceedings transferred from  the  Court  of  Session,
                  summarily dismisses part or all  of  the  proceedings,  or
                  imposes any limitations or conditions on the  continuation
                  of such proceedings.


         (4)  Subject to paragraph (4A), in the circumstances  specified  in
             paragraph (3) the applicant may apply for the decision  to  be
             reconsidered at a hearing.


        (4A)   Where  the  Upper  Tribunal  refuses  permission  to   bring
             immigration  judicial  review  proceedings  and  considers  the
             application to be totally without merit, it shall  record  that
             fact in its decision notice  and  in  those  circumstances  the
             applicant may not request the decision to be reconsidered at  a
             hearing.


        ...


         33.  Right to make representations


         Each party and, with the permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  any
         other person, may-


         (a)  submit evidence, except at the hearing of an  application  for
             permission;


         (b)  make representations at any hearing which they are entitled to
             attend; and


         (c)  make written representations in relation to a decision  to  be
             made without a hearing."




3.  The importance of an Acknowledgment of Service and  summary  grounds  of
    defence

7.   In formulating a response to what is, as we shall  see,  the  Secretary
    of State's continuing inability to meet the 21  day  time  limit  in  a
    large number of  immigration  judicial  reviews,  it  is  necessary  to
    appreciate the function of an  AoS  and,  in  particular,  the  summary
    grounds which are required to accompany it.  The origin and purpose  of
    the AoS were summarised by the Court of Appeal in R (on the application
    of Ewing) v Office of the Deputy Prime Minister [2006] 1  WLR  1260  as
    follows:-

         "15. The provisions for service on,  and  response  by,  the  other
             parties were an innovation.  Formerly the  rules  allowed  the
             application for permission to be made without  notice  to  the
             other parties.  There was no formal provision for  a  response
             at the permission stage, although it was not uncommon for  the
             court  to  seek  the  written  assistance  of  the  respondent
             authority, or to direct an oral hearing on notice.  The change
             followed the publication in March 2000  of  A  Review  of  the
             Crown Office List by a  review  team  headed  by  Sir  Jeffery
             Bowman ("the Bowman Report").  Para 24 of the report contained
             this recommendation:


                  'If the defendant indicates that he intends to contest the
                  claim, then he must, in his acknowledgment, also  set  out
                  an outline of the  grounds  of  defence.   There  are  two
                  reasons for this.  Firstly, it requires the  defendant  to
                  address his mind to  the  issues  in  the  claim  and  his
                  response.  Secondly, his outline grounds of  defence  will
                  assist the judge at the permission stage  by  providing  a
                  fuller understanding of the issues and arguments.   We  do
                  not expect the defendant to incur substantial  expense  at
                  this stage.'


         ...


         43.  The purpose of the 'summary of grounds' is not to provide  the
             basis for full argument of the substantive merits, but  rather
             ...  to  assist  the  judge  in  deciding  whether  to   grant
             permission, and if so on what terms ... If a party's  position
             is sufficiently apparent from the protocol response, it may be
             appropriate  simply  to  refer   to   that   letter   in   the
             acknowledgment of service.  In other cases it will be  helpful
             to draw attention to any 'knock-out point' or procedural bars,
             or the practical or financial consequences for  other  parties
             (which  may,  for  example,  be  relevant  to  directions  for
             expedition).  As the  Bowman  Report  advised,  it  should  be
             possible to do what is required without incurring 'substantial
             expense at this stage'."

8.   In R (on the application of Mount Cook Land  Ltd)  v  Westminster  City
    Council [2003] EWCA Civ 1346, Auld LJ summarised  the  purpose  of  the
    AoS:-

         "71. The objects of the  obligation  on  a  defendant  to  file  an
             acknowledgment of service setting out  where  appropriate  his
             case are: 1) to assist claimants with a speedy and  relatively
             inexpensive determination by the court of the  arguability  of
             their claim; and 2) to prompt defendants - public  authorities
             - to give early consideration to and,  where  appropriate,  to
             fulfil their public duties ..."

9.   In Singh, Hickinbottom J considered  the  primary  purpose  of  summary
    grounds as being:-

          "to  assist  the  court  when  a  judge  comes  to  consider   the
          application  for  permission  to  proceed,  not  (as  the   Rules,
          literally read, might suggest) as to the basis for  resisting  the
          substantive claim  (which,  if  necessary,  is  the  role  of  the
          detailed grounds,  in  due  course);  but  as  to  the  basis  for
          resisting the application for permission to proceed and/or limited
          scope in terms of any permission granted ... that focused role  is
          reflected in CPR R54.9, which prohibits a  Defendant  from  taking
          part in a permission process if he has not filed  summary  grounds
          in accordance with R54.8; although, if he proceeds  thereafter  to
          file detailed grounds under CPR R54.14, he may take  part  in  the
          substantive hearing" [4].

        Hickinbottom J described the significance of  the  AoS  and  summary
    grounds as follows:-

         "5.  The acknowledgment of service  incorporating  the  defendant's
             summary grounds is therefore a procedural  document  which  is
             vitally important to the court when it  considers  permission;
             and there is a heavy procedural obligation on a  defendant  to
             file it promptly to assist the court in that task.


         6.   The obligation is imposed for good practical reason.   At  the
             permission stage it is crucial that the court is placed  in  a
             properly informed position to decide the issue of arguability.
              With the retreat of legal aid, an  increasing  proportion  of
             public law claimants are acting in person.  Through  no  fault
             of their own, the immigration history that they  are  able  to
             portray in their claim, and the issues to which  that  history
             has given rise, are often inaccurate.  That of course may also
             apply to cases where the claimant relates that  history  to  a
             legal representative who prepares  the  procedural  documents,
             but generally  to  a  much  lesser  extent.   A  well-drafted,
             succinct acknowledgment of service, including a clear  history
             and brief reasons as to why the  decision-maker  came  to  the
             relevant decision and why that decision is not unlawful, is of
             invaluable help to a  judge  considering  an  application  for
             permission, particularly on the papers.  The  rules  recognise
             that practical value.  That is why  the  heavy  obligation  to
             file summary grounds promptly is imposed."


4.  Differences between the Civil Procedure Rules  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules

(a)  Extending time

10.  Before proceeding, it  is  convenient  to  notice  certain  differences
    between the High Court procedure, as set out in the CPR,  and  that  of
    the Upper Tribunal, as contained in the Upper Tribunal  Rules.   First,
    the absence from the Upper Tribunal Rules of a provision equivalent  to
    CPR 54.8(3), which prohibits extensions of time by consent, is  not  to
    be taken as indicating that, in  judicial  review  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, the parties can extend the time for filing an  AoS  or,
    indeed, make an application under rule 28.  In the Upper Tribunal there
    is no general rule or practice whereby parties may, unless specifically
    prohibited, extend time limits  in  the  Rules  by  agreement,  without
    recourse to the Tribunal.  By rule 5(3)(a) the power to extend time  is
    given to the Tribunal alone.  Whilst, in practice, bearing in mind  the
    overriding objective in rule 2, the Tribunal may well  have  regard  to
    the view of the parties in deciding whether to extend  time,  any  such
    view is only one of what is likely to be a number of factors.   In  the
    context of judicial review, particularly in the immigration field where
    there will often be a strong public interest in the  prompt  resolution
    of claims, the fact that an applicant may consent to the  Secretary  of
    State's request to extend time for serving the AoS is  unlikely  to  be
    determinative of the Tribunal's response to that application.



(b) Detailed grounds of defence

11.  The second point of difference concerns the consequences of not  filing
    an AoS.  Under both regimes, a respondent who fails to do  so  may  not
    take part in the application for permission  (although  Upper  Tribunal
    rule 29(3) expressly provides for the Tribunal, nevertheless, to permit
    that to happen).  CPR 54.14 enables a respondent to take part  after  a
    grant of permission provided he or she  files  detailed  grounds.   The
    Upper Tribunal Rules, by contrast, make no express provision for filing
    detailed grounds, following the grant of permission.  This  is  because
    the questions of whether and, if so, how  and  when  such  grounds  are
    filed are subsumed in the Tribunal's general case management  functions
    pursuant to rule 5.  We will return to the matter of  detailed  grounds
    in due course.


5.  The High Court's approach in Singh

12.  At [12] of  his  judgment,  Hickinbottom  J  referred  to  the  various
    different responses in the High  Court  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    failure to file an AoS and summary grounds  (see  paragraph  3  above).
    Hickinbottom  J  regarded  none  of  the  courses  as  being  "entirely
    satisfactory" [13].

13.  In his statement of 16 September 2013  filed  in  connection  with  the
    proceedings in Singh, Mr Daniel Hobbs, the Director  of  UK  Visas  and
    Immigration (and thus the  official  with  overall  responsibility  for
    litigation case working and appeals operations  for  the  Secretary  of
    State) described the "rapid and unprecedented  rise  in  challenges  to
    asylum and immigration decisions made by the Secretary of State", which
    was some 69% higher in July 2013 than in  July  2012.   In  particular,
    there had been a steep  rise  in  challenges  to  "temporary  migration
    decisions, which include applications for limited leave under  the  new
    family Rules and under the points-system, for example students": [14].

14.  At the heart of the systemic problems faced by the Secretary  of  State
    is the inability of the Home Office  case  workers  in  the  Litigation
    Operations Team (North) to give timeous instructions  to  the  Treasury
    Solicitor in a large number of temporary  migration  judicial  reviews.
    As Hickinbottom J noted:-

         "... every claim, whether  it  be  in  the  form  of  a  pre-action
         protocol letter or action in  this  court,  of  course  has  to  be
         allocated to a case worker, investigated and a  response  prepared.
         Mr Hobbs frankly accepts that his teams have simply been unable  to
         keep up: [14] ... Mr Hobbs accepts that the  Secretary  of  State's
         response time to claims is currently unacceptable: [16]"

15.  In Singh, the judge was told about:

         "The positive steps taken to improve the position ... these include
         the  short-term  use  of  very  junior  members  of  the  bar,  the
         employment and training  of  60  additional  full-time  caseworking
         staff, the prioritisation of the cases, the  basing  of  some  Home
         Office  staff  at  the  Treasury  Solicitors  to   ensure   earlier
         instructions can be given in  more  cases,  the  identification  of
         cases which raise identical or very similar  issues  which  can  be
         dealt with by standard summary grounds, and procedures for ensuring
         that staff comply with guideline judgments and Tribunal and  courts
         quickly.  In addition, Ms Patry says that staff have been  employed
         over weekends to try and deal with the backlog: [16]"

16.  At [20] Hickinbottom J noted that,  in  addition  to  possible  adverse
    consequences for claimants (such as being denied permission to work  in
    the United Kingdom), "in the field of public law there is also  a  very
    substantial  public  interest  in  the   finality   of   administrative
    decisions", which needed to be determined "with reasonable promptness".
     By the end of the calendar year 2013, the  Secretary  of  State  hoped
    that AoSs "will be filed within the prescribed 21 days": [21].

17.  Having set out the nature of the problem and the steps being  taken  by
    the Secretary of State to ameliorate it, the Court gave  its  views  as
    follows:-

         "22. I cannot lay down any general guidelines. Of course, each case
             must turn on its  own  facts.  Some  complex  cases  may  well
             warrant a longer time than 21 days, even to  make  an  initial
             summary response. But in my view, even with the challenges the
             Secretary of State faces, such  cases  should  be  few.  There
             should be very few cases indeed which require  more  than  six
             weeks in which to lodge a  summary  response.  In  respect  of
             those cases, there needs to be  some  very  compelling  reason
             demonstrated for the requirement for additional time.  In  the
             cases before me, there has been and is no such reason.  In  my
             view, the Secretary of State simply cannot pray in aid a  lack
             of resources or foresight to  justify  an  extension  of  time
             that, even in standard  cases,  more  than  doubles  the  time
             allowed by the rules. Miss Patry, for the Secretary of  State,
             does not suggest otherwise.


         23.  As I have stressed, there will always  be  exceptional  cases.
             But without laying down rigid guidelines, it seems to me that,
             as she accepts, the Secretary of  State  must  aim,  within  a
             reasonable period  of  time,  generally  to  comply  with  the
             requirement of the rules that a summary response to the  claim
             is filed within 21 days.


         24.  Nevertheless, certainly in the period whilst the  benefits  of
             the positive measures that are being taken  are  achieved  and
             assessed, in my view, unless a claimant identifies  some  good
             reason  why  such   an   extension   would   be   particularly
             prejudicial,  the  first  application  in  any  claim  for  an
             extension of time of up to three weeks need not  be  supported
             by any detailed evidence or grounds, and such  an  application
             should be treated generously by the court.


         25.  However, subsequent applications must be supported by  a  full
             explanation for the delay in compliance and a firm promise  to
             the court as  to  when  the  acknowledgement  of  service  and
             summary grounds will be filed. Repeat applications with barely
             aspirational dates, such as have been made in the past, are to
             be deprecated. On  second  and  subsequent  applications,  the
             court should scrutinise the reasons for the delay  rigorously;
             and the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  prepared  for  such
             applications  to  fail  unless  she  has  produced  compelling
             reasons specific to the case as to why further time is needed.




         26.  Where a matter appears reasonably capable of compromise -  for
             example, where the Secretary of State has agreed to reconsider
             a challenged decision -  then,  the  summary  grounds  can  be
             short, setting out why that belief is  held  and  a  realistic
             date for lodging a consent order or  substantive  grounds  if,
             contrary to  the  hope  and  expectation,  compromise  is  not
             reached.  Mr  Hobbs  has  indicated   that   cases   will   be
             prioritised; and it is to be hoped that  cases  where  such  a
             compromise is possible will be prioritised to enable  them  to
             be disposed of promptly.


         27.  The court must remain in control of  the  management  of  each
             case, and should not  hesitate  to  impose  sanctions  on  the
             Secretary of State, including costs sanctions, if good  reason
             for  delay  is  not  made  out   on   second   or   subsequent
             applications. Where the time and effort  of  parties  and  the
             court are wasted because of a  failure  on  the  Secretary  of
             State's part to comply with a reasonable procedural timetable,
             then severe sanctions can be expected. In this, of course  the
             court must be even-handed. Whilst  the  cases  before  me  now
             concern defaults on the part of  the  defendant  Secretary  of
             State, the same principles apply to  claimants.  Although  its
             manifestation may be different,  the  spirit  of  the  Jackson
             reforms apply to public law cases as much as  to  private  law
             claims.


         ...


         29.  Every extension (whether the  first  or  subsequent)  must  of
             course be sought by way of an application, which will  require
             the  appropriate  fee.  Before  making  the  application,  the
             Secretary of State should seek the views of the claimant  with
             regard to  the  proposed  extension,  and  file  any  response
             received with the application.


         30.  I have of course been considering the position with regard  to
             acknowledgments of service in asylum and immigration claims on
             the basis of the evidence and submissions before me. Mr  Hobbs
             has set out the steps the Secretary  of  State  has  taken  to
             ensure that she fulfils her obligations to the court; and  has
             expressed confidence that they will produce immediate  results
             and that, within a reasonable time (say, by  the  end  of  the
             this year), the Secretary of  State  will  be  in  a  position
             generally to comply with the 21 days time limit imposed by the
             rules. If the position changes - if, for example, the tide  of
             claims continues to rise so that Mr  Hobbs'  expectations  are
             frustrated - then it is incumbent on the  Secretary  of  State
             promptly to inform the President of the Queen's Bench Division
             and the Lead Judge of the Administrative Court as to  the  new
             problems that have arisen, the steps being  taken  to  address
             them and the proposed timetable for ensuring that the position
             is rectified."


18.  Following delivery of the judgment in Singh, the  general  approach  of
    this Chamber  has  been  essentially  the  same  as  that  outlined  by
    Hickinbottom J.  Initial applications by the  Secretary  of  State  for
    extensions of time of up to 21 days for  filing  the  AoS  and  summary
    grounds have routinely been granted, mainly by Upper Tribunal  lawyers,
    acting under delegated powers.  In the case of subsequent applications,
    the Tribunal has rigorously scrutinised the reasons for  the  requests.
    The great majority of such subsequent extension applications have  been
    purely formulaic. They have accordingly been refused, as non  compliant
    with the Singh principles, with the Tribunal indicating that a decision
    on the judicial review application would be taken by  a  judge  at  any
    time after the expiration  of  eight  days  from  the  refusal  of  the
    extension application.


6.  The position following Singh

19.  In his letter of 20 September 2013 to  the  President  of  the  Queen's
    Bench Division, written in the immediate aftermath of the  judgment  in
    Singh, Mr Hobbs said:

         "Unfortunately I anticipate that  in  relation  to  many  temporary
         migration and family migration judicial reviews  submitted  in  the
         last  three  months  the  Home  Office  will   continue   to   face
         difficulties in meeting with AoS deadlines in the short  term.   It
         is likely therefore that we will continue to seek extensions in the
         majority of cases and for a number of cases it is  likely  that  we
         may have to seek third extensions in the short term.


         For  other  judicial  reviews  -  including  asylum,   deportation,
         international, criminal and enforcement cases - I am able to report
         that our operations are currently working well, but at present I do
         not expect that the position  on  temporary  migration  and  family
         cases, which account for over 50% of current immigration and asylum
         judicial reviews, to change in the short term."

20.  In October and November 2013 there was  correspondence  between  Master
    Gidden of the High Court and the  Treasury  Solicitor,  concerning  the
    content of second and subsequent applications by the Secretary of State
    for extensions of time for  filing  the  AoS.   In  particular,  Master
    Gidden expressed concern that the application letters  which  the  High
    Court was seeing were, in general, entirely generic in  nature,  citing
    pressure at work and difficulties in obtaining  instructions  from  the
    relevant Home Office officials.  Master Gidden pointed  out  that  such
    letters did not meet the standard envisaged by Hickinbottom J and were,
    accordingly, likely to be refused.

21.  The Treasury Solicitor responded on 6 November 2013 by saying that  the
    reasons advanced, albeit  generic  in  nature,  were  nevertheless  the
    reasons why the Secretary of State had been  unable  to  file  her  AoS
    within the requisite time (as extended by 21 days).  Since the inherent
    problem was the absence of instructions, there was, in effect, no  more
    that the Treasury Solicitor could say.  The Treasury Solicitor's letter
    of 6 November also touched on a number of other matters,  to  which  we
    shall return shortly.

22.  On 17 January 2014, Mr  Hobbs  wrote  to  the  office  of  the  Chamber
    President, in connection with the hearing due on 20 January.   In  this
    letter it was made clear that the difficulties facing the Secretary  of
    State had far from disappeared:-

         "Since my letter of 20 September, case numbers have not abated  (as
         no doubt the Tribunal itself will have  appreciated).   Indeed,  in
         October, we saw the highest number  of  judicial  reviews  recorded
         (1957) and that  number  was  not  significantly  lower  in  either
         November and December (1580 and approximately 1400 respectively)."


23.  Hickinbottom J had referred in  his  judgment  to  particular  problems
    arising from an upsurge  in  challenges  to  decisions  concerned  with
    temporary and family migration.  Those judicial reviews are handled  by
    the Secretary of State's staff in Sheffield, comprising a team with the
    acronym TMOS (Temporary Migration Operations).  According to Ms Patry:-

         "18. TMOS deal with challenges  to  refusals  of  leave  to  remain
             following temporary  migration  applications,  not  asylum  or
             settlement  claims.   For  example,  this  team   deals   with
             applications for limited leave under the new family rules  and
             applications under the points-based system,  such  as  student
             applications.  During 2013, the Home  Office  increased  their
             decision making capabilities, to clear a backlog of  temporary
             migration applications and as such the Home Office  have  been
             concluding  initial  applications  at   an   increased   rate.
             Furthermore, the new paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM  of  the
             Immigration Rules had also led to litigation  exploring  their
             interpretation and their interrelation with the Article 8 case
             law."

24.  As well as temporary and family migration cases, it  appears  that  the
    Treasury   Solicitor   is   having   similar   difficulties   obtaining
    instructions from her Older Live Cases Unit (OLCU), based in Liverpool.
     This unit deals with challenges which raise "legacy" issues,  as  well
    as challenges concerning delays in making decisions.

25.  Hickinbottom J  was  told  about  various  steps  being  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State to improve the  process  of  her  staff  giving  the
    necessary instructions to the Treasury Solicitor.   A  number  of  Home
    Office staff had been assigned to  work  at  the  Treasury  Solicitor's
    offices,  in  order  to  provide  the  Treasury  Solicitor  with  early
    instructions in certain categories of TMOS cases.  Where a  perusal  of
    the claim  indicates  that,  so  far  as  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    concerned, the claim lacks any  merit,  standard  summary  grounds  are
    being produced to accompany the AoS.  At the other end of the spectrum,
    it appears that cases which it is considered should be conceded by  her
    are also being sifted out at an early  stage,  and  AoSs  produced,  in
    conjunction with draft consent orders.

26.  Apart from these two categories, however,  the  position  remains  that
    the Treasury Solicitor cannot take any substantive step  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, including making a  second  or  subsequent  AoS
    extension application that is likely to be  "Singh"  compliant,  unless
    and until a caseworker in Liverpool or Sheffield has been allocated  to
    the judicial review and has given the Treasury Solicitor instructions.

7.  Discussion

(a) Secretary of State's applications for second and  subsequent  extensions
    of time

27.  That, then,  is  the  background  to  the  "generic"  applications  for
    extensions of time for filing the AoS, which both the  High  Court  and
    the Tribunal is still seeing on a very regular basis.

28.  On 20th January, the Tribunal  explored  with  Mr  O'Callaghan  and  Ms
    Patry the question first posed last autumn by Master Gidden  (paragraph
    20 above): namely, whether, in such cases, there is any  point  in  the
    Secretary of State making an application for a subsequent extension  of
    time.  Apart from requiring payment  of  the  requisite  fee,  such  an
    application requires a judicial response. Albeit that the  time  needed
    for such a response is, individually, not great, the  sheer  number  of
    applications means a significant amount of judicial and  administrative
    time of the Chamber  is  being  devoted  to  dealing  with  second  and
    subsequent applications for extension of time.

29.  In his letter of 17 January 2014, Mr  Hobbs  plainly  acknowledges  the
    difficulties with the present stance:-

         "TSol has been placed in  the  unenviable  position  of  having  to
         continue to seek extensions beyond the first extension  using  only
         the generic reasons for the backlog of unallocated cases.   We  are
         proposing to ease this position by suggesting in appropriate  cases
         that if the Tribunal or Court is not minded to grant  a  second  or
         further extension, then we would be content for the  matter  to  be
         put before a Judge to consider the permission  application  without
         our input (provided of course that the application is considered on
         its merits and not simply on the basis that  permission  should  be
         granted due to the SSHD's failure to submit an AoS).  If the  Judge
         considering the case is of the opinion that an AoS is needed either
         to assist the Tribunal or the Court as to the facts or to  set  out
         the SSHD's  position  and  directs  that  an  AoS  be  filed  by  a
         particular date, we will  of  course  do  our  best  to  meet  that
         deadline (provided that does not  happen  in  every  single  case).
         Alternatively,  Judges  have  in  some  cases  directed   an   oral
         permission hearing which will also advance  the  matter.   We  have
         though seen many instances where Judges have been prepared to  make
         a decision on the permission application without our input which at
         least moves the matter forward even if the outcome is not in SSHD's
         favour."

30.  At present,  if  the  Tribunal  refuses  a  second  or  subsequent  AoS
    extension  application,  it  indicates   that   the   judicial   review
    application will be placed before a judge for  decision,  on  or  after
    eight days from the refusal decision. Ms Patry informed  us  that  this
    eight day period was, in  practice,  of  no  material  benefit  to  the
    Secretary of State.  There was no  realistic  chance  of  the  Treasury
    Solicitor's lack of instructions  being  remedied  within  so  short  a
    period, so as to enable an AoS and summary grounds to be  filed  before
    its expiry.  We accept this  may  be  so;  but,  as  explained  at  the
    hearing, the eight day period assists the Tribunal  and  its  staff  in
    sending notice of its decision on  the  extension  application  and  in
    consequent file-handling matters.

31.  For the future, the Secretary of State  should  make  applications  for
    second or subsequent extensions  of  time,  only  where  she  is  in  a
    position to do so by reference to the factors identified  in  Singh  as
    necessary for such applications. Where she is not in such  a  position,
    the Tribunal will not regard it as discourteous for her to say  nothing
    and merely allow the time for filing an AoS to expire.


(b) First applications for extension of time

32.  What, then, of the first application for  extension  of  time?   As  we
    have seen, Hickinbottom J considered that these need not  be  supported
    by any detailed  evidence  or  grounds,  and  indicated  that  such  an
    application would be treated generously by the Court.  As we have said,
    that has been the position in this Chamber, following the  judgment  in
    Singh.

33.  In the situations with which we  are  concerned,  just  as  it  may  be
    doubted whether there is any purpose in  making  a  formal  application
    which is effectively bound to fail, the question arises  whether  there
    is any utility in making an application which is effectively  bound  to
    succeed.  We remind ourselves that the overriding objective in  rule  2
    of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  emphasises   dealing   with   a   case
    proportionately, as well as "avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking
    flexibility" and  "avoiding  delay".   The  resources  of  the  Chamber
    (including its lawyers) are finite and it  may  well  be  thought  that
    their time is best spent dealing with issues that are not, in practice,
    foregone conclusions.

(c) The "six weeks" proposal

34.  The Tribunal therefore invited oral submissions  from  the  parties  on
    the following proposal: although the 21 day requirement in  rule  29(1)
    would stand, the  Tribunal  would,  in  immigration  judicial  reviews,
    regard an AoS filed within six weeks of service of  the  claim  on  the
    Secretary of State as falling routinely  for  consideration  and  would
    therefore not undertake an initial (i.e. "paper  stage")  consideration
    of the judicial review application before the  end  of  that  six  week
    period. Such a proposal would not, in  practice,  involve  any  further
    delay. Just as was the position  in  the  High  Court,  the  burden  of
    immigration judicial review work in the Tribunal is currently such that
    an application which is not treated as urgent  will  not  routinely  be
    considered earlier than six weeks after service  on  the  Secretary  of
    State.

(d)  Application for urgent consideration

35.  Any such general approach would, of course, require to  be  subject  to
    the important exception that an applicant for judicial review  who  has
    reasons to request the Tribunal to undertake an  earlier  consideration
    of that application (whether before the end of the rule 29(1) period or
    the additional three weeks which the above proposal would  entail)  can
    make an application  for  urgent  consideration.   Provision  for  such
    urgent applications is found in Practice Direction  12  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Directions: Immigration and Judicial Review in the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal ("the IJR Practice
    Directions") and Form T483 exists for this  purpose.   Although  mainly
    used when a judicial review applicant  faces  the  threat  of  imminent
    removal from the United Kingdom, the procedure is not confined to  such
    cases.    It is for an Upper Tribunal judge to decide whether  and,  if
    so, how to give effect to a request  for  urgent  consideration.   This
    could include directing the Secretary of State  to  file  an  AoS  with
    summary grounds, not later than a specified date, following the  expiry
    of which the Tribunal  would  proceed  to  determine  the  application,
    whether or not those materials had been filed.

36.  An application for urgent  consideration  made  contemporaneously  with
    the  application  for  judicial  review  attracts  no  additional  fee.
    However,  a  person  who  does  not  apply  for  urgent   consideration
    contemporaneously with filing the application for judicial  review  but
    who subsequently wishes to advance reasons why that application  should
    be considered earlier than six weeks from service on the  Secretary  of
    State, is required to pay a fee for  that  discrete  application.  But,
    since the proposal described in paragraph  34  above,  if  implemented,
    will dispense the Secretary of State from the necessity  of  making  an
    application extending the rule  29(1)  period  by  a  further  21  days
    (colloquially known as "first Singh applications"), we  consider  that,
    for so long  as  that  proposal  is  being  implemented,  it  would  be
    sufficient for a  judicial  review  applicant  who  wishes  to  advance
    reasons why that application should  be  considered  earlier  than  the
    expiry of the six week period (but who is not seeking a stay on removal
    or other interim injunctive relief), to give those reasons by means  of
    a letter sent to the Tribunal and copied to the Secretary of State.

37.  The letter should include two basic requirements of Practice  Direction
    11; namely, the  need  for  urgency  and  the  proposed  timescale  for
    considering the application. Any  letter  that  fails  to  do  this  is
    unlikely to achieve its desired result. The letter  and  file  will  be
    placed  before  a  judge,  who  will  decide  if  the  judicial  review
    application requires earlier  consideration  than  it  would  otherwise
    receive. The Tribunal would  not  treat  such  a  letter  as  requiring
    payment of a fee. The Tribunal will not, however, ordinarily inform the
    applicant of its response to the request made in  the  letter.  If  the
    proposed timescale passes without a decision on the  application  being
    forthcoming (or without a specific direction to the Secretary of  State
    to file an AoS: see paragraphs 50 to 54 below), then the applicant  can
    assume the request for urgent consideration has been unsuccessful.

38.   It is important to emphasise that where a stay  on  removal  or  other
    form of interim injunctive relief is sought, an application for  urgent
    consideration must  be  made,  using  Form  T483,  complying  with  IJR
    Practice Directions 11 and 12 and accompanied by any requisite fee. The
    same is true where the applicant wishes to have  a  discrete  response,
    one way or the other, to a request for urgent consideration.

39.  A further exception to the "six week" proposal concerns cases that  the
    Chamber agrees to expedite,  at  the  request  of  the  respondent.  By
    arrangement with the Chamber President, the Secretary of State is  able
    to  request  a  specified  number  of   immigration   judicial   review
    applications to be dealt with on  an  expedited  basis.   (There  is  a
    corresponding arrangement  in  place  in  the  High  Court.)   In  such
    expedited cases, the Tribunal would, of  course,  expect  her  to  have
    filed her AoS and summary grounds.



(e)  Scope of the proposal

40.  On 20 January, neither of the representatives indicated any  principled
    objection to the  proposal,  including  the  exceptions  we  have  just
    mentioned.  Ms Patry confirmed that the Secretary of  State  would  not
    regard the proposal, if implemented, as dispensing with her  obligation
    to serve the AoS as soon as she can do so, wherever possible within the
    rule 29(1) period.  Indeed, given the  Secretary  of  State's  asserted
    ability, as noted earlier, to be coping well with certain categories of
    judicial  review  applications,  the  Tribunal  would  expect  to   see
    significant numbers of AoSs filed within the 21 days  provided  by  the
    Upper Tribunal Rules.

41.  It is, however,  important  to  emphasise  that  any  practice  of  not
    undertaking consideration of a judicial review  application  until  six
    weeks from service on the Secretary of State would  apply  (subject  to
    the above exceptions) to  all  immigration  judicial  reviews  and  not
    merely those that are being handled by TMOS in  Sheffield  or  OLCU  in
    Liverpool.  Whilst the need for special arrangements concerning  filing
    of an AoS is driven by the problems currently faced by those units, the
    Tribunal cannot be expected to differentiate in advance on the basis of
    which  particular  group  of  caseworkers  might  be  dealing  with   a
    particular judicial review application.  By the  same  token,  judicial
    review applicants need, as a general matter, to know where they  stand.
    Therefore, as in the case of Singh, any practice  the  Tribunal  adopts
    needs to be  by  reference  to  the  general  category  of  immigration
    judicial reviews.


(f) Conclusion

42.  It appears to us that, instead of  the  present  practice  whereby  the
    Secretary of State applies for and is invariably granted a "first Singh
    extension" of 21 days of the 21 day time limit in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules,  the  parties  to  an  immigration   judicial   review   should,
    henceforth, assume that, subject to the exceptions we  have  discussed,
    initial judicial consideration of an application  for  judicial  review
    will not occur before the expiry of six weeks from the  date  on  which
    the Secretary of State was served with a copy of  the  application  and
    accompanying documents.

43.  Any application by the Secretary of State for permission  to  file  her
    AoS later than the end of that six week period will need to satisfy the
    requirements set out by Hickinbottom J at [25] of  Singh;  that  is  to
    say, there must be "compelling reasons specific to the case as  to  why
    further time is needed", together with "a firm promise...  as  to  when
    the Acknowledgment of Service and summary grounds will be filed".   The
    Secretary of State should assume that  the  Tribunal  will  not  regard
    generally  occurring  failures   to   give   the   Treasury   Solicitor
    instructions,  as  detailed  above,  as  constituting  such  compelling
    specific reasons.

44.  Any application for extension made by the Secretary of  State  must  be
    made on  giving  72  hours'  notice  to  the  applicant,  so  that  the
    application made to the  Tribunal  should  include  information  as  to
    whether the applicant has agreed or objected  to  the  application,  or
    simply not responded.  As previously indicated, whilst the  applicant's
    views may be of relevance, the  parties  should  not  assume  that  the
    applicant's consent  will  be  determinative  of  the  application  for
    extension.


8.  Addressing the difficulty of deciding a judicial review  application  in
the absence of an AoS and summary grounds

45.  Where no application for extension is made within the six week  period,
    or where an application is refused, the Tribunal will consider  whether
    permission to bring judicial proceedings should be granted or  refused.
    On the basis of Mr Hobbs' letter of 17 January 2014 and the information
    provided by Ms Patry, it is plain that the Tribunal will be faced  with
    determining a very significant number of judicial  review  applications
    on or after the end of the six week  period,  where  the  Secretary  of
    State has not filed an AoS and summary grounds.   Accordingly,  at  the
    hearing on 20 January, the Tribunal explored with Counsel possible ways
    in which that unsatisfactory state of affairs might be ameliorated.

(a) Response to pre-action protocol letter

46.  It is a feature of judicial review proceedings generally  that,  before
    an application for judicial review is filed, the person aggrieved by  a
    public law decision (or failure to make a  decision)  makes  known  the
    nature of the complaint, by sending to the  person  or  body  concerned
    what is known as a pre-action protocol  (PAP)  letter.   The  decision-
    maker thereby has an opportunity to give its reaction to the threatened
    challenge, before the potential applicant decides  whether  to  file  a
    judicial review application with the Court or Upper Tribunal.

47.  We have  seen  above  how  at  [43]  of  Ewing,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    specifically  acknowledged  that,   where   a   party's   position   is
    sufficiently apparent from the response to the PAP letter,  it  may  be
    appropriate simply to refer to that  response  in  the  AoS.  In  other
    words, the PAP response would serve as the summary grounds.  There  is,
    of course, no reason why the  Secretary  of  State  in  an  immigration
    judicial review should do more than rely on the PAP response, where she
    deems that appropriate. But, again, in the  areas  of  temporary/family
    migration/legacy etc, unless the case is being conceded or is one where
    a caseworker based at the Treasury Solicitor's offices instructs that a
    short or standard form of summary  grounds  will  serve,  the  Treasury
    Solicitor will be without instructions from the Secretary of State  and
    will not know whether the latter wishes to do more than rely on any PAP
    response she has sent the applicant.  Nevertheless, in the hypothetical
    position with which we are presently concerned, where the  Tribunal  is
    faced with deciding a judicial review application without  an  AoS  and
    summary grounds, it may well be useful for the  judge  determining  the
    application to know what, if anything, the Secretary of State has  said
    by way of her response to the PAP letter.

48.  We explored with Counsel how  the  existence  and  contents  of  a  PAP
    response could be brought to the attention of the  Tribunal.   In  many
    cases, particularly where an applicant is  professionally  represented,
    the PAP response is  included  in  the  application  bundle.   However,
    unless the applicant is asserting that the PAP response forms  part  of
    the decision challenged in the judicial review, or  is  a  document  on
    which the applicant intends to rely, rule  28  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules does not  formally  require  an  applicant  to  include  the  PAP
    response in the materials accompanying his or her application.

49.  Accordingly, the Tribunal asked  Ms  Patry  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State could, within the six week period, provide the Tribunal with  any
    PAP response made in respect of the case  in  question.   Having  taken
    instructions, Ms Patry  informed  us  that,  whilst  the  Secretary  of
    State's and Treasury Solicitor's systems did not currently enable  this
    to be done, changes to those systems could be made so  as  to  make  it
    possible.

50.  The Tribunal considers that, in the light of the problems arising  from
    the Secretary of State's current systemic inability to file AoSs within
    the required time limit, it is essential that arrangements are  put  in
    hand so that the Treasury Solicitor can, in every case, file  with  the
    Tribunal a copy of any PAP response letter  relating  to  the  judicial
    review application sent by the Secretary of  State  to  the  applicant.
    Where no response letter was sent prior to the making of  the  judicial
    review application, that fact should be communicated in writing to  the
    Tribunal.  We would emphasise that, by doing  this,  the  Secretary  of
    State would not absolve herself of the obligation to file an AoS, where
    she intends  to  contest  the  application  for  judicial  review.   In
    particular, in cases where, following the receipt of instructions  from
    the caseworker, the  Treasury  Solicitor  proposes  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State to rely on the  PAP  response  as  constituting  the
    summary grounds, that would need to be done by filing an actual AoS and
    grounds, stating as much.


(b) Immigration Factual Summary

51.  Both Mr O'Callaghan and Ms Patry  acknowledged  that  some  immigration
    judicial reviews may turn on issues of fact, about which the  Secretary
    of State has detailed knowledge.  In cases where the Secretary of State
    has made directions for the removal of the person  concerned  from  the
    United Kingdom, she is able to provide the High Court and the  Tribunal
    with an Immigration Factual Summary (IFS).   We  enquired  whether,  as
    with PAP response letters, the Treasury Solicitor  could  file  an  IFS
    with  the  Tribunal  in  every  case,  since  this  might,  in  certain
    circumstances, assist the Tribunal in considering  the  arguability  of
    challenges involving an alleged factual state of affairs.  Having taken
    instructions, Ms Patry informed us that this would not be possible  for
    technological and operational reasons.



(c) Specific direction to file AoS and summary grounds

52.  In the light of those instructions, we need to  go  back  to  a  matter
    contained in Mr Hobbs' letter of 17 January 2014 (paragraph 29  above);
    namely, that the Secretary of  State  acknowledges  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge may direct her to file an AoS and summary grounds  and  that  she
    would "of course do our best to meet that deadline (provided that  does
    not happen in every single case)."  It is,  accordingly,  necessary  to
    make some general observations regarding the circumstances in  which  a
    judge seeking to determine a permission application without the benefit
    of an AoS and summary grounds might be  expected  to  give  a  specific
    direction to the Secretary of State to file these by a specified date.

53.  The first and obvious point is that there is no  practical  utility  in
    doing so on a general basis.  As with the eight  day  period  discussed
    earlier,  any  wholesale  practice  of  making  such   directions   for
    compliance within a short timescale is likely to involve the  Secretary
    of State's non-compliance, for the  simple  reason  that  the  Treasury
    Solicitor will still be without instructions.  If, on the other hand, a
    generous time limit is set, the  rationale  underlying  Singh  and,  we
    would add, the arrangements we envisage would be  undermined.   It  is,
    accordingly, important for parties to have a general indication of  the
    circumstances in which a judge may decide to give  specific  directions
    concerning the filing of an AoS in a particular case.

54.  Our general expectation is that the only circumstances in which  it  is
    likely a judge would give such a direction is where the judicial review
    application is based on an asserted factual position, which it  appears
    the Secretary of State is in  a  position  to  confirm  or  deny.   One
    example would be where the applicant contends that he or she had extant
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  time  of  making  an
    application for variation of that leave.  In such a case, it  would  be
    appropriate to direct the filing of an AoS and summary grounds  dealing
    with that issue within, say, fourteen days.

55.  In the light of the submissions we heard, we do not consider  that,  as
    a general matter, any wider use of such specific  direction  powers  is
    likely to be  productive.   In  particular,  we  acknowledge  that  the
    Secretary of State would, at present, simply be  unable  to  cope  with
    specific directions to file an AoS in all cases where, in  the  absence
    of the AoS and summary grounds, the judge is  unable  to  categorise  a
    judicial review application as being totally without merit.

(d)  Relevance of an AoS filed late

56.  The final point to mention under  this  general  heading  concerns  the
    status of an AoS and summary grounds, filed after  the  expiry  of  the
    rule 29(1) time limit or any specific extension by the Tribunal of that
    time limit.  It is plainly an  essential  element  of  the  "six  week"
    process described above that the Upper Tribunal should engage with  any
    AoS and summary grounds filed before the end of that six  week  period.
    Where an AoS and summary grounds are filed after that time but before a
    judge comes to consider the judicial review application, Mr O'Callaghan
    very properly accepted that the interests of justice require the  judge
    to have regard to those documents.   Whether  the  Secretary  of  State
    should be entitled to the costs of preparing an AoS and summary grounds
    that are out of time, in cases where  permission  is  refused,  it  is,
    however, one of a number of costs issues that arise in  the  situations
    with which we are concerned.  We shall deal with the issue of costs  as
    a general matter later in this decision (see paragraphs 60-67).


9.  Deciding an immigration judicial review application in  the  absence  of
    an AoS and summary grounds

57.  How should an Upper Tribunal judge approach the  issue  of  whether  to
    grant permission to bring judicial review proceedings, where  there  is
    no AoS or summary grounds?  The first thing to say is that it would  be
    inappropriate to grant permission merely  because  of  the  absence  of
    those documents,  whether  by  way  of  "punishing"  that  failure,  or
    otherwise.  The judge must engage with the issue on the basis  of  such
    materials he or she has, including any PAP response letter (see above).
     The rationale underpinning the decision effectively to  transfer  from
    the High Court to the Upper Tribunal the great majority of  immigration
    judicial  reviews  is  that  this  Chamber's  judiciary  has   relevant
    expertise.  This means the parties should expect the Tribunal to  apply
    its specialist knowledge of the relevant legislation, policies and case
    law.

58.  We have seen from the judgment in Singh that, amongst the responses  of
    High Court judges and deputies to the Secretary of State's  failure  to
    serve an AoS, had been to adjourn  the  permission  application  to  be
    decided at a hearing.  So far as this Chamber is concerned, we  do  not
    consider that, absent exceptional circumstances, such a course would be
    appropriate merely because the Secretary of State has failed to file an
    AoS.  It is important to bear in mind that the judge, at this stage, is
    dealing only with the arguability of the judicial  review  application.
    The grant of permission is not a final determination of the legality of
    the decision under challenge. Notwithstanding what we have  said  about
    the Tribunal's expertise, it must be recognised that the absence of  an
    AoS and summary grounds may result  in  permission  to  bring  judicial
    review  proceedings  being  granted  when,  had  those   grounds   been
    available, permission would have  been  refused.   Similarly,  a  judge
    refusing permission in the absence of an AoS and  summary  grounds  may
    decline to categorise the judicial review application as being  totally
    without merit (thereby precluding the possibility of oral renewal:  see
    rule 30(4A)), when the  availability  of  summary  grounds  would  have
    persuaded the judge that the application totally lacked merit.

59.  We have noted earlier the absence from the Upper Tribunal  Rules  of  a
    specific requirement, following grant,  for  the  respondent  to  serve
    detailed grounds  of  defence.   In  practice,  following  a  grant  of
    permission, the Tribunal invariably  makes  directions  under  rule  5,
    which include the filing of what are, in  practice,  detailed  grounds.
    The normal time period for filing such grounds is 35  days,  which  the
    parties before us on 20 January were agreed was  satisfactory.   As  in
    the High Court, an applicant who has been granted permission  would  be
    expected to reconsider whether to continue with  the  judicial  review,
    following receipt of detailed grounds from the respondent.


10.  Costs issues

60.  As can be seen from what we have just said, the  Secretary  of  State's
    failure to comply with the Upper Tribunal Rules regarding filing of the
    AoS and summary grounds raises various questions concerning  the  issue
    of costs.  Three particular situations arise:-

    (a)  Permission to bring judicial review proceedings is refused on  the
         papers but not recorded as "totally without merit".  The permission
         application is renewed pursuant to rule 30(4) but the Tribunal,  at
         the resulting hearing, finds that, had the  arguments  advanced  by
         the Secretary of State at that hearing been put in summary  grounds
         of defence, the  application  would  have  been  refused  as  being
         totally without merit;


    (b)  Permission to bring judicial review proceedings is granted but, in
         the light of the Secretary  of  State's  detailed  grounds,  it  is
         evident that -  had  those  grounds  found  expression  in  summary
         grounds of defence  - permission would not have been granted; and


    (c)  Whether, in any event, the Secretary of State should  be  entitled
         to the whole or part of her costs in preparing an AoS  and  summary
         grounds, which are served late.

61.  Ms Patry rightly accepted that, in the case  of  situation  (a)  above,
    the Secretary of State would, as a general matter, be vulnerable to  an
    application  by  the  unsuccessful  judicial   review   applicant   for
    reimbursement of his or her costs in connection with the  oral  renewal
    hearing.  Whilst the decision  would,  of  course,  be  for  the  judge
    conducting the hearing, one  can  readily  see  that,  save  where  the
    judicial review application was particularly egregious,  the  Secretary
    of State's failure to file an AoS may  well  have  such  adverse  costs
    implications for her.

62.  As regards  situation  (b),  Ms  Patry,  again  in  our  view  rightly,
    accepted that the applicant's costs, incurred up to the point at  which
    the Secretary of State's detailed grounds were filed, would  ordinarily
    be payable by the Secretary of State.

63.  So far as situation (c) is concerned, we have already stated  that  the
    interests of justice require  the  Tribunal  to  consider  an  AoS  and
    summary grounds, albeit served late, if they are filed before the judge
    makes a decision on permission to bring  judicial  review  proceedings.
    Ordinarily, the Secretary of State could expect to be  the  beneficiary
    of an order from the Tribunal, pursuant to rule  10,  that  she  should
    receive  from  an  unsuccessful  applicant  the  reasonable  costs   of
    preparing the AoS and accompanying documentation.  Should the  position
    be different where the Secretary of State has failed to serve  the  AoS
    etc. within the period of six weeks from the date  of  service  on  her
    (and thus outside the rule 29(1) time limit)?

64.  Mr O'Callaghan's submissions were  to  the  effect  that  the  Tribunal
    should adopt a "robust approach" to the issue of costs, in the wake  of
    the so-called Jackson reforms  to  the  CPR[2],  as  evidenced  in  the
    judgments of the Court of Appeal in Mitchell v  News  Group  Newspapers
    Limited [2013] EWCA Civ 1537.  In effect, Mr O'Callaghan's  submissions
    were that, as happened in Mitchell,  the  costs  which  a  party  would
    normally expect to receive should be withheld as punishment for failing
    to comply with the relevant Rules; in our case, the  rule  relating  to
    filing an AoS and summary grounds.

65.  Whilst the matter is, of course, one for individual  judges  to  decide
    in the exercise of their discretion, we are not for our part  persuaded
    by Mr O'Callaghan's submissions on this issue.   We  say  this  despite
    Hickinbottom J's observation at [27] of Singh that "the spirit  of  the
    Jackson reforms apply to public law cases as much  as  to  private  law
    claims".  Those reforms do not, however, extend to the costs regime  in
    the Upper Tribunal, whose rules are framed in terms unlike those  found
    in the CPR, and where even the principle of "costs shifting" is  in  no
    sense universal.

66.  In any event, it is not apparent why, having accepted  the  reality  of
    the Secretary of State's current inability to meet relevant time limits
    in a significant proportion of immigration judicial reviews and  having
    acknowledged the steps being taken by her to deal with  that  state  of
    affairs, the Tribunal should then routinely penalise the  Secretary  of
    State in costs, where the result of her failure has not been either  to
    cause a permission hearing to be held, which would otherwise have  been
    unnecessary (situation (a) above) or to cause permission to be granted,
    when it would not otherwise have been (situation (b) above).

67.  Accordingly, as a general matter, we would not regard either a  failure
    to file an AoS within the 21 days allowed by rule 29(1) or,  indeed,  a
    failure to file within the six week period discussed  above  as  itself
    constituting a reason to refuse to make an order  that  the  reasonable
    costs of preparing the AoS etc. should be recoverable by the  Secretary
    of State from the unsuccessful applicant.   Where,  however,  situation
    (a) or (b) above has arisen, the costs of the AoS etc. will be subsumed
    in the wider issues we have discussed in paragraphs 61 and 62 above.


11. Summary of new general arrangements

68. We summarise the new general arrangements as follows:

 (1)   The  Tribunal  will,  in  immigration  judicial  reviews,  regard  an
    Acknowledgement of Service filed within six weeks  of  service  of  the
    claim on the Secretary of State as falling routinely for  consideration
    and will not undertake an initial consideration of the judicial  review
    application before the end of that six week period.

 (2)  The Tribunal  will  undertake  a  consideration  of  that  application
    earlier than the end of the period mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)  above
    ("the six week period"):-

       (a)    where the Tribunal considers it  appropriate  to  do  so,  in
       response to:-


            (i) an  application  for  urgent  consideration  filed  by  the
           applicant (on Form T483); or


            (ii) a notice in writing from  the  applicant,  copied  to  the
           Secretary of State, which states the need for  urgency  and  the
           proposed timescale for considering the application; and


       (b)  in response  to  a  request  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for
       expedition, pursuant to an arrangement between her and  the  Chamber
       President.


 (3)  Where a stay on removal or other form of interim injunctive relief  is
    sought, an application for urgent consideration on Form  T483  must  be
    made, complying with Practice Directions 11 and 12 and  accompanied  by
    any requisite fee.

(4)   In view of paragraphs  (1)  and  (2)  above,  the  Tribunal  will  not
    consider it necessary for the  Secretary  of  State  to  apply  for  an
    extension of the 21 day time limit in rule 29(1), unless she  considers
    she is unable to file an AoS and summary grounds before the  expiry  of
    the six week period. In such a case, the Secretary of State  must  make
    an application for extension  of  time,  on  72  hours  notice  to  the
    applicant, which satisfies the requirements set out by  Hickinbottom  J
    at [25] of Singh; that is to say,  there  must  be  compelling  reasons
    specific to the case as to why further time is needed, together with  a
    firm promise as to when the AoS and summary grounds will be filed.  The
    application should include the judicial review applicant's response (or
    lack of response) to the application for extension of time.

(5)  The Secretary of State should not make an application for an  extension
    of time for filing an AoS, which she knows cannot satisfy  the  'Singh'
    requirements.

(6)   In every case, not later than the end of  the  six  week  period,  the
    Secretary of State will be expected to  file  with  the  Tribunal  (and
    serve on the applicant) either a copy of the written  response  of  the
    Secretary of State to the applicant's  pre-action  protocol  letter  or
    written confirmation that no such written  response  was  sent  to  the
    applicant. This requirement does not absolve  the  Secretary  of  State
    from filing an AoS and summary grounds, where she wishes to  take  part
    in the proceedings.

(7)   Except as provided in paragraph (2) above or where  time  is  extended
    in response to an application by the Secretary of State  for  extension
    of time, the parties can expect the Tribunal to consider  the  judicial
    review application at any time after the expiry of the six week period.
    This will be so, whether or not an AoS and summary  grounds  have  been
    filed, unless the judge considering the application is of the view that
    there are particular reasons (such as potentially  significant  factual
    matters) why the Secretary of State should be specifically directed  to
    file an AoS and summary grounds.

(8)  As a general matter, the Secretary of State will be  vulnerable  to  an
    application for costs in respect of an oral hearing  held  pursuant  to
    rule 30(4) made by an unsuccessful judicial review applicant, where:-

        (a) the  application  to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings  was
       refused on the papers without the benefit  of  an  AoS  and  summary
       grounds; and


        (b) the Tribunal  considers  that,  had  those  grounds  then  been
       available, the application would have been recorded as being totally
       without merit.

(9)  Where permission was granted without the benefit of an AoS and  summary
    grounds, the Secretary of State will ordinarily be liable  to  pay  the
    applicant's costs, up to  the  point  when  the  Secretary  of  State's
    detailed grounds are filed, regardless of  the  ultimate  fate  of  the
    judicial review application.

12.  Commencement and duration of new general arrangements

69.  As  from  6  March  2014,  the  Chamber  will  apply  the  new  general
    arrangements in the following proceedings:

        (a) all immigration judicial review applications made to the  Upper
        Tribunal on or after that date: and


        (b) all immigration judicial review applications made to  the  High
        Court on or after that date, which are  transferred  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal pursuant to section 31A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.

70.  The Chamber will keep these arrangements  under  regular  review.  They
    are intended to be a temporary response to what has been  presented  by
    the Secretary of State as a temporary systemic  problem  affecting  her
    ability to comply with the relevant  requirements  of  the  Rules.  The
    Secretary of State will be  expected  to  keep  the  Chamber  President
    informed of any developments or other changes in the situation. By  the
    same token, those acting for applicants should make the President aware
    of any relevant issues concerning the new general arrangements.
                               Signed   [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
-----------------------
[1] From 17 October 2011 to 31 October 2013, the Upper Tribunal had
jurisdiction to decide certain immigration judicial reviews involving fresh
claims (paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules).
[2] See Review of Civil Litigation Costs: Final Report (December 2009).

