
[pic]


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


R (on the application of Muzzana Munir Baloch) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00103(IAC)

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             5 December 2013

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Between

                                  the queen

                            ON THE application OF

                            muzzana munir baloch

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

For the applicant: Mr A Jafar, instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

For the respondent: Mr P Halliday, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1.  JUDGE  allen:  This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the
    decisions of the respondent of 12 October, 26 October  and  28  October
    2011 refusing to treat further representations made by the applicant as
    a fresh claim and maintaining her  decision  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom.

Background

2.   The applicant is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   According  to  Home  Office
    records she and her husband Muhammad Iqbal  Rahi  applied  together  in
    person for visitors' visas to the United Kingdom, on 14 November  2010.
    The applicant was issued with a six month visa and entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 27 December 2010 with her two sons. On 10 January  2011  she
    attended with her children at the Asylum Screening Unit in Croydon  and
    claimed asylum, subsequently attending  a  screening  interview  on  26
    January and a substantive asylum interview on 8 February.

3.   Her application for asylum was refused  on  18  February  2011  on  the
    basis first that she was married to Muhammad Rahi and not  Amjad  Iqbal
    (the latter being her husband's name, according to her) and that in any
    event she failed all stages of the test in the country guidance case of
    SN and HM [2004] UKIAT 00283, on the basis that she  had  not  shown  a
    real risk of harm from her husband or, even if there were such a  risk,
    alternatively she had not shown there was no effective  protection  for
    her in her home area,  or  in  the  alternative  she  could  reasonably
    relocate elsewhere in Pakistan.

4.   Her appeal against this decision was heard  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on 11 April 2011. The applicant was not  represented  before  the
    judge. Her claim in essence is summarised at paragraphs 21 to 23 of the
    judge's determination. She said that she had  married  Amjad  Iqbal  in
    2000 in an arranged marriage. After the birth of their second child  in
    2004 her husband began to beat her every time she asked him for  money.
    She went to her father but he could not intervene as  her  husband  was
    considered to be entitled to do what he  wanted.  However,  her  father
    began to pay all her expenses for  the  house  and  the  children.  Her
    husband left his job and continued to ask her for money  and  beat  her
    when she refused and also used to beat the children.  Her  father  died
    in 2009 and then her in-laws threw her out so she moved to her father's
    house. She said that she lived in the house on her  own  with  her  two
    children after her father died and there were no other  family  members
    there.  She was asked how she managed for money and she  said  she  had
    rented out part of her house to tenants so she  was  not  there  alone.
    She would sell jewellery whenever she needed money.  Eventually she had
    run out of money and her  friends  arranged  for  an  agent  to  obtain
    passports and visas for her and the children and on a day in  2010  the
    agent took her and the children  to  be  fingerprinted  and  there  was
    another man there who was also fingerprinted. Passports were  obtained,
    the house was sold and she paid the agent  some  11  lakhs  rupees  and
    brought the rest to the United Kingdom. She did not  tell  her  husband
    that she was leaving.

5.   The judge noted that on inspection  her  Pakistani  passport  had  been
    found to be genuine and consequently this was regarded  as  undermining
    her claim that an agent "made" her passport for her. He also noted  the
    fact that although she claimed her husband's full name was Amjad Iqbal,
    her passport  named her  husband as  Muhammad Iqbal Rahi. Her  evidence
    was that she did not complain to the police at  any  time  because  she
    would have suffered more beatings.  During the eighteen months when she
    lived at her father's house her husband knew that she was living  there
    and the judge noted that at no time did she  come  to  any  harm  while
    there.  She said she could not seek the protection  of  the  police  in
    Pakistan because they were "useless" and would  only  help  people  who
    gave them money.

6.   In his determination the  judge  said  that  he  did  not  consider  it
    necessary to embark upon a detailed analysis of the evidence as to  the
    current  domestic  violence   situation   in   Pakistan   because   the
    determinative issue in the appeal was not  what  could  happen  to  the
    applicant if her story were true but whether it  was  true.   He  found
    that it was not. He found her evidence to be discrepant and that in any
    event, even if her account was true, she was not  entitled  to  refugee
    status.

7.   He said that on her evidence she was living for  eighteen  months  away
    from her husband with her two children in a house that  had  previously
    belonged to her father, located some twenty minutes walk from where her
    husband was living. She came to no harm while living  there  and  there
    was a police station in the locality where she  could  seek  protection
    from her husband if necessary but had not done so. He  considered  that
    she added to her claim at the hearing in claiming  that  she  had  also
    lived in fear of her in-laws and he did not accept that to be  credible
    given the late stage at which it was mentioned. He considered  that  if
    she were genuinely in fear of her husband and in-laws there was no need
    for her to leave Pakistan and she could have sought  protection  there.
    The money she claimed to have raised from the sale of the  house  would
    have enabled her to relocate comfortably  in  various  other  parts  of
    Pakistan.  He did not accept that she had used an  agent  to  obtain  a
    passport  and visa as they were obtained, using a genuine passport,  at
    the Embassy and he was satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that
    her husband was the person named in her passport and not the person she
    claimed. He dismissed her appeal.

8.   Various sets of further submissions were  sent  in  subsequently  after
    the applicant become appeal rights exhausted on 18  May  2011.  Further
    submissions including photographs and other documents were  sent  on  2
    July 2011 and in a letter responding to  this  on  8  August  2011  the
    respondent decided that these further submissions did not amount  to  a
    fresh claim. Further submissions were sent  on  5  September  2011  and
    again not accepted as amounting to a fresh claim, on 16 September 2011.
     Further submissions were sent on 15 September 2011 receiving a similar
    response on 12 October 2011, as was the case also with a  letter  which
    also served as a Pre-action Protocol letter sent on 18 October 2011 and
    responded to on 26 October 2011.  On 28  October  2011  the  respondent
    served removal directions on the applicant.  She issued her  claim  for
    judicial review on 7 November 2011 and the respondent as a  consequence
    cancelled the removal directions.

9.   The further submissions of 2 July 2011 included a  letter  from  Asylum
    Justice, copies of visa application  details  for  the  applicant,  her
    children and Muhammad Iqbal  Rahi,  five  photographs,  a  letter  from
    Muhammad Usman Malik of 16 June 2011 together with a photocopy of an ID
    card entitled "Punjab Bar Council" and a  letter  entitled  "Affidavit"
    from Hafiz Muhammad Syed Akthar.

10.  The respondent referred to the Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702  guidance
    and also  the  principles  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  in
    assessing the documentation.  As regards the photographs, it was  noted
    that they were not dated and were submitted some eight months after the
    asylum claim, and no reasonable explanation had been provided as to how
    the applicant came to be in possession of them or  indeed  of  the  two
    letters from people who confirmed that they  had  participated  in  the
    marriage ceremony of the applicant and Amjad Iqbal.  It was noted  that
    no evidence had been provided that these people were who  they  claimed
    to be or indeed that they attended the applicant's wedding ceremony  as
    she claimed.

11.  Reference was  made  to  what  had  been  said  by  the  judge  in  his
    determination that the marriage certificate was a document  that  could
    be obtained easily and he noted it  was  obtained  shortly  before  the
    hearing and he found it, having considered the evidence in  the  round,
    not to be credible. The letter from Asylum Justice contained assertions
    by the applicant that she was indeed married to Amjad  Iqbal  and  that
    the photograph of the man shown on the visa application was clearly not
    the man shown in the photographs she had submitted.  Consideration  was
    also given by the decision-maker to Article 8 issues in  the  light  of
    the Razgar test, including assessing the position of the children under
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

12.   Attached  to  the  letter  of  5  September  2011  were  a  number  of
    photocopies  including  photocopies  of  certificates  from   a   child
    specialist and a school principal, a certificate from Silver Lining, an
    Addiction and Psychological Treatment Centre, a photocopy  of  a  fatwa
    against the applicant, three photocopies of ID cards for Mohammed Usman
    Malik, photocopies of  birth  certificates  for  GM  and  AK  (the  two
    children) along with translations and a photocopy  of  a  passport  for
    Iqbal Amjad.  There was also  a  photocopy  of  the  Daily  Aftab  Ahur
    Newspaper with three missing people extracts  along  with  translations
    which stated that the applicant's husband had placed the adverts as she
    and the children went missing on 27 December 2010.

13.  With regard to this last document the  decision  maker  commented  that
    the original document had not been provided, the photocopies  had  been
    pieced together instead of displaying the original  articles  in  their
    original format and the translations did not provide any details of the
    translator or  indeed  of  his  qualifications.  The  letter  from  the
    principal of the school referred to the children  and  said  that  they
    were mentally disturbed due to their father being addicted to drugs and
    that he used to beat their mother.  It was noted that this document was
    dated 10 August 2010,  some  four  months  before  the  applicant  left
    Pakistan and the comment was made that no  reasonable  explanation  had
    been given as to why there was a delay  in  producing  it  and  it  was
    issued over a year ago and the original had not been  provided.

14.  In the letter from Dr Amir, a child specialist  who  said  he  was  the
    family doctor of Amjad Iqbal and his  family,  it  was  said  that  the
    applicant brought AK to him and he had to treat him  for  his  injuries
    and said that "his father beats him when he was addicted to drugs".  It
    was commented that this letter was dated 25 April  2010,  nearly  eight
    months before the claim to asylum in the United Kingdom, and again  the
    comment was made that she had not provided any  reasonable  explanation
    for the  delay  in  producing  this  document  or  why  indeed  it  was
    requested.

15.   As  regards  the  letter  from  "Silver  Lining",  an  addiction   and
    psychological centre in Sheikhupura, which said  that  Mr  Amjad  Iqbal
    remained under treatment there from 3 June 2010 to 25 May 2011 and  was
    admitted to the hospital from 22 March 2011 to 25 May 2011, the comment
    was made that this was a photocopy.

16.  As regards the letter from Malik Muhammad Ramzam  of  15  May  2010  in
    which it was stated that Mr Amjad Iqbal "beats his  wife  and  children
    very badly", the age of this document and the fact that  it  was  dated
    seven months before the applicant claimed  asylum  was  noted  and  the
    comment was again made that no reasonable explanation for the delay  in
    producing it or how she came to be in possession of it had been  given.
    The absence of the originals was also  noted.

17.  As regards the fatwa, which was said to be  a  response  to  a  request
    from Amjad Iqbal, stating that the applicant should be punished in  the
    presence of her children and people  in  the  vicinity  and  stoned  to
    death, it was noted that it was a photocopy and  there  was  no  detail
    provided as to who had translated it and the translation was incomplete
    and information appeared to  be  missing  which  was  included  in  the
    original document. It was said  with  regard  to  the  photocopy  birth
    certificates for AK and GM that  no  reasonable  explanation  had  been
    provided as to how the applicant had come to be in possession  of  them
    and why she was not able to produce them previously.   As  regards  the
    copy provided of what appeared to be a passport for Amjad Iqbal it  was
    said that she had not provided any explanation as to how she  would  be
    in possession of this, bearing in mind that her husband on her  account
    had filed a missing persons reports for her and the  children  and  had
    obtained a religious decree against her.

18.  Taking all these matters together the decision  maker  again  concluded
    that they did not bear out the claim that the applicant's  husband  was
    Amjad Iqbal and it was not accepted that the  documents  together  with
    the previously considered material would create a realistic prospect of
    success before a First-tier Judge.

19.  The further submissions of 15 September 2011  included  some  documents
    that had been previously  sent  and  otherwise  included  a  number  of
    photographs, but the comment was made that none of them  was  dated  or
    indeed clearly stated who the people photographed  in  them  were,  why
    they had not been submitted previously or how the applicant had come to
    be in possession of them.  With regard  to  progress  reports  for  her
    sons, it  was  noted  that  the  father's  name  was  written  slightly
    differently and no explanation had been given as to how  the  applicant
    came to be in possession of the documents.

20.  The final set of submissions of 18 October 2011 contained a  number  of
    internet articles with regard to the background situation  in  Pakistan
    and a letter addressed to  the  police  station  at  Sheikhupura.   The
    letter states that Amjad Iqbal is married to Munaza  Munir  Baloch  and
    they have two sons and the wife and children have disappeared since  27
    December 2010. It is commented that no  details  are  provided  of  the
    person who did the translation or any details of their  qualifications,
    nor had any explanation been given as to why, although the  letter  was
    dated 9 January 2011, the applicant had come to be in possession of it.
     It was said to have been sent by Amjad Iqbal to  the  police  but  the
    applicant had provided, it was said, no reasonable explanation or proof
    regarding how it had then been sent to her, bearing in  mind  that  she
    had claimed her  husband  did  not  know  where  she  was.   Background
    evidence concerning false documents in Pakistan and the  high levels of
    corruption there were also referred to.

21.  It was also  noted  that  the  applicant  stated  in  relation  to  the
    documents predating her claim that they were prepared and  sent  to  an
    international NGO working for the welfare of women in Karachi  who  had
    been contacted to get help for the applicant before  she  fled  to  the
    United Kingdom and she said that a friend  of  hers  had  received  the
    documents from the NGO and sent them to  her  and  that  explained  the
    delay in their submission. It was commented that she had  not  provided
    the name of the NGO nor had she mentioned any contact with  an  NGO  at
    any previous stage, and reference was made to question 67 of her asylum
    interview where she said there was no support for women in Pakistan  in
    her situation.  Again this evidence was regarded as taking  matters  no
    further.

22.  The applicant issued the judicial  review  application  on  7  November
    2011, challenging the decision that the applicant's passport  had  been
    genuinely obtained, referring in some detail to the  evidence  provided
    and  also  making  points  in  respect  of  internal   relocation   and
    protection.  Permission to apply was refused on the papers by Geraldine
    Andrews QC, but subsequently after an oral hearing Judge Latter of  the
    Upper Tribunal granted permission on the basis that arguably there  had
    been a lack of anxious scrutiny in the  respondent's  consideration  of
    the cumulative effect of the documents relied on.

The Law

23.  The test to be applied in a fresh claim case such as  this  is  whether
    the respondent's view that the further submissions, taken together with
    the previously considered material, did not create a realistic prospect
    of  the  applicant  succeeding   before   a   First-tier   Judge,   was
    irrational/Wednesbury unreasonable bearing in mind the need for anxious
    scrutiny.


Discussion

24.  An issue that  clearly  concerned  the  judge  in  this  case  and  has
    continued to be a relevant issue was the fact that the applicant had  a
    Pakistani passport naming her husband as Muhammad Iqbal Rahi whereas at
    interview she said  her  husband's  full  name  was  Amjad  Iqbal.   At
    interview she said that she obtained the passport with  the  assistance
    of an agent and one day she and her children went to a place  with  the
    agent and there was another man there who was also fingerprinted.   She
    said that these were the only passports she had ever had.  Her passport
    has been assessed and found to be  a  genuine  Pakistani  passport,  as
    noted by the judge at paragraph 26 of his determination.

25.  On behalf of the applicant it is argued by Mr Jafar that  the  passport
    was  fraudulently  obtained.  He  refers  to  such  documents  as   the
    applicant's children's birth certificates  and  the  family  tree  data
    registered with NADRA as containing genuine information. The  applicant
    has also produced photographs purporting to show her and her husband at
    their wedding.

26.  With regard to these matters the respondent argues that the  fact  that
    the passport has been found to be genuine contradicts  the  applicant's
    assertion that it was "made" by an agent for remuneration. It is  noted
    that she and Mohammed Iqbal Rahi applied together in person at  the  UK
    Visa Application Centre for a visa to the United Kingdom. At  interview
    she had been asked whether she could provide any  evidence  to  support
    her contention that her husband was Amjad Iqbal and she said she  would
    try to obtain such evidence from her friend in Pakistan.  This was  not
    done at the hearing but later on in July 2011 or subsequently.

27.  The respondent makes the point that  many  of  the  new  documents  now
    produced such as purported testimonies from a doctor and a head teacher
    predate the original asylum application but were  not  provided  either
    when that application was made or when the applicant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Judge.

28.  The explanation for the late production of the documents was that  they
    were being held for her by an NGO, and there was provided a certificate
    dated 15 October 2011 from the Nabi Pura Community Board  stating  that
    the applicant contacted them and asked for protection from her  husband
    and verifying that she handed over all documents to them which had been
    submitted subsequently to her representative through her  friend.   The
    respondent makes the point that this was not an explanation provided by
    the applicant earlier and the likelihood is questioned of the applicant
    handing over documentation to an NGO just before  moving to the  United
    Kingdom to claim asylum.  Mr Jafar on the other hand argued that it was
    a perfectly credible thing to do bearing in  mind  the  difficulty  she
    could face if documents naming as her husband a different man from  the
    man the passport said was her husband were found on her  arrival.   The
    applicant had produced to the judge a copy of  a  marriage  certificate
    but he found it lacked credibility, noting that such documents could be
    obtained easily and it was obtained shortly  before  the  hearing.  The
    respondent makes the point that the applicant therefore had  a  history
    of producing forged documentation.  Reference is made to the Country of
    Origin Information Report (COIR) for Pakistan  attesting  to  the  ease
    with which forgery of documents in Pakistan is done.

29.  A number of photographs have been provided. The applicant  argues  that
    these bear out her contention that  she  is  married  to  Amjad  Iqbal,
    noting among other things the fact that clearly the  man  she  is  seen
    next to in the wedding photographs is not the man whose  photograph  is
    to be found with the visa application documentation. The respondent  on
    the other hand argues that there is no sensible and reliable way to  be
    sure of the identity of the people in the photographs or  whether  they
    are indeed attending the applicant's wedding ceremony  or  whether  the
    people pictured are indeed the applicant and Amjad  Iqbal  and  whether
    they are bride and groom as opposed to, for example, friends.

30.  Mr Halliday has argued that if the pictures at, for  example,  254  and
    263B are supposed to be the applicant and her husband at a wedding then
    they  are  differently  dressed  in  the  two  photographs  and  indeed
    differently dressed again in the top photograph at 263B.  He  has  also
    suggested  that  there  is  an  element  of  artificiality  about   the
    photographs at 263B and suggests a possibility  that  one  picture  has
    been superimposed upon another.

31.  Mr Jafar points to evidence concerning the Pakistan  National  Database
    Central  Registration  Authority  (NADRA)  which  is  described  in   a
    Wikipedia   article   as   being   an   independent   autonomous    and
    constitutionally established institution of the Government of  Pakistan
    that performs government databases and statically manages the sensitive
    registration database of all the national citizens of Pakistan.  It  is
    said that all the databases are kept in extreme secrecy and security to
    ensure the safety of the citizens' databases and  that  the  government
    has shifted all its existing records of national identity cards to  the
    central computerised database managed by NADRA.

32.  Mr Jafar points to the NADRA birth certificates  of  the  children,  GM
    and AK naming the parents as the applicant and Amjad Iqbal. Mr Halliday
    has made the point than the Wikipedia page was not before the Secretary
    of State when she made her decisions and the  correspondence  from  the
    applicant's representatives to NADRA  begins  with  the  letter  of  10
    November 2011, postdating  the  most  recent  decision  letter  of  the
    respondent.  Mr Jafar argues that the respondent was requested to  make
    enquiries of NADRA, in letters that were  written  to  her  before  the
    decision letters were made.  Mr Halliday responds that there is no duty
    on the Secretary of State to  investigate.  In  this  regard  Mr  Jafar
    relies on what was said by the Upper Tribunal in  MJ  [2013]  UKUT  253
    (IAC), referring  in  light  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  to  the  existence  of
    particular cases where it may be appropriate for the respondent to make
    enquiries, for  example  where  verification  would  be  easy  and  the
    documentation came from an unimpeachable source.

33.  I do not consider however that it is properly arguable that it  is  for
    the Secretary of State to make the  applicant's  case.  Ultimately  the
    applicant made her own enquiries of  NADRA  as  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect her to do, and that evidence was  provided.   The  primary  duty
    must be on a litigant to put forward his or her case as best  she  can,
    rather than expecting the respondent to do it for her.

34.  Taking as a separate issue for the moment the question  of  whether  or
    not the respondent was  entitled  to  continue  to  conclude  that  the
    applicant was in fact married  to  Mohammed  Iqbal  rather  than  Amjad
    Iqbal, I consider that it was open  to  her  to  conclude  as  she  did
    without irrationality or any other public law error.  The  points  made
    in the various decision letters about the lack of any explanation as to
    why documentation was not provided earlier and as to the  circumstances
    in which documentation  was  obtained  in  this  regard  are  of  clear
    relevance and force.

35.  Aligned to this point is the question of the documentation which it  is
    said was being held by  an  NGO  for  the  applicant  and  subsequently
    forwarded to her. This, it is relevant to note, was not an  explanation
    that  was  provided  by  the  applicant  either  at  the  time  of  her
    application or at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the  judge.   The
    respondent was entitled to be concerned at the failure to mention  this
    before, and to note  its  dissonance  with  the  applicant's  claim  at
    interview that there was no protection to be  had  in  Pakistan,  which
    does not sit very well with her  claim  in  fact  to  have  sought  the
    support of the NGO.

36.  It is relevant also to note the alternative finding of the  judge  that
    even if the story were true the applicant would not face a real risk on
    return.  As he noted, on her  evidence  she  was  living  for  eighteen
    months away from her husband with her two children in a house which had
    previously belonged to her father, some twenty minutes walk  away  from
    where her husband was living and that she came to no harm whilst living
    there. These conclusions are borne out by  the  account  given  by  the
    applicant at interview, and were taken into account by  the  respondent
    in coming to her conclusions.

37.  It is relevant to point out, as did Mr Halliday,  that,  building  upon
    what was said in the decision  letters,  no  credible  explanation  has
    been given for the applicant's ability to produce such documents as the
    fatwa, provided to Amjad Iqbal, bearing in mind her claim that she fled
    Pakistan and was hiding from him, and the same point is made in respect
    of the certificate from the Silver Lining Addiction  and  Psychological
    Treatment Centre concerning Amjad Iqbal and also Amjad  Iqbal's  letter
    to the police of 9 January 2011 reporting the disappearance of his wife
    and children. As has been said on behalf of the Secretary of State,  it
    is difficult to see how the applicant could obtain possession  of  such
    documents which were written to or could be seen to be private to Amjad
    Iqbal.

38.  Bringing all these matters together, I consider the respondent has  not
    been shown to have failed to apply anxious  scrutiny  to  the  previous
    materials and the further submissions and that, as  a  consequence,  no
    irrationality in her decision has been identified.  In  particular  she
    was entitled to attach weight to the judge's determination, to the lack
    of explanation for the applicant's ability to produce documents such as
    the Treatment Centre certificate, the fatwa and Amjad Iqbal's letter to
    the police of 9 January 2011, the lack of  a  satisfactory  explanation
    concerning the documents said to have been held by the NGO, the  timing
    of the production of documents generally and  the  concerns  about  the
    photographs.

39.  Accordingly I conclude that the respondent  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the fresh material taken with the previously  considered  material
    did not create a realistic prospect  of  success  before  the  putative
    First-tier Judge. For the sake of completeness it is relevant to   note
    that I agree with the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    concerning protection and relocation.  The respondent properly attached
    weight to the judge's conclusions about lack of risk  of  harm  to  the
    applicant during the  eighteen  months  when  she  was  living  in  her
    father's house. These are however secondary issues bearing in mind as I
    have concluded above that the respondent was  entitled  not  to  accept
    that the further evidence showed that the applicant was married to  the
    man she has claimed to be married to and as a consequence  was  not  at
    risk from her husband.


Conclusion

40.  I therefore  refuse  to  grant  judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
    decisions in this case.



Costs

41.  It was common ground at the hearing that the outcome  of  the  decision
    would determine the issue of costs.  The  normal  rule  is  that  costs
    follow the event, and accordingly I order  the  applicant  to  pay  the
    respondent's costs, to be assessed if not agreed.
