
KF (Removal directions and statelessness) Iran [2005] UKIAT 00109
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  19 November 2004
                                                          and 1st March 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  07/06/2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                              Mrs L H S Verity

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT




                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer; Mr P
                 Patel at the resumed hearing.
For the Respondent:    Mr J C Shah, instructed by Dozie & Co; Mr E Pipi at
                 the resumed hearing.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
     of an Adjudicator, Ms P Lingam, promulgated on  26  March  2004.   She
     allowed the Claimant's appeal on the basis of what were  described  as
     two preliminary issues:  the Claimant's alleged statelessness and  the
     invalidity of the removal directions.

  2. The Claimant sought asylum in the United Kingdom  in  September  2003,
     not long after he entered illegally  from  Turkey.   (The  Adjudicator
     notes entry as being a year earlier, but that must be an error judging
     by the interview material and his claim to have left after the fall of
     Saddam Hussein.)  He was born in 1972 in Iran.   He  and  his  parents
     were captured in  1976,  when  he  was  aged  four,  by  Iraqi  forces
     attacking Iran.  They ended up in a camp  in  Iraq  where  his  father
     died.  He started  working  when  he  was  fifteen  and  when  he  was
     eighteen, the  Iraqi  authorities  issued  him  with  a  green  paper,
     renewable annually.  After the fall of Saddam Hussein,  the  camp  was
     attacked by local people because of their Kurdish ethnicity.   He  and
     his family fled to Baghdad, where they hid until he left  in  fear  of
     his life.

  3. There was no  dispute  about  the  claim  of  birth  in  Iran  or  the
     circumstances which led to the Claimant being in Iraq.  Since the  end
     of the Iran-Iraq war, there  have  been  disputed  nationality  issues
     between the two countries arising from  the  many  refugees  in  their
     territories.

  4. The Claimant said that he was no longer a citizen of Iran and objected
     to his removal there, and continued that he could not be  returned  to
     Iraq because he was a refugee from Iraq.  The Secretary  of  State  in
     his refusal letter of 4 November 2003 pointed out  that  many  Iranian
     refugees had returned from Iraq, that many formal papers  relating  to
     birth or marriage issued in Iraq were recognised   by  Iran  and  that
     there were many Iranians Kurds who lived in the Kurdish areas of Iraq.

  5. The Secretary of State refused asylum, said that his removal would not
     be contrary to the ECHR and sent a Notice of Decision which  included,
     against  the  side  note  "Removal  Directions"  the  statement   that
     "Directions will be given for your removal from the United Kingdom  to
     Iran".

  6. The Adjudicator described the  endeavours  made  by  the  Claimant  to
     obtain Iranian nationality papers.  These appear  only  to  have  been
     made after this refusal.  His letter to the Iranian Embassy  dated  19
     January 2004, though headed, at least in  translation,  "Visa  Entry",
     makes it clear that the Claimant is seeking to return for good to  the
     country where he was born, and has no documents or other  nationality.
     It also described briefly how he came to be in Iraq and said that  his
     parents had Iranian nationality and papers.  He had filled in the visa
     application form with which he was issued  and  said  on  it  that  he
     wanted to stay for good.

  7. Neither we, nor the Adjudicator so far as we can see from the file  of
     material before her, had the  complete  form.   There  may  have  been
     questions about the parents' nationality which are on the  part  which
     we do not have.  But the Claimant,  although  answering  the  question
     about his birthplace by writing "Iran", simply put a line through  the
     place for  answers  to  the  questions  as  to  his  past  or  present
     nationality.  So it contained no apparent assertion as to  nationality
     or that he was seeking the papers as a national.  There  may  well  be
     other relevant questions but we have not seen them  because  only  the
     one face of the form was copied.

  8. The Adjudicator said that the Claimant had said that when he  attended
     at the Iranian Embassy with the form, he was told that his application
     had been unsuccessful.  She continued, at paragraph 11:

           "There are also telephone attendance notes by his solicitors but
           it is regretful that the person who made the calls did  not  see
           fit to put in an affidavit regarding the calls made to the UNHCR
           and the Iranian Embassy."

  9. There is one fifteen minute call to the Embassy which does not  appear
     to have dealt with this Claimant by name;  rather  it  was  a  general
     request for information about how a national  who  did  not  have  the
     necessary documents could return to  Iran.   The  answer  was  that  a
     refugee from Iraq would be allowed to return to Iran, but needed proof
     of identification.  They did not have a written document saying  that.
     There was no written follow-up to the refusal or to the  conversation.
     The UNHCR rather vaguely said that it thought that a document would be
     required for an Iranian refugee from Iraq to return.

 10. The Adjudicator then set out two extracts from the CIPU Report saying:

           "Nevertheless  the  CIPU  Report  at  paragraphs  5.7   confirms
           'citizenship  is  based  upon  the  Iranian  Civil  Code   which
           stipulates that in general birth within the  territory  of  Iran
           does not automatically confer citizenship.  Some instances where
           birth does confer citizenship  are  when  a  child  is  born  to
           unknown parents, children born to non-citizens, one of whom  was
           born within Iran or a  child  born  to  non-citizens,  if  after
           reaching the age 18 the child continues to live within Iran  for
           at least one year ...'.  At paragraph 5.9 of the report confirms
           'Iranian citizenship may be  acquired  upon  fulfilment  of  the
           following conditions: the person must be at least  18  years  of
           age, have resided in Iran for five  years,  not  be  a  military
           service escapee and not have been convicted of a major crime  in
           any country ...'."

 11. She then said that she accepted that the Claimant was unable to fulfil
     the requirement set out in paragraph 5.9 of the CIPU Report,  that  he
     had resided in Iran for five years, and confirmed:

           "I accept in line with Revenko that even if he were to  lodge  a
           proper citizenship application, he is unlikely to be  considered
           for Iranian citizenship due to his lack of appropriate residence
           in Iran.  It is therefore probable  that  Iran  is  unlikely  to
           accept the appellant upon return."

 12. The Adjudicator next turned  to  the  "removal  directions",  and  the
     provisions of paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Immigration
     Act.  She rejected the applicability of each in turn:  (i) because the
     Claimant was not likely to be seen as a national of  Iran  as  he  had
     left aged four;  (ii) because, although he had Iraqi  identity  papers
     of a sort, he was not being returned to Iraq;  (iii) because, although
     he had come via  Turkey,  Turkey  was  not  the  proposed  country  of
     removal;  and (iv) because there was no other country to  which  there
     was reason to believe he would be admitted.

 13. That led her to say in paragraphs 15 and 16:

           "15.  I  therefore  accept  that  the  Removal  Notice  dated  5
                 November 2003 is invalid because it is  not  in  accordance
                 with the law.


           16.   For the purposes of clarity, I also  accept  according  to
                 Revenko  that  the  appellant's  statelessness  in  no  way
                 qualifies him to be a refugee under the Geneva  Convention.
                 I therefore allow  the  appellant's  appeal  for  the  sole
                 reason that the  Removal  Notice  of  5  November  2003  is
                 invalid."

14.   The Adjudicator, submitted  the  Secretary  of  State,  had  erred  in
     dealing with either or both issues, statelessness and the validity  of
     the removal  directions,  as  preliminary  issues.   Statelessness  by
     itself was not a sufficient answer, even if  properly  found,  to  the
     question of whether someone  was  entitled  to  protection  under  the
     Refugee Convention.

15.   In any event, there was no  adequate  basis  for  any  conclusion,  if
     there had been one, that the Claimant was  stateless.   The  analysis,
     set out above, of  the  factual  material  was  wholly  inadequate  to
     support any such conclusion.  Various aspects of the CIPU  Report  had
     been ignored, and no consideration had been given to the  availability
     of nationality to the Claimant as the child of Iranian nationals.  The
     possibility of return to Iraq ought also to have been considered.

16.   Mr Shah for the Claimant submitted that the  Adjudicator  had  made  a
     finding as to statelessness, and that she was entitled to do so on the
     totality of the evidence.


Conclusions on statelessness


17.   The Adjudicator clearly appreciated  correctly  that  a  finding  that
     someone was stateless did not of itself determine  whether  he  was  a
     refugee within the Geneva Convention;  Revenko [2000] Imm AR 610 Court
     of Appeal.  She did not go on to determine the asylum  claim,  because
     she  concluded  that  that  issue  was  irrelevant  because   of   her
     conclusions on the removal directions.

18.   That is unfortunate  because  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  on  the
     removal directions were at least arguably wrong.   It  is  unwise  for
     Adjudicators to deal with cases on the basis of a  preliminary  point;
     the same is nearly always true at Tribunal level.  The factual  issues
     should be resolved so that if any issue of law is decided wrongly,  it
     is more likely that the case can be resolved finally at  appeal  level
     without a remittal for the factual issues to be resolved.

 19. The conclusion that the Claimant was stateless was wrong in law on the
     evidence, or inadequately reasoned.  The reality is that the  Claimant
     was asserting to the Adjudicator that he was an Iranian national.   He
     would not become stateless simply because his country  of  nationality
     would not permit him entry, and certainly not  because  it  would  not
     permit entry on the  basis  of  the  very  modest  endeavours  of  the
     Claimant.  The Claimant said at his screening  interview  (C7),  which
     the Adjudicator overlooked, that he had no evidence with him  to  show
     where he was from, but his Iranian ID was with his parents in Iraq; he
     could produce it in two to three weeks.  There was no  dispute  before
     us but that that is the correct interpretation of the answer at  2.44,
     and that that was in fact correct.

 20. It is not always surprising that less than vigorous endeavours may  be
     made by asylum applicants  to  obtain  proof  of  nationality.   Their
     endeavours to obtain nationality  documents  might  prove  successful.
     But to fail to assert the relevant nationality and the basis  for  it,
     to fail to seek the right documents, or to follow up  a  refusal  with
     letters, or to seek further assistance, legal or NGO, in  pursing  the
     claim or to produce to  the  asserted  country  of  nationality  those
     documents which are obtainable is  to  fall  well  below  the  minimum
     necessary for any claim of statelessness.  He has not been deprived of
     citizenship but claims  that  the  country  of  nationality  will  not
     recognise him.  That is a very difficult basis  upon  which  to  prove
     statelessness and is nowhere near satisfied here.


 21. The Adjudicator also misinterpreted the CIPU Report which she  quoted.
     Granted that the Claimant did not fulfil the citizenship  requirements
     in paragraph 5.9, she failed to appreciate that that was expressing an
     unusual way for citizenship  to  be  acquired.   She  also  failed  to
     appreciate the significance  of  paragraph  5.7;   we  have  seen  the
     underlying source document but its meaning is clear enough anyway.

 22. It is clear that although birth in Iran does not automatically  confer
     citizenship, and that the Appellant  is  not  within  the  exceptional
     categories, the child of an Iranian father regardless of  the  country
     of its birth is Iranian.  The CIPU Report deals with exceptional  ways
     of acquiring nationality; those assume the existence  of  more  common
     ways.   The  commonest  is  descent,  which  would  usually  but   not
     necessarily involve birth in Iran from an Iranian father.  But  it  is
     the father's nationality which legally is crucial.

 23. The finding of statelessness was therefore legally erroneous.

24.   At this stage, the Tribunal was satisfied that the appeal  had  to  be
     allowed  and  the  case  remitted  for  further  consideration  by  an
     Adjudicator other than Ms P Lingam.  Mr Pipi pointed out that evidence
     of a denial of citizenship rights or identity papers to  a  particular
     section of the population within which a claimant falls  may  also  be
     indicators of statelessness.  He is correct but that related  to  Iraq
     here and does not alter the conclusion.



Removal Directions and the country of proposed removal



25.   We also saw force in the arguments put forward by Ms Brown,  which  we
     have not yet elaborated, as  to  why  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
     allowing the appeal on the grounds that there were removal  directions
     which were invalid by reference to paragraph 8 of Schedule  2  to  the
     1971 Immigration Act.  We saw a link between the availability of  such
     an argument, the uncertain significance of the  country  specified  in
     the Notice of Decision and the obligation  or  otherwise  to  consider
     return to Iraq. It would also have been unfair on the parties  and  on
     the new Adjudicator on a remittal for the Tribunal not  to  have  said
     whether the Adjudicator had to consider removal to any  country  other
     than Iran, notably Iraq, if the Claimant were found to be stateless or
     not of Iranian nationality.


26.   We concluded  that,  without  disrespect  to  any  of  the  advocates'
     submissions in those cases, further argument was  necessary  on  these
     points.  The first resumed hearing proved abortive as the Secretary of
     State had not yet resolved his stance on the questions  which  we  had
     earlier posed.  The hearing was resumed on 1 March 2005.


27.   It is convenient here to set out the  relevant  statutory  provisions,
     relevant to whether an  appeal  lies  against  removal  directions  or
     against an immigration decision on the  ground  that  the  country  of
     proposed destination falls outside the relevant provisions of the 1971
     Immigration Act, here Schedule 2 paragraph 8.


28.   Schedule 2 paragraph 8(1)(c) provides for removal  directions  to  the
     following countries to be given to a carrier:


           "(i)  a country of which he is a national or citizen; or
            (ii) a country or territory in which he has obtained a passport
                 or other document of identity; or
           (iii) a country or territory in which he embarked for the United
                 Kingdom; or
           (iv)  a country or territory to which there is reason to believe
                 that he will be admitted."

29.   The basis for removal directions being given to a carrier  is  section
      4(2)(c) of the 1971 Act which provides:

            "The provisions of Schedule 2 to  this  Act  shall  have  effect
with respect to-

           (c )  the exercise by immigration officers of  their  powers  in
                 relation to entry into the United Kingdom, and the  removal
                 from the United Kingdom of persons refused leave  to  enter
                 or entering or remaining unlawfully;"

      Section 5 deals with deportation orders and subsection (5) deals  with
     removals of those against whom deportation orders  are  in  force,  by
     reference to Schedule 3, which permits removal directions to countries
     within paragraph 8(1)(c) (i) and (iv) of Schedule 2.  Mr Patel for the
     SSHD at the resumed hearing said  that  removal  directions  were  the
     invariable accompaniment to removals.

30.   Section 82(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
     sets out the appealable immigration decisions.  The relevant  one  for
     an ordinary illegal entrant, as here, is (h), which is:

           "a decision that an illegal entrant is to be  removed  from  the
           United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10  of
           Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act  1971  (c.77)  (control  of
           entry)."


31.   It is also worth noting that (g) and (i) also refer  to  removals  but
     in (g) "by way of directions under section 10(1)(a), (b) or (c) of the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c.33) (removal of  person  unlawfully
     in United Kingdom)" and (i) "by way of directions given by  virtue  of
     paragraph 10A of that Schedule (family)".  In each of (g), (h) and (i)
     the appealable decision is described as "a decision that a  person  be
     removed ...".

32.   The relevant grounds of appeal against such a decision are set out  in
     section 84(1).  We note (1)(c), (e) and (g), the latter in particular.

           "(c)  that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                 Rights  Act  1998  (c.42)  (public  authority  not  to  act
                 contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being  incompatible
                 with the appellant's Convention rights;


           (e)   that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the
                 law;


           (g)   that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
                 consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach  the
                 United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention
                 or would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
                 Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the   appellant's
                 Convention rights."


33.   The contrast  with  the  preceding  statutory  language  is  relevant.
     There are no equivalent provisions to those in  the  1999  Immigration
     and Asylum Act which provided  for  appeals  against  the  country  of
     destination specified in directions where an appellant put forward  an
     alternative (sections 59 and 67).   The  language  of  section  66(2),
     which provided for an appeal against removal directions "on the ground
     that on the facts of his case there was in law no power to  give  them
     on the ground on which  they  were  given",  is  not  repeated.   This
     provision was considered by the Court of Appeal in Zecaj  [2002]  EWCA
     Civ 1919, [2003] Imm AR 298 which held that that provision meant  that
     an appeal lay where the ground  given  under  section  66(1)  for  the
     proposed removal did not entitle the Secretary of State to remove  the
     individual in question; it did not apply to the individual as a matter
     of law, on the facts of the case.

34.   Section 69(5) of the 1999 Act, the  asylum  appeal,  provided  for  an
     appeal on the ground that "removal in  pursuance  of  the  directions"
     would breach the Convention.  Section 65(1) and (4), the ECHR  appeal,
     referred to "any decision ... relating to that person's entitlement to
     enter or remain the United Kingdom".  This matter was considered in  R
     (Kariharan and others) v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 1102, [2003] Imm AR 163.
      It concluded  that  removal  directions,  with  or  without  a  prior
     decision as to leave or illegality of entry, were a "decision"  within
     section 65,  and  were  also  decisions  "relating  to  that  person's
     entitlement to  ...  remain".   The  particular  issue  of  an  appeal
     directed to the country of destination by reference to Schedule  2  to
     the Immigration Act 1971 was not raised.

35.   The Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 S.I. No 658,  in  force  on
     1st April 2003, provide in Regulation 4(1):


           "4 - (1) Subject to regulation 6, the decision-maker  must  give
           written notice to a person of any immigration  decision  or  EEA
           decision taken in respect of him which is appealable."

      Regulation 5(1) provides:

            "5 - (1) A notice given under regulation 4(1) is to -
                 (a)   include or be  accompanied  by  a  statement  of  the
                 reasons for the decision to which it relates; and
                 (b)   if it relates to an immigration decision specified in
                 section 82(2)(a), (g), (h), (i) or (j)  of  the  2002  Act,
                 state the country or territory to which it is  proposed  to
                 remove the person."

      The immigration decisions for which the Regulations require a  country
      of proposed removal to  be  specified  are  the  three  which  involve
      removal by way of directions (unlawful presence (g),  illegal  entrant
      (h) and family (i)), plus refusal of leave to enter (a) and a decision
      to make a deportation order (j).


      The reason for the distinction between the various subsections appears
      to relate to the general absence of  an  in-country  right  of  appeal
      except under section 82(2)(c), (d), (e), (f) and (j);  section  92(2).
      But this is subject to a general exception where an  asylum  or  human
      rights claim is raised in the UK; section 92(4)(a).


36.   The questions which we asked  of  the  parties  beforehand  so  as  to
      assist their submissions were these:


           (a)   If it is concluded on the facts that the proposed  country
                 of removal falls  outside  the  scope  of  paragraph  8  of
                 Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act, is that fact irrelevant to  the
                 appeal?


           (b)   If it is relevant, should the result be  dismissal  of  an
                 appeal because there would be no removal,  or  allowing  of
                 the appeal  if  either  Convention  would  be  breached  on
                 removal to that country?


           (c)   Under what circumstances should an Adjudicator or the  IAT
                 examine any other country which fell within  the  scope  of
                 Schedule 2, although not currently proposed as a country of
                 removal?


           (d)   Should a Claimant seek to deal with  all  countries  which
                 fell within paragraph 8 of Schedule 2?


           (e)   If the  Claimant  here  was  stateless,  did  Iran  become
                 irrelevant and did  Iraq  which  was  not  the  country  of
                 proposed removal become relevant?


           (f)   If the Claimant were not stateless, might  both  Iran  and
                 Iraq be considered?

37.   We now turn to the submissions made by the parties on the question  of
     whether an appeal could be brought  against  removal  directions,  the
     first ground of appeal by the  Secretary  of  State,  and  as  to  the
     significance of the country of proposed destination in the  Notice  of
     Decision.  The later advocates argued along the same  lines  as  their
     forerunners.

38.   The Adjudicator had erred in law, submitted Mr Patel, because she  had
     no power to say that  a  removal  direction  was  invalid  or  not  in
     accordance with law.  Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002 did not permit an appeal against removal directions as
     such.  Section 82(2)(h)  only  provided  for  an  appeal  against  the
     decision to remove and the effect of  section  84(1)(e)  was  that  an
     appeal on the grounds that that decision was not  in  accordance  with
     the law did not enable the country of destination to be  raised.   The
     provisions of the 2002 Act thus contrasted with sections 66(2), 67, 68
     and 69(5) of the 1999 Act.  There was no longer an appeal against  the
     country of destination in removal directions.  In effect,  though  not
     so expressed, her argument was that  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Zecaj [2002] EWCA Civ 1919, [2003]  Imm  AR  298,  had  been
     given statutory confirmation.  The ground for the decision  to  remove
     had to be shown to be invalid, such that the reason given for proposed
     removal  did  not  entitle  the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove  the
     individual in question.  The country of removal was irrelevant to  the
     lawfulness of the decision to remove and there  was  now  no  separate
     appeal against the country of removal.

39.   Mr Patel submitted that  section  82(2)  permitted  an  appeal  to  be
     brought only against an "immigration  decision"  as  defined;  here  a
     "decision that an illegal entrant is to be  removed  from  the  United
     Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to
     the Immigration Act  1971."   The  other  subsections  which  included
     reference to directions were in the same form.  The reference  in  the
     grounds  of  appeal  available  under  section  84(1),  and   (g)   in
     particular, to "removal...in consequence of the immigration decision",
     suggested a distinction between the immigration decision  and  removal
     directions.  The Notices Regulations only required notice to be  given
     of an appealable immigration decision, which must necessarily  already
     have been reached before notification of it  in  accordance  with  the
     Regulations could be required.   Removal  directions  related  to  the
     stage subsequent to the immigration decision appeal.  The  Explanatory
     Notes to the 2002 Act referred to the initial immigration decision  as
     being the only appealable decision and not now  consequential  removal
     directions.


40.   The legislative structure was supported by practice: first IND  serves
     notice (IS151A) informing the individual  of  his  immigration  status
     i.e. that he is an illegal entrant/overstayer/in breach of his  leave;
     second, and in this case on the same  day,  IND  serves  a  notice  of
     decision (IS151B) to remove him under the appropriate provision,  here
     by way of directions under the 1971 Act; third, directions  are  given
     to  the  carrier  for  the  removal  in  form  IS151D.   The   Notices
     Regulations bit at stage two and that was the only stage at  which  an
     appeal could be brought.


41.   Hence, the appellant had  to  contend  that  he  was  not  an  illegal
     entrant  or  that  his  removal  would  breach  the  two  Conventions.
     Liability to removal had to  be  established  and  could  be  appealed
     before any question of the mechanics  of  removal  could  arise.   The
     inclusion of a country of proposed removal in the Notice  of  Decision
     was not the giving of removal directions nor did  it  serve  the  same
     purpose.  Its purpose was to enable the individual to "ventilate"  the
     asylum and human rights issues and the legal basis for  the  assertion
     that he was an illegal entrant, overstayer or as the  case  might  be.
     It was to be contrasted with the viability or  practicability  of  the
     destination in terms of Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act.   If  removal
     directions were given which fell outside the scope  of  the  Schedule,
     their lawfulness could be challenged by way of judicial review.


42.   Mr Patel drew support for  his  analysis  from  the  decision  of  the
     Tribunal in MY (Somalia) (Disputed Somali  nationality)  [2004]  UKIAT
     00174*.  That case concerned the problem of  decisions  in  which  the
     Secretary  of  State,  contesting  the  asserted  nationality  of  the
     individual, nonetheless proposed to remove him to the country of which
     the Secretary of State, but  not  the  individual,  denied  he  was  a
     national.  This country was therefore  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
     primary contention outside the scope of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.


43.   Although the problem  here  is  different  in  nature  and  that  case
     concerned the 1999 Act which is different in a number  of  significant
     respects, it is worth setting out the passages relied on:


           "30.  Section 69(5) specifically provides for a right of  appeal
                 in asylum  cases  against  removal  directions  in  certain
                 circumstances.  There is no reason  why  Parliament  should
                 have enacted section 69(5) if there was an  adequate  right
                 of appeal for all against such directions already  inherent
                 in section 69(1).  We do not accept  Mr  Gill's  submission
                 that section 69(5) was simply a carry  over  from  previous
                 legislation, and that that explains why a  separate  appeal
                 provision in relation to removal  directions  was  provided
                 for illegal entrants.  It is  clear  from  Zecaj  that  the
                 right of appeal under subsection  (5)  is  limited  to  the
                 ground specified in section 66(1), and that the section  66
                 appeal itself is limited.  The effect of Zecaj is that  the
                 ground of an appeal must be that the subsection (1)  ground
                 did not apply to the Appellant on the facts as a matter  of
                 law.  It would be necessary for the directions to have been
                 given on the ground  that  the  Appellant  was  an  illegal
                 entrant, or an overstayer, or had obtained leave to  remain
                 by deception, was a member of a family for  which  one  had
                 received removal directions, or was a crew member.  None of
                 these were relied on by the  Secretary  of  State.   So  no
                 appeal lay under section 66.  It would be  bizarre  if  the
                 restrictions in section 69(5) and 66 could  be  sidestepped
                 by an appeal under section 69(1).  The language of  section
                 69(1) also refers to "ground" in the singular; it does  not
                 import a further ground relating to removal directions.


           "32.  The Notice is inaccurate in referring to an appeal on  the
                 ground that "removal  in  pursuance  of  these  directions"
                 would  breach  the  Geneva   Convention.    The   statutory
                 provision to which it relates refers rather to  removal  in
                 consequence of the decision to refuse leave  to  enter;  it
                 does not  refer  to  removal  directions  at  all  and  the
                 provision which does is not referred to as  the  ground  of
                 appeal.  Nonetheless we do not consider that  that  can  be
                 seen as altering the true scope of section 69(1)."

44.   Mr Patel also relied on the Tribunal decision in  SG  (Bhutan)  [2005]
     UKIAT 0005 in which it was held that the 2002 Act conferred  no  right
     of appeal against proposed removal directions;  it did not appear that
     destination was capable of being the subject matter of an appeal.


45.   We asked Mr Patel for submissions on the questions which we had  asked
     which went to the relevance of the country of proposed destination, if
     he were right in his submissions above.  He was in agreement  with  Mr
     Pipi that the ascertainment of whether someone was a  refugee  or  not
     did not depend on the country of proposed  removal  specified  in  the
     Notice of Decision; indeed it did not  depend  on  any  removal  being
     proposed at all.


46.   If someone was a refugee, or if an ECHR claim were made, it  would  be
     necessary to consider whether removal would breach  either  Convention
     by reference to the country of proposed destination in the Notice.  It
     would be necessary for the appeal also to consider other countries  to
     which the individual might be returned.  In this instance, it would be
     necessary for the Adjudicator to consider whether return to  Iraq,  as
     the country of former habitual residence,  would  breach  the  Refugee
     Convention if the Claimant were  found  to  be  stateless.   This  was
     notwithstanding that the Secretary of State had not said that he would
     return the Claimant to Iraq even on the  basis  of  that  contingency.
     The Adjudicator ought also to consider return to Iraq for the purposes
     of the ECHR because that would be a  sensible  approach  enabling  the
     issues to be dealt with in one go, again even though the Secretary  of
     State had not said that he would return the Claimant there.


47.   Iraq was for consideration also because it  had  been  raised  and  it
     would not be unfair to deal with it.  As an aspect of case management,
     an Adjudicator might raise another country and indicate that  a  fresh
     or amended Notice of Decision should be  issued.   The  decision-maker
     should adopt what he said was the "belt and braces"  approach  of  the
     Tribunal  in  Agartha  Smith  HX/88505/97,  in  which   the   Tribunal
     considered the risk of a breach of the Refugee Convention in returning
     someone to a country of which it had found she was not a national,  so
     that she had a considered determination of her claim on the  basis  of
     her asserted nationality.


48.   He accepted that the logic of his argument was that the Appellant  had
     only one opportunity to appeal against the immigration decision as  he
     defined it.  This was the purpose of the statutory structure.  It  was
     to embody in clearer form the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
     Zecaj, and to overturn the effect of the Court of Appeal in Kariharan.


49.   When challenged as to the  consequence  of  that  for  the  subsequent
     setting of removal  directions  for  a  country  which  had  not  been
     considered or the subject matter of the proposed  destination  in  the
     Notice of Decision,  he  recognised  that  this  could  give  rise  to
     problems for those  whose  Convention  rights  could  be  breached  by
     removal to that country but who had not had any judicial determination
     of their appeal on that basis.  The answer was that the  Secretary  of
     State would avoid the problem by giving to such  individuals  a  fresh
     N0tice which would constitute a fresh appealable  decision;  he  would
     not move directly to the issue of removal directions.


50.   There might be scope for debate as to whether  Iraq  fell  within  the
     scope of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act in relation  to  this  individual;
     and the scope might be  greater  or  lesser  in  any  individual  case
     depending on the facts.  Iraq would not come within paragraph 8(1) (c)
     (i) or (iii) and it would be for factual resolution as to  whether  he
     came within (ii)  by  reference  to  identity  documents  or  (iv)  by
     reference to a belief  that  Iraq  might  be  willing  to  admit  him.
     Nonetheless, if Iraq were not dealt with in the appeal, a decision  to
     remove him there could be made and the availability of an appeal would
     depend on the administrative machinery of the Secretary of State.   If
     such a practice were ignored by the Secretary of State that  could  of
     itself found Judicial Review.  If Iraq were dealt with in the  appeal,
     the appeal might indirectly consider those factors which were relevant
     to the application to Iraq of Schedule 2.  But  no  final  or  binding
     decision could be reached on whether Iraq fell within  schedule  2  in
     relation to this Claimant.  After all circumstances might  change  and
     what was previously not possible might in future become so.


51.   Mr Pipi for the Claimant at the resumed hearing submitted as follows:-



      (1)   "immigration decisions" as defined had to be lawful,  and  their
           lawfulness could be appealed pursuant to section 84(1)(e),  that
           it was not in accordance with the law, quite apart from breaches
           of the two Conventions or of the Immigration Rules.  A  decision
           to remove someone to a country to which removal was  not  lawful
           because it fell outside paragraph 8 of Schedule 2  to  the  1971
           Act could be appealed against on that ground.  Parliament  could
           not have intended that  say,  a  Russian  could  be  removed  to
           Nigeria regardless of paragraph 8.   The  fact  that  Iran  fell
           outside Schedule 2 strengthened the claim that he could  not  be
           removed there.


      (2)   If removal to any country which fell within Schedule 2 paragraph
           8 would involve a breach of the Conventions, the  appeal  should
           be allowed.


      (3)   In general  agreement  with  Mr  Patel,  an  Adjudicator  should
           examine countries other than the one in the Notice of  Decision,
           where  nationality  was  disputed,  or   there   were   "genuine
           difficulties in ascertaining the correct  country  of  removal".
           The Secretary of State ought to specify  proposed  countries  of
           removal in the alternative, which would be procedurally fair.


      (4)   Consequently, an Appellant  should  deal  with  all  Schedule  2
           paragraph 8 countries, though it would  be  more  efficient  and
           fairer if the Secretary of State  identified  those  which  were
           candidates for consideration.  He also said  in  answer  to  the
           Tribunal that the country of proposed removal  was  an  integral
           part of the decision and that without it, there was no decision.
            The decision could be amended to add another country.


      (5)    Therefore,  if  the  Claimant  were  stateless,   Iran   became
           irrelevant though specified and Iraq fell to be considered  even
           though it was not specified.


      (6)   Both Iran and Iraq might be considered, subject to the  Claimant
           being put on notice if he were not stateless.


      (7)    The  Adjudicator,  having  concluded  that  the  Claimant   was
           stateless, ought to have considered whether he was nonetheless a
           refugee by reference to Iraq and ought to have concluded that he
           was a refugee because that country was no longer his country  of
           former habitual residence because it was no  longer  willing  to
           admit him, and provide  protection.   He  sought  permission  to
           serve a Respondent's Notice in support.



Conclusions on removal directions and the country of proposed removal



52.   The Adjudicator first erred in law in treating  the  "Removal  Notice"
     as invalid  because  the  country  of  proposed  removal  was  outside
     paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.  The immigration  decision,
     as she regarded it, could not itself have  been  "invalid",  for  that
     reason.  She must  have  been  treating  the  Notice  of  Decision  as
     constituting or containing Removal Directions,  because  of  the  side
     note.  But those are not Removal Directions at all; it merely says  to
     what country such directions will be given; see also the  analysis  in
     paragraph 22 and 23 of MY (Somalia)*  It is simply  the  statement  of
     the country of proposed removal required  by the Notice Regulations.


53.   We have to say that much of  the  confusion  in  this  area,  and  the
     Adjudicator's misconception here is not uncommon,  is  caused  by  the
     potentially misleading side note "Removal Directions" on Form IS151B.


54.   Second, it is clear that there is no appeal available against  removal
     directions,  as  such.   Removal  directions  are  not  of  themselves
     "immigration decisions" within section 82, and the specific provisions
     for destination appeals relating to removal directions in the 1999 Act
     have been removed.


55.   If it had been intended to create a separate  appealable  decision  in
     respect of the country stated in Removal Directions  that  would  have
     been  done  explicitly,  given  the  tidying  up  of  the   appealable
     decisions.  Were that to have been done,  provision  would  also  have
     been made  to  avoid  the  practical  problems  which  the  overturned
     Tribunal decision in Zecaj created for  those  whose  nationality  was
     unknown  or  contested:   an  illegal,  removable   entrant's   appeal
     succeeding  because  the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  claimed
     nationality but did not yet know what the real nationality was.  There
     are no equivalents to the previous grounds of appeal.  Section 82 is a
     provision which embodies the result of Zecaj and expresses the purpose
     of section 66(2) of the 1999 Act in rather clearer language.  This was
     a further error by the Adjudicator.

56.   We assume without deciding that the effect of section 4  of  the  1971
     Act is to require removal directions to be  issued  as  the  means  of
     enforcing any removal,  and  so  are  a  legal  necessity.   The  next
     question is whether an appeal can  be  brought  against  the  proposed
     country of removal in the Notice  of  Decision  on  the  grounds  that
     removal directions for there when given would be outside  paragraph  8
     of Schedule 2 or the equivalent in Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act.


57.   All this turns  on  the  meaning  of  the  "immigration  decision"  in
     section 82 of the 2002  Act.   The  relevant  appealable  "immigration
     decision" is that in section 82(2)(h).  It is the  decision  that  the
     Appellant is an illegal entrant, removable and to be  removed  through
     directions under Schedule 2, which is in question.  It enables status,
     removeability and the basis in principle of removal to be the  subject
     of an appeal.  The decision is that removal, when it occurs,  will  be
     pursuant to directions under that Schedule.  The country  of  proposed
     destination is not part of the immigration decision.  The  country  of
     destination relates to the consequences of  that  decision  and  hence
     Convention breaches, and needs to be specified so that  the  available
     grounds of  appeal  relating  to  Convention  breaches  can  be  given
     concrete focus.  The structure of the 2002 Act provisions is  that  of
     "decision", separated from the appeal grounds, which permit an  appeal
     against the decision by reference to its consequences, i.e. removal to
     the country of proposed destination.

58.   The purpose of the tailpiece reference in section 82(2)(h) to  removal
     being by way of Schedule 2 directions is to deal  with  the  basis  of
     removal and contrasts with  the  basis  for  the  removal  of  persons
     unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  (section  82(2)(g),  administrative
     removal) and those being removed as family members (section 82(2)(i)).

59.   The language of section 82 is different from the language  of  section
     65 of the 1999 Act which led to  the  decision  in  Kariharan.   Where
     removal directions embody the "immigration decision", that decision is
     appealable.  Where  the  removal  directions  are  the  administrative
     consequence of an earlier appealable decision, which of course has  to
     be notified and to identify the country of  proposed  destination,  no
     appeal arises.  The decision on status, removeability and the  use  of
     Schedule 2 directions has already been made in an appealable form.  It
     cannot  now  be  said  that  removal  directions  are  an   appealable
     immigration "decision", in view  of  the  definition  and  listing  of
     appealable "immigration decisions".  Nor has the language of decisions
     "relating to" entitlement to remain, been retained in the 2002 Act  so
     as to provide an indirect link to an appealable immigration  decision.
     Even less can it be said that the 2002 Act permits an issue as to  the
     lawfulness under Schedules 2 or 3 to the 1971  Act,  of  the  proposed
     country of destination to be raised.  The language of the 2002 Act  is
     clearly designed to overturn Kariharan.

60.   Section 84 does not permit an appeal on the grounds that the  proposed
     destination is outside Schedule 2.   Removal  in  consequence  of  the
     immigration decision may  or  may  not  breach  the  ECHR  or  Refugee
     Convention but that does not turn on whether the country  of  proposed
     destination falls within Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.


61.   This conclusion  is  not  affected  by  section  84(2)(e);   the  same
     question arises as to the content of the  "decision"  and  whether  it
     includes the specified destination country.  The "decision"  does  not
     include the country of destination.

62.   The conclusion that an appeal cannot be brought  against  the  country
     of proposed removal on the ground that it falls outside the  scope  of
     Schedules 2 and 3 to the 1971 Act does not dispose of the issues which
     may be faced in this appeal.  It means that the Adjudicator would have
     erred in allowing the appeal on a similar basis to the one upon  which
     she did allow it but that does not  answer  the  question  as  to  the
     relevance of the country of proposed removal, Iran, in the  Notice  of
     Decision, nor whether the Tribunal should consider Iraq, were it found
     to be a country of former habitual  residence  or  one  to  which  the
     Claimant might be returned, if he could not be returned  to  Iran  for
     reasons of Convention breaches.


63.    The  country  specified  in  the  Notice  is  not  material  for  the
     determination of whether or  not  the  Claimant  is  a  refugee.   The
     parties were rightly agreed on that.  That is because the question  of
     whether someone is or is not  a  refugee  depends  on  whether  he  is
     outside his country of nationality or former  habitual  residence  and
     not upon the country to which he might be  retuned.   The  country  of
     proposed removal is only relevant to whether his removal  there  would
     breach the Convention obligations in Articles 32 or 33 of the  Refugee
     Convention, owed to someone who is a refugee.  If  a  claimant  cannot
     establish that he is a refugee, that questions  does  not  arise;   MY
     (Somalia)*.


64.   The country specified is obviously critical to the ground  of  appeal,
     consequent upon removability being  established,  that  removal  would
     breach either Convention.  It is  the  country  of  removal  which  is
     capable of giving rise to  the  breach  rather  than  removal  in  the
     abstract.  The purpose of the specification of the country is to focus
     on the consequences of removal.  It is irrelevant for  these  purposes
     that removal to the country in question would not be permissible under
     Schedules 2 or 3 to the 1971 Act.


65.   If removal to the country specified would involve a breach  of  either
     Convention, the appeal would be allowed.  It could not be dismissed on
     the basis that removal would be unlawful to that  country  because  of
     the 1971 Act, would therefore not take place and so there would be  no
     risk.  Circumstances change any way.  If the Secretary of  State  were
     to decide that he could remove the Claimant  to  another  country,  he
     would have to issue a fresh and  appealable  decision.  Following  the
     allowing of the appeal against his first decision.

66.   If the appeal were dismissed on the basis that the removal  would  not
     breach either Convention but if the Secretary of State were  later  to
     decide that removal there would not take place because that would  not
     be lawful under the Schedules to the 1971 Act, or even if the  removal
     directions were quashed for the same reason on  judicial  review,  the
     question arises as to whether the consequential  intention  to  remove
     the Claimant to another country would generate a fresh decision  which
     could be appealed.  The Secretary of State position is that  he  would
     issue one as a matter of  fairness  but  not  as  a  matter  of  legal
     obligation.


67.   The answer to our mind is that the mere issue  of  removal  directions
     itself is not the appealable  decision  and,  as  we  have  said,  the
     directions do not afford a specific ground of appeal.  But  the  issue
     of them for a different country evidences the fact  that  a  different
     appealable immigration decision must have been taken, even  though  it
     relies entirely on the same points as to status  and  removability  as
     had already been upheld.  The  actual  issue  of  removal  directions,
     pursuant to the earlier decision and as a consequence of it,  for  the
     very country which has been considered does no such thing and so  that
     would not give rise to a fresh decision.   It  is  very  important  to
     avoid the legal safeguards being available as  a  matter  of  practice
     rather than of legal obligation even at the price of some straining at
     the bounds of the statutory structure.


68.   The statutory structure is intended to  give  a  full  factual  merits
     appeal in relation to risk on  return  to  the  country  proposed  for
     removal.  It is not intended to give an  appeal  in  relation  to  the
     first country proposed and to provide for a review challenge  only  in
     relation to any  subsequently  proposed.   Alternatively,  if  removal
     directions are issued for a country other than the one in the  earlier
     appealable Notice of Decision a fresh claim may be generated.


69.   We prefer this analysis  to  the  possible  alternative  canvassed  in
     paragraph 53 of  MY  (Somalia)*  to  the  effect  that  fresh  removal
     directions for a different country might not  give  rise  to  a  fresh
     appeal but would lead only to Judicial Review.

70.   The next question is whether or not the appeal body in the one  appeal
     can or should consider the removal of the Claimant to a country  other
     than the one referred to in the Notice of  Decision.   The  ground  of
     appeal is whether or not removal in consequence of the decision  would
     be a breach of either Convention.  If only one country  is  specified,
     which is the invariable position, it is the only  consequence  of  the
     removal which the Secretary of State is proposing.  It cannot be  said
     that he is proposing to remove the Claimant to any other country.  The
     range  of  other  countries  would  be  potentially  limited  only  by
     Schedules 2 and  3  to  the  1971  Act  and  that  would  involve  the
     establishment of the possible contenders by reference  to  them,  even
     though the Secretary of State might have no intention of removing  the
     Claimant to them anyway.  That approach would be  consistent  with  Mr
     Pipi's arguments but does not fit with the Secretary of State's.


71.   We appreciate that it can  be  said  that  in  reality  the  practical
     contenders would be limited but that does not help analyse  the  legal
     requirements.  There are practical reasons, however, why the seemingly
     attractive solution which both parties appeared to support  cannot  be
     accepted.  The very establishment of the list would  be  fraught  with
     difficulty over who was to prepare it or when; it is difficult to  see
     how the Secretary of State could nominate countries which he  had  not
     put on the Notice of Decision.  It  would  be  potentially  very  time
     wasting to consider countries which the Secretary  of  State  had  not
     said that he intended as the country of return.


72.   This is reinforced by consideration of what decision  should  be  made
     on the appeal.  If  it  is  concluded  that  removal  to  the  country
     proposed would involve no breach of the Conventions but  that  removal
     to another would, how could the appeal properly be allowed?  And if it
     could  not  be  allowed,  what  would  have  been  the  advantage   of
     considering it?  Conversely, if removal to  the  proposed  country  of
     removal would breach the Conventions but removal to another would not,
     how could the appeal be  dismissed?   The  range  of  powers  to  give
     directions on the  outcome  of  an  appeal  is  not  broad  enough  to
     encompass the giving of directions that removal to one  country  would
     not be a breach but removal to  another  would  be  and  to  allow  or
     dismiss the appeal accordingly, regardless of the decision notice.


73.   We also have a  very  real  concern  about  arguments  arising  as  to
     whether it was fair for a country to be  considered,  and  as  to  the
     uncertain focus on a country  which  may  have  seemed  peripheral  or
     unlikely, on a not very satisfactory basis, and yet then  becomes  the
     country of removal.  The parties'  arguments  that  the  law  reflects
     practicalities does not  advance  their  point.   To  our  minds  they
     emphasise the limits placed on the scope of the appeal by the  country
     in the Notice of Decision.


74.   There is no "one-stop shop"  provision  which  covers  other  possible
     countries  of  removal,  requiring  the  Claimant  to  identify   such
     countries.  It is clearly for the SSHD  to  identify  the  country  to
     which he proposes to remove someone whom he has decided to remove.


75.   The IAT decision in Smith does not  really  deal  with  this  type  of
     problem at all.  The practical solution which  is  in  line  with  the
     requirements of the Act and the provision for Notice to  be  given  of
     the country of proposed removal is that the issue of  whether  removal
     would breach either Convention is  confined  to  the  country  in  the
     Notice.


76.   Therefore here the AIT should not  consider  the  risk  on  return  to
     Iraq, whether it concludes that there is a risk or not  in  return  to
     Iran.  It cannot conclude that return  to  Iran  would  not  meet  the
     requirements of Schedules 2 or 3 to the  1971  Act  nor  can  it  then
     proceed to consider Iraq in consequence.  That is  irrelevant  to  the
     appeal.  The appeal should be allowed, if there is a risk on return to
     Iran, and in the case of the Refugee  Convention,  if  he  is  also  a
     refugee.  A fresh decision referring to Iraq might then be issued.  It
     is for the Secretary of State to give effect to the  earlier  decision
     subject to any directions from the Tribunal but those  directions  are
     limited, and do not include directions to  consider  other  countries.
     It would simply be for the Secretary of State  to  decide  whether  to
     take a fresh immigration decision and refer to Iraq in the  Notice  or
     to grant some form of leave.  It would not be open  to  him  to  issue
     removal directions to Iraq without  generating  a  further  appealable
     immigration decision.


77.   The practical disadvantages of limiting consideration  of  removal  to
     the country in the Notice of Decision is that the  overall  conclusion
     in any particular claim for asylum may involve a sequence of decisions
     and appeals.  One solution which  the  parties  canvassed  in  seeming
     agreement is that the Secretary of  State  can  amend  his  Notice  if
     representations in the  course  of  the  appeal  or  the  evidence  or
     indications  from  the  appeal  body,  but  not  in  the  form  of   a
     determination of the appeal, suggest that a different country would be
     appropriate.  We do not accept that the Secretary of State  has  power
     to amend the Notice of Decision, with the appeal carrying on from  the
     stage which it had already reached.  There is no  such  power  in  any
     Rules.  In effect he is issuing a fresh Notice which must comply  with
     the Notice Regulations and which generates a fresh  right  of  appeal.
     It may very well be that if the Appellant nonetheless  continues  with
     the appeal and relates his case to the new country, he will  be  taken
     to have waived any right to contend  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision or the appeal body's decision on  the  appeal  was  unlawful.
     But that does not alter the legal position.


78.   The remaining possibility is that the Notice of Decision should  refer
     to countries in the alternative, perhaps with the reason why  set  out
     in the accompanying letter.  In this case the Notice might  have  said
     that removal was proposed to Iran or Iraq; the reason might have  been
     that the Secretary of State intended to return the  Claimant  to  Iran
     but if that were to involve a breach of either Convention, he intended
     to return him to Iraq.  The appeal could then be  allowed  if  neither
     country were acceptable because of the Conventions  and  dismissed  if
     either was.  The decision would make  clear  whether  removal  to  one
     country alone would involve no breach of Convention rights.

79.   Again this course has something to  commend  it  in  practical  terms;
     but we do not regard it as the correct solution without  much  further
     consideration.  The appeal determination has to be  clear  as  to  its
     consequences.  Even if there were no difficulty  in  saying  that  the
     appeal was dismissed because removal in consequence of  the  Secretary
     of State's decision would be to the safe country rather  than  to  the
     unsafe one, the Notice of Decision would have to  be  read  with  that
     determination in order for its  consequences  to  be  understood.   We
     think that the Secretary of State Decision Notice should be  clear  as
     to its consequence when enforcement comes,  it  should  be  understood
     simply with the knowledge that the appeal against it has been  allowed
     or dismissed and should not require the determination  of  the  appeal
     body to be with it or understood properly before the consequences  for
     the Claimant  are  clear.   We  think  that  the  statutory  framework
     reflects our provisional view on this.


80.   It follows from what we have said that the Notice of  Decision  should
     refer only to the one country.  If  the  appeal  is  allowed  but  the
     Secretary of State thinks that removal to  another  country  would  be
     within the Conventions, he can take a fresh appealable  decision.   If
     the appeal is dismissed and the  country  of  proposed  removal  falls
     outside the Schedules and removal cannot  therefore  take  place,  the
     Secretary of State cannot issue removal directions for another country
     without  necessarily  generating  a   fresh   appealable   immigration
     decision.


81.   Here, Iraq does not fall  for  consideration  upon  the  remittal  for
     reconsideration.  The appeal must be determined by  reference  to  the
     grounds of appeal and those  do  not  cover  either  the  question  of
     whether Iran would fall within the Schedules to the 1971 Act.


82.   This is different from  the  position  in  MY  (Somalia)*,  where  the
     Notice and accompanying letter were seen as  containing  a  two  stage
     decision that removal should be to Somalia, but not if he were  not  a
     Somali national; see paragraphs 47 to 52.


83.   We are not intending to preclude more than one country being  referred
     to, were that necessary, in those circumstances where return is via  a
     transit country where that country  nonetheless  has  to  be  entered.
     That sequence gives rise to different problems from  the  question  of
     alternative or contingent countries of proposed removal.


84.   We did not think that the proposed Respondent's Notice  would  advance
     our deliberations or avoid the remittal.  We refuse leave for it.


85.   Accordingly, this appeal is allowed to the extent  of  being  remitted
     to the Tribunal for it to be dealt with  other  than  by  Ms  Lingham.
     This determination is reported for what we  say  about  statelessness,
     removal directions and the relevance of the country in the  Notice  of
     Decision.








                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
