

|EA (Family visitor, directions, mistake of fact - unfairness)     |
|Ghana [2005] UKAIT 00108                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Asylum and Immigration Tribunal                                   |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|Heard at Field House                                              |
|Heard on: 19 April 2005    |        |Determination issued:       |
|Prepared : 26 April 2005   |        |1 June 2005                 |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Ms C Jarvis                                                       |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Dr T Okitikpi                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Entry Clearance Officer Accra                                     |
|Respondent                                                        |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This case is reported for what we say about the exercise of the power to
make directions to give effect to a determination, pursuant to the
Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and pursuant to the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ( as amended by the Asylum and Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004); to highlight the procedure to be
followed at a reconsideration hearing, including the requirements to be met
in order that fresh evidence may be considered at such a hearing, thus
widening the ambit of the appeal in this case, to include mistake of fact
giving rise to unfairness, and to highlight certain provisions of
legislation and rules relating to family visitors, their rights of appeal,
and Entry Clearance Officer practice in that regard.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Respondent, against the determination of  an
      Adjudicator (Mr D Zucker) who in a determination issued on 10  October
      2003, reached after  consideration  of  the  matter  without  an  oral
      hearing, allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision made on 21 February 2003 to refuse to grant  entry  clearance
      as a family visitor, to visit his uncle, Peter Kofi Nsiah  Yeboah  (Mr
      Yeboah).


   2. There was no appearance by or on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  although
      there was good service of the notice of  hearing  at  the  last  known
      address of the Appellant. The Appellant has not instructed  any  legal
      representative.  We  decided   to   proceed   to   hear   the   appeal
      notwithstanding the absence of the Appellant

   3. The Appellant was interviewed in connection with his application on 21
      February 2003, and the decision to refuse entry clearance was made  on
      the same date.

   4. The Appellant claimed to have been born on 17 January 1980 and  to  be
      an undergraduate student at the University of Ghana.  He  proposed  to
      visit his uncle in the UK for a period of four weeks, after  finishing
      his final year exams in May 2003, and before commencing  his  military
      service. An uncle in Ghana was said to be supporting  the  application
      financially. He claimed that he had his mother and siblings  in  Ghana
      and his father was said to be dead.

   5. Although satisfied that the sponsor was lawfully in the UK and that he
      had a wish  for  the  Appellant  to  visit,  the  Respondent  was  not
      satisfied that the Appellant had shown on balance that he was able  to
      meet  the  costs  of  his  proposed  trip  and  his  maintenance   and
      accommodation in the UK without working or recourse to  public  funds.
      Further, he was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  shown,  in  the
      light of all the circumstances, that he was a genuine  family  visitor
      who was seeking entry to the  UK  only  for  the  period  and  purpose
      stated.

   6. There  was  no  oral  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator,  as  we  have
      indicated. This was because the Appellant stated on  his  appeal  form
      that he wished the appeal to be decided without an  oral  hearing,  on
      the basis of the documentary evidence.  On 10 October 2003, copies  of
      the Adjudicator's determination to allow the appeal and to direct that
      entry clearance be granted, were sent to the parties and to the  named
      sponsor, Mr Yeboah.


   7. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant had shown that  his  personal
      circumstances were as stated and that the Appellant had shown evidence
      that there was �11,000.00 in the account of the relative in Ghana  who
      was to pay for the trip. Considering the letter from the Appellant and
      the documentary evidence that was before him, he  was  satisfied  that
      the Appellant had shown on balance that he met all the requirements of
      paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules in relation to family  visitors.
      On 1 October 2003 he  allowed  the  appeal  and  directed  that  entry
      clearance be granted forthwith.


The Grounds of Appeal

   8.  In summary, the grounds of appeal, which were lodged out of time, are
      three fold. First, that the Appellant had  misrepresented  himself  to
      the Respondent and to the Adjudicator. This  ground  was  asserted  by
      reason of the fact  that  Mr  Yeboah  had,  since  the  issue  of  the
      determination, been in contact by telephone, letter  and  email,  with
      the  British  High  Commission,  and,  it  seems  the  UK  authorities
      elsewhere, to  inform  them  that  he  did  not  know  the  Appellant,
      certainly was not related to him as claimed, and had  not  offered  to
      sponsor him as a family visitor.


   9. Second, it is submitted that as the Appellant is not  related  to  the
      sponsor as claimed, then he has no right of appeal to  an  Adjudicator
      as he  does  not  qualify  as  a  family  visitor.  Therefore,  it  is
      submitted, the Adjudicator, unbeknown to  him  at  the  time,  had  no
      jurisdiction to entertain an appeal.


  10. Third, it  is  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  giving  a
      direction to give effect to his decision in this case. This is because
      the Adjudicator did not receive oral  evidence  or  submissions  at  a
      hearing; rather he decided the  appeal  in  October  2003,  without  a
      hearing, in respect of a decision  made  in  February  2003,  about  a
      request to visit the UK in May 2003, for four weeks between  finishing
      studies and beginning military service. The Adjudicator had  not  been
      in a position to receive any evidence going to any relevant changes in
      the circumstances of the Appellant or otherwise.


  11.  The Vice President who, on 28 May 2004, granted permission to appeal,
      first, in view of the matters set out in the  grounds,  extended  time
      and granted permission. He then stated that through no  fault  of  the
      Adjudicator or the Entry Clearance Officer, the  Adjudicator  did  not
      see a late letter from the so-called sponsor to the effect that he did
      not know the claimant, whom the writer  of  the  letter  describes  in
      extremely disparaging terms.

  12. We note that none of the communications from Mr Yeboah was before  the
      Adjudicator at any stage  prior  to  his  signing  his  determination.
      Copies were lodged for the first time, by  the  Respondent,  with  the
      application for permission to appeal.

Submissions

  13. Mr Deller sought initially to rely on all the grounds  of  appeal.  He
      lodged, with permission, the determination of the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal MG(Visit appeal, directions) Jamaica [2004] UKIAT  00140  (10
      June 2004). This case was authority for the general  proposition  that
      where time has gone by since the date of the relevant decision and the
      date of the proposed visit, then it would  normally  be  inappropriate
      for an Adjudicator  to  give  a  direction  for  the  grant  of  entry
      clearance. This is because it is still necessary for an  appellant  to
      provide satisfactory up to date evidence to show  on  balance,  to  an
      Entry Clearance Officer, that nevertheless, all  the  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules relating to visitors are still met.


  14. As the arguments developed at the hearing, it  became  clear  that  by
      reason of the requirement to first identify a material error of law in
      the determination of an Adjudicator (now Immigration Judge), it  would
      potentially be difficult for Mr Deller to continue  to  seek  to  rely
      upon the late produced evidence from Mr Yeboah, or the  argument  that
      if it were to be found that  Mr  Yeboah  was  not  the  uncle  of  the
      Appellant, then the Appellant would, in law, have had  no  entitlement
      to an appeal as a family visitor, given that he would  not  have  been
      seeking to visit his family member at all. Mr Deller was of  the  view
      that these grounds of appeal did not avail him so  far  as  the  first
      hurdle of demonstrating that there had been a material  error  of  law
      was concerned. We return to these matters below.


  15. At the hearing, after deliberation, we found that the Adjudicator  had
      materially erred in law, in that the Adjudicator  ought  not  to  have
      given a direction that entry clearance be granted.   We  proceeded  to
      consider all the grounds of appeal. We admitted fresh evidence, and in
      the light of  all  the  evidence  then  before  us,  and  the  helpful
      submissions  of  Mr  Deller;  we  reconsidered  the  appeal   to   the
      Adjudicator. We concluded that not only  should  the  Adjudicator  not
      have made a direction, but also that the Appellant had not shown  that
      he was related as claimed to Mr Yeboah, that the Appellant was  not  a
      family visitor within the meaning of Section 90  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act),  and  that  there  had
      been  no  valid  appeal  before  the  Adjudicator.  We   allowed   the
      Respondent's appeal in that we substituted a decision to  dismiss  the
      Appellant's appeal to the Adjudicator. We now give our reasons for our
      decision.

Consideration and Findings

Material Error of Law

  16.  We  remind  ourselves  that  when  hearing   a   case   by   way   of
      reconsideration, the Tribunal must first decide  whether  or  not  the
      determination discloses a material error of law. It is only where that
      question is answered in  the  affirmative  that  it  is  open  to  the
      Tribunal to go on to consider what relief, if any, should be  granted,
      and whether or not fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.


  17. The appeal before us is,  by  virtue  of  the  Commencement  No.5  and
      Transitional Provisions Order 2005, to be reconsidered by  the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal (AIT) as if it had begun its life as  an  AIT
      appeal. It is governed by the provisions of the Asylum and Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants etc.)  Act  2004  (the  2004  Act),  including
      provisions that amend the Nationality, Immigration  Asylum  Act  2002,
      (the 2002 Act). In particular we refer to Section  103A  of  the  2002
      Act, as inserted by Section 26 of the 2004 Act (unification of  appeal
      system); and the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
      2005 (the 2005 Procedure Rules).

  18. Of particular importance are Rules 31 and 32 of  the  Procedure  Rules
      2005, which read as follows:

           Procedure for reconsideration of appeal
                31.  - (1) Where an order for reconsideration has been
           made, the Tribunal must reconsider an appeal as soon as
           reasonably practicable after that order has been served on both
           parties to the appeal.

               (2) Where the reconsideration is pursuant to an order under
           section 103A -

                 (a) the Tribunal carrying out the reconsideration must
                 first decide whether the original Tribunal made a material
                 error of law; and

                 (b) if it decides that the original Tribunal did not make a
                 material error of law, the Tribunal must order that the
                 original determination of the appeal shall stand.

               (3) Subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal must substitute a
           fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.

               (4) In carrying out the reconsideration, the Tribunal -

                 (a) may limit submissions or evidence to one or more
                 specified issues; and

                 (b) must have regard to any directions given by the
                 immigration judge or court which ordered the
                 reconsideration.

               (5) In this rule, a "material error of law" means an error
           of law which affected the Tribunal's decision upon the appeal.

           Evidence on reconsideration of appeal
                32.  - (1) The Tribunal may consider as evidence any note
           or record made by the Tribunal of any previous hearing at which
           the appeal was considered.

               (2) If a party wishes to ask the Tribunal to consider
           evidence which was not submitted on any previous occasion when
           the appeal was considered, he must file with the Tribunal and
           serve on the other party written notice to that effect, which
           must -

                 (a) indicate the nature of the evidence; and

                 (b) explain why it was not submitted on any previous
                 occasion.

               (3) A notice under paragraph (2) must be filed and served as
           soon as practicable after the parties have been served with the
           order for reconsideration.

               (4) If the Tribunal decides to admit additional evidence, it
           may give directions as to -

                 (a) the manner in which; and

                 (b) the time by which,

           the evidence is to be given or filed.

  19.  We also note that by Rule 62(7), the reconsideration is  'limited  to
      the grounds on which the IAT granted permission to appeal'. This means
      that, save where a further issue is identified in  the  grant  itself,
      consideration of any question of error  of  law  will  necessarily  be
      limited to (at most) any alleged errors identified in the  grounds  of
      appeal.


  20. We have before us all the evidence that was  before  the  Adjudicator,
      including the Appeal  Bundle  prepared  by  the  Respondent,  and  the
      correspondence from and concerning Mr Yeboah's  complaint,  which  was
      lodged with the application for permission to appeal, as well  as  the
      case of MG referred to above. We also admitted in  evidence,  pursuant
      to Rule 32  of  the  2005  Procedure  Rules,  the  Appendices  to  the
      application for  permission  to  appeal,  in  particular  the  written
      communications from Mr Yeboah and  the  extract  from  the  Diplomatic
      Service Procedures at Appendices 2 ,6,7,8,and 9. We are satisfied that
      we may consider this evidence pursuant to Section 85(5)(b) of the 2002
      Act, as  it  is  relevant  and  forms  part  of,  and/or  informs  the
      circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse  (see
      also DR (ECO: post-decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038).


  21.  Mr Deller accepted that there was in the grounds of appeal, no cogent
      assertion of any material error of law on the part of the Adjudicator,
      save in relation to his giving  the direction that entry clearance  be
      granted in order to give effect to his decision to allow  the  appeal.
      We remind ourselves that a 'material error of law' means an  error  of
      law which affected the Tribunal's decision on the appeal.

  22. Plainly, the Adjudicator cannot be  criticized  in  any  way  for  not
      taking into  account  evidence  which  was  not  before  him  and  the
      existence of which he was not aware. In this case, the  Appellant  did
      not have a United Kingdom based legal representative, and he  did  not
      request an oral hearing of his appeal. No notice of  any  hearing  was
      served upon Mr Yeboah, as the named sponsor, in  those  circumstances.
      It was in this way that Mr Yeboah appears to have become aware of  the
      existence of the proceedings, and of the  Appellant's  claim  that  Mr
      Yeboah was his uncle and his sponsor, only on receipt of a copy of the
      Adjudicator's determination which was issued  to  him  on  10  October
      2003.

  23. The Tribunal understand from Mr Deller  that  it  is  now  policy  and
      practice for an Entry Clearance  Officer  to  write  to  or  otherwise
      contact any person named as a sponsor, in order to  conduct  enquiries
      intended to show whether or not the individual is indeed a sponsor  as
      stated by an applicant. That policy and practice was not in  place  at
      the time of this application and appeal to the Adjudicator. It  is  in
      this way that the complaints of Mr Yeboah came to be received  by  the
      Respondent and the Home Office. Whilst it may be arguable,  given  the
      wide terms of the grant of permission to appeal,  that  this  evidence
      concerning Mr Yeboah, and the allegation that the Appellant  would  in
      fact have had no right of appeal had the Adjudicator decided  that  he
      was not related as claimed, can be raised at the initial stage  before
      this Tribunal, in order  to demonstrate a material error of law on the
      part  of  the  Adjudicator,  by  way  of  mistake  of  fact  going  to
      unfairness, that was not the way in which Mr Deller  argued  the  case
      before us. Although as will be seen, we did  go  on  to  consider  the
      matter of mistake of fact.

  24. There remains the challenge by way of submission that the  Adjudicator
      materially erred in law in giving a direction that entry clearance  be
      granted forthwith. The appeal to the Adjudicator in the case before us
      was lodged  on  18  March  2003,  and  was  brought  pursuant  to  the
      provisions of Section 59 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  (the
      1999 Act), as limited by  section  60,  (5)  (a),  which  removes  the
      entitlement to appeal against refusal of entry clearance as a  visitor
      unless the Appellant is a family visitor. The appeal was determined on
      1 October 2003 and issued on 10 October 2003.

  25. By Schedule 4, Paragraph 21(5) (a) to the 1999 Act, if  an  appeal  is
      allowed, an Adjudicator must give such directions for giving effect to
      the determination as he thinks are required.

  26. Where there was then an appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal,  by
      Paragraph 22(2) the Tribunal could affirm the  determination  or  make
      any other determination which the Adjudicator could have made. Where a
      direction was made, there was no requirement to comply with it so long
      as an appeal could be duly brought against the determination, and,  if
      duly brought, whilst the appeal is pending (22(4)).

  27.  By  Paragraph  22(5),  if  the  Tribunal  affirm  the   adjudicator's
      determination, allowing the appeal, they  may  alter  or  add  to  his
      directions...or replace them with their own directions...

  28. Section 87(1) of the  2002  Act  permits  an  adjudicator  to  give  a
      direction for the purpose of giving effect to his decision, and by sub-
      paragraph (2), a person responsible for making an immigration decision
      shall act in accordance with any such direction. Sub-paragraph (4)  of
      section 87 makes clear that such a direction shall be treated as  part
      of the determination of the appeal for the purposes of section  101  (
      now section 103).

  29. In the light of the above provisions, the Tribunal is satisfied that a
      direction, whether made pursuant to  both  Paragraphs  21  and  22  of
      Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act  (repealed from 1 April 2003), or   section
      87 of the 2002 Act, forms part of the decision of the Adjudicator upon
      the appeal. As such, the Tribunal finds that the  direction  given  by
      the Adjudicator in his determination issued on 10 October  2003  forms
      part of his decision upon the appeal, and that  it  is  open  to  this
      Tribunal to reconsider the matter by virtue of  Section  103A  of  the
      2002 Act, and to make whatever decision  the  Adjudicator  could  have
      made under the provisions of the 2002 Act.

  30.  We find that the Adjudicator did fall into a material error of law in
      reaching his decision that any direction was required in order to give
      effect to the determination. We find that he erred in forming the view
      that a  direction  was  required  or  necessary  or  appropriate.  The
      Adjudicator failed to take into account  relevant  factors,  including
      the fact that the Respondent had seen and heard the  Appellant,  where
      he had not had the benefit of so doing. Further, and importantly,  the
      Adjudicator had not taken into consideration the fact that he had  not
      had  the  opportunity  to  hear  from,  or  receive  any  up  to  date
      documentary evidence from the sponsor, who had played no part  at  all
      in the appeal proceedings. He had given no weight to these factors. In
      addition, the Appellant had proposed to travel to the UK for  a  short
      visit of four weeks, in May 2003, between the end of his undergraduate
      final examinations and the commencement of his military service.  That
      window of opportunity had  long  gone  by  the  time  the  Adjudicator
      considered and decided the appeal in October 2003.

  31. Evidence as to  the  Appellant's  circumstances  at  that  stage,  was
      missing. In addition, the Adjudicator did not have before him  any  up
      to date evidence going to the issue of maintenance and  accommodation.
      Nor could it be said that he had evidence to show that as at the  date
      of the Adjudicator's decision, all the requirements  of  the  relevant
      immigration rule were met.  It  is  for  all  these  reasons  that  we
      conclude that the Adjudicator fell into irrationality in deciding that
      any direction  was  either  necessary  or  required,  or  appropriate,
      whether under the 1999 Act, or the 2002 Act, in order to  give  effect
      to his decision to allow the appeal (see the case of MG which provides
      guidance as to factors which are relevant when considering whether  or
      not a direction should be made).

  32. We further observe that in addition to the statutory requirement under
      section 87 of the 2002 Act that an Entry Clearance officer comply with
      an adjudicator's direction unless  the  determination  is  subject  to
      further appeal; the DSP provide guidance to an ECO, including steps to
      be followed when an appeal is allowed.

  33. At paragraph 27.11 ii the DSP state that where no direction is made by
      an adjudicator, the ECO should interview the  appellant  to  ascertain
      whether he or she still  wishes  to  travel,  the  category  of  entry
      clearance  required  and  whether  there  has  been  any   change   of
      circumstances. This should generally not be a detailed interview.  The
      entry clearance SHOULD (emphasis as in the DSP) be issued unless there
      has been a significant and material change of circumstances since  the
      refusal decision, of which the Adjudicator  would  be  unaware,  or  a
      material deception has come to light of which  the  adjudicator  would
      have been unaware.

  34. It is not to be assumed that an ECO would not follow the DSP guidance,
      the content of which should be borne in  mind  by  Immigration  Judges
      when consideration is  being  given  to  whether  or  not  to  make  a
      direction.  The  existence  of  the  DSP  is  a  further  factor  that
      reinforces this Tribunal in  our  view  that  it  was  not  necessary,
      required or appropriate, for the Adjudicator to have made a  direction
      in this particular case.


  35. The  Tribunal  having  found  that  there  is  force  in  Mr  Deller's
      submission  that it was a material error of law on  the  part  of  the
      Adjudicator to have made any direction at all, we must now  go  on  to
      consider the appeal and substitute a fresh decision, as is  stated  at
      Rule 31(3) of the Procedure Rules 2005.


   Consideration of Fresh Evidence

  36. In so doing, we are satisfied that we may consider not only the matter
      of the direction to give effect to the  determination,  but  also  the
      fresh evidence going to the Appellant's claimed relationship  with  Mr
      Yeboah. This is because we are satisfied that evidence from Mr  Yeboah
      complies with the requirements laid down by the court in  E  and  R  v
      SSHD[2004] QB 1044 , and in Antonio Cabo Verde v SSHD [2004] EWCA  Civ
      1726.


  37. In the case of E and R the court held that a mistake  of  fact  giving
      rise to unfairness was a separate head of challenge in an appeal on  a
      point of law in  a  statutory  context  where  the  parties  share  an
      interest in cooperating to achieve the correct result. Asylum law  was
      undoubtedly such an area according to the court and we see  no  reason
      why immigration law would not also be such an area. Here, the evidence
      of Mr Yeboah goes to assist in establishing the existence of a mistake
      of fact giving rise to unfairness.


  38. The requirements are first that there  has  been  a  mistake  of  fact
      giving rise to unfairness, namely a mistake as to  an  existing  fact,
      including a mistake as to the availability of evidence on a particular
      matter. Second, it  must  be  shown  that  the  fact  or  evidence  is
      'established' in the sense that it is  uncontentious  and  objectively
      verifiable. Thirdly, the party appealing must not be  responsible  for
      the mistake. Fourthly, it must be shown  that  the  mistake  played  a
      material (not necessarily decisive) part in the tribunal's  reasoning.
      Whilst the judgments  of  the  court  in  these  two  cases  were  not
      specifically referred to before  the  Tribunal  at  the  hearing,  the
      judgments are of course binding upon the Tribunal, and we follow  them
      accordingly.

  39. In this appeal, the assertion, if proved, that the  Appellant  is  not
      related as claimed to  the  sponsor,  would  undermine  not  only  the
      credibility of his claim to be a family visitor,  but  would  also  go
      against the  Adjudicator's  jurisdiction.  There  is  only  an  appeal
      against the refusal of entry clearance as a visitor where the proposed
      visit is as a family member. (See e.g. Section  90  of  the  2002  Act
      which provides for a right of appeal under Section 82(1) as a visitor,
      only if the application was made for the purpose of visiting a  member
      of the applicant's family, and e.g. the previous appeal  regime  under
      Part IV of the 1999 Act (above), and The Immigration  Appeals  (Family
      Visitor) Regulations 2003 and their predecessors).

  40. We have before us a copy of an email  communication  from  Mr  Yeboah,
      dated 15 October 2003 to the ECO at the UK High Commission  in  Accra,
      in  which  he  expresses  his  shock  at  receiving  a  copy  of   the
      determination of the Adjudicator, stating that he knew nothing of  the
      proceedings until then, that he is not the sponsor  of  the  Appellant
      and indeed does not even know him. He confirms that he has  not  given
      his address, or any letter,  or  any  copy  of  his  passport  to  the
      Appellant, and that there has been  an  abuse  by  the  Appellant.  He
      states that he is not to be held responsible for the Appellant or  his
      behaviour, and that the Appellant should not be granted  any  visa  to
      visit him.


  41. Mr Yeboah also wrote to the  Home  Office  Implementation  Section  in
      Leeds, on 19 October 2003 and to the ECO in Accra, on 28 October 2003,
      in similar terms to those set  out  in  the  email  communication.  It
      appears that  Mr  Yeboah  made  a  telephone  call  to  the  Appellate
      Authority at that time, also to express similar concerns.


   Findings in the Light of all the Evidence Including Fresh Evidence

  42. We are satisfied that there has been a mistake as to an existing fact:
      the relationship between the claimed sponsor and the  Appellant.  This
      fact is objectively verifiable from the evidence before  us,  and  has
      not been the subject of any challenge on the part of the Appellant who
      has had the opportunity to make any such challenge and  has  not  done
      so. The mistake has not been the responsibility of the party appealing
      and it was clearly material to the Adjudicator's reasoning.

  43. In the light of the evidence now available, in particular the  letters
      and email from Mr Yeboah, the authenticity and  content  of  which  is
      unchallenged before us; and bearing in mind that the Appellant has not
      played any part in this second appeal since the Respondent's notice of
      appeal was lodged; the Tribunal is not satisfied that the Appellant is
      related as claimed to Mr Yeboah. Mr  Yeboah  has  denied  that  he  is
      related to the Appellant. We find that Mr Yeboah's evidence  that  his
      personal details have been misused, without his knowledge or  consent,
      by the Appellant, who has not challenged Mr Yeboah's  evidence,  shows
      on balance that the Appellant is not related as claimed or at  all  to
      Mr Yeboah.

  44. It follows, we find, that a genuine visit was not intended,  and  also
      that this was not a family visit. In turn that leads  to  the  finding
      that there was no valid family visit appeal, so that  the  Adjudicator
      had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the  appeal.  We  find  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in law by proceeding  on  a  mistaken  view  of  the
      facts, falling within the principles set out in E  and  R.   We  would
      therefore  substitute  a  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  to   the
      Adjudicator.

The Position Absent the Evidence from Mr Yeboah

  45. For completeness it is useful to mention what the  position  would  be
      had the evidence of Mr Yeboah not existed, and  the  appeal  had  been
      launched solely on the basis that the Adjudicator materially erred  in
      law in making a direction.


  46. It is to be recalled that we have found that the Adjudicator fell into
      a material error of law in making a direction,  for  all  the  reasons
      that we give above (see paragraphs 24-34, and in particular 30-34).


  47. The Tribunal takes the view that its powers are now  governed  by  the
      provisions of the 2002 Act as amended by the 2004 Act, and  therefore,
      the Tribunal must consider and apply the powers set out in sections 85-
      87 of the 2002 Act. These sections do not contain the power to  alter,
      add to, or  replace,  directions,  as  was  given  to  the  IAT  under
      paragraph 22 (5) of the 1999 Act. However, what the Tribunal  may  do,
      in such circumstances, is to consider an appeal,  substitute  a  fresh
      decision to allow or dismiss an appeal, and, if  allowing  an  appeal,
      the Tribunal may give a direction for the purpose of giving effect  to
      the decision, as is stated at section 87(1) of the 2002 Act.

  48. In the circumstances of  this  particular  case,  had  there  been  no
      operative  effective  challenge  to  the  substantive  body   of   the
      determination of the Adjudicator, or to the determination to allow the
      appeal on its merits, whilst the Tribunal may  not  have  reached  the
      same decision as the Adjudicator in this case, it would not have  been
      open to the Tribunal to interfere with the Adjudicator's  decision  on
      that  basis.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal   would   have   allowed   the
      Respondent's appeal, but only on the limited basis that, for  all  the
      reasons given at paragraphs 24 - 34 above, it would have been  neither
      necessary, required, nor appropriate  to  give  a  direction  for  the
      purpose of giving effect to the decision.

  49. It would follow, that in allowing the Respondent's appeal in part, the
      determination by the  Adjudicator  to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against refusal of entry clearance as a visitor would  not  have  been
      changed by the fresh decision of this Tribunal,  save  in  that  there
      would no longer exist any direction for the grant of  entry  clearance
      to the Appellant.

  50. In the circumstances of cases such as this, it appears to the Tribunal
      that where a right of appeal is not available, or is unsuccessful, for
      whatever reason, Entry Clearance Officers and Immigration Officers may
      look to  and  apply  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
      particular Rule 321, which deals with circumstances in which a  person
      in possession of entry clearance may be refused leave to enter the UK,
      and 321A, which deals with grounds on which leave to enter  or  remain
      which is in force is to be cancelled at port or while  the  holder  is
      outside the UK. It appears to the Tribunal that  within  these  Rules,
      are the remedies needed to deal with situations  similar  to  some  of
      those presented in this appeal.

   Decision


     51.    The  original  Tribunal  made  a  material  error  of  law.  The
following    decision  is  accordingly  substituted:  the  appeal   by   the
Appellant against      the decision of the Respondent made  on  21  February
2003, to refuse  entry clearance as a family visitor is dismissed.






Catriona Jarvis
Senior Immigration Judge

Date:  26 April 2005




