
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

AE (Relocation-Darfur-Khartoum an option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT 00101

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at         Field House                    Determination Promulgated
On          19th April 2005
     3rd May 2005


                                   Before

                    Mr Hon. Mr Justice Hodge (President)
                   Miss E R Arfon-Jones (Deputy President)



                                   Between




                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant            Ms L Saunders, Counsel
For the Respondent           Ms L Hooper, Counsel

Internal relocation in the Khartoum area is an option for those fleeing
from Darfur. The available evidence does not show that on any such
relocation every Darfurian faces a real risk of persecution or ill
treatment contrary to article 3

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of the Sudan.   He  was  born  on  the  5th
      October 1985 so is now 19.  He claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on
      his arrival on 24th June 2003.  That claim  was  refused  but  he  was
      granted exceptional leave to  remain.   His  application  for  further
      leave led to a refusal to  vary  leave  to  enter  or  remain  by  the
      respondent on 19th April 2004.  The appellant appealed and his  appeal
      was heard by Mr F Pieri, Adjudicator, in Glasgow.


   2. The adjudicator found the appellant credible.  He  accepted  that  the
      appellant is a member of the Massaleit tribe from the Darfur  area  of
      Sudan.  In his determination promulgated on the 6th  August  2004  the
      adjudicator concluded:-

           "It seems to me clear when this appellant's past experiences are
           placed in context of the current background material that  there
           is  a  real  risk  of  the  appellant  suffering   ill-treatment
           amounting to persecution and a breach of Article 3 in the Darfur
           area now.  Members of his close family have suffered terribly in
           the past.  The situation in the Darfur area is still dire.   The
           ill-treatment he risks suffering is on account of his  race  and
           so falls within the terms of the Refugee Convention."

   3. The adjudicator having concluded that the claimant had a  well-founded
      fear of persecution in the Darfur area of Sudan went  on  to  consider
      the question of internal relocation.  He  concluded  at  paragraph  42
      "Internal relocation has no part to play in the circumstances of  this
      appeal".  It is against that decision  that  the  Secretary  of  State
      applied for permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.

   4. That application was considered by Mr P R Lane (Vice  President).   He
      granted permission to appeal and concluded that the  determination  of
      the adjudicator contains arguably a mistake in law in the  application
      by the adjudicator of the concept of internal  relocation  within  the
      context of the Refugee Convention.

   5. By Article 5 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
      etc.) Act 2004 (Commencement no. 5 and Transitional Provisions)  Order
      2005  (SI  2005/230),  any  appeal  which   immediately   before   the
      commencement of the 2004 Act is pending before the Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal shall, after commencement of that Act, be dealt with  by  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal as if it had  originally  decided  the
      appeal and it was reconsidering its decision.

   6. As this is an appeal before the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  we
      will refer to the claimant as the appellant and the Secretary of State
      as the respondent notwithstanding the fact that  the  application  for
      permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   In
      accordance with paragraph 14.8  of  the  Practice  Directions  of  the
      President of the AIT issued  on  4th  April  2005,  we  must  consider
      whether the adjudicator made a material error in law.

Material Error of Law

   7. We first considered whether the determination in this case contained a
      material error of law.   The  Adjudicator  dealt  with  the  issue  of
      internal relocation and made his findings as follows:-

           "38.  That leaves the  question  of  internal  relocation.   Mrs
           Ahmed submitted that the  background  material  shows  that  the
           Massaleit do not suffer at the hands of the authorities out with
           the Darfur area.  I agree.  The background material  shows  that
           there are many displaced people from Darfur living elsewhere  in
           Sudan.  This however appears to me to raise a  difficult  issue.
           I shall explain.




           39.    Underlying  the  whole  question  of  refugee  status  is
           surrogate protection.  In the normal course a person  living  in
           an area of a country where he is at risk of persecution  at  the
           hands of non state agents who act with impunity in that area can
           be expected to relocate to another  safe  area  of  the  country
           still controlled by the government, if such an area  exists,  as
           the government will  protect  him  in  that  other  area.   That
           provides the  paradigm  example  of  internal  relocation.   The
           situation however in Darfur appears to me to be far removed from
           this.


       40.  In Darfur Arab militias are attacking black  Africans  such  as
           the Massaleit.  These Arab militias were the source of the  ill-
           treatment endured by the Appellant's family.  What distinguishes
           this from the typical example I set out earlier  is  that  there
           appears to me on the background evidence, at the very  least,  a
           real risk that these Arab militias are acting with  the  support
           and  the  complicity  of  the  Sudanese  Government.   In  these
           circumstances does internal relocation to another area of  Sudan
           have any part to play?  The answer to this, in my view,  can  be
           found be examining the persecution which  this  appellant  risks
           facing.  It is more than a risk of persecution by Arab militias.
            It is a risk of persecution by Arab militias  acting  with  the
           support of the government.


       41.  I return to the United Nations News document of 23rd June 2004.
            That states that a UN Human Rights Report has found many  human
           rights  violations  in  the   Darfur   area   including   ethnic
           displacement.  The United Nations News  Bulletin  of  2nd  April
           2004 talks of forced depopulation of entire areas.  On the whole
           evidence there appears to me to  be  a  real  risk  that  forced
           depopulation is one of the aims of the Arab militias.  As I have
           said there also appears to me at the very least a real risk that
           the Arab militias are acting with the support and complicity  of
           the Sudanese government.  There appears to me  to  be  something
           fundamentally  flawed   in   the   suggestion   that   in   such
           circumstances the Appellant should be expected  to  relocate  to
           Khartoum or  some  other  area  in  Sudan  rather  than  seeking
           surrogate protection of the international community.  By  moving
           to another area of Sudan he could not be said  to  be  obtaining
           the  protection  of  the  government  against  the   persecution
           sponsored by the same government in Darfur.  At best,  it  seems
           to me, all that could be said is that the Appellant  would  have
           moved to an area where his persecutors have no interest  in  him
           and  would  have  gone  along  with  one  of  his   persecutors'
           objectives namely that he and his kind  be  displaced  from  the
           area where he once lived.  To go along with the  wishes  of  his
           persecutors may result in his being safe but it is  far  removed
           from his obtaining protection  from  his  persecutors.   I  find
           support for these conclusions in the Michigan Guidelines on  the
           internal protection alternative and Macdonald,  Immigration  Law
           Practice paragraph 12.43.


       42.  In my view therefore internal relocation has no part to play in
           the circumstances of this appeal."

Submissions on Error of Law




   8. The Secretary of State  argued  that  the  adjudicator  made  a  legal
      mistake in the manner in which he considered internal relocation.   It
      is said he failed to consider the argument raised with  him  that  the
      appellant will not have any need for protection if he is relocated  to
      a different area.  Even  if  it  were  accepted  that  the  State  was
      complicit in  the  events  of  Darfur  that  does  not  rule  out  the
      possibility that a safe haven cannot be found elsewhere in Sudan.   He
      is further said to have erred in finding that the appellant by  moving
      to another area  in  Sudan  would  not  be  availing  himself  of  the
      protection of the State.  It was also  suggested  that  there  was  no
      objective evidence that indicates the problems in  Darfur  extend  out
      with the Darfur area.  Indeed there is no  real  risk  of  persecution
      says the Secretary of State for the appellant if he were to  relocate.




   9. Counsel for the appellant described the activities of the militias  in
      Darfur supported by the Sudanese government as  ethnic  cleansing  and
      forcible displacement.  It was said this continues  in  any  place  of
      relocation.   The  adjudicator  adopted  the  right   approach.    The
      persecution in Darfur is government sponsored.  Reliance was placed on
      paragraph 31 of the UNHCR Guidelines on International  Protection  ...
      "Internal Flight or Relocation (UNHCR 23rd July 2003)".  At  paragraph
      31 it is said "Where internal displacement is  a  result  of  ""ethnic
      cleansing"" policies, denying refugee  status  on  the  basis  of  the
      internal  flight  or  relocation  concept  could  be  interpreted   as
      condoning the resulting situation on the ground and  therefore  raised
      additional concerns".

Conclusions on Error Law


  10. We are satisfied that the adjudicator made a material error of law  in
      his conclusion on the issues of internal  relocation.   The  appellant
      was held to be a Massaleit.  The adjudicator concluded members of that
      tribe do not suffer at the hands of the authorities outwith the Darfur
      area and that there are  many  displaced  people  from  Darfur  living
      elsewhere in Sudan.  The internal relocation  alternative  would,  the
      Adjudicator concluded, have meant the claimant moving to an area where
      his persecutors have no interest in him.  But he  would  be  displaced
      from the area where he had once  lived.   That  it  was  said  "...may
      result in his being safe but it is  far  removed  from  his  obtaining
      protection from his persecutors".

  11. The proper start-point  for  any  consideration  of  the  question  of
      internal relocation is set out in  paragraph  91  of  the  1979  UNHCR
      Handbook as follows:-


           "Relocation Within County of Origin.


           Where it appears that the persecution is clearly confined  to  a
           specific part of the country's territory, it may be necessary in
           order to check that the condition laid down in Article  1  a  of
           the Geneva Convention has been fulfilled, namely that the person
           concerned is ""is unable or owing to such fear (of persecution),
           is  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  that
           country,"" to ascertain whether the person concerned cannot find
           effective protection in another part  of  his  own  country,  to
           which he may reasonably be expected to move".


      This issue has been considered jurisprudentially on many occasions  in
      many jurisdictions.  The leading UK cases are R v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department ex parte Robinson [1998] QB929 as reconsidered
      and further interpreted in the light of the Human Rights Act  1998  in
      AE and FE v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2003]  INLR
      475. CA.

  12. At paragraph 67 of AE and FE the Master  of  the  Rolls  concluded  in
      relation to the right to refugee status under the  Refugee  Convention
      that: "consideration of  the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation
      should focus on the consequences to the asylum seeker settling in  the
      place of relocation instead of his previous home".  This as  was  said
      at  paragraph  24  "involves  a  comparison  between  the   conditions
      prevailing in the place of habitual residence and those which  prevail
      in the safe haven, having regard to the impact that they will have  on
      a person with the characteristics of the asylum seeker".


  13. This is not the approach taken by the adjudicator in  this  case.   He
      appears to have accepted that the claimant would  not  suffer  at  the
      hands of the authorities out with the Darfur area and his  persecutors
      would have no interest in him and he may  indeed  be  safe  away  from
      Darfur.  Nevertheless he allowed the appeal.  That he did so indicates
      a misconception of the internal relocation test.  On this logic, there
      is a further requirement in order to be able  to  show  that  internal
      relocation is not available.  It is not sufficient despite the  person
      moving being safe in the area to which he moves.  His move  must  also
      not accord with the wishes of his  persecutors.   But  the  wishes  of
      one's persecutors will only matter in this context if as a  matter  of
      fact they adversely impact on the situation in which  a  person  finds
      himself: see para. 24 AE and FE (above).

  14. The background material quoted by the adjudicator suggests  complicity
      by the government of Sudan in a campaign of ethnic  cleansing  in  the
      Darfur region.  There is nothing in UK law to support the assertion in
      paragraph 31 of  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on  International  Protection
      quoted (see para. 9 above) that if there has been a policy of  "ethnic
      cleansing" acceptance of the viability of internal relocation condones
      that policy or could be interpreted as condoning that policy.   We  do
      not accept it is legitimate to claim that governmental or governmental
      supported  action  amounting  to  persecution  directed   against   an
      individual or group because of their ethnicity leading to their  being
      displaced to another area in their country must lead to an entitlement
      to international protection as refugees even if, in the area to  which
      they are displaced, there is no real risk of there being persecuted.


  15. When considering internal relocation the adjudicator erred in  law  by
      failing to focus on the consequences to the appellant of  settling  in
      the place of relocation instead of his previous home.  He should  have
      considered  the  background  information  on  the  proposed  place  of
      internal relocation having regard to the impact that that will have on
      a person with the characteristics of the appellant.  In general  terms
      if there is a safe haven within his own country for a person  who  has
      been persecuted  in  another  part  of  that  country  even  with  the
      complicity of the government  then  the  international  community  can
      expect a claimant to go there.  Many hundreds of thousands  of  people
      appear to  have  been  displaced  from  Darfur  as  a  result  of  the
      activities of the  militias  widely  condemned  by  the  international
      community as ethnic cleansing.  If as a matter of fact they  are  safe
      elsewhere  in  Sudan  it  cannot  be   the   responsibility   of   the
      international community to give them  refuge  merely  because  of  the
      abhorrent nature of the policy which has driven them from their homes.
       We  speak  here  of  the  position  generally.   Of  course,  in  any
      individual case there may be specific circumstances which would  still
      cause relocation to be unduly harsh, but none were identified  by  the
      adjudicator in this case.

  16. We, therefore, concluded that the  adjudicator  had  made  a  material
      error of law.  We heard submissions on whether to proceed to hear  and
      determine the case or to adjourn it for the gathering  of  further  or
      other evidence.  We noted the claimant had  filed  further  and  fresh
      evidence dealing with the background position in Sudan.   An  expert's
      report from a Mr F H  Verney  had  been  filed  and  the  witness  had
      attended at the hearing.  We concluded we should consider the evidence
      provided and hear from the witness and reconsider the decision in this
      appeal.

Internal Relocation in Sudan:  IAT Decisions

  17. The  adjudicator  found  that  this  claimant  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution were he to return to his home area in Darfur.  It  is  the
      Secretary of State's case that there is  no  objective  evidence  that
      indicates the problems in Darfur extend out with the Darfur  area  and
      there is no real risk to Darfur Africans returning to  Khartoum.   The
      IAT has considered the issue of internal relocation to Khartoum  in  a
      number of recently reported cases.

  18. In AA (Kreish Ethnicity, Decree 4/307 (Sudan) [2004] UK  IAT00167  the
      Tribunal  considered  the  background  evidence  about  the   internal
      displacement camps in Khartoum.  At paragraph 23 they said as follows:-



           "We feel nonetheless that the claimant could be returned without
           being at risk of Article 3 harm even if it meant he  would  have
           to be placed in  an  internal  displacement  camp  in  Khartoum.
           Approximately  1.8  million  internally  displaced  persons  are
           living around Khartoum and the Norwegian Report makes  it  plain
           their conditions are difficult.   What  the  Report  also  makes
           plain, however, if that their conditions cannot be  said  to  be
           inhumane or degrading.  Employment is scarce and there  is  much
           poverty but there are health facilities and water facilities for
           those who live in camps and for approximately 70% of the IDPs in
           Khartoum there is access to some form of medical service".


      The Tribunal relied  on  a  Norwegian  Refugee  Council's  profile  of
      Internal Displacement on Sudan  dated  19th  May  2004  which  as  the
      Tribunal pointed out "...contains a  very  large  amount  of  material
      relating to the position of displaced persons in Sudan  gathered  over
      the last two or three years."

  19. In AB (Return of Southern Sudanese) Sudan CG 20 [2004] UK IAT 00260  a
      determination promulgated on the 17th  September  2004   the  Tribunal
      quoted a letter from the UNHCR of the 1st July 2002  relating  to  the
      potential placement of southern Sudanese in camps in Khartoum.   UNHCR
      said as follows:-

           "Such  persons  may  be  placed  in  camps  for  the  internally
           displaced and would likely be compelled to  contend  with  harsh
           living conditions and physical insecurity".

  20. In commenting on this letter the Tribunal said at paragraph 33:


           "There is no evidence to show that (the claimant)  would  be  at
           real risk of finding himself in a camp  for  displaced  persons.
           Even if he did, the UNHCR  letter  contains  no  assertion  that
           conditions in  a  camp  for  the  internally  displaced,  albeit
           involving harsh living conditions and physical insecurity, would
           be such as to cross the high threshold applied for Article 3".

  21. Again in MM (Zaghawa - risk on return - internal flight) Sudan 2005 UK
      IAT 00069, a decision published on the 9th March  2005,  the  Tribunal
      again considers  this  issue.   The  claimant  in  AA  was  of  Kreish
      ethnicity and the  claimant  in  AB  was  from  southern  Sudan.   The
      claimant in MM was not of the same ethnicity as the appellant in  this
      case but was from Darfur.  The Tribunal therefore addressed the  issue
      of whether the appellant in MM could safely relocate within the  Sudan
      and whether it would be unduly harsh for him to do so  and  considered
      any risk the appellant might  face  in  Khartoum  where  he  would  be
      returned to.

  22. The Tribunal in MM relied on a UNHCR  letter  of  the  18th  May  2004
      concerning "return of failed asylum seekers to Sudan".  Quoting  UNHCR
      at paragraph 35 the Tribunal said:

           "Internally  displaced  persons  from  Darfur  also  often  face
           protection risks, including forced  relocation,  forced  return.
           We do not find that the heightened risk of scrutiny is enough to
           amount to persecution in breach of Article 3 of the  ECHR.   The
           appellant was not a student.  We note that the UNHCR cited  only
           one example of the authorities  moving  into  a  camp  to  evict
           residents and forcibly  relocating  them  to  the  outskirts  of
           Khartoum.  This one example does not  show  that  evictions  are
           being systematically carried out on all the camps and  does  not
           make it a real risk".

  23. Again referring to the UNHCR letter of the 18th May 2004 the  Tribunal
      said at paragraph 37:


           "The UNHCR describes the conditions as precarious.  This limited
           information is insufficient  to  lead  to  a  finding  that  the
           conditions in the camp amount to a breach of Article 3  or  that
           the displaced persons in those camps are persecuted by reason of
           their ethnicity by the authorities who run the camps."

  24. In MM the Tribunal heard evidence from Peter Verney,  the  witness  in
      this case.  They said in response to his evidence,"  We  do  not  find
      that this evidence paints a picture of systematic human rights  abuses
      of displaced Darfurians in Khartoum".

  25. The appellant also maintains that there is a real  risk  that  on  any
      return to Khartoum he  will  be  detained  by  the  internal  security
      services and presumably ill-treated.  This issue was also addressed in
      the three cases cited.  In AA  at paragraph 16 the Tribunal said:

            "We find it entirely plausible that someone who  has  been  away
           from Sudan for a  long  time  will  be  questioned  and  may  be
           required to make tax payments in foreign currency but that could
           not amount to persecution and we see no reason to  suppose  that
           this would place a person at the risk of Article 3 harm.

      At paragraph 17, it added:


           "We are further not aware of any information that shows that the
           Sudanese  authorities  in  Khartoum   are   treating   returning
           southerners in such a way as to put them at real risk of Article
           3 harm".

  26. In AB the Tribunal had received no evidence to  cast  doubt  upon  the
      earlier Tribunals findings at AA and concluded:

           "There is no evidence to show that at the present time  being  a
           person who originates from southern Sudan is such as to put  him
           or her at real risk on return to Khartoum."

  27. The Tribunal  in  MM  having  considered  the  background  information
      concluded at para. 44:-

               i) We accept the appellant is likely to be questioned at the
                  airport on his return to Sudan in view of his ethnic  and
                  linguistic characteristics.


              ii) The objective information does not lead us to  find  that
                  he is likely  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
                  treatment which reaches to the threshold of Article 3  as
                  the result of the questioning."

The Background Information

  28. The CIPU Reports of April 2004 available to the adjudicator  and  that
      of October 2004 shown to us do not cite any evidence which calls  into
      question the conclusions of the three cases cited above.  We note that
      the claimants in those cases came variously from  Southern  Sudan  and
      Darfur and were not of this appellant's  ethnicity  as  found  by  the
      adjudicator.  But the general conclusion from the cases is that  there
      is no real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3  for
      those relocated from areas of Sudan to Khartoum.


  29. The Global IDP Project, a group established by the  Norwegian  Refugee
      Council in 1996 produced a report on  the  24th  March  2005  entitled
      "Sudan: Darfur Crisis adds to challenge of mass return  to  the  South
      following historic peace deal".  Under a heading entitled  "Challenges
      of Return" the Report says of internally displaced  persons  currently
      living in Khartoum "... the capital hosts nearly 2 million IDPs,  most
      of whom appear to be willing to go back to their places of origin  ...
      a  survey  found  that  three  quarters  of  IDPs  in  Khartoum   were
      unemployed, 44% having received no formal  education.   Over  half  of
      them were under 20 years old".

  30. It further said:

           "Despite an encouraging government initiative to grant  land  to
           IIDPs in Khartoum the actual way this process has  been  carried
           out  has  raised  serious  concerns   about   the   government's
           commitment to the project as  thousands  of  displaced  families
           have been left homeless.  Out of some 2 million IDPs in  greater
           Khartoum the vast majority are  living  in  squatter  areas  and
           about 270,000 are settled  in  four  overcrowded  camps  ...  By
           November 2004 80% of the IDPs were living in improvised shelters
           and many were forced to return to the south as a consequence  of
           the demolitions."

  31. A significant amount of the material submitted to us  related  to  the
      position of internally displaced persons in Darfur.  The adjudicator's
      factual finding that this appellant was at a real risk of  persecution
      in Darfur has not been challenged.  The issue here is,  can  there  be
      internal relocation to  Khartoum  for  the  appellant.   Much  of  the
      background  information  provided  to  us  on  this  issue   is   very
      generalised.  We were for instance  provided  with  extracts  from  an
      Amnesty International paper dated 4th April 2005  entitled  "Risks  of
      Refoulement for Sudan's refugees".   Its discussion  of  the  security
      situation in Khartoum  is  somewhat  contradictory.   It  asserts  for
      instance "there is no internal flight alternative  for  Darfurians  in
      Khartoum/Central Sudan".  It  says  "Darfurians  from  African  ethnic
      groups such as ... Massaleit ... are a high risk group to arrests  and
      human rights violations".  On the other hand it says:

           "..arrests have been carried out mostly of suspected  supporters
           of opposition groups  including  Darfuris  from  African  ethnic
           groups accused of sympathising with the armed groups".

      Further it refers to the existence of ghost houses and the  fact  that
      those who are detained there "are mainly  political  opposition  party
      members or supporters".


      Further it says:


           "It is difficult to keep track  of  people  returned  of  people
           returned to  Sudan  and  we  do  not  have  reports  of  persons
           returning/deported to  Sudan  being  arrested.   Over  the  last
           couple of year's high  profile  politically  active  individuals
           have  travelled  to  the   centre   without   any   particularly
           significant instances being reported.  However, this  is  not  a
           guarantee of safety for others."

  32. Mr Peter Verney, who gave evidence, said he had last been in Sudan  in
      1998.  He described himself as being persona non grata in Sudan having
      received death threats from the Sudanese government.  He cannot return
      to Sudan as he cannot protect his friends and relatives there.  He was
      married to a Sudanese citizen.  His evidence was that he had had  long
      exposure to Sudanese society and is in daily contact with Sudanese.

  33. He regarded internally displaced persons as being given  very  minimal
      provision.  He accepted there was several  hundreds  of  thousands  of
      internally  displaced  persons  in  Khartoum.   He  thought  that  the
      appellant might be identified by informer  systems  that  operated  in
      camps.  He said that there were reports of arrests  and  detention  of
      students,  lawyers,  merchants  and  traders  but  accepted  that  the
      appellant did not fit into any of these categories.  He asserted  that
      anybody from the appellant's ethnic background would have  loyalty  to
      the rebels imputed to them.  The witnesses overall approach  was  that
      in effect the  appellant  would  be  at  a  relatively  high  risk  of
      persecution "like others from African ethnic groups who are  perceived
      to sympathise with rebel groups".

  34. The adjudicator accepted this appellant as a Massaleit from Darfur who
      had a real risk of persecution in that area of Sudan  because  of  his
      ethnicity.

  35. There is no evidence in the background papers to support a  suggestion
      that Massaleit from Darfur, or indeed  any  individual  member  of  an
      African tribe from that region  would  be  automatically  at  risk  on
      return to Khartoum or as a internally displaced person  in  or  around
      Khartoum.

  36. On the 18th May  2004  UNHCR  accepted  that  "Sudanese  of  non  Arab
      Darfurian background returning  to  Sudan  faced  heightened  risk  of
      scrutiny by the security apparatus ...  internally  displaced  persons
      from Darfur often faced protection risks including  forced  relocation
      and forced return".  But the area  around  Khartoum  has  1.8  million
      internally displaced persons of who some  hundreds  of  thousands  are
      from the Darfur region and most of whom will  be  from  the  "African"
      tribal groups.  This appellant was found to be at risk of  persecution
      in Darfur  because  of  his  ethnic  origin.   To  suggest  that  this
      appellant on any return and on relocation to  Khartoum  faces  a  real
      risk of persecution or indeed a real risk of ill-treatment contrary to
      Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights is tantamount  to
      accepting that  all  and  every  internally  displaced  person  within
      Khartoum faces such a risk.  Had that been the case we  are  satisfied
      that UNHCR with long and careful knowledge of the area would  have  so
      indicated by now.  Internally displaced persons in the  Khartoum  area
      clearly face a number of difficulties.  It may be that for some  there
      may be a real risk arising out of the fact that the authorities  would
      target them as active sympathisers of armed rebel groups or as persons
      connected with opposition political groups.  But we cannot accept that
      there is a real risk there  to  this  individual  appellant.   We  are
      conscious of having to consider this matter on a "case by case"  basis
      as urged by  UNHCR.   There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  this
      appellant would be perceived as involved with armed  rebel  groups  or
      opposition political groups or that he would inextricably be driven to
      the worst circumstances for internally displaced persons in  Khartoum,
      where ever they may be.  The previous decisions of the IAT,  which  we
      accept, do not suggest there is likely to  be  an  automatic  risk  of
      serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3  in  the  Khartoum
      area.

  37. Nor do we accept that this appellant will be singled out  at  Khartoum
      airport on any return.  His ethnicity may be clear  but  it  does  not
      follow from that that he will be targeted, arrested and persecuted  or
      ill-treated.

  38. We note finally that the adjudicator when considering this appellant's
      case agreed that the Massaleit do not  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the
      authorities outwith the Darfur area and that there are many  displaced
      people from Darfur living elsewhere in the Sudan.   He  also  accepted
      that by moving elsewhere in the  Sudan  the  appellant's  "persecutors
      have no interest in him" and such a move  "may  result  in  his  being
      safe."

Decision

  39. For the reasons given we consider  the  adjudicator  made  a  material
      error of law in the manner in which he treated the possibility of  the
      appellant being internally relocated within Sudan away from the Darfur
      area.

  40. We went on to reconsider the case.  We concluded for the reasons given
      that internal relocation within  Sudan  outside  the  Darfur  area  is
      available for the appellant.  We do not  consider  that  the  evidence
      available leads to the conclusion that the appellant would face a real
      risk of persecution or  a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 of the ECHR on any relocation to the Khartoum area.

  41. The following decision is accordingly substituted.  The appeal against
      the decision dated 19th April 2004 by the Secretary of State to refuse
      to vary leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  this
      appellant is dismissed.




                          The Hon. Mr Justice Hodge
                                  President
