

JT (Tutsi - failed asylum seekers - evidence) Democratic Republic of Congo
[2005] UKAIT 00102





                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester Hearing Centre
On 12 May 2005
Determination promulgated:

                                   Before:
                    Mr K Drabu (Senior Immigration Judge)
                      Mr John Lever (Immigration Judge)

Between
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                 Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Wood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. We heard this appeal in pursuance  of  the  IAT  direction  for  re-
       consideration afresh. The Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  Practice
       Directions paragraph 14.11 state that: 'Where immediately before,  4
       April 2005, an appeal was pending before an Adjudicator, having been
       remitted to an Adjudicator by a court or the  IAT  it  will  already
       have been decided  that  the  original  Adjudicator's  determination
       cannot stand. The Tribunal will accordingly proceed  to  rehear  the
       appeal.' Pursuant to Rule 31(3) of the Asylum and Immigration Appeal
       (Procedure) Rules 2005, we are obliged, therefore, to  substitute  a
       fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.

    2. The facts of the case as put to the  respondent  initially  were  as
       follows: The appellant is a national of the Democratic  Republic  of
       Congo. He was born on 1 December 1984 in Seke,  DRC.  He  claims  to
       have arrived clandestinely in the  United  Kingdom  on  8  September
       2004. On 13 September 2004 he applied for asylum at the ASU.  On  28
       October 2004 the respondent made  a  decision  to  refuse  to  grant
       asylum under paragraph 336 of HC395 (as amended) and on  1  November
       2004 the respondent decided to give directions for his removal as an
       illegal entrant from the United Kingdom under paragraphs 8 to 10  of
       Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

    3. The decision to refuse to grant asylum and to  give  directions  for
       removal was made for the reasons stated in the Reasons  for  Refusal
       letter dated 28 October 2004. In paragraph  5  of  that  letter  the
       basis of the appellant's claim is summarised as follows: "The  basis
       of your claim is that you are of Banyamulenge Tutsi  ethnicity.  You
       claim that you were educated in Zambia. You claim  that  after  your
       education in 1999, you returned to the Democratic Republic of  Congo
       (DRC) and in June or July 2001 your brother, who was a  soldier  for
       the Rassamblement Congolais pour la Democratie (RCD) was  killed  by
       government forces. Soon after you state that the Mai Mai raided  and
       destroyed your home village. You claim  that  you  were  accused  of
       supporting the RCD and the Mai Mai  took  some  hostages  from  your
       village including your stepmother, but you were able to escape.  You
       state that in October or November of 2003 you  were  apprehended  by
       the RCD and were made to work for them for  about  two  months.  You
       claim that when they knew your name and where  you  came  from  they
       realised that you were of Tutsi origin and insisted  that  you  join
       them as a soldier. You state  that  around  Christmas  of  2003  you
       managed to escape from the RCD by slipping out  of  the  lorry  they
       were using to transport you to a training camp.  However  you  claim
       that you were then captured by the Mai Mai who noticed  strap  marks
       on your body sustained from carrying items  and  assumed  from  this
       that you were RCD soldiers. You state that you were taken to a  camp
       and questioned about your  activities.  You  allege  that  you  were
       beaten with sticks and  rubber  batons.  You  claim  that  you  were
       arrested as prisoners of war and the Government soldiers  then  came
       and questioned you. You claim that they did  not  believe  that  you
       were an active member of the RCD and so  you  were  released  around
       February 2004. You state that a  friend  told  you  that  government
       forces and Mai Mai had killed your other brother. You claim you then
       did casual work and left the DRC by boat on 28 July  204.  You  fear
       that if you are returned to the DRC you will be tortured and  beaten
       by Mai Mai rebels or the Interahamwe rebel Hutu group on account  of
       your ethnicity.  You  fear  that  the  DRC  Government  forces  will
       imprison  you  because  you  are  a  Tutsi.  In  addition  you  fear
       retribution from the RCD because you escaped from the convoy  taking
       you to training camp."


    4. The letter then goes on to give reasons  for  the  decision  of  the
       respondent.  In  summary  the  respondent  does   not   accept   the
       appellant's claim of being a Tutsi. The letter  gives  a  number  of
       reasons for  rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  of  being  a  Tutsi
       including the fact that he had on his own account lived in  the  DRC
       without difficulties from  December  2001  to  November  2003  doing
       casual work in various areas of  the  DRC  which  according  to  the
       respondent would not have been possible had he  been  a  Tutsi.  The
       respondent also disbelieved the  appellant  in  his  claim  to  have
       escaped from the custody of the Mai Mai as well as his claim  to  be
       detained by the RCD and his escape from the RCD.  Having  considered
       and rejected  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum,  the  respondent
       considered and also rejected the appellant's claim  to  Humanitarian
       Protection under Articles 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR  and  Discretionary
       Leave for infringement of Article 8.


    5.       When we heard the appeal the appellant said that he  does  not
       need an interpreter and that his  command  of  English  language  is
       good. Mr Schwenk confirmed that an interpreter was not  needed.  The
       appellant gave oral evidence, relying on his  bundle  of  documents,
       which included his two written statements dated 6 January  2005  and
       28 April 2005. He confirmed the veracity  of  these  statements  and
       also the contents of his statement made on 29 September 2004,  which
       he had submitted, to the respondent. He said he does  not  presently
       have a passport or a travel document. He said that he  receives  �31
       from NASS for his maintenance. He said that if he is returned to the
       DRC and if he were required to pay a bribe on arrival to secure  his
       safe entry, he would have no money to pay. He said that  the  reason
       Tutsis are discriminated and harassed in the DRC is because they are
       seen as foreigners and troublemakers. He said that if he is sent  to
       Kinshasa he would be subject to the same treatment as anywhere  else
       in the DRC as the  authorities  in  Kinshasa  are  also  hostile  to
       Tutsis.   He  said  that  in  Kinshasa  he   would   have   language
       difficulties as he speaks English and not French. He said  he  would
       be victimised and discriminated against in Kinshasa.


    6.       In cross-examination  the  appellant  was  taken  through  the
       answers that he had given at his interview and the  statements  that
       he had made in writing. He was asked what had happened to the  other
       people who had been with him and who had been asked by  the  by  the
       government forces to take guns and uniforms.  He  said  he  did  not
       know. When asked if he knew where his father had been born, he  said
       that he did not know. When  asked  to  name  big  towns  around  his
       birthplace Seki, the appellant named Kosongo and Ovira and said that
       different languages are spoken in these  areas.  He  said  that  his
       stepmother had funded his  education  in  Zambia  and  that  he  had
       returned from Zambia in 2000. When asked why he had  not  re-located
       in the DRC he said that he could not as the Mai Mai were everywhere.
       He was asked to explain why he had described himself  as  unemployed
       in the DRC when according to his written statement he had worked  on
       the ship. He said that he had said so because when he left  the  DRC
       he was unemployed. He had been employed in 2002/2003. He  was  asked
       why he had gone to Seke when he should have known that  area  to  be
       unsafe. He said that he had gone there because his sister and mother
       were there and he did not know who  was  controlling  Seke  at  that
       time. When asked about his passport he said that he had lost  it  on
       the boat. It had been issued in the DRC and he  had  always  carried
       his passport on him. He explained that when he had been detained  by
       the RCD he had the passport with him. Neither the RCD  nor  the  Mai
       Mai had ever asked him to show his passport. When asked  to  explain
       his answer given at the interview that at the time of his arrest  by
       the RCD he did not have his ID with him, the appellant said he meant
       his ID Card and not his passport, as he had not been asked about the
       passport. When reminded that he had earlier on said that he had  not
       known who was controlling Seke when he returned there whereas in the
       interview he had said that it had been under  the  RCD  control,  he
       agreed that the South  and  the  North  was  mostly  under  the  RCD
       control. He was asked to explain the sequence  of  events  when  the
       government forces visited the camp where the Mai Mai had  held  him.
       He said that when the forces came  they  treated  the  prisoners  as
       rebels and tortured them on the suspicion that they had  helped  the
       RCD. The same people, he said, were then asked to pick up  guns  and
       uniforms and taken away by the government forces. When asked whether
       it was strange that the people who were treated as rebels were  then
       asked to take guns  and  uniforms  by  the  government  forces,  the
       appellant said he could not say whether the  guns  were  loaded.  He
       said that he was not taken because there was no uniform or gun  left
       for him. When asked by the Tribunal to state why he did not want  to
       be removed to the DRC, the appellant said that he did not want to go
       to the DRC because there is a war going on there  and  also  because
       people in authority would discriminate him against as  a  Tutsi.  He
       said he would not feel safe in the DRC. He was asked whether he  was
       recognisable as a Tutsi by his physical appearance, he said he  was.
       He was asked why then he had said that he was recognised by the RCD,
       as a Tutsi only after they had spoken to him  and  one  of  the  RCD
       soldiers had known his brother. He was referred to  paragraph  9  in
       his written statement and was asked to explain why he had  used  the
       word "consequently". He said that that  part  of  the  statement  is
       wrong. He agreed that he had signed the statement and  that  he  had
       earlier on confirmed its accuracy as well as veracity. He said  that
       he had not meant to say that he had been recognised as a Tutsi  only
       after  the  conversation.  This  concluded  the  evidence   of   the
       appellant.


    7. We heard submissions from Mr Wood and Mr Schwenk. Mr Wood  asked  us
       to find that the appellant lacked credibility as a witness. He asked
       us to  apply  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act.  He  argued  that  the
       appellant's evidence on the loss of passport did not add up. He  had
       always kept his passport on his person, he claimed and he had  never
       lost it in the DRC through all the claimed turmoil and  tribulations
       and yet he had lost it, he claims,  on  the  boat.  As  examples  of
       inconsistency  in  his  evidence,  Mr  Wood  reminded  us  that  the
       appellant had said that he had his  passport  on  him  when  he  was
       detained and yet during his interview he had said that he had no  ID
       at the time. Further the appellant claimed that  he  was  clearly  a
       Tutsi by appearance and that he would be recognised as such and  yet
       on his own evidence he was not recognised by his  appearance  either
       by the Mai Mai or the DRC when they apprehended him.  Mr  Wood  said
       that the respondent does not accept the appellant to be a Tutsi  and
       nor does the respondent accept  that  all  Tutsis  in  the  DRC  are
       persecuted by reason of their ethnicity. He asked us to take account
       of the contents of paragraph 19 of the IAT  decision  in  TC  [2004]
       UKIAT 00238 and note that in the case before us  the  appellant  had
       not produced any expert evidence  to  support  his  claim  to  Tutsi
       ethnicity. Mr Wood also  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  has  no
       political profile and no criminal record in the DRC. He asked us  to
       find that the expert's report (the report  of  Dr  Kennes  dated  27
       March 2005) to be of no assistance to the appellant in  establishing
       a real risk of persecution or suffering  of  treatment  contrary  to
       Article 2 or 3 on removal to the DRC. He said that the  report  says
       no more than failed asylum  seekers  in  the  circumstances  of  the
       appellant may be stopped on arrival at Kinshasa with  the  intention
       of pressuring them to pay bribes for their  release.  He  said  that
       such conduct on the part of the authorities  in  the  DRC  does  not
       engage the Refugee Convention because the harassment is  not  caused
       for a Convention reason but for the perceived ability  of  returnees
       to meet demands for payment.


    8. Mr Schwenk put his case for the appellant under two heads. He argued
       that the appellant as a Tutsi failed asylum seeker faced  real  risk
       of persecution on return throughout the DRC and that he  would  also
       be at serious risk of receiving treatment contrary to Article  3  at
       the airport in Kinshasa because he would not have the means  to  pay
       bribes to officials to secure his release  from  custody  and  entry
       into the DRC. Mr Schwenk said that the appellant is a Tutsi  and  he
       would be seen as such on arrival  or  at  worst  he  would  have  to
       disclose his ethnicity when asked. Mr Schwenk said that he relied on
       the report of Dr Kennes whose credentials  and  expertise  had  been
       favourably commented upon by the IAT in its decision  in  VL  [2004]
       UKIAT 00007. When asked whether the  report  that  had  been  placed
       before us had been written by Dr Kennes for this  case,  Mr  Schwenk
       said that it had not and that he had come across this  report  in  a
       different case and had asked his instructing solicitors  to  include
       it in the appellant's bundle of documents in  this  case.  We  asked
       whether his instructing solicitors had sought the permission  of  Dr
       Kennes for production of this report in this case. He said that they
       had not. He went on to say that it was evident from Dr Kennes report
       that he expected the report to be used in cases other than  the  one
       for which he had written it and that indeed the Tribunal itself  had
       taken account of Dr Kennes report in VL [2004] UKIAT  0007  although
       the report had not been written for that case and nor had Dr  Kennes
       authorised its production. He then took us through Dr Kennes report.
       He argued that the contents of the report showed that  the  previous
       decisions of the Tribunal on risk on return to failed asylum seekers
       of Tutsi origin wee no longer valid. Mr  Schwenk  also  pointed  out
       that according to paragraph 6.269 of the CIPU Tutsis  are  generally
       granted asylum in the United Kingdom. He said this clearly suggested
       acceptance  on  the  part  of  the  respondent  that  Tutsis  as  an
       ethnic/racial group is at real risk of persecution in  the  DRC.  Mr
       Schwenk also drew our attention to the  UNHCR  document  of  January
       2005 and asked that we find the appellant a  Tutsi  and  reject  the
       points raised against his claim to be a Tutsi. Mr Schwenk said  that
       although the points raised by the respondent in this  regard  cannot
       be brushed aside, the doubts cast are insufficient. He said that the
       appellant had given explanations in respect of the issues raised and
       the explanations were plausible. Mr Schwenk said that  the  conflict
       in the DRC had cost an estimated three million human lives and  that
       the appellant would not be safe in any  part  of  the  DRC  for  the
       reasons that he had given in his evidence. Mr Schwenk  asked  us  to
       accept that evidence and allow the appeal.


    9.  We  adjourned  for  a  short  while  to  enable  Mr  Wood  to  take
       instructions on the contents of Paragraph  6.269  of  the  CIPU.  He
       informed us that there was no policy  of  the  respondent  to  grant
       asylum to those from the DRC  who  established  their  Tutsi  ethnic
       origin. He said that the contents were erroneous. Mr Schwenk  agreed
       that there was no policy of the respondent to grant  refugee  status
       to Tutsis from the DRC.


   10. We have given careful consideration to all the evidence - subjective
       as well as objective, oral as well as documentary. In appraising the
       evidence we have borne in mind that the burden of proof  is  on  the
       appellant and that the standard of proof is reasonable likelihood or
       substantial grounds for believing. We have also  reminded  ourselves
       that whilst evidence of past experiences may assist  in  forecasting
       the future, it is the future that we must focus on, asking ourselves
       whether the appellant is reasonably likely to be  at  real  risk  of
       persecution for a Convention reason on  being  removed  to  the  DRC
       and/or whether there are substantial grounds for believing  that  he
       will be subjected to treatment that is contrary to Article 3 of  the
       ECHR. In deciding on the credibility of the appellant as a  witness,
       we have, as we must, take account of Section 8 of the 2004 Act.


   11. The appellant came across as a well spoken, pleasant and intelligent
       young man. Whilst he was not able to explain all the concerns, which
       were raised, about the credibility of his claim to be a Tutsi by the
       respondent,  we  are  satisfied,  on  the  standard  of   reasonable
       likelihood that he is of Tutsi ethnic origin.  However, contrary  to
       his claim, we are not satisfied that his physical  appearance  marks
       him out as a Tutsi. We say this because  his  own  evidence  on  the
       matter  is  clearly  inconsistent  with  that  claim.  He  was   not
       recognised as a Tutsi by his physical appearance either by  the  Mai
       Mai or the RCD. Indeed in paragraph 9 of his written statement dated
       29  September  2004  he  clearly  states  that  it  was  only  as  a
       consequence of conversation with him that the RCD found out that  he
       is Tutsi.  Although  in  re-examination  he  attempted  to  distance
       himself from the natural meaning of what he said in that  paragraph,
       we remain of the view that not all Tutsis are recognisable  just  by
       physical appearance and that he is one who is not.


   12. Mr Wood asked us to take account of the IAT's views on proving Tutsi
       ethnicity as expressed in paragraph 19 of its decision in TC  [2004]
       UKIAT 00238. The IAT said, "For our part, we consider the  starting-
       point must be that it is for the Claimant to establish his case  and
       that, if he expressly wished to claim that his  physical  appearance
       would alone put him at risk, it was necessary to adduce evidence  to
       that effect. It would not be sufficient for the Claimant himself  to
       claim that  his  appearance  placed  him  at  risk  because  such  a
       contention should normally be dealt with by expert evidence." We  do
       not think that the IAT could have meant that expert  evidence  would
       normally  be  required  to  prove  Claimant's  ethnicity  if  it  is
       disputed. There is no rule of law,  which  enables  a  Court  to  be
       prescriptive about method of proving an assertion. It is  of  course
       the case that the burden of proving  an  assertion  rests  upon  the
       person who makes it, but what evidence will  discharge  that  burden
       will depend on the Court, which has to make  the  decision.  Such  a
       court may regard the oral evidence of the Claimant sufficient as  we
       have in this case. We do not understand the IAT decision to impose a
       requirement of expert evidence in cases  of  disputed  ethnicity  or
       indeed of laying down the kind of  evidence  that  another  Tribunal
       must seek to satisfy itself on an issue of fact.


   13.  Having  taken  account  of  the  respondent's  points   about   the
       appellant's claim to be a Tutsi, we  have  concluded,  applying  the
       correct standard of proof, that he is a Tutsi by ethnicity.  We  are
       therefore dealing in this case with a Tutsi from the DRC who has  no
       political profile and no criminal record.  He is not  likely  to  be
       recognised, in our view, as a Tutsi. He has been  the  victim  of  a
       number of tragedies and difficulties while in the DRC. His  brothers
       have been killed in the conflict - one in 2001 and  the  other  more
       recently in 2004. They had both joined the RCD. His parents are dead
       - his father having been killed by the Banyamulenge, his own  ethnic
       group on suspicion of being a spy  for  the  Mobutu  government.  He
       himself was at a boarding school in Zambia from 1994 until 2000.  In
       2001 the appellant's village was raided by the Mai-Mai, which caused
       the appellant to go into hiding  for  two  weeks  in  the  bush.  In
       December 2001 he was detained overnight by the  RCD.  From  December
       2001 to October 2003 the appellant was working and mostly for a  man
       called Samuel assisting him with the sale of precious  stones.  This
       involved  travelling  and  during  one  of  such  travels   he   was
       apprehended in October 2003 by the RCD. He was forced  to  work  for
       them for two months carrying boxes to and from Lake Tanganyika. When
       they learned his name and where his village was  based  one  of  the
       rebels claimed to know his brother and consequently they  found  out
       that he was a Tutsi.  On learning that he was Tutsi the  RCD  people
       insisted that he joined their group and become one of the  soldiers.
       Around Christmas 2003 he  managed  to  escape  from  the  RCD.  Soon
       thereafter he was arrested by the Mai-Mai who were in the  area  and
       who upon finding belt marks on his shoulders, chest, back and  waist
       suspected him to be a member of the RCD. He was taken to the camp in
       Pangi where the Mai Mai was holding a lot of other prisoners. He was
       questioned and during questioning he was ill-treated.  He  was  told
       that he was now a prisoner of war and that he would be handed  over,
       with the other prisoners, to the government  army  to  be  taken  to
       Kindu or Mbujima and which was on its way  to  the  camp.  When  the
       government soldiers came, he was questioned and as a result  of  his
       answers the government soldiers were satisfied that  he  was  not  a
       member of the RCD and he was released in February 2004. He then went
       go his home village Seke and found it  abandoned  with  no  sign  of
       life. He travelled for two days to get to Kindu  to  see  a  friend.
       While travelling he found out that the government forces had  killed
       his brother. When he met up with his friend they went to  port  Boma
       to work on the ships. He then obtained casual employment on board  a
       ship bound for Sierra Leone. His job was to load and unload goods on
       and off the ship while it passed through ports. In Sierra  Leone  he
       managed to find a ship that was coming to Europe and he  arrived  in
       the United Kingdom on 8 September 2004. His four sisters were living
       with his stepmother in Seke but he does not know  their  whereabouts
       now.


   14. We have no good reason to disbelieve the appellant except on matters
       where his evidence is inconsistent or is based on a belief  that  is
       unsupported by objective evidence - (see paragraphs  12  and  19  of
       this determination). On the facts as found above,  we  have  to  ask
       ourselves whether the appellant is a refugee  and/or  qualifies  for
       grant  of  Humanitarian  Leave.  In  deciding  the  matter  we  have
       obviously considered the relevant objective evidence,  the  relevant
       case law as well as the report from Dr Kennes.


   15. By way of background objective evidence, we  note  that  the  United
       Nations News, DR of Congo published on 6 January  2005  carries  the
       headline "DR of Congo moves steadily towards elections in  2005  but
       challenges are formidable". The Voice of America News of 21 December
       2004 states that the "Congolese Tutsis feel targeted  by  government
       troops." It goes on to say, "The  conflict  in  Congo's  North  Kivu
       province is stirring up ethnic hostility between many Congolese  and
       Congo's ethnic Tutsi population. BY some estimates, there  are  more
       than one million ethnic Tutsis living in the hills of  Congo's  Kivu
       provinces. Many Tutsi families have lived here for decades and  some
       even identify themselves as Congolese.  But  many  Congolese  reject
       Tutsis as countrymen, saying the Tutsis  are,  for  the  most  part,
       Rwandan with Rwandan family ties, Rwandan businesses,  Rwandan  bank
       accounts, with sons and daughters who  go  to  Rwandan  schools  and
       universities. Many Congolese have accused them of  siding  with  the
       rebels backed by Rwanda's Tutsi led  government,  who  have  clashed
       with Congolese troops. Some observers  say  the  current  crisis  in
       eastern Congo is  essentially  ethnic:  there  is  a  widening  rift
       between the Congolese and so-called Rwandaphones, meaning anyone who
       speaks Kinyarwandan, the Rwandan language. That includes  about  one
       million Congolese Tutsis and Hutus, Banyamelenges,  Banyejombas  and
       Bagogwes clustered in the lush green  hills  of  Congo's  North  and
       South Kivu provinces." On 8 December 2004 the  United  Nations  High
       Commissioner for Human Rights, Human rights experts are reported  as
       having expressed concern about mounting  tensions  in  the  DRC  and
       about  information  on  the  presence  of  Rwandese  troops  in  the
       territory of the DRC."  The  Human  Rights  Watch  report  dated  19
       November 2004 states "Guns and ethnic hatred make  for  catastrophic
       mix" and asks "UN peacekeepers need to interrupt the arms flows  and
       Security  Council  members  must  pressure  local  leaders  to  stop
       fuelling ethnic hostilities." On this evidence we  accept  that  the
       conditions in the DRC remain volatile and inter-ethnic tensions  are
       fairly intense.


   16. On the more specific objective evidence relevant to the facts before
       us we note that in an article published by  the  Institute  of  Race
       Relations and written by Arun Kundnani who interviewed Rene  Kabala,
       described as Congolese human rights  activist,  it  is  stated  that
       "grim fate awaits those  deported  to  Congo."  The  article  says,"
       According to reports that we have had from returning asylum  seekers
       as well as from agents of the DGM, deportees are held by the DGM  in
       small cells at the airport. There are no windows  and  there  is  no
       light. But you can see cockroaches and rats. From these cells,  they
       are called in one  by  one  to  the  director  of  the  DGM  for  an
       interrogation. During the interrogation, deportees are  sifted  into
       different groups. Only those able to pay a bribe of between $250 and
       $300 have a chance of immediate escape  from  detention.  Since  the
       officials of the DGM have not  been  paid  for  so  long,  accepting
       bribes is their only income. Yet few deportees have easy  access  to
       these sums of money; it would take a university professor six months
       to earn the required amount on local  wages.  Of  those  who  cannot
       bribe their way out, many  will  be  handed  over  to  the  National
       Security (ANR), which operates its own extra-judicial prisons  where
       people  are  detained  illegally  for  long  periods  of  time.   As
       individuals  who  have  claimed  asylum  in  Europe  deportees   are
       automatically regarded by the ANR as threats to national security in
       Congo. Simply because they have claimed  asylum  in  the  West,  the
       Congolese authorities consider them political dissidents. There  are
       cases I have dealt with in which somebody asks for asylum in  Europe
       for humanitarian rather than political reasons.  However  when  they
       are returned to Ndili airport, they  are  put  in  prison  like  all
       others. They may  then  stand  trial  under  the  national  security
       legislation and if convicted find themselves imprisoned in  Makala."
       The article states that Rene Kabala was not able to produce  figures
       on what proportion of asylum seekers deported from Europe end up  in
       Makala or other forms  of  illegal  detention  in  Kinshasa.  He  is
       reported as saying, "There are many cases which escape  us.  We  can
       follow up those that we know about. Others disappear if  we  haven't
       got contact details for their families. But even those deportees who
       are released face insecurity. The DGM  takes  down  details  of  all
       deportees' family members and, often, agents arrive on the doorsteps
       a few weeks later to make arrests. Some  deportees  have  chosen  to
       disappear on their return to Kinshasa to avoid re-arrest." Whilst we
       accept that the person interviewed may genuinely believe what he has
       said to the  author,  he  has  not  disclosed  the  sources  of  his
       information and perhaps for understandable reasons. Nevertheless, in
       the circumstances we have looked at the contents  of  the  interview
       and the  author's  own  views  in  the  context  of  other  reliable
       information such as the report of Dr Kennes.


   17. We have taken account of the IAT decisions in [2004] UKIAT 00075  M,
       [2004] UKIAT 00072 I, [2004] UKIAT 00337, [2004] UKIAT 00007 VL  and
       [2004] UKIAT 00238 TC. We note that the IAT said  in   [2004]  UKIAT
       00075 M that Tutsis do not fall into a separate risk  category.  The
       Tribunal said, "It is clear that the authorities now protect  Tutsis
       in Kinshasa. If there is a failure to make a  distinction  sometimes
       between Tutsis and Rwandans, it is made by civilian Kinois,  not  by
       the authorities. The latter, to repeat, are described  as  affording
       protection to Tutsis against civilian actions." The  decision  in  M
       was promulgated in August 2004  and  we  have  not  been  shown  any
       credible  evidence  that  casts  proper  doubts  on  the  Tribunal's
       findings.


   18. Dr Kennes report of March 27 2005 begins with the statement that the
       "report is not a summary of existing documents  or  information  but
       contains new, unedited and most of all  reliable  information  about
       the fate of failed returned asylum seekers."  It  goes  on  to  say,
       "This report is an  updated  version  of  the  report  submitted  to
       Lawrence Lupin on October 19,  2004.  It  deals  with  an  important
       change in  immigration  policy  by  the  Congolese  authority,  more
       specifically since the nomination of Mr  Jean-Claude  Tshijik  Kamb,
       successor to Mr Yambuya, as head of the Congolese migration services
       in October 2004. The update relies on several  confidential  sources
       from within the security services at the  airport.  The  information
       has been double checked." In paragraph 1 of  his  report  Dr  Kennes
       says, "Quite evidently, a number of stories by  asylum  seekers  are
       invented. The reasons for this  are  obvious:  the  closure  of  the
       European  borders  for  ordinary   immigration   leaves   only   one
       possibility for a Congolese citizen to  leave  the  country,  namely
       seeking of political asylum. The economic and  social  situation  in
       the DRC is simply terrible. It has never, never in the whole history
       of the country, been so bad. Anyone in the same situation  would  do
       anything to  escape."   We  regard  this  to  be  an  important  and
       objective piece of information.


   19. Paragraph 2 of the report  is  titled  "Risks  for  failed  returned
       asylum seekers." It starts off as, "this risk presumes that somebody
       is identified as a failed asylum seeker. This will only happen  when
       the  following  situation  happens  (or  a  combination   of   these
       elements). (1) This person does not have ordinary travel  documents;
       (2)  The  immigration  or  security  services  have  a  reason   for
       interrogating or arresting this  person  about  whom  they  have  an
       amount of information available. This person may have a known charge
       against him/her or may belong to a risk category." The appellant  is
       not likely to have "an ordinary travel document" and therefore he is
       likely to be interrogated. We note that the appellant does not  have
       a criminal record and does not have a political profile.  Dr  Kennes
       report in respect of such people says,  "This  category  of  persons
       (i.e. failed returned asylum seeker without known political  charges
       against them) is, in a sense, 'ransomed' by these services. They are
       kept in detention  in  irregular  places  (often  offices)  and  are
       released only upon payment of 'fines' that disappear in the  pockets
       of state officials. These fines may amount to about USD1000 or more,
       depending on the case." We note that on page 14  of  his  report  Dr
       Kennes says, "All passengers identified as returned  asylum  seekers
       are kept 'hostage' for financial reasons.  If  the  person  kept  in
       detention cannot pay and/or his family cannot pay or is unwilling to
       pay, this person  is  transferred  to  Makala  prison  and  the  sum
       requested  for  release  becomes  even  more  important.   Generally
       speaking this situation is resolved when payment is made, except for
       risk categories (as e.g. ethnic Rwandans, UDPS militants  etc.)"  Dr
       Kennes goes on to say,  "In  my  opinion  it  is  true  that  failed
       returned asylum seekers per  se,  i.e.  independently  of  any  risk
       category they may belong to, and supposing their story  was  totally
       untrue, are not the object of persecution. But it  is  equally  true
       that any person who is known to be a failed returned asylum  seeker,
       again independently of any other qualifications, is  the  object  of
       harassment and is put to ransom. Indeed important sums of money  are
       requested for 'buying' their entry into the  country.  If  they  are
       unable to pay, they are arrested and transferred  to  Makala  prison
       (CPRK) to put more pressure on  the  family  of  the  returnee.  The
       recent MONUC report on  prison  conditions  is  explicit  about  the
       terrible and inhuman conditions in DRC prisons. This  leads  to  the
       conclusion that, while failed returned asylum seekers per se are not
       prosecuted, they are  subjected  to  cruel,  inhuman  and  degrading
       treatment."


   20. Pausing here for a moment, we should point out that if  the  purpose
       of  harassing  returnees  is  to  extract  money  as  is  repeatedly
       suggested by Dr Kennes in his report, it must  follow  that  putting
       further pressure on a person who has no ability to  offer  money  or
       arrange money from relatives by putting him or  threatening  to  put
       him in prisons with 'inhuman and degrading conditions' is not  going
       to meet the objective of securing pecuniary benefit. In those  cases
       it would be reasonable  to  assume,  the  person  concerned,  absent
       criminal record and political profile, would  be  allowed  to  enter
       following initial harassment. We do not accept Dr Kennes description
       of that treatment as "persecution". We accept  that  it  amounts  to
       harassment as Dr Kennes himself says  on  page  15  of  his  report:
       "Again, an identified returned asylum seeker does not  automatically
       run the risk of persecution, but will automatically be  harassed  or
       even imprisoned for financial reasons. Risk categories run the  risk
       of being arrested."  In  his  risk  categories  Dr  Kennes  includes
       persons who are considered as Tutsi or Rwandan.  Persons  from  Kivu
       region are at risk of being considered Rwandans.  UDPS  members  and
       activists from Kivu are also at risk.. We note that on page  8  with
       regard to Tutsis Dr Kennes says, "This is a category of persons most
       at risk. If a failed returned asylum seeker is Tutsi or says  he/she
       is, he may not survive. The Congolese have suffered so much from the
       endless war that the resentment against anything Rwandan and anybody
       Rwandan is very high." We do not understand Dr Kennes  to  say  that
       every Tutsi who is returned faces a  real  risk  of  death  or  even
       persecution. If that is what Dr Kennes meant, it  goes  contrary  to
       other evidence and in any case has no support from  any  independent
       source.


   21. Upon a close and careful analysis of the report of Dr Kennes and the
       other relevant objective evidence we are satisfied, on the requisite
       standard, that there is a real  risk  that  the  appellant  will  be
       stopped at the airport. He will be seen as a returned failed  asylum
       seeker. He will not be recognised  as  a  Tutsi.  He  will  have  no
       adverse record. We reject the suggestion that his  escape  from  the
       custody of the RCD in 2003 will be on record. We do not believe  the
       authorities or the militia in opposition in the DRC to  be  so  well
       organised as to have records on such minor infringements in  distant
       parts of the country located and registered centrally either at  the
       airport or elsewhere. We have seen no evidence that establishes  the
       suggestion on the standard of reasonable likelihood. We do not  read
       the report of Dr Kennes to  say  that  all  failed  returned  asylum
       seekers would be harassed with demands for  money  at  the  airport.
       Many would, it  seems  to  us.  However  the  level  and  degree  of
       harassment would depend  on  a  number  of  factors  including  most
       importantly the leverage the authorities could have on a person with
       reference to his past record and his present ability to pay.


   22. We find that if the appellant faces harassment at  the  airport,  it
       will not amount to persecution. He may be asked to pay  a  bribe  to
       secure his entry, which he may or may not be able to pay. If  he  is
       not able to pay it is most unlikely that he will suffer any  further
       harassment because the infliction of further harassment can and will
       serve no purpose for those in authority. The appellant will be of no
       interest to the authorities except as a potential source of securing
       money. The treatment meted out to him in the  course  of  extracting
       money will not have any nexus with any of  the  Convention  reasons.
       Therefore the harassment that he may suffer will not be due  to  any
       Convention reason. His claim to asylum must therefore fail  for  the
       reasons given.


   23. With regard to the claim of the appellant that his  removal  to  the
       DRC will be in violation of his rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the
       ECHR, it is our judgment that the evidence in support of that  claim
       falls well below the required standard  of  proof.  The  rights  are
       indeed absolute and accordingly the threshold is high. We have  seen
       no  evidence,  which  establishes  on  the  standard  of  reasonable
       likelihood that failed returned asylum seekers are at real  risk  of
       losing their life on arrival or thereafter in the DRC at  the  hands
       of the authorities. We also have seen  no  reliable  evidence  which
       proves on the reasonable likelihood standard that      the appellant
       will be at real risk of being subjected to torture  or  inhuman  and
       degrading treatment by the authorities on arrival or thereafter.  In
       this context we remind ourselves  that  Dr  Kennes  has  said,  "The
       economic and social situation in the DRC is simply terrible. It  has
       never, never in the whole history  of  the  country  been  so  bad."
       However that "terrible" situation in the  DRC  in  itself  does  not
       assist the appellant in making out a valid claim  under  Article  3.
       We do not believe that he  will  be  imprisoned  on  return.  Having
       regard to the objective evidence we believe that the worst that  the
       appellant can expect to happen is temporary detention in  an  office
       at the airport so as to get him to pay a bribe. If  he  is  able  to
       comply with the demand, he will be released. If he is not, he may be
       held for a short period and on being satisfied that he has no  money
       or not enough money on him, the authorities will  let  him  go.  The
       authorities will have no reason  whatsoever  to  hold  him  for  any
       reason other than obtaining money. Our attention has not been  drawn
       to any credible evidence, which proves that those unable  to  pay  a
       "fine" or bribe are ill treated or imprisoned. As  we  have  already
       said, we do not find the assertions made in this regard by Dr Kennes
       as reliable since these are unsourced and are not mentioned  in  any
       other objective evidence.


   24. Finally, we reject the  submission  made  by  Mr  Schwenk  that  the
       relevant dicta in the Country Guidance and reported cases on the DRC
       are no longer valid because of the latest report of  Dr  Kennes.  We
       have given full and detailed consideration to the report and  we  do
       not reach that view. In our respectful view the dicta in  the  cases
       that we have referred to in this determination remain  valid  in  so
       far as these relate to the facts of this case - in  particular  that
       Tutsi ethnicity by itself is not a risk factor  that  is  reasonably
       likely to cause real risk on  return  of  persecution  or  treatment
       contrary to Article 3.


   25. For the sake of completeness, we should say that we do not find  any
       substance in the appellant's assertion that he cannot reasonably  be
       expected to live  in  Kinshasa.  He  said  he  would  have  language
       difficulties there as he could only speak English. He also said that
       he has no family in Kinshasa and has never lived there. There is  no
       requirement upon removal for the appellant to live in any particular
       part of the DRC. He can live wherever he feels comfortable and safe.
       He will of course be removed on a flight to Kinshasa but  that  does
       not mean that he must live there. In any event we do not accept that
       he will be at any real risk should he decide to live in Kinshasa.


   26. We dismiss this appeal.






                                                                     K Drabu
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge
                                                                 23 May 2005

