


IN (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG [2005]UKIAT OO106

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Heard at Field House
Date of hearing: 20 February 2005
Prepared: 28 February 2005                                           Date
Determination notified

                                          24th May 2005


                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                      Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)
                               Dr A U Chaudhry




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation:
For the appellant :     Mr C Jacobs, Counsel, instructed by White Ryland
For the respondent : Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Eritrea, appeals against the determination
      of an Adjudicator, Mr Warren L. Grant, notified on 8  September  2004,
      who dismissed his appeal on  both  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
      against a decision made on 26  May  2004  giving  directions  for  his
      removal following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

   2. This appeal raises the issue of the nature and extent of the  risk  of
      persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3 for actual or perceived
      draft evaders being returned to Eritrea  and,  if  there  is  a  risk,
      whether it extends to all those of draft age. This case will review in
      the light of the  current  evidence  the  country  guidance  cases  MA
      (female draft evader) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00098, SE (deportation -
      Malta - 2002 - general risk) Eritrea CG [2004]  UKIAT  00295  and  the
      reported case GY (Eritrea - failed asylum seeker) Eritrea [2004] UKIAT
      000327, AT (return to Eritrea - article 3) Eritrea [2005] UKIAT  00043
      and NM (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea- [2005] UKIAT 00073.
       This appeal is reported as country guidance on these issues.

Background to the appellant's claim
3.    The appellant is an Eritrean  citizen.  His  account  can  briefly  be
      summarised as follows.  He was born on 1 April 1983 and was brought up
      in Ginda. He attended a private school from seven  until  the  age  of
      fifteen. He claimed that in 1991 his father left home. The family  did
      not know where he had gone and it was not until the end of  1997  that
      his mother and uncle found out that his father had  been  arrested  by
      the Eritrean government. His father had been a longstanding member  of
      the ELF. In September 1998 when the appellant  was at home, government
       armed police came and took him to do  military  service  against  his
      will. He was taken to Sawa training camp. Two days after he arrived he
      challenged one of the officers, demanding to  know  why  he  had  been
      brought to do military service against his will.  He was then detained
      and ill-treated. After four weeks he  and  two  others  were  able  to
      escape. They ran to a nearby road where they met a caravan which  took
      them to Kassala on the border  between  Sudan  and  Eritrea.   He  was
      helped by one of his father's friends who took him to  Khartoum  where
      he stayed until arrangements were made with an agent who provided  him
      with documents so that he could travel to the United Kingdom.

4.    He left Sudan  on  22  February  1999,  entering  the  United  Kingdom
      illegally.  He claimed asylum on 26 February  1999.   His  application
      was refused for the reasons set out in the Secretary of State's letter
      dated 24 May 2004. It was his view that the appellant's  unwillingness
      to undertake military service did not give rise to a claim  under  the
      Refugee Convention. The appellant had failed to provide  any  evidence
      that he would suffer disproportionate punishment  for  draft  evasion.
      The application was refused on both asylum and human  rights  grounds.
      The decision to remove  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  to
      Eritrea was made on 26 May 2004.

5.    The appellant appealed against this decision  to  an  Adjudicator  who
      heard the appeal on 1 September 2004.  He did not find  the  appellant
      to be a credible witness. He did not believe that he had been forcibly
      recruited into the armed forces in 1998 nor that he had  escaped  from
      detention. He  rejected  the  appellant's  story  about  his  father's
      membership of the ELF and his subsequent detention.   The  appeal  was
      dismissed on asylum grounds. The Adjudicator went on to  consider  the
      claim on human rights grounds. He summarised his findings in paragraph
      17 of his determination as follows:

             'The appellant is  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  It  is  however
             implicit in Mr Jacobs'  argument  that  the  appellant  is  an
             Eritrean aged twenty-one who has not carried out his  military
             service and that, on return, he  would  be  subjected  to  the
             treatment meted out to returnees from Malta who  are  referred
             to in paragraph 23 of the IAT determination in MA Eritrea.   I
             note however that in that case the appellant had been required
             to report at the age of sixteen  for  military  training.  The
             appellant in our appeal did not receive any call up papers and
             I have rejected his story about being forced  to  do  military
             service. Even though he may well have been living  in  Eritrea
             during the time when  fifteen  year  olds  were  subjected  to
             forcible recruitment, he was not according to my findings ever
             recruited. He is someone who is liable to carry  out  military
             service. Mr Jacobs supplied me with a  copy  from  the  Africa
             director of  HRW  dated  3  August  2004  concerning  refugees
             repatriated from Libya. It does not say what has  happened  to
             them but it refers to returnees  from  Malta.  Mr  Jacobs  has
             helpfully supplied me with a marked bundle  and  I  have  read
             through it. The appellant is not someone who has fled  Eritrea
             to avoid military service. He would have served in  the  armed
             forces to defend his country. I  believe  that  this  fact  or
             attitude distinguishes him from the Malta returnees  who  were
             draft evaders.  Upon return he will be  able  to  declare  his
             willingness to serve. As a result I  find  that  there  is  no
             reason to believe that he will be subjected to  the  treatment
             referred to in paragraph 5.70 of CIPU. I do not  believe  that
             either of these Articles is engaged.'

The grounds of appeal
6.    The grounds of appeal argue that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  finding
      that the appellant was not a draft evader.  They repeat the  assertion
      that the appellant was forcibly  conscripted  in  September  1998  and
      argue that the Adjudicator erred in finding that the appellant's  case
      was distinguishable from that of the Maltese  returnees.  It  is  also
      argued that he erred in finding that  the  appellant  would  willingly
      serve in the Eritrean army. He had never asserted that  he  would  but
      only stated that he would fight to defend his country if invaded.  The
      Adjudicator erred in finding that the appellant would be able to avoid
      ill-treatment as a suspected draft evader by declaring an intention to
      serve in  the  military  upon  return.  The  grounds  argue  that  the
      Adjudicator misdirected himself on the objective evidence.  The  UNHCR
      have not alleged that  only  actual  as  opposed  to  perceived  draft
      evaders were ill-treated amongst the Maltese returnees.  As  a  failed
      asylum seeker of military age, the appellant  would  be  suspected  on
      return of draft evasion and would be interrogated and ill-treated as a
      suspected draft evader. The grounds rely on the UNHCR report dated  20
      January 2004 and the country guidance case of MA.  They further  argue
      that the Adjudicator failed properly to consider the evidence relating
      to the return of 110 returnees to Eritrea from Libya who were detained
      and ill-treated as suspected draft evaders.

7.    When granting permission to appeal, the Vice President commented  that
      the Adjudicator's treatment of the facts could not be faulted  but  he
      granted permission on the  basis  that  the  grounds  raised  properly
      arguable issues as to the assessment of risk in the light of the facts
      relating to the  Maltese  and  Libyan  returnees  and  the  Tribunal's
      determination in MA.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant
8.    Mr  Jacobs  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in  law  by
      distinguishing the facts in this case  from  those  in  MA  where  the
      Adjudicator had rejected the claim that the applicant had received her
      call up papers when she was sixteen but had accepted that she would be
      required to do military service. The  second  error  of  law  was  the
      failure to take into account the background evidence which showed that
      those  of  draft  age  would   be  perceived  as  draft  evaders.  The
      Adjudicator also erred in his finding that the appellant would be able
      to avoid the possibility of ill-treatment by declaring his willingness
      to undertake military service. He had also failed to take into account
      the implications arising from the treatment of not  only  the  Maltese
      but also the Libyan returnees.

9.    Mr Jacobs submitted that MA was correctly decided. The evidence  about
      the Maltese returnees illustrated the risk to those perceived as draft
      evaders. This risk  was  confirmed  by  Amnesty  International,  Human
      Rights Watch and the UNHCR. All those returned from Malta were treated
      in the same way and  no  distinction  was  drawn  between  actual  and
      perceived draft  evaders.   The  fate  of  the  returnees  from  Libya
      confirmed these concerns and demonstrated that the fate of the Maltese
      returnees could not be treated  as  a  one-off  incident.   There  was
      evidence that many Eritreans had fled the country  in  an  attempt  to
      evade military service. The authorities were responding by  attempting
      to prevent those of draft age leaving Eritrea,  actively  seeking  out
      suspected draft evaders or deserters and routinely  ill-treated  them.
      The reasoning in SE was undermined  by  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal
      failed to consider the evidence relating to the returnees from  Libya.
      The Tribunal in GY had also failed to address this issue.

10.   The risk to the appellant arose because  he  was  of  draft  age.   As
      someone who had not undertaken military service, he would face a  real
      risk of detention and ill-treatment. That fear would not be removed by
      the appellant declaring his intention to  serve  in  the  military  on
      return, which in any event was an intention he did not have. There was
      nothing in the background evidence to support a proposition that draft
      evaders could avoid ill-treatment on return by agreeing  to  undertake
      military  service.  The  situation  in  Eritrea  was  such  that   the
      authorities treated draft evaders as political opponents and any  ill-
      treatment arose for a Convention reason. The authorities attributed  a
      political opinion to those who sought to evade the draft.


Submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State
11.   Mr  Blundell  submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
      Adjudicator's  determination.  The  appellant  had  not   been   given
      permission to a challenge the  Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact.  His
      finding was that the appellant had not fled Eritrea to avoid  military
      service and in these circumstances his  position  was  distinguishable
      from the Maltese returnees who were draft evaders. The Adjudicator was
      entitled to distinguish between those who were draft evaders and those
      who would be required to undertake military service: paragraph  12  of
      SE.  The assessment  of  risk  on  return  must  be  set  against  the
      background of a large number of returns to Eritrea  from  Sudan:  CIPU
      Report April 2004 paragraph 6.151-4.   The UNHCR had  facilitated  the
      return of a large number of those who had fled from Eritrea  and  that
      must have included many of draft age.

12.   There was no real likelihood of the appellant  being  treated  in  the
      same way as the Maltese returnees. where the  circumstances  of  their
      return would  have  drawn  them  to  the  attention  of  the  Eritrean
      authorities.   It should be noted that  many  of  those  returned  had
      failed to claim asylum in Malta. The returns from  Libya  demonstrated
      failures  by  the  Libyan  authorities  towards  those  recognised  as
      refugees but the evidence from the returns  provided  an  insufficient
      factual basis to establish the risk category argued for in the present
      appeal that all returnees  of  draft  age  would  be  at  risk.   When
      assessing what would happen to this appellant, there was  no  evidence
      to  support  a  contention  that  he  would  be  at  risk  as  someone
      potentially liable for military service.    The Adjudicator had  found
      that he had no good reasons for refusing to  undertake  such  service.
      The evidence from Dr Campbell confirmed that someone who was  prepared
      to carry out their military service would not be at risk.

13.   Eritrea was  not  involved  in  hostilities  with  Ethiopia.  Military
      service would involve fitness training and reconstruction work.  There
      was nothing for most people to object  to  in  principle.   There  was
      evidence that those who refused to undertake such service were put  in
      detention but there was no  proper  basis  for  a  finding  that  this
      appellant either would refuse to undertake military service or that he
      would have any good reason for doing so.

14    Before considering the Adjudicator's determination, the Tribunal  will
      summarise the background evidence before us including  evidence  post-
      dating the hearing before the Adjudicator even though that evidence in
      so far as it relates to issues of fact will have no bearing on whether
      the Adjudicator erred in law.

The historical background
15.   Eritrea was recognised as an  independent  state  in  1993.   Ethiopia
      historically regarded Eritrea as an integral part of its territory and
      in 1962 Eritrea was reconstituted as a province of Ethiopia.  However,
      from 1952, the end of the period of British military administration in
      Eritrea, there has been resistance to Ethiopian rule and  following  a
      dramatic deterioration  of  relations  with  Ethiopia  in  late  1997,
      fighting erupted in May 1998 between Eritrea and Ethiopian  troops  in
      the border region after both countries accused the other  of  invading
      their territory.  A  peace  agreement  was  signed  in  December  2000
      followed by the establishment of two separate independent  commissions
      to delineate the border and assess  compensation  claims.  The  Border
      Commission has reported but the  Ethiopian  and  Eritrean  governments
      remain in dispute about the interpretation of its ruling.  It  appears
      that the Commission has decided that the small border  town  of  Badne
      was Eritrean territory according to colonial treaties of 1900-1908 but
      Ethiopia refused to accept this. Eritrea has  called  for  the  United
      Nations to enforce the ruling. There have been widespread fears  of  a
      resumption of fighting although both governments have said  that  they
      would not start another war.

Human rights and military service
16.   According  to  the  US  State  Department  Report  2003  the  Eritrean
      government's human rights record remains  poor  and  it  continues  to
      commit serious  abuses.  There  were  some  reports  that  the  police
      resorted to torture and physical beatings of  prisoners,  particularly
      during interrogations and that the  police  severely  mistreated  army
      deserter  or  draft  evaders.   Amnesty  International  reports   have
      described the situation more graphically:

             'Human rights violations continue  in  Eritrea  on  a  massive
             scale. Thousands of government critics and political opponents
             - many of them prisoners of conscience who have  not  used  or
             advocated violence - are detained in secret.  Some  have  been
             held for several years. None has been taken to court,  charged
             or tried. In some cases panels of military and police officers
             have  reportedly  handed  down  prison  sentences  in   secret
             proceedings that flout  basic  standards  of  fair  trial  ...
             torture  is  systematically  practised  within  the  army  for
             interrogation and  punishment,  particularly  of  conscription
             evaders, deserters and soldiers accused of  military  offences
             and members  of  minority  churches.   Torture  is  also  used
             against some political prisoners. Furthermore,  the  atrocious
             conditions under  which  many  political  prisoners  are  held
             amount to cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  ...  The
             government dismisses the  criticism  from  all  sides  of  its
             appalling human rights record. It ignores the principle of the
             rule of law and flagrantly contravenes human rights safeguards
             in  Eritrea's  constitution  and  laws.   (see:  A40  and  A41
             extracts from the  draft  "Religious  Persecution  Eritrea:  A
             Compilation of Commentary and Reports".


17.   In the Amnesty report "Eritrea, You have no right  to  ask"  (A82-108)
      it is reported that Eritrea is a de facto one party  state  where  the
      only party permitted is the ruling People's Front  for  Democracy  and
      Justice (PFDJ) which is the renamed former Marxist  Leninist  Eritrean
      People's Liberation Front (EPLF). This  report  records  that  several
      hundreds or even thousands of prisoners of conscience  are  imprisoned
      on account of their non-violent opinions, beliefs  and  criticisms  of
      government: (A84).  It identifies national military service as  a  key
      government policy of nation-building and representing a continuity  of
      military oriented mobilisation  by  a  predominantly  EPLF  government
      after the liberation war.  There are exemptions from national  service
      for EPLF veterans and the disabled and there  is  a  postponement  for
      those in  higher education. Conscription is  enforced  by  a  regional
      administration through round-ups  where  police  search  houses,  work
      places and  streets  and  detain  suspected  evaders  to  check  their
      identity documents.

18.   There are reports of  people  trying  to  escape  conscription.  Young
      persons are required to register at  the  age  of  seventeen  and  are
      usually refused exit permits  when  they  approach  conscription  age.
      Exit permits are only  issued  on  proof  of  completion  of  national
      service or payment of a bond as security  for  return  to  Eritrea  to
      perform national service. In addition,  in  measures  related  to  the
      aims of national service, the government requires final year secondary
      students and all university students to do up  to  2-3  months  summer
      vacation service on development projects. In 2003 an extra final  year
      was added to the school system which required all students  to  attend
      at Sawa military training centre reportedly under  military  authority
      and military type training.  At the end of this final boarding year of
      secondary  education  there  is  competitive  selection   for   higher
      education and immediate entry  into  national  service  for  the  rest
      (A94).  This  report  identifies  the  categories  of  people  Amnesty
      International regards as particularly at risk of arbitrary  detention.
      These include people evading and refusing conscription on  account  of
      their opinions or beliefs and anyone suspected of  disloyalty  to  the
      government - even the act of applying for asylum from abroad would  be
      regarded as evidence of disloyalty and reason to detain and torture  a
      person on return to Eritrea after rejection of asylum.

The Maltese Returnees
19.   Concerns about the fate of those deported to Eritrea were  highlighted
      by the return between 30 September and 4 October 2002  of  233  people
      from Malta to Eritrea. In the UNHCR Position Paper January  2004  this
      is summarised as follows:

             "Between 30 September and 3 October  2002,  233  persons  were
             deported from Malta to Eritrea. 170 of them were reported  not
             to have sought asylum, whereas 53 had  been  rejected  in  the
             asylum procedure (which was not known  to  the  UNHCR  at  the
             time). They were reportedly arrested immediately on arrival in
             Asmara and taken  to  detention  incommunicado.  The  Eritrean
             authorities neither acknowledged the detentions  nor  revealed
             the whereabouts of the detainees  to  their  families  or  the
             public. Subsequent reports  have  suggested  that  those  with
             children and those over forty  (the  conscription  limit)  may
             have soon afterwards been released but that the remainder were
             - and still are  -  kept  incommunicado  detention  in  secret
             places, described as halls made of iron sheets and underground
             bunkers.  According to different sources, the  detainees  were
             deprived of their belongings (including shoes and  clothes  to
             change) subjected to forced labour, interrogated and  tortured
             (e.g. by beating, tying up and exposing to  sun  as  described
             above). The dwellings are said to be congested  and  lack  any
             facilities for personal hygiene.   Food and water provided for
             the detainees are inadequate and unclean.  Consequently,  many
             of the detainees have succumbed to illnesses, notably  various
             skin conditions and diarrhoea.  Medical treatment is said  not
             to be available. Some detainees are believed to have  died  of
             their diseases  and/or  injuries.  At  least  one  person  was
             allegedly killed by shooting during an escape attempt."

20.   The Amnesty International Report (at  A97)  confirms  that  women  and
      children and those over the  conscription  age  limit  of  forty  were
      released after some weeks in Adi Abeto prison  but  the  rest  of  the
      deportees, mostly army deserters, were kept in detention and tortured.
      Some EPLF veterans among them  were  sent  separately  to   'Tract  B'
      military prison in Asmara. The rest were  transferred  to  the  secret
      Dahoak Kebir island prison in  December  2002.   Later  the  civilians
      (about 95) were sent to secret mainland prisons in July 2003,  leaving
      behind 85 conscription deserters in  Dahoak  Kebir.   About  30  later
      escaped and fled to Sudan where they sought UNHCR protection.  In  his
      submissions  Mr  Jacobs  emphasised  the  distinction  between   those
      identified as conscript deserters and civilians.  He argued  that  the
      fact  that  it  was  only  women  and  children  and  those  over  the
      conscription age who were released indicated that  those  of  military
      service age, even if not  deserters,  were  being  detained  and  ill-
      treated.

The Libyan Returnees
21.   In an Amnesty  Report  dated  28  July  2004  (A80-81)  concerns  were
      expressed about the reported forcible return of 110 people to  Eritrea
      on 21 July 2004 and the fear that they were  now  detained  in  secret
      detention in military  camps.  This  report  says  that  most  of  the
      detainees are believed to have either deserted from  military  service
      or evaded conscription. Returnees were reportedly taken to the  remote
      Gelano prison in  eastern  Eritrea  where  conditions  are  harsh  and
      temperatures extreme. By way of background  information,  it  is  said
      that thousands of young Eritreans have fled from military conscription
      in the past few years and  that  those  caught  deserting  or  evading
      military service are detained indefinitely without charge or trial  in
      harsh conditions and tortured. This evidence is also  referred  to  in
      the Amnesty Report 9 November 2004 (A4) which records:

             'Many young people have tried to evade  military  service  and
             thousands have  fled  the  country  or  deserted  after  being
             conscripted.  The usual punishment  for  evading  or  escaping
             from military service is torture, by beatings and  being  tied
             in painful and contorted positions  for  days  and  indefinite
             detention without charge or trial. Hundreds of  Eritreans  who
             fled the country were forcibly returned by Malta in  2002  and
             by Libya in July 2004. They were arrested on arrival  back  in
             Eritrea, reportedly tortured and sent to a  secret  prison  on
             Dahlak Island where most are still detained incommunicado.'

      These events have been the subject of a Human Rights Watch  letter  to
      the Eritrean President dated 3 August 2004: A78-79.

22.   There was a further attempt by the Libyan authorities  to  remove   75
      refugees to Eritrea on 27 August  2004  which  led  the  returnees  to
      hijack the aircraft, forcing it to land in Sudan: see A8-9,  an  Afrol
      News Report. A Human Rights Watch Report of 13 January  2005  (2A  17)
      refers to the fact that arbitrary arrests and  prolonged  imprisonment
      without trial have not been  limited  to  political  leaders  and  the
      press. The Eritrean government continues to detain about 350  refugees
      who fled Eritrea but were involuntarily repatriated in 2002 from Malta
      and in 2004 from Libya. They are held in detention centres on the  Red
      Sea Coast and in the Dhalak Islands.

The evidence relating to other returnees
23.   There is a report from Amnesty dated 7 January 2005  (A15-6)  relating
      to the return from Djibouti to Eritrea on 28  December  2004  of  four
      Eritreans including two army officers. It is asserted  that  they  are
      being detained without charge at an unknown  location.  There  are  no
      further details about the fate of these returnees.

The expert evidence
24.   The appellant relied on an expert report from Dr David Poole dated  15
      February 2005.  This confirms that,  with  the  exception  of  married
      women and the medically unfit, all Eritrean citizens between the  ages
      of eighteen and forty must undertake military service and  that  draft
      evasion is punishable by imprisonment with decisions on the length  of
      detention decided by secret military tribunals. The element of secrecy
      involved in the discipline and punishment of draft  evaders  makes  it
      difficult to state  with  any  certainty  the  length  of  sentencing.
      According to this  report,  military  service  in  Eritrea  is  highly
      politicised and rather broader than the duty to serve the state.   The
      Eritrean government has pursued a vision of making a new generation of
      Eritreans imbued with  the  characteristics  of  the  EPLF  liberation
      fighters using military service as an instrument of socialising a  new
      generation into the values of the EPLF.  The establishment of a  final
      year of education at Sawa can only be explained by  the  will  of  the
      government to ensure all eligible for national service  undertake  it.
      This goes with the sweeps and round ups of young  people  of  military
      age and the checks on those travelling across Eritrea by bus and  car.
      There are also restrictions on  travel  abroad  by  those  approaching
      military age. It is  Dr  Poole's  view  that  if  the  appellant  were
      returned to Eritrea he would be treated  as  either  a  deserter  from
      military service or an evader of military service.


25.   Dr Poole says that as the appellant has  sought  political  asylum  on
      this ground the authorities would  be  likely  to  place  him  in  the
      category of a draft evader.  The likely punishment for  draft  evasion
      has been taking place in secret  and  unaccountable  ways  within  the
      Eritrean military.  There is no free press  and,  other  than  through
      clandestine opposition pamphlets, information  and  news  is  strictly
      controlled  by  the  government.  It  is  Dr  Poole's  view  that  the
      government  is  determined  to  use  military  service  for  political
      purposes as well as national security purposes. This  is  demonstrated
      by its refusal to permit opposition  from  any  quarter.     Jehovah's
      Witnesses have been denied many rights of citizenship because of their
      opposition to military service. The concerns of the Muslim communities
      over the conscription of unmarried women have  been  disregarded.  The
      Eritrean state and its institutions evolved from the practice  of  the
      EPLF where discipline within the guerrilla forces was extremely strict
      and fighters who broke disciplinary codes were harshly treated.

  26. A further expert report from Dr Campbell of the School of Oriental and
      African Studies was also produced in evidence. This was prepared for a
      different appeal but put in evidence  after  enquiries  were  made  to
      ensure that there were no objections from the author or those for whom
      it  was  prepared.  This  report   deals   generally   with   military
      conscription in Eritrea  and  confirms  much  that  has  already  been
      covered in  the  background  evidence.  Dr  Campbell  deals  with  the
      position after the end of the border war as follows:

             'Following cessation of the border war in the summer of  2000,
             it  was  widely  expected  that   government   would   rapidly
             demobilise its  armed  forces  to  pre-war  levels.   However,
             despite the availability of international assistance for  this
             task, no  demobilisation  of  troops  has  occurred  to  date.
             Instead the government extended the length of service  for  an
             additional two years and it has been repeatedly prolonged. The
             government has not explained its decision  but  three  reasons
             can be ascertained. First, political  tensions  with  Ethiopia
             over  the  border  remain  high  ...   Second,  in  2003   the
             government announced a new campaign - the 'Warsia Yakolo Plan'
             - to rehabilitate and reconstruct  the  nation  which  in  the
             light of the refusal of the international community to provide
             funds  will  be  undertaken  by  the  armed   forces.   Third,
             conscription is apparently used to control dissent.'


27.   Dr Campbell refers  to  the  general  public  perception  that  police
      roundups in 2002 were directed at  female  draftees.  He  notes  that,
      beginning in 2003, school students were  required  to  complete  their
      last year of  schooling  at  military  training  camp  at  Sawa.   The
      government refused to issue exit visas to adolescents and children  as
      young as ten years of age, apparently on the grounds  that  they  were
      approaching the age of  eligibility  for  national  service.   In  the
      context of compulsory  military  service  extensive  police/  military
      sweeps are taking place and there is a growing number of young  people
      seeking to evade conscription and desert the military. In August  2003
      it was reported that 5,000 Eritreans crossed  the  demilitarised  zone
      into Ethiopia and were residing at a relief camp. Many were said to be
      deserters from the army and young people fleeing the military call  up
      at home. This information is sourced to IRIN News.

28.   When dealing with the risk to draft  evaders,  Dr  Campbell  expresses
      the view relating to the female applicant  for  whom  the  report  was
      prepared that she would be detained indefinitely on arrival and  would
      most likely be beaten  and  interrogated  by  the  military.   If  she
      refused to be conscripted this treatment would carry  on  indefinitely
      or until her health failed.  He eHecomments that  to  date  all  known
      deportees have been treated in this manner. On the facts  relating  to
      the claim before him he said that he was forced to conclude  that  she
      faced a reasonable likelihood that she would be indefinitely  detained
      on arrival and that during her detention she would be  maltreated  and
      tortured and that if her health prevailed she  would  be  forced  into
      national service.  These comments are made in  the  context  of  draft
      evaders being defined broadly as meaning individuals who  have  evaded
      conscription,  who  may  have  failed  to  register,  those  who  have
      previously served but who now may be  compelled  to  serve  a  further
      period and conscientious  objectors.   The  reality  according  to  Dr
      Campbell is that  those  caught  would  be  tortured  and  arbitrarily
      detained for several months with hard labour before being forced  back
      into the army: paragraph 26 of his report.


The treatment of military deserters and draft evaders
29.   There is a general consensus in the evidence that those identified  as
      deserters or draft evaders are at  risk  of  severe  ill-treatment  in
      Eritrea. This is referred to in the US State Department Report 2004 at
      A121-2 which records that the government continued  to  authorise  the
      use of deadly force against anyone resisting  or  attempting  to  flee
      during military searches for deserters  and  draft  evaders  and  that
      there were substantial but unconfirmed reports that hundreds of  draft
      evaders and national service escapees were  being  held  in  makeshift
      prisons around the country. It confirms  the  continued  detention  of
      some of the Maltese deportees being held at secret  locations  without
      contact with their families and without formal charges and  refers  to
      reports that some who tried to escape were killed by security  forces.
      The UNHCR report of  January  2004  refers  to  the  punishments  used
      against deserters, conscript evaders  and  army  offenders  reportedly
      including measures such as tying of the hands and  feet  for  extended
      periods of time and prolonged sun exposure at  high  temperature.  The
      CIPU Report April 2004 at paragraphs 5.63-5.72 draws on these sources,
      confirming the risk of severe ill-treatment  for  army  deserters  and
      draft evaders.

The current country guideline and reported determinations
30.   In MA, the  Tribunal  held  that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
      applicant would be subjected to the same treatment as  those  deported
      from Malta and that her rights under Article 3 would be breached.  The
      appeal concerned a nineteen year old citizen of Eritrea who claimed to
      have left in September 2001 when she was required as  a  sixteen  year
      old to  report  for  compulsory  military  training.  The  Adjudicator
      rejected her claim that she had received her call up papers but it was
      accepted that she would be liable for military service on return.  The
      Adjudicator had failed to indicate whether he regarded  the  applicant
      as either a draft  evader  or  as  someone  required  to  do  military
      service. In paragraph 20 of its determination the Tribunal  identified
      the real question as the sort of  treatment  to  which  the  applicant
      would be subjected as someone who  would  be  identified  as  a  draft
      evader.  It held that she would not be  persecuted  for  a  Convention
      reason. The Tribunal commented that her  claimed  religious  objection
      had been properly rejected. There was no  evidence  that  her  illegal
      exit and failure to respond to her call up papers would  lead  her  to
      have any political opinion imputed to her which would put her at  risk
      of persecution. However, on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  that
      Tribunal, it was satisfied  that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
      applicant would be subjected to the same treatment as  those  deported
      from Malta and that her rights under Article 3 would be breached.  The
      Tribunal commented that the  position  might  change  with  the  UNHCR
      review or with other evidence as to how someone in her position  would
      be treated on return, or other evidence as to the  position  of  those
      deported from Malta.  The appeal was refused  on  asylum  grounds  but
      allowed on human rights grounds under Article 3.

31.   This determination refers in its title to "female draft  evaders"  and
      the Tribunal did refer in paragraph 7 to the evidence that there was a
      general perception that the round-ups by the Eritrean authorities were
      directed particularly at female draftees. However, in  other  passages
      the Tribunal did not limit  its  assessment  of  the  risks  to  those
      identified as draft evaders solely  to  women  or  to  any  particular
      factors putting women at a greater risk than men.   But  whatever  the
      extent to which the evidence was seen in MA as pointing to  risks  for
      draft evaders generally and not just female draft  evaders,  there  is
      further evidence of the risks to those regarded  as  evading  military
      service:  the fate of the Libyan returnees  and  those  returned  from
      Djibouti and the fact the majority of the Maltese returnees remain  in
      detention. The Tribunal in MA found that there was no evidence  before
      it that a failure to respond to call  up  papers  would  lead  to  the
      applicant having any political opinion imputed to  her.   However,  in
      the light of the evidence  now  before  this  Tribunal  the  issue  of
      evading military service must be looked at in the context of  its  use
      by the Eritrean authorities as a means of rebuilding Eritrea in a  way
      that reflects the values of the current authorities.  The fact that  a
      state may view military service in political terms  does  not  without
      more engage the Refugee Convention but if the treatment of  those  who
      are regarded as draft evaders amounts to persecution it is  likely  to
      follow that it arises for a Convention reason.

 32.  The Tribunal now turn to SE which dealt primarily with  whether  there
      was a general risk to all returnees to Eritrea. The two issues  before
      the Tribunal were whether the applicant would be at  real  risk  as  a
      female draft evader or as a mere returnee:  paragraph 10 of  SE.   The
      Tribunal was not satisfied that it could be concluded on the  evidence
      that the authorities upon return would view her  as  someone  who  had
      left in circumstances designed to avoid compliance with  her  duty  to
      perform military service. It held that MA could  not  be  regarded  as
      authority for the proposition that returnees  generally  would  be  at
      risk.  When considering what inferences should be drawn from the  fate
      of the Maltese returnees, the Tribunal noted that their problems  were
      closely linked with the perception by the  Eritrean  authorities  that
      they were draft evaders or deserters. The  authorities  differentiated
      on the basis of both sex and age. Women and children  and  those  over
      the conscription limit of forty were released. The Tribunal also noted
      that whatever the degree of adverse treatment meted out to the Maltese
      returnees in 2002, there had been no  similar  large  scale  incidents
      since.  The  Tribunal  regarded  this  lack  of  repetition  as   very
      significant. The incidents involving  subsequent  returnees  had  been
      very few and in  each  case  they  had  involved  a  small  number  of
      individuals largely confined to returnees  with  foreign  citizenship.
      The Tribunal drew attention to the wording of the UNHCR Position Paper
      of January 2004 that in the light of the problems faced by the Maltese
      returnees, it could not be excluded that future deportees would face a
      similar risk. In the view of the Tribunal, that fell short of  stating
      that all returnees faced a well-founded fear of  persecution.  It  was
      the Tribunal's conclusion that there was no basis for a  finding  that
      returnees generally were at risk.

  33. It is important when considering SE to keep in mind that the  Tribunal
      made the point that the issue relating to whether the applicant  would
      be perceived as a draft evader depended upon  the  evidence  available
      before the Adjudicator. The Tribunal commented that  it  was  hard  to
      accept on that evidence that the Eritrean authorities  would  classify
      someone as a draft evader if there was no evidence that they had taken
      steps to call someone up over a significant period of time during when
      that person was eligible. In GY the Tribunal confirmed that MA was not
      intended to be authority for a proposition that there was a real  risk
      for  returnees  generally.   The  Tribunal  considered  that  SE   had
      correctly identified the limit of the scope of the  Tribunal  decision
      in MA in the following terms:  MA was concerned with those who were of
      draft age who would be perceived as having evaded the draft  in  their
      departure (paragraph 8 of SE).  The Tribunal accepted the analysis  of
      the background material in SE as  satisfactorily  demonstrating  there
      was no real risk on return to the ordinary failed asylum seeker.


  34. However, the present appeal has not been  argued  on  the  basis  that
      there is a risk for all returnees but that this appellant would be  at
      risk of being treated as someone who has avoided military service  and
      as a draft evader.  So far as the issue of risk to  persons  of  draft
      age is concerned, we now have to take account of the further  evidence
      concerning the Libyan returnees, those returned from Djibouti and  the
      continuing plight several years on of  the  majority  of  the  Maltese
      returnees.

Further comments from the UNHCR

35.   At the hearing it was indicated that the UNHCR's comments  were  being
      sought,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  programme  of  voluntary
      repatriation from Sudan to Eritrea highlighted  in  the  January  2004
      position paper.   The UNHCR response has now been provided in a letter
      dated 10 March 2005 which has been copied to both parties who have had
      an opportunity of making further submissions. This  response  confirms
      that the voluntary repatriation programme was specifically intended to
      facilitate the voluntary return of those Eritreans who had arrived  in
      Sudan as a direct result of  the  protracted  conflict  preceding  the
      Eritrean declaration of independence in 1993, some of  whom  had  been
      forcibly displaced from Eritrea for up to thirty years. Following  the
      Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities on  18  June  2000  and  the
      Comprehensive Peace Agreement in December 2000, a  temporary  security
      zone was established under United Nations supervision between the  two
      countries.  Many refugees who had fled the war  wanted  to  repatriate
      and were encouraged to do  so  under  UNHCR's  voluntary  repatriation
      programme.    In  May  2002  the  UNHCR  announced  that  the  'ceased
      circumstances'  cessation  clauses  under   Article   1C(5)   of   the
      Convention would be applicable to specific groups of Eritrean refugees
      as from 31 December 2002.   The cessation clauses apply  to  Eritreans
      who fled their country as a result of the war  of  independence  which
      ended in 1991, or the border conflict  between  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia
      which ended in June 2000.    The application of the cessation  clauses
      is limited in scope and does not extend to the refugees  who  fled  or
      are not able to return to Eritrea on other grounds.

36.   The UNHCR has monitored those  who  returned  under  this  scheme  and
      found that they had been generally well received and assisted  to  re-
      integrate. There have  been  some  problems  where  a  few  returnees,
      apparently  in  error,  have  been   drafted   to   national   service
      prematurely. The Eritrean government had generally  provided  for  one
      year leave from drafting for returning refugees but they  had  usually
      been released after interventions by the UNHCR.   However,  the  UNHCR
      response confirms its previous position of having continuing  concerns
      for the safety of asylum seekers who fall to be  forcibly  removed  to
      Eritrea. Its comments on the successful monitoring  and  reintegration
      of refugees refer only to the group of refugees  returned  voluntarily
      under the auspices of the voluntary  repatriation  programme.  Persons
      being deported to Eritrea have long been  of  concern  to  UNHCR.  The
      reply refers to the situation of the returnees from Malta and also  to
      the reports  relating  to  those  deported  from  Libya.   The  letter
      expresses the view that  the  deportees  from  Malta  may  have  faced
      persecution owing  to  an  imputed  political  opinion,  conscientious
      objection or other reasons and  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  future
      deportees would face a similar risk. The situation in Eritrea has been
      kept under close review and so far as the UNHCR is concerned there has
      been no such change in the situation  which  would  warrant  taking  a
      different view.

Consideration of the issues and conclusions
37.   The Eritrean government is entitled to  make  provision  for  military
      service and  to  require  its  citizens  to  undertake  such  service.
      Liability  for  military  service  in  Eritrea,   save   for   limited
      exceptions, is for those aged between 18 and 40: see paragraph  11  of
      NM.  A state is entitled to impose a proportionate  punishment  for  a
      failure to carry out military service. We note that Eritrean law  does
      not provide for conscientious objection but that issue does not  arise
      in this appeal and the appellant does not claim to be a  conscientious
      objector.  On the basis of the further evidence made available in this
      case we consider that the current approach of the Eritrean authorities
      to the enforcement of its system of compulsory military  service  goes
      significantly beyond that of a conventional  state  and  has  acquired
      persecutory elements.  The state of the evidence as it was before  the
      Tribunal in MA, SE and GY already contained  some  worrying  features.
      The further evidence before this Tribunal reinforces and significantly
      increases our concerns.   On the lower standard of proof, the evidence
      now available leads to one conclusion: anyone, whether male or female,
      regarded as a draft evader, is at risk of being subjected to treatment
      contrary to Article 3.

38.   The issues that also arise in  this  appeal  are  whether  a  returnee
      within the age of military service is for this reason at risk of being
      treated as a draft evader and whether a returnee who does not have any
      principled objections to the  current  form  of  military  service  in
      Eritrea is able to declare his willingness to  serve  on  return.  The
      Vice  President,  when  granting  permission,   commented   that   the
      Adjudicator had found that the  appellant  would  submit  to  military
      service like most other people with no principled objection to it  and
      faced with sanctions for refusal.  He added  that  this  finding  made
      good sense. Indeed, it would in normal circumstances but the issue for
      the Tribunal is whether circumstances are normal at present in Eritrea
      in the light of the evidence currently available.  In submissions  the
      issue was raised as to whether there was a real  risk  for  those  who
      returned and undertook their military service even if reluctantly  and
      so avoid the risk of either punishment or ill-treatment.

39.   The Tribunal take into account firstly what has in  fact  happened  to
      the  specific  groups  of  returnees  identified  in  the   background
      evidence. First there are the Maltese returnees. Those  released  from
      detention were those not liable for military service, whether  because
      they are women, children or over the military service age. Even  those
      who were not identified as  draft  evaders  as  such  appear  to  have
      remained in detention. In SE the Tribunal attached importance  to  the
      fact that there had been no  subsequent  large  scale  incidents  with
      similar results.  However, in July  2004  over  one  hundred  Eritrean
      citizens were return from Libya. This  evidence  was  not  before  the
      Tribunal in SE. The evidence is that these returnees  have  also  been
      detained in military camps. The Tribunal also take  into  account  the
      evidence relating to the four  Eritreans  returned  from  Djibouti  in
      January 2005.

40.   It was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  an
      inference cannot be drawn from this evidence  that  all  returnees  of
      military age are at risk as it must follow  that  a  large  number  of
      people between eighteen and forty must be travelling  in  and  out  of
      Eritrea. It was also argued that the  fact  that  UNHCR  in  May  2002
      declared  the  end  of  refugee  status  for  certain  categories   of
      Eritreans, including those who  had fled during the war with  Ethiopia
      and the fact that many had returned voluntarily to Eritrea from  Sudan
      indicated that it was unlikely that there was a real risk for a  broad
      category of  returnees  of  military  age.  These  arguments  must  be
      assessed in the light of the evidence about the way returnees such  as
      the Maltese, Libyan and Djibouti returnees have actually been treated.
       It must also be set in the context of the evidence  that  exit  visas
      are routinely denied for those approaching the age of eligibility  for
      national  service,  the  evidence  about  the  Eritrean   government's
      determination to implement national service by periodic round-ups, the
      evidence that  significant  numbers  of  draft  evaders  are  held  in
      makeshift detention centres and the alteration of the education system
      to include arrangements requiring a further final year to  be  carried
      at Sawa. The evidence  points  to  a  determination  by  the  Eritrean
      authorities  to  use  military  service  as  part   of   its   planned
      reconstruction of Eritrea in accordance with the values of the present
      government.

41.   The Tribunal have considered whether  the  proper  inference  to  draw
      from Dr Campbell's report was  that  a  returnee  willing  to  undergo
      military service would be able to do so  and  avoid  punishment.  This
      arises from a comment in paragraph 27 of his report  that  individuals
      deported from Libya and Malta and  those  caught  by  security  forces
      inside the country who are alleged to have evaded conscription or  who
      are conscientious objectors have been treated by the authorities in an
      identical fashion: they  are  detained  indefinitely  and  beaten  and
      tortured until they agree to be conscripted.  It  concluded  that  the
      applicant  for  whom  the  report  was  written  faced  a   reasonable
      likelihood that she would be indefinitely detained on arrival and that
      during her detention she would be maltreated and tortured and that  if
      her health prevailed she would be forced into military service.

42.   However, to cite those passages as support for a  proposition  that  a
      returnee would be able to undertake military  service  and  avoid  the
      consequence of being perceived as someone who has evaded conscription,
      would be taking them out of context.  His report says that  those  who
      have failed to register or who have evaded the draft  are tortured and
      arbitrarily detained for several months with hard labour before  being
      forced into the army and it also refers to the  fact  that  all  known
      deportees have been treated in  this  manner.   By  implication,  this
      appears to mean those liable for military service as  opposed  to  all
      detainees as such. However, it does not necessarily  follow  that  all
      returnees of draft age are at real risk of  being  regarded  as  draft
      evaders.

43.    The  Tribunal  accept  that  the  present  Eritrean   government   is
      determined to use military service for political purposes as  well  as
      national security purposes. This is the view of Dr  Poole  and  it  is
      consistent with Dr Campbell's comment that conscription is  apparently
      used to control dissent. At present military  service  in  Eritrea  is
      highly politicised and an actual or  perceived  failure  to  undertake
      military service is seen as  an  expression  of  a  political  opinion
      opposed to the present government.  We are satisfied that there  is  a
      real likelihood that the government's treatment  of  the  Maltese  and
      Libyan returnees was motivated by a response to the  fact  that  there
      have been widespread attempts to avoid military service and that  most
      of those who have recently left Eritrea have done so in order to avoid
      their military service.

Summary of our conclusions

44.   Bringing all these factors together, and applying the  lower  standard
      of proof, the Tribunal is satisfied that at present there  is  a  real
      risk that those who have sought  to  avoid  military  service  or  are
      perceived to have done so, are  at  risk  of  treatment  amounting  to
      persecution  and  falling  within  Article  3.    We   summarise   our
      conclusions as follows:


      (i)   On the basis of the evidence presently  available,  there  is  a
           real risk of persecution and treatment contrary to Article 3 for
           those who have sought or are regarded as having sought to  avoid
           military service in Eritrea.


       ii) There is no material distinction to be drawn  between  deserters
           and draft evaders. The issue  is  simply  whether  the  Eritrean
           authorities will regard a returnee as someone who has sought  to
           evade military service or  as  a  deserter.   The  fact  that  a
           returnee is of draft age is not  determinative.   The  issue  is
           whether on the facts a returnee of draft age would be  perceived
           as having sought to evade the draft by his or her departure from
           Eritrea. If someone falls within an  exemption  from  the  draft
           there would be no perception of draft evasion.  If a person  has
           yet to reach the age for  military  service,  he  would  not  be
           regarded as a draft evader: see paragraph 14 of AT.  If  someone
           has been eligible for call-up over a significant period but  has
           not been called up, then again there will normally be  no  basis
           for a finding that he or  she  would  be  regarded  as  a  draft
           evader.  Those  at  risk  on  the  present  evidence  are  those
           suspected of having left to avoid the draft.  Those who received
           call up papers or who were approaching or  had  recently  passed
           draft age at the time they left Eritrea may, depending on  their
           own  particular  circumstances,  on  the  present  evidence   be
           regarded by the authorities as draft evaders.


      iii) NM is not to be treated as authority for  the  proposition  that
           all returnees of draft age are at risk on return.  In that  case
           the Tribunal found on the facts  that  the  appellant  would  be
           regarded as a draft evader and also took into account  the  fact
           that  there  was  an  additional  element  in  the   appellant's
           background, the fact that her father had been a  member  of  the
           ELF, which might put her at risk on return.


      (iv)  There is no justification on  the  latest  evidence  before  the
           Tribunal for a distinction between male and female draft evaders
           or deserters. The risk applies equally to both.


      (v)   The issue of military service has become politicised and  actual
           or perceived evasion of military  service  is  regarded  by  the
           Eritrean authorities as an expression of political opinion.  The
           evidence  also  supports  the  contention  that   the   Eritrean
           government uses national service as a repressive measure against
           those perceived as opponents of the government.


      (vi)  The position for those who  have  avoided  or  are  regarded  as
           trying to avoid military service has worsened since the Tribunal
           heard MA.

      (vii) The evidence does not support a  proposition  that  there  is  a
           general risk for all returnees.  The determinations in SE and GY
           are confirmed in this respect. In so far as they  dealt  with  a
           risk arising from the evasion of  military  service,  they  have
           been superseded by further evidence and on this issue should  be
           read in the light of this determination.

The facts of the present appeal
45.   We remind ourselves that an appeal now only lies on a  point  of  law.
      However, we are satisfied that the  Adjudicator  did  err  in  law  by
      failing to take proper account of recent evidence regarding  risks  to
      persons who would be regarded as draft evaders.   The  fact  that  the
      appellant  may  not  have  received  call  up  papers  and  that   the
      Adjudicator rejected his account of being forced to undertake military
      service does not alter the fact that he was liable to  undertake  such
      service.  The issue is how he will be perceived  on  return  and  more
      specifically whether his departure from Eritrea would be  regarded  as
      an attempt to evade the draft. The  fact  that  on  the  adjudicator's
      findings the appellant did not flee to avoid military service does not
      necessarily mean that the Eritrean  authorities  will  take  the  same
      view.

  46. As the Tribunal is satisfied that the Adjudicator materially erred  in
      law in his assessment of risk, it is entitled to  substitute  its  own
      assessment.  The appellant has been out of Eritrea since 1998.  He  is
      now aged twenty-one (twenty-two in April 2005). In our view there is a
      real risk that  if  the  appellant  comes  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities on return he will be regarded  as  someone  who  has  left
      Eritrea to  avoid  military  service  with  a  consequential  risk  of
      treatment amounting to persecution. He is not someone  about  whom  it
      could be said that the authorities would not regard  him  as  a  draft
      evader because of his age,  medical  condition  or  lack  of  interest
      during a significant period when he was of eligible age  for  military
      service.  For  the  reasons  the  Tribunal  have  already  given,  the
      background evidence before us does not support a  contention  that  he
      will be able to avoid that risk by agreeing to undertake his  military
      service.

Decision

47.   It follows that this appeal  is  allowed  on  both  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.







                                H.J.E LATTER
                                  VICE PRESIDENT

Appendix A:
Background materials placed before the Tribunal
CIPU Assessments Eritrea Country Report April 2004
Amnesty International Update on Detained Jehovah's  Witnesses:  26  November
2004
Amnesty International report on Indiscriminate Arrests and  Imprisonment  of
thousand of suspected draft evaders: 9 November 2004
BBC - Eritrean Death Jail Deaths Overblown: 8 November 2004
AFROL News - UNHCR slams Libya for expelling Eritrea refugees: 21  September
2004
US State Department International Religious  Freedom  Report:  15  September
2004
IAS Report on Inaccuracies in Eritrea CIPU Report 9/2004
Christian Today -  Small  denominations  face  persecution  in  Eritrea:  18
September
BBC Religious Persecution in Eritrea: 17 September 2004
Amnesty International Further Information on Eritreans Deported in  July:  6
September 2004
BBC Expelled from Eritrea: 10 September 2004
Jubilee Campaign USA Religious Persecution in Eritrea: August 2004
Human Rights Watch letter about Eritreans  deported  from  Libya:  3  August
2004
Amnesty International Over 110 Eritreans Forcibly returned  from  Libya:  28
July 2004
You Have No Right to Ask -  Government  resists  scrutiny  on  human  rights
amnesty: 19 May 2004
Amnesty International Country Report April 2004
Enough - A Critique of Eritrea's Post Liberation Politics March 2004
US State Department Report 2003: February 2004
UNHCR Position on Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers to Eritrea : 20  January
2004
Eritrea Country Update Human Rights Watch January 2004
Letter from UNHCR 11 February 2005
Letter from UNHCR 16 December 2004
Amnesty International Report 23 December 2004
Amnesty International Report 7 January 2005
Human Rights Watch 13 January 2005
Letter from UNHCR 10 March 2005

Appendix B
Expert evidence
Report from Dr David Poole dated 15 February 2005
Report from Dr John Campbell dated 31 January 2005

Appendix C
Cases cited or referred to
MA (Female Draft Evader) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00098
SE (Deportation - Malta - 2002 -  General  Risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
      00295
GY (Eritrea - Failed asylum seeker) Eritrea [2004] UKIAT 327
YT (Kale Hiwot Church in Eritrea) Eritrea [2004] UKIAT 00218
AT (return to Eritrea - article 3) Eritrea [2005] UKIAT 00043
NM (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea [2005] UKIAT 00073

                                     ***
Approved for electronic transmission


-----------------------
      1


