

|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|On 15 February 2005        |        |SM and Others (MDC -        |
|Prepared: 16 February 2005 |        |internal flight - risk      |
|                           |        |categories) Zimbabwe CG     |
|                           |        |[2005] UKIAT 00100          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|11 May 2005                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter -Vice President                                   |
|His Honour Judge G Risius, CB -Vice President                     |
|Dr J O de Barros                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Respondent                                                        |
|and between                                                       |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|Respondent                                                        |
|and between                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|Respondent                                                        |

Representation:
For the applicants:          Mr I Huffer, Counsel,  for  first  and  second
Applicants                   Ms S Widdison, Counsel, for third Applicant
For Secretary of State:   Ms L Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    There are three appeals before the Tribunal being heard together  with
      the consent of all the parties.  They raise a number of common  issues
      of  fact  relating  to  the  current  situation  in  Zimbabwe  and  in
      particular the categories of those at real risk  of  persecution  from
      the authorities, Zanu-PF members and war veterans and whether internal
      relocation is a viable option for those at risk in  their  home  area.
      These appeals are reported as country guidance on these  issues.   Our
      conclusions are summarised in paragraph 51 of this determination.

The three appeals

2.    In the first  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator,  Mrs  S  M  Walker,  notified  on  19
      october 2004, who allowed the appeal by  the  respondent  ("the  first
      applicant") against the decision giving  directions  for  her  removal
      following the refusal of her claim for asylum.   In the second  appeal
      the  appellant  ("the   second   applicant")   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr L Saffer, notified on 18  November
      2003, who dismissed his appeal against the decision made on 11  August
      2003 refusing him leave to enter following the refusal  of  his  claim
      for  asylum.     In  the  third  appeal,  the  appellant  ("the  third
      applicant") appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  J
      R Gibb, notified on 22 October 2004 who refused her appeal  against  a
      decision giving removal directions following the refusal of her  claim
      for asylum.

The facts relating to the first appeal

3.    The first applicant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  17  September
      1972.   She arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 December 2002  with  a
      valid visit visa.  She  subsequently  applied  for  further  leave  to
      remain as a student which was refused on 29 July 2003.   On  28  April
      2004 she applied for  asylum.    After  attending  the  University  of
      Zimbabwe in Harare, the first applicant started her teaching career in
      1996 at Murewa High School in Mashonaland  East  province.   When  the
      Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) was formed in 1999 she hoped that
      this would prove to be a strong  opposition  party  prepared  to  turn
      things round for the better.   She became a member of the MDC  but  at
      that stage as  she had a small  child  she  was  not  able  to  attend
      rallies.   In May 2000  she  went  back  to  Murewa  to  continue  her
      teaching career.   She encouraged other teachers to become members  of
      the MDC.   One night there was a knock at her door and she was dragged
      from her home by four men.  She was taken to an office.   One  of  the
      men produced MDC cards and asked if she had anything to do with  them.
      She denied this but she was slapped in the face and beaten  up.    She
      was then taken back to the school.  They went straight  to  her  staff
      house.   The men  went  in  and  searched  the  house  destroying  her
      property in the process.    She  gave  up  her  MDC  T-shirt  and  her
      membership card.  She was told that she had to  report  to  a  ZANU-PF
      office and tell them anything suspicious amongst her colleagues at the
      school.

4.    The first applicant remained in  the  school  but  lived  in  fear  of
      harassment.   She had to watch what she was saying all the time.    In
      April 2001 she managed to obtain a transfer to Harare and a place at a
      different school.   She became aware that  some  teachers  were  being
      investigated.   She was called into the  Headmaster's  study  and  was
      told by a man she did not know that he knew who she was and where  she
      was coming from.   He said that he had come to meet her and  warn  her
      that she should mind her own business.   The following year the  first
      applicant secured a place on a course at the  University  of  Zimbabwe
      and was away for 10 months.   When she returned to  school  she  found
      that the teachers had gone on  strike.   At  her  school  no  one  was
      working so she joined in the strike.   The government  then  announced
      that all teachers who had gone on strike were fired but people thought
      this was a joke as the authorities could not fire  all  the  teachers.
      The next day she went to the school and she was met by war veterans at
      the school gate.   The car she was  driving  was  stoned.    When  she
      contacted the Headmaster he said that she would only be  safe  if  she
      stayed away.   She was a target because of her past.  He did not  want
      any trouble  at  the  school.    Because  of  these  problems  it  was
      suggested she should come to the United Kingdom to get away and  spend
      some time with her mother and sister.   She obtained a visitor's visa,
      arriving in this country  in  December  2002.   Subsequently  she  had
      received news from home  that  she  was  no  longer  employed  by  the
      Ministry of Education even though she  had  applied  for  sick  leave.
      Her younger sister had been attacked when she went back to  school  to
      collect her results because the attackers believed that  she  was  the
      first applicant.

5.    The Adjudicator accepted that the first applicant had given an  honest
      account of her experiences in Zimbabwe.  She also heard evidence  from
      the first applicant's sister  and  accepted  that  she  was  a  wholly
      genuine  witness.   The  Adjudicator  was  satisfied  that  the  first
      applicant had experienced persecution in Zimbabwe  for  her  political
      opinions.  She described her as  a  low  key  MDC  supporter  who  had
      managed to avoid trouble by taking a course for 10 months when she was
      not the subject of unwarranted attention.   However, as a teacher  she
      was in a very vulnerable category.   She could choose to try and avoid
      trouble as she had done in the past but as an experienced teacher  she
      should be able to follow her career without fear  of  persecution  and
      intimidation.  Although it was possible that she might  avoid  trouble
      on return to Zimbabwe, the adjudicator took the view  that  there  was
      still a realistic risk of persecution.   In  these  circumstances  her
      appeal was allowed.

The facts relating to the second appeal

6.    The second applicant was born on  17  April  1981.    His  family  has
      homes in Murewa and in Highfield, Harare.  His  father  supported  the
      MDC and the second applicant joined the party in January  2000.    His
      father ran a grocery shop which was in the centre of the  village  and
      they assisted in giving out party cards, T-shirts  and  posters.   War
      veterans came to the house and warned the family telling them to leave
      the party.   His father ignored this.   His  mother  and  sister  were
      abducted and beaten up.   His father told them to move to  Harare  for
      their own  safety.    On  a  number  of  occasions  the  war  veterans
      threatened to kill his father.

7.    After his father's death the second  applicant  starting  running  the
      shop.   MDC officials contacted him asking if he was willing to  help.
       The second applicant and a few others travelled round the village  on
      behalf of the MDC.   A few weeks before the election a  group  of  war
      veterans heard about this.  The second applicant  and  his  colleagues
      were the first targets.  He was beaten up.   He had to leave the  area
      and after the election half his shop was burned down by ZANU-PF youth.
        The second applicant returned to Harare.  In September 2002  he  was
      abducted by ZANU-PF taken to a torture camp where he was beaten up and
      forced to watch the rape of a woman.   He was able to escape from  his
      captors whilst he was being moved and after making his way  to  Harare
      left for the United Kingdom in November 2002.

8.    The credibility of the second applicant's account  was  challenged  at
      the hearing but for the reasons which the Adjudicator  gave  he  found
      the  second  applicant's  story  to  be  compelling,  consistent   and
      credible.   He was  satisfied  that  the  treatment  he  had  suffered
      crossed  the  threshold  of  simple   harassment   and   amounted   to
      persecution.   The  Adjudicator  described  the  second  applicant  as
      falling fairly and squarely in the category of low level supporters of
      the MDC who had had problems with ZANU-PF and the  war  veterans,  who
      the Adjudicator accepted were state agents of  persecution  given  the
      linkage between them and the government.   He went on to consider what
      was reasonably likely to happen to the second applicant on his  return
      to Zimbabwe.   He was likely to be questioned about why he had gone to
      the United Kingdom.   His escape from detention was two months  before
      he fled Zimbabwe.  As he had been taken by  the  war  veterans,  there
      would be no record of his detention or escape.    There  would  be  no
      reason to stop him at the airport.

  9.  The Adjudicator was not satisfied that the Immigration authorities  in
      Zimbabwe would have  any  knowledge  of  or  interest  in  the  second
      applicant.  He went on to consider whether there would be a continuing
      risk from the war veterans and local ZANU-PF.   He accepted that there
      was a risk that he would be of interest to them in his village and  in
      Highfield, Harare, but said these were two very localised areas.    It
      had not been established that it was reasonably likely that  he  would
      come to the  attention  of  the  authorities  elsewhere  in  Zimbabwe.
      There were many areas controlled by the MDC where the second applicant
      could safely relocate.  It would not be unduly harsh to expect him  to
      do so as he was a single man in good health.  The appeal was dismissed
      on both asylum and human rights grounds.

The facts relating to the third appeal

10.   The third applicant was born in May 1983.  She is a white  woman  from
      a farming family.   She arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  31  August
      2002 with entry clearance as a working holiday maker.  She  was  given
      leave to enter for 2 years in this capacity.   On  12  July  2004  she
      applied for asylum.   Her father was a  farmer  in  Centenary  growing
      tobacco and maize on a farm with about 900 employees.    War  veterans
      occupied the farm in 2000 and the family  were  forced  out  in  2001.
      The third applicant left the area with her mother  and  sister  before
      the war veterans arrived.  In 2001 her parents moved  to  a  different
      farm in Mtoroshanga but this farm was also occupied.   When her mother
      became ill, her family took her to South Africa for medical  treatment
      in June 2002.   Her father continued to return to Zimbabwe  trying  to
      keep the farm running but was  forced  out  in  November  2003.    Her
      parents are now living in South Africa.

11.   The third applicant was a supporter of the MDC but never attended  any
      demonstrations although the Adjudicator accepted that she had attended
      an MDC demonstration in the  United  Kingdom  outside  the  Zimbabwean
      Embassy.   The Adjudicator accepted that the  third  applicant  was  a
      credible witness.  He found that  her  family  were  forced  off  both
      farms, that her father was a member of the MDC  and  that  she  was  a
      supporter.  She was also contributing towards the cost of her mother's
      medical treatment in South Africa.  The Adjudicator accepted  that  if
      the third applicant were to return to the family farm  which  had  now
      been abandoned by her parents and made  some  attempt  to  argue  with
      those who had occupied it, there would be a real risk of serious harm.
       This established a risk in her home area  arising  for  a  Convention
      reason.

  12. However, the Adjudicator did not accept that there  would  be  a  real
      risk to the third applicant  as  a  young,  educated  white  woman  in
      Harare.   However much her situation commanded sympathy,  it  was  his
      finding that it would not be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect
      her to relocate.   She had relatives there and should be able to  find
      employment.  The Adjudicator accepted that because of the weakness  of
      the Zimbabwean currency she would not be in a position  to  contribute
      to her mother's treatment as she could at present but this  would  not
      make internal relocation unduly harsh.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on
      both asylum and human rights grounds although the Adjudicator added  a
      recommendation that in the light of her particular  circumstances  she
      should be permitted to continue to work so long as she remained in the
      United Kingdom as a result of the Secretary of State's  suspension  of
      removals to Zimbabwe.

The evidence of Professor Ranger:  (i) written evidence

13.   The Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  Professor  Terence  Ranger.   His
      report is dated 7 February 2005.   He has been asked to give  evidence
      relating to

   a) the assessment of the  degree  of  risk  on  return  to  MDC  members,
      supporters and family members
   b) the risk of white MDC members and supporters
   c) the risk to teachers
   d) the nature of the records kept at the airport  on  the  activities  of
      returnees
   e) the viability of  internal  flight  away  from  the  home  area  where
      persecution has previously been suffered in the light  of  the  tribal
      nature of Zimbabwe and
   f) the factual issues arising out of the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in
      Ndlovu [2004] EWCA Civ 1567 as to whether returnees can  survive  away
      from their  home  area  because  of  ZANU-PF's  control  of  the  food
      distribution and its denial to political opponents.

14.    Professor  Ranger's  expertise  arises  from  more  than   45   years
      familiarity with Zimbabwe.   He first went there in 1957 and has spent
      two periods teaching at the University of Zimbabwe  between  1957  and
      1963 and between January 1998 and June 2001.    He has also taught  at
      the University of Dar es Salaam where he was Professor of History  and
      at the University of California.   He has been a Professor  of  Modern
      History at the University of Manchester and at  Oxford  University  as
      the Rhodes Professor of African Studies.   All but one  of  his  eight
      monographs have dealt  with  the  history  of  Zimbabwe  in  the  20th
      century.    He  has  published  books  dealing  with  the  history  of
      nationalism in Zimbabwe generally and  more  specifically  with  rural
      history in eastern Zimbabwe and  the  history  of  both  southern  and
      northern Matabeleland.     He is the founder of the  Britain  Zimbabwe
      Society, an organisation devoted to the interests  of  the  people  of
      Zimbabwe as a whole rather than any regime or party.   He is a regular
      visitor to Zimbabwe.  He  was  last  there  in  August  2004  for  the
      International Book Fair and will be returning  again  in  March  2005.
      In 1960 he joined the African Nationalist Party,  the  NDP  and  later
      ZAPU.   He has known Robert Mugabe and other senior leaders of ZANU-PF
      for 45 years.

15.   In his report Professor Ranger makes the point that the  questions  he
      has been asked to consider are very general questions.   In  his  oral
      evidence he made it clear  that  he  felt  happier  dealing  with  the
      specifics of an individual case rather than writing a  general  report
      particularly when the issues raised were so recent.   He had attempted
      to draw on such evidence as there was.  Since the  re-commencement  of
      forced returns to Zimbabwe it was hard to collect  confirmed  data  on
      what had happened to returnees.   There were abundant rumours.  It did
      seem to be clear that deportees were being held  at  the  airport  for
      prolonged interrogation and that in some cases families  of  detainees
      were being charged considerable sums of money to obtain their release.
        Prior to the suspension of returns by the Secretary of  State  there
      was evidence of CIO interrogation of returnees.   Since 2002 the risks
      of interrogation at Harare airport have increased.   He referred to  a
      story of  one  particular  returnee  who  gave  an  account  of  being
      interrogated and asked why he had "sold the country out".  The  source
      of this information is a report in The Observer  of  13  January  2002
      about a returnee who subsequently managed to escape out of an  airport
      lavatory window and make his way to south Africa. Since the news  that
      the  United  Kingdom  has  resumed  deportations,   there   has   been
      speculation in the state press alleging that  the  British  government
      will use these to infiltrate a third force  into  Zimbabwe  to  commit
      acts of violence which  would  be  attributed  to  ZANU-PF  so  as  to
      discredit the regime.

16.   There have also been scare stories  that  the  British  government  is
      training hundreds of Zimbabwean recruits to the army holding  them  in
      readiness to use in an invasion.   A report appeared in the Herald  on
      17 December 2004 where Jonathan Moyo Minister of Information, referred
      to threats by the United Kingdom to deport about 10,000 Zimbabweans as
      a cover to deploy elements trained in  sabotage  and  intimidation  to
      destabilise the country both before and during the next  Parliamentary
      elections in March 2005.  Similar  reports  have  been  carried  in  a
      Zimbabwean paper, the Sunday Mail.   There have been  attacks  in  the
      Zimbabwean press on those who have claimed  asylum  abroad  describing
      them  as  unpatriotic  and  as  denigrating  their  own  country   and
      government.   The material in the state press was designed  to  ensure
      and justify a permanent  large  scale  CIO  presence  at  the  airport
      searching for British agents and was generally  unsympathetic  to  any
      asylum seekers.

17.   Professor Ranger referred to the only detail he  had  seen  of  a  CIO
      investigation as coming from a member of the Zimbabwe Reference  Group
      of the Methodist Church.    This described the  testimony  of  someone
      who was held for  5  hours,  questioned  and  threatened  about  being
      involved in political  activities.    He  was  asked  about  political
      activists and human rights organisers who had fled  to  Britain.    He
      was told that if he  had  applied  for  asylum,  he  would  have  been
      imprisoned as a British secret agent.  This source  refers  to  others
      who have returned and were  not  as  lucky.   Several  had  never  re-
      appeared once they were taken from the  plane  by  CIO  agents.    The
      Zimbabwean Community Campaign to Defend Asylum Seekers  (ZCCDAS)  said
      that it feared for the fate of several who had disappeared and  others
      who had been beaten and threatened after deportation but there were no
      names or details available.   Professor Ranger could only comment that
      such assertions were plausible in the present context.

18.   Professor Ranger said that there had been an obvious and  considerable
      risk to whites living in the commercial farming areas between 2000 and
      2002.   At that time the Mugabe government  believed  that  the  white
      farmers were subsidising the MDC and encouraging their farm workers to
      vote for it.   The family experience recorded by the  third  applicant
      was  typical.   However,  the  situation  had   since   changed   very
      considerably.    There was a sense in which  local  whites  living  in
      Zimbabwe have become irrelevant to  Zimbabwean  politics.    The  2005
      elections have been declared as being against Tony Blair  rather  than
      against white farmers.  It is returning black Zimbabweans who are seen
      as the most likely people to be acting as British  agents.   Professor
      Ranger said that he had  many  white  friends  resident  in  Zimbabwe.
      They were able to return after travelling outside the country  without
      attracting protracted attention from immigration.   There were  a  few
      individual white activists who had suffered assault and detention  for
      taking part in marches and demonstrations and some  white  headmasters
      and headmistresses of private schools had  been  arrested  last  year.
      However, being white in itself did not put people in  danger.   Recent
      political violence  did  not  include  examples  of  violence  against
      whites.

19.   There had been a falling away of  threats  to  teachers  in  2003  and
      early 2004.  However, two processes have  been  going  on  which  once
      again exposed teachers to threat.    The  first  was  the  process  of
      increasing state and party presence within schools. A number of  those
      trained in youth militia camps were now teaching in  schools.   A  new
      union, the Teachers Union of Zimbabwe had been established  which  was
      openly committed to ZANU-PF.  Teachers were under pressure to join it.
       The second process related to  the  approach  of  the  March  general
      elections.   The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum  reports  have  again
      begun to report violence against teachers.   On  9  January  2005  the
      Standard reported that scores  of  teachers  were  converging  on  the
      Education Ministry Office in Mutare  seeking  transfers  because  they
      wanted to get out of the rural areas before the March  elections  were
      held.

20.   In FN (Risk - Relocation - MDC) Zimbabwe CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00163  the
      Tribunal held that it was simply going  too  far  to  infer  that  the
      Zimbabwean authorities had a record keeping system  which  would  make
      available to staff at the airport those who had merely  been  detained
      without a charge.  This appeared to refer to the immigration personnel
      at the airport.   However, according to Professor Ranger the CIO  were
      a different matter.   They kept very extensive files on  thousands  of
      people including many not  charged  or  detained.   It  was  Professor
      Ranger's view that few of those files were actually at the airport but
      they could be summoned up during interrogation.  If the CIO thought it
      necessary it could hold any person and information could  be  obtained
      from networks in his or her home area.  The  war  veterans  have  also
      compiled lists of MDC sympathisers and these  lists  have  since  been
      used for  retribution  after  elections.   Such  lists  are  exchanged
      between areas.   The accounts given by the first and second applicants
      were consistent with this exchange of information  between  areas  and
      their  account  was  replicated  dozens  of  times  in  other   asylum
      narratives Professor Ranger had seen.   There was  no  doubt  that  an
      information network existed on the ground in Zimbabwe.   War  veterans
      and party youth passed on information from district to  district.   It
      was certain that such information was not kept at the airport  but  it
      could be obtained.

21.   The facts accepted in relation to  the  first  and  second  applicants
      indicated the difficulties of internal flight.    Both applicants were
      followed up when they moved from Murewa to Harare.   Professor  Ranger
      was aware of cases where war veterans from areas  in  Mashonaland  had
      followed up people who had relocated as far away as Bulawayo.   He did
      not believe the tribal nature of Zimbabwe  was  a  significant  factor
      particularly in multi-lingual towns.    Much  more  relevant  was  the
      question of family networks.  People could be  followed  by  means  of
      those networks and it was very difficult to manage in Zimbabwe without
      kin networks especially for  women  and  children.    There  would  be
      special difficulties for people  who  wished  to  return  to  previous
      employment.   Teachers had to undergo a period in which enquiries were
      made by the Ministry about their past  activities.    Current  factors
      would make relocation  difficult.    The  state  press  was  currently
      warning that asylum deportees might be scattered about  the  provinces
      and they should be watched carefully everywhere  they  went.   In  the
      weeks running up  to  the  election  newcomers  would  be  immediately
      noticed and enquiries made.   Whenever an unknown person settled in  a
      town or rural area, enquiries were carried out and contact  made  with
      war veterans and party officials in their area of origin.

22.   It was common ground that Zimbabwe had suffered  a  serious  shortfall
      in food production.    The NGOs had been prevented  from  distribution
      and the Grain Marketing Board (GMB) administered by local  authorities
      was to be responsible for  distribution.    There  were  reports  that
      grain was being  brought  in  from  South  Africa  and  stockpiled  in
      readiness for a pre-election distribution.   The  MDC  had  complained
      that the hardest hit areas were those which supported  the  opposition
      and that in other others areas  MDC  activists  were  the  subject  of
      discrimination.    Many  international  reports  suspected  that  such
      complaints were well-founded.   A number of organisations had come  to
      the conclusion that  ZANU-PF  interfered  with  food  distribution  in
      different areas of the country.   The GMB were  said  to  exclude  MDC
      sympathisers and ZANU-PF militias  assisted  in  distribution.   Local
      authorities overwhelmingly supported the ZANU-PF  and  determined  who
      got food.

(ii)  Oral Evidence

23.   In his oral evidence in chief Professor Ranger confirmed that the  new
      airport in Harare had an arrival lounge.   He was referred to a report
      that there were now three desks; one for returning residents, one  for
      those with visas and one for those in need of a visa.   It  would  not
      be difficult for there to be structural changes to  provide  interview
      rooms for the CIO out of the  public  area.    The  questions  in  the
      report from the New Zimbabwe were predictable questions.   This  is  a
      reference to an article of 2 March 2005 detailing an intimidating  and
      oppressive interview of a female returnee.  She secured her release as
      she had an uncle in the army who was able to vouch  for  her.    There
      had been two recent newspaper reports criticising  asylum  seekers  as
      those who maligned the country and  raising  the  issue  of  saboteurs
      amongst those returning.   It was Professor Ranger's view that if  the
      CIO had any reason to suppose that someone was politically active  any
      interrogation would be followed up.    Local records could be summoned
      up.   There was a hostile atmosphere for the reception  of  those  who
      were returned.   There was a pattern of violence linked  to  elections
      both preceding the election and then a  punishment  process  following
      them.

24.         Teachers and civil servants were assumed to have influenced  the
      votes and there  would  be  a  period  of  post-election  retribution.
      There would be a range of risk  for  those  returning.    Some  people
      would have a rough time but get through whereas others particularly if
      there were arrest warrants outstanding would be detained.   At present
      all cases had to be determined  in  the  context  of  a  very  hostile
      atmosphere on return.   So far as food distribution was concerned, the
      Zimbabwean government had recently announced that it was  planning  to
      spend $8 million to buy corn  meal  so  that  needy  households  could
      receive bags.   Other  NGOs  and  churches  had  been  prevented  from
      distributing food.   Local groups would decide how the grain was to be
      distributed.

25.   In response to questions from Ms Widdison Professor  Ranger  confirmed
      that a range of files were kept in Zimbabwe.   So far as the  CIO  was
      concerned if there was any  question  of  whether  a  file  should  be
      opened, it was opened.   There  was  a  "Stasi  style"  collection  of
      files.   The disturbing feature was an increasing network of informers
      amongst teachers and lecturers.    The Zimbabwean  community  in  this
      country was convinced that the CIO operated here.   The CIO would have
      files which war veterans and local militias would not have.   The  war
      veterans would draw up lists of families  with  a  view  to  punishing
      them.    The lists could be connected through party structures.    The
      war veterans kept lists for retribution.   Professor Ranger  commented
      that Zimbabwe was a great country for lists at the present time.    If
      there was a file on the third applicant, it would contain  information
      about the farm.  Officials at the  Embassy  did  take  photographs  of
      demonstrations but this might be an act of  intimidation.    Professor
      Ranger had no knowledge of what happened to the  photographs.    There
      was a very recent report that three white farmers  had  been  abducted
      and killed.  This was reported as the activities of a group which  was
      out of control.   It would be particularly difficult for  black  women
      to relocate although ethnicity was not particularly relevant.

26.   The ability to return to a  supportive  network  was  relevant.     In
      answer to questions from Ms Saunders, Professor Ranger said  that  the
      numbers of returnees identified by the  Britain  Zimbabwe  Association
      were smaller than those claimed by other campaigning groups.   It  did
      attempt to keep a record of  those  returned,  the  flights  and  what
      happened after return.   The Sunday Mail and Herald were state papers.
       Jonathon Moyo was beleaguered politically but very much in charge  of
      the  newspapers.     In  a  smaller  town  a  new  arrival  would   be
      investigated  immediately.    The   government   were   committed   to
      transforming the teaching service.   There was a specific  attempt  to
      control the education system and this  had  been  the  main  issue  in
      President Mugabe's Heros' Day speech.   The files were probably  paper
      files.   The CIO did keep extensive files, a practice  inherited  from
      the previous regime.  Many of the daughters of MDC activists had  been
      targeted by war veterans.   They would not have a CIO file  but  would
      still be at risk.   Teachers and trade unionists probably would have a
      CIO file.   Professor Ranger was not  personally  aware  of  instances
      when files had been called for.  This was a matter of inference.   The
      reports tended to show that  the  interrogators  were  well  informed.
      People depended  on  family  networks  in  Zimbabwe.    This  posed  a
      dilemma.   Someone could not operate outside their family network  but
      might well endanger themselves and the network if they were pursued by
      the war veterans.   If someone relocated in a township every one would
      know about it.   It might be possible to relocate in large towns where
      there was  more  coming  and  going  but  this  raised  the  issue  of
      resources.   Human rights reports did refer to  government  statements
      that it could not feed those who were disloyal.

27.   In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Professor Ranger  felt  that
      demanding money from relatives of those held at the  airport  probably
      rose  from  private  opportunism.    Decisions   relating   to   grain
      distribution would be decided  by  local  committees  including  local
      headmen and party cell leaders.   They may well be  some  in  Zimbabwe
      who really did believe  that  the  United  Kingdom  might  attempt  to
      infiltrate agents through returned asylum seekers.

General submissions on behalf of the first and second applicants:

28.   Mr Huffer submitted that those who had attracted  persecution  by  the
      authorities in Zimbabwe were those who supported or were suspected  of
      being associated with the MDC.   These included not only activists but
      members and supporters and those who had voted  or  were  believed  to
      have voted for the MDC, those belonging to the MDC and their families.
        There was a heightened risk  during  election  periods.   That  risk
      would continue for some time after the conclusion of  the  March  2005
      Parliamentary elections.  There was a heightened risk for returnees at
      present in the light of the assertions by the Zimbabwe government that
      the decision to return Zimbabweans could be a cover to deploy elements
      trained in sabotage and to de-stabilise the country before and  during
      the elections.    There was evidence  that  those  returned  would  be
      interrogated.  There was a particular risk for teachers.    There  was
      evidence that all deportees were handed over to  the  authorities  for
      questioning.  Those without a current passport or comparable  document
      but  returning  with  emergency  travel  documents   would   put   the
      authorities on notice that they had sought asylum.

29.   When assessing the risk on return, Mr Huffer accepted that  it  should
      be assumed that returning states had properly discharged their  duties
      under international law and were only returning those not at  risk  of
      persecution  and  that  those  being  interrogated  on  return   would
      truthfully answer questions as  to  their  political  allegiances  and
      activities.   There was evidence that extensive  files  were  kept  on
      many people.   It was reasonable to assume that those records would be
      made available to the CIO at arrival if requested.   If the risk arose
      at the point of arrival, internal flight was unlikely to  arise.    If
      it did arise, there would be significant difficulties facing those who
      did not have family networks or where their presence would be revealed
      as a result of ZANU-PF informants.   The discriminatory  use  of  food
      distribution was used to punish MDC supporting areas at  a  time  when
      many were close to starving.  Mr Huffer did not seek to maintain  that
      all returnees would be at risk but submitted that at the present  time
      in the light of the atmosphere of suspicion and antagonism, all claims
      should be closely scrutinised as to whether there was a real risk that
      interrogation would lead to a perception of links to  the  opposition.



Submissions in respect of the first applicant

30.   The first applicant had been found  credible  after  a  very  thorough
      examination  by  the  Adjudicator  in   a   careful   and   considered
      determination.   There was no obvious error of  law.    The  issue  of
      internal flight had not been raised by the Secretary of State  and  in
      these circumstances there was no reason for it to  be  raised  by  the
      Adjudicator, who had made clear findings.   The first applicant was  a
      teacher who was suspected of MDC links and in fact had links with  the
      MDC.   There was clear evidence that she would be at risk  on  return.



Submissions relating to the second applicant

31.   The second applicant had also been found credible by the  Adjudicator.
        He had erred in law in his assessment of internal  flight.   He  had
      referred to areas controlled by the MDC.   There were  no  such  areas
      even though there may be areas where there were MDC majorities.   When
      assessing internal flight the Adjudicator had not taken  into  account
      the risk that inquiries would be  made  about  the  second  applicant.
      These would lead to him being identified as an MDC activist.   He  had
      attempted to relocate in Harare but had been the victim  of  violence.
      The Adjudicator had accepted that he was at risk  from  state  agents.
      Where there was evidence of a network of information, it would only be
      in exceptional circumstances that internal relocation was available.




Submissions on behalf of the third applicant

32.    Ms  Widdison  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in   his
      assessment of the objective evidence.   He had failed to  take  proper
      account of the evidence relating to the position of whites in Zimbabwe
      and the fact that President  Mugabe  had  incited  his  supporters  to
      target the white population and the regime imputed a  pro-MDC  opinion
      to Zimbabwean whites.  His conclusions were against the weight of  the
      evidence in the light of his acceptance  that  the  third  applicant's
      father was a member  of  the  MDC  and  she  was  a  supporter.    His
      assessment of internal flight failed to take  into  account  the  fact
      that the CIO kept very extensive files and that the war  veterans  and
      party youth movement  passed  on  information  from  one  district  to
      another.  In LS (Persecution - CIO) Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT 03342 the
      Tribunal found that CIO interrogators were active and on the facts  of
      that appeal there was a real risk that the appellant would be detained
      for questioning.  The risks of interrogation had increased.   It would
      be difficult for a single woman to relocate in  Zimbabwe  without  kin
      networks.   Her immediate family were in  South  Africa  and  she  was
      unaware of the exact whereabouts of her other  relatives.   The  third
      applicant would be at risk as a failed asylum seeker.     There  would
      still be a risk  to  a  white  woman  returning.    The  Adjudicator's
      assessment  of  Article  8  was  flawed.    In  the   light   of   the
      Adjudicator's recommendation  he  should  have  taken  the  view  that
      removal would be disproportionate.

Submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State

33.   Ms Saunders submitted that so far  as  any  risk  on  arrival  at  the
      airport was concerned there was very little  evidence.    The  account
      set out in the extract from  New  Zimbabwe  was  the  only  documented
      evidence of a returnee being questioned.  The other  evidence  related
      to the report in The Observer of 13 January 2002  where  the  returnee
      had been  able  to  escape  from  detention.   The  evidence  was  not
      sufficient to suggest that all returnees were at risk  or  that  there
      was a comprehensive information system available to  the  CIO  at  the
      airport.   The evidence relied on was speculative.   The  evidence  of
      detention and interrogation at the airport did not cross the threshold
      into persecution.  The evidence about disappearances from the Zimbabwe
      Reference Group and the ZCCDAS provided no  names  or  details.    The
      evidence showed a distinction between the records held by  the  police
      and by ZANU-PF and the war veterans.   Internal flight would generally
      be a viable option for those at risk in their home area.

34.   So far  as  the  first  applicant  was  concerned,  the  position  for
      teachers had improved  since  2000/2001.    The  Adjudicator  had  not
      referred to this.  The Secretary of State had not been able  to  raise
      the issue of internal flight before the application to the Tribunal as
      he had not been represented at the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator.
      The evidence showed that teachers were now being invited back to their
      schools.   The major problem for the first applicant arose following a
      strike at her school.   There was no evidence of torture following the
      strike: paragraph 6.134-5 of the CIPU  report.   The  first  applicant
      could return to her husband  and  relocate  to  a  different  area  in
      Zimbabwe.

35.   In the appeal relating to the second  applicant  the  Adjudicator  had
      not erred in law.   The  second  applicant  had  left  using  his  own
      passport and could return on it.   There would be  no  record  of  his
      political activities as his problems were localised.   The Adjudicator
      was entitled to find that he could relocate.   If he went to a heavily
      populated area, there was no reason to believe that enquiries would be
      made about him.   There was no proper basis for  a  challenge  to  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions.

36.   The third applicant had been found to be credible.    Racial  tensions
      in Zimbabwe had subsided and had remained relatively low: CIPU  report
      paragraph 6.82-4.  There may be a problem for some  white  people  but
      there was no real risk for the third applicant.   She had no political
      background and there was now no reason to believe that she would be of
      any adverse interest to the authorities on return.  In so far  as  she
      had attended a demonstration  in  the  United  Kingdom  there  was  no
      evidence that the Zimbabwe authorities would be able to identify  her.
       It was unlikely that there was any file in  relation  to  her.    The
      likelihood was that she would be able  to  pass  through  the  airport
      without  problems  and   relocate.     There   were   no   exceptional
      circumstances  which  justified  finding   that   removal   would   be
      disproportionate.

The background to the current situation in Zimbabwe

37.   The background to the current situation in  Zimbabwe  can  briefly  be
      summarised as follows.  Zimbabwe achieved formal independence from the
      United Kingdom in  1980.    Robert  Mugabe's  ZANU-PF  party  won  the
      largest number of seats in the elections in that year.   Mugabe became
      Prime Minster leading a coalition government and  has  been  in  power
      since then.   Constitutional changes  in  1987  created  an  executive
      Presidency incorporating the ceremonial post of President with that of
      Prime Minister.    ZANU-PF won a decisive election  victory  in  1995.
      The MDC was formed in September 1999 under the  leadership  of  Morgan
      Tsvangiri.   In February 2000 a  referendum  was  held  in  a  bid  to
      consolidate the  President's  powers  by  amending  the  constitution.
      Although  this  was  lost,  the  government  party  pushed  through  a
      constitutional amendment to allow the seizure of  white  owned  farms.
      Elections were held in June 2000 and there was a  systematic  campaign
      of violence towards supporters of  potential  opposition  politicians.
      Many acts of violence were perpetrated by ZANU-PF  militants  and  war
      veterans.   Politically  motivated  violence  mostly  perpetrated   by
      government supporters against the MDC and commercial farmers continued
      throughout 2001 after the Parliamentary elections and in 2002  in  the
      run up to the Presidential election of March 2002.

38.   The government's human  rights  record  remains  poor.    There  is  a
      significant amount of evidence that ZANU-PF supporters have  committed
      numerous acts of abuse against  opposition  supporters  and  there  is
      little prospect of redress from the police  or  authorities.   In  the
      determination  relating  to  the  second  applicant  the   Adjudicator
      described the background material  as  showing  that  Zimbabwe  was  a
      country in chaos where flagrant breaches of human rights sanctioned by
      the government against supporters  and  potential  supporters  of  the
      opposition have dominated news reports over the past 3-4  years.   The
      incidents set out in the CIPU reports do show a pattern  of  political
      intimidation  and  violence  perpetrated  by  the   government   using
      affiliated organisations and  supporters.    The  deteriorating  human
      rights record has led to the European Union imposing sanctions and the
      Commonwealth suspending Zimbabwe's membership.

39.   Because of the situation in Zimbabwe in January 2002 the Secretary  of
      State announced a temporary suspension of the removal of failed asylum
      seekers.   This was in response to concerns  at  the  time  about  the
      serious  deterioration  in  the  situation  in  the  run  up  to   the
      Presidential election.   According to  the  statement  issued  by  the
      Minister of Citizenship and Immigration the government did not  regard
      it as unsafe to return failed  asylum  seekers  but  in  view  of  the
      turbulent political conditions considered that it would be appropriate
      not to enforce returns.   In his  statement  the  Minister  said  that
      although there had not been any improvement in conditions in  Zimbabwe
      since enforced removal of failed  asylum  seekers  was  suspended  the
      proportion  of  claimants  whose  claims  were  not  well-founded  had
      increased markedly and it was  clear  that  the  absence  of  enforced
      returns increasingly acted as a pull factor for Zimbabweans and others
      posing as Zimbabweans who did not  require  international  protection.
      The policy on the return of failed Zimbabwean asylum seekers was to be
      brought into line with that of every other country and  the  temporary
      suspension  of  enforced  returns  would  be  ended.    The  statement
      confirmed that there was no doubt that political  persecution,  abuses
      of human rights and the denial of basic freedom persisted in  Zimbabwe
      and that asylum decision making and the appeal system  would  continue
      to ensure that Zimbabweans who faced persecution and claimed asylum in
      the  United  Kingdom  would  continue  to  receive  the  international
      protection they needed.

Consideration of the issues: (i) political opponents.

40.   The Tribunal accept the evidence of Professor Ranger.   His  expertise
      and knowledge of Zimbabwe is clear.   In his oral evidence he made  it
      clear that there were some sources to which he would attach relatively
      little weight and others which were more  compelling  because  of  the
      greater care in recording and  analysing  information.    He  accepted
      that much of the information he had collated was speculative but  this
      was inevitable as he was being asked to deal with very recent events.

41.   The Tribunal accepts from his evidence and from the  news  reports  in
      Zimbabwe that those deported to Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom  will
      be subject to interrogation on return.  In the light of  the  interest
      and comment the resumption of returns has  raised  in  the  government
      press in Zimbabwe it seems to us to be inevitable that  this  will  be
      the case.  If it is being asserted by  the  Zimbabwe  government  that
      returns are being used as a cloak for British agents and saboteurs  to
      be smuggled into the country, it is likely that those returns will  be
      carefully monitored  whether  for  that  reason  or  to  identify  and
      intimidate opponents to the regime.   The reports in the newspapers in
      Zimbabwe are consistent with there being an atmosphere of suspicion to
      those returned.   The returnee in the New Zimbabwe report was released
      following a telephone call made to an uncle serving in  the  army  but
      only after an intimidating interview.    We  take  into  account  that
      before returns were suspended there was some evidence  that  returnees
      were investigated.  We have our doubts about the story of the returnee
      in the article from January 2002 and his  escape  out  of  an  airport
      lavatory window at Harare and his subsequent travel to  South  Africa,
      but in any event we are concerned with returns at  the  present  time.
      We also approach with caution the reports  that  a  number  of  recent
      returnees have never re-appeared once they were taken from  the  plane
      by CIO agents and that others have disappeared.   No names or  details
      have been provided and if, as Professor Ranger says the  returns  have
      been carefully monitored, we would have thought such details would  be
      available.

42.   Nonetheless the Tribunal is satisfied in the light of  the  statements
      made by the Zimbabwean authorities that returnees  are  regarded  with
      contempt  and  suspicion  on  return  and  do  face  a  very   hostile
      atmosphere.   This by itself does not indicate that all returnees  are
      at real risk of persecution but that  returnees  are  liable  to  have
      their  background  and  circumstances  carefully  scrutinised  by  the
      authorities.  We are satisfied that those who are suspected  of  being
      politically active with the MDC would be at real risk.  We agree  with
      Professor Ranger that if the authorities have any  reason  to  believe
      that someone is politically active the interrogation will be  followed
      up.   There is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  this  will
      include treatment sufficiently serious to amount to persecution.

43.   In his submissions Mr Huffer argued that those suspected or  perceived
      of being associated  with  the  opposition  have  included  activists,
      campaigners, officials and election polling agents, MDC candidates for
      local and national government, MDC members, former  MDC  members,  MDC
      supporters, those who voted or believed to have voted for the MDC  and
      those belonging to the MDC, families of the  foregoing,  employees  of
      the foregoing, those whose actions have given  rise  to  suspicion  of
      support for the opposition such as attending an MDC rally or wearing a
      T-shirt, attending a demonstration, teachers and other  professionals,
      refusal to attend a ZANU-PF rally or chant a  ZANU-PF  slogan  or  not
      having a ZANU-PF membership card.   The  Tribunal  accept  that  these
      categories illustrate those who might be at risk but  each  case  must
      depend upon its own circumstances.  In a number of cases the  Tribunal
      has drawn a distinction between low level  and  high  level  political
      activities.   The situation in Zimbabwe is arbitrary and unpredictable
      and in these circumstances such a distinction  is  not  determinative.
      The phrase "low level activities"  is  sometimes  used  as  a  way  if
      describing someone whose background and profile is  such  that  it  is
      thought that he would not  be  of  interest  to  the  authorities  but
      someone whose political activities may have been at a  low  level  may
      have become of interest to the authorities.     The  current  position
      taken by the Tribunal that each case must be decided on its individual
      facts should be continued.   This approach has been  endorsed  by  the
      Court of Appeal in Mhute [2003] EWCA Civ 1029 and Ndlovu  [2004]  EWCA
      Civ 1567.    The factors identified by Mr Huffer are relevant  to  the
      assessment  of  risk  but  cannot  be  regarded   as   by   themselves
      determinative in any particular appeal.

      (ii) The election cycle

44.   The Tribunal also accept  that  there  is  a  heightened  risk  during
      election periods and their immediate aftermath.    This  reflects  the
      pattern which has been followed since 2000.  Before an election  there
      is intimidation of opposition supporters and  those  perceived  to  be
      encouraging support for the  opposition  in  particular  teachers  and
      civil servants. Following an election the phenomenon of  post-election
      retribution is well documented.   However, in the current situation in
      Zimbabwe, in our judgment it is artificial  to  attempt  to  draw  too
      clear a distinction between election periods and those periods  before
      the next Parliamentary or Presidential  elections.    The  reality  is
      that there is only likely to  be  a  short  break  before  campaigning
      starts for the next  election,  for  example,  the  2007  Presidential
      elections.

45.   The Tribunal accept that there is a heightened  risk  at  present  for
      teachers because of their profession and the perception that they have
      supported and encouraged support for the MDC.   The  risk  had  fallen
      away in 2003 and early 2004  but has  recently  increased  because  of
      greater Zanu-PF presence in schools through the new union.

      (iii) The existence and use of records.

46.   We have heard argument about the  use  of  the  records  held  by  the
      authorities on return at Harare airport.  More evidence  is  available
      to us than was before the Tribunal in FN.  The Tribunal  accepts  that
      returnees are likely to be closely questioned  about  what  they  have
      been doing in the United Kingdom.   However, it is only those who  are
      not at risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3  who
      are likely to be removed and on  this  basis  interrogation  will  not
      reveal anything of adverse interest  to  the  authorities.   Any  risk
      arising from the maintenance of records is an  integral  part  of  the
      assessment of whether the applicant in his particular circumstances is
      at risk on return.   The  fact  that  a  file  has  been  kept  on  an
      applicant does not mean that he or she  will  be  at  risk.  Professor
      Ranger told the Tribunal that he knows that the Zimbabwean authorities
      have a file on him.   He confirmed that Zimbabwe is a country where  a
      lot of  records  are  kept.   He  described  it  as  a  "Stasi  style"
      collection of information.  We accept that if someone is  interrogated
      there may be information which the CIO are able to call  upon  whether
      from their own files  or  from  the  local  party  structures  in  the
      returnee's home area.   However, the existence of the  files  and  the
      availability of information does not mean that  there  is  a  separate
      risk on return at the airport  which  can  be  differentiated  from  a
      general risk whether in the country as a whole or  in  an  applicant's
      home area.  The issue is whether an applicant is of  adverse  interest
      to the authorities.   The fact that an applicant has a file  indicates
      that he is or has been known to the authorities but  without  more  it
      does not indicate whether he would currently  be  of  interest.    The
      assessment of risk should focus on what has happened to the  applicant
      and what his current profile is rather than speculation on whether  he
      has a file and if so, what might be in it.



      (iv) The risk to white Zimbabweans.

47.   The Tribunal accepts Professor Ranger's  evidence  that  the  fact  of
      being a white Zimbabwean does not now of itself put  an  applicant  in
      danger.   The issue remains whether  the  individual  in  his  or  her
      particular circumstances is regarded as a political opponent.

      (v) Internal relocation

48.   The Tribunal now turn to the issue of whether internal  relocation  is
      a viable option for those at risk in their home area.    The  Tribunal
      accept that there is a network of information whereby the CIO, ZANU-PF
      and the war veterans can check up on incomers in a different area.  In
      small towns and in rural areas new  arrivals  are  at  risk  of  being
      checked.  Someone who has been or is at risk in his home area may find
      that information is forwarded to where he has sought to relocate.   In
      such circumstances relocation will not be a  viable  option.   We  are
      satisfied that in the current situation of excessive hostility towards
      returnees the issue of relocation does  need  to  be  considered  with
      particular care.  Someone who has come to the adverse attention of the
      war veterans or ZANU-PF and who has been noted as a political opponent
      in his home area in our judgment is unlikely to be able to relocate in
      safety.

49.    If  an  applicant  has  been  a  victim  of  arbitrary  violence   in
      circumstances where his identity is unlikely to have  been  noted  and
      recorded, then internal relocation would be available.   The  Tribunal
      accept that the absence of family networks outside the home area  make
      it difficult to relocate.   Even the presence of family networks  must
      be considered with  caution  because  of  the  propensity  of  ZANU-PF
      supporters to take reprisals against family members.

      (vi) Grain distribution.

50.   The Tribunal  heard  evidence  about  the  discrimatory  use  of  food
      distribution to punish MDC supporting areas.  However, the evidence is
      tenuous.  The MDC have complained that the hardest hit areas are those
      which support the opposition and that in other areas MDC activists are
      discriminated   against.    According   to   Professor   Ranger   many
      international reports suspect that such complaints  are  well-founded.
      In our judgment this factor adds little to the assessment  of  whether
      an applicant is likely to be at risk on return.  The refusal  of  food
      on political grounds in famine conditions is clearly capable of  being
      persecution but on the evidence  available  relating  to  the  present
      situation in Zimbabwe the Tribunal is not satisfied that such a  claim
      is made out in respect of the issues of either persecution or internal
      relocation.

Summary

51.   It may be helpful at this stage  if  we  summarise  our  findings  and
      conclusions on the issues raised in this appeal:

   a) There does continue to be a real risk of persecution for those who are
      or are perceived to be politically active in  opposition  to  and  for
      this reason of serious adverse interest to the present  regime.   This
      can potentially include the categories identified in paragraph 43  but
      none of these factors by itself is determinative.  Each case  must  be
      looked at on its own  individual  facts.   Some  categories  are  more
      likely to be at risk than others such as MDC activists and campaigners
      rather than supporters but we do not exclude the possibility  that  in
      exceptional cases those with very limited political involvement  could
      in their particular circumstances find themselves at real risk.


   b)  The  risk  to  political  opponents  is  increased  both  before  and
      immediately after elections but this fact is of limited importance and
      is only likely to have any material bearing in borderline cases.

   c) There does continue to be a  risk  for  teachers  with  an  actual  or
      perceived political profile of support for the MDC.

   d) Records are kept by various groups and authorities including the  CIO,
      local police and Zanu-PF party organisations and the war veterans  but
      the existence  of  these  records  does  not  materially  add  to  the
      assessment of the risk of persecution  in  an  individual  case  which
      depends on the applicant's profile and  background.  It  seems  to  us
      unlikely  that  someone  who  has  been  caught  up  in   random   and
      intimidatory violence would without more be regarded as of  continuing
      interest to the authorities.  However, the  fact  that  these  records
      exist may indicate that an applicant found to be at risk  is  unlikely
      to be able to relocate in safety.  In this context  it  will  also  be
      important  to  take  into  account  whether  the  risk  is  from   the
      authorities or from a local branch of Zanu-PF  or  locally  based  war
      veterans.

   e) The current atmosphere of hostility to the  return  of  failed  asylum
      seekers does not of itself put at risk those who would  otherwise  not
      be at real risk but does serve  to  reinforce  the  fact  that  asylum
      claims  must  be  considered  with  care  and  where  there   is   any
      uncertainty, any doubts must be resolved in the applicant's favour.

   f) The fact of being a  white  Zimbabwean  does  not  of  itself  put  an
      applicant in danger

   g) Where an applicant is at risk in his  home  area,  the  assessment  of
      internal relocation must take into account the fact that  there  is  a
      network of information available to the authorities, ZANU PF  and  war
      veterans. An applicant who is regarded as an active political opponent
      in his home area may not to be able to relocate in safety but this  is
      a question of fact to be assessed in the circumstances of each case.

   h) The use of grain distribution as a way  of  taking  reprisals  against
      political opponents does not arise in this appeal.  We do not rule out
      the possibility of a case succeeding on  this  ground  alone  but  the
      evidence would have to be clear and compelling.  In so far as this was
      an issue in Ndlovu [2004] EWCA  Civ  1567,  the  case  turned  on  the
      findings of fact made by the Adjudicator.  The Court  of  Appeal  held
      that the Tribunal was wrong to find that the Adjudicator had erred  in
      law but also emphasised that the adjudicator's decision  did  not  and
      could not create a factual precedent of any kind.

   i) There is no general risk for failed asylum  seekers  of  a  breach  of
      article 3 as a result of the current hostility towards such returnees.



   j) This determination is to be treated as updating  and  superseding  all
      previous country guidance cases most of which were  decided  in  2002.
      The following  cases  are  therefore  no  longer  to  be  regarded  as
      providing country guidance: LS (Persecution  -  CIO)  Zimbabwe  [2002]
      03342, LM (MDC) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 03916, BN (MDC ) Zimbabwe [2002]
      UKIAT 05518, BS (Liberty Party - CIO airport)  Zimbabwe  [2002]  UKIAT
      06461, AB (Persecution - CIO) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 03598 and FN (Risk
      -relocation -MDC) [2003] UKIAT 00163. The Tribunal will  now  turn  to
      the facts in the three individual appeals.

The first applicant

52.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.   The  Adjudicator  found
      the first applicant to be a credible witness.   In the light  of  what
      had happened to her in the past and the fact that she  is  a  teacher,
      the Adjudicator was satisfied that there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
      persecution  on  return.    The  grounds  argue  that   although   the
      Adjudicator accepted the credibility of the  account,  she  failed  to
      address whether there would be a viable internal flight option.    The
      grounds refer to the Tribunal decision in  FN  making  it  clear  that
      there is no evidence to show that the Zimbabwean  authorities  have  a
      record keeping system of previous detentions which can be used against
      returnees at the airport.   The grounds also rely on  the  April  2004
      CIPU report that unlike in the previous year there had been no reports
      that schools were shut down as a result in the torture of teachers who
      supported the MDC and although teachers still faced intimidation there
      were  no  reports  that  ruling  party  supporters  attacked  teachers
      suspected of supporting the opposition.   It is argued the Adjudicator
      had failed to  take  this  information  into  account  when  assessing
      whether  the  first  applicant  would  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution.

53.   The Tribunal is not satisfied that there is any adequate basis  for  a
      challenge to the Adjudicator's  assessment  of  risk  on  return.   An
      appeal can now only be brought on a point of law.  She has  considered
      the position of teachers and there is no reason to  believe  that  she
      left out of her account those parts of the  report  dealing  with  the
      relatively slight improvement in the situation faced by teachers.  Her
      findings on the issue of risk were properly open to her and cannot  be
      categorised as unreasonable.   There is no  substance  in  the  second
      ground.   The first ground  of  appeal  argues  that  the  Adjudicator
      failed to consider the issue of internal flight.   The issue  was  not
      raised before her and had not been raised in the reasons  for  refusal
      letter.  The Secretary of State was not represented  at  the  hearing.
      In these circumstances the tribunal is not satisfied that  this  issue
      should be raised on appeal: paragraphs 33-4 of the  judgment  of  Lord
      Woolf CJ in P & M v Secretary of  State  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1640.  The
      Tribunal is not satisfied that the Adjudicator erred in law by failing
      to deal specifically with this issue.

 54.   The Tribunal would accept that just as  an  Adjudicator  should  take
      obvious points in favour of an appellant, it is in the public interest
      that he should take points obviously against the appellant as it would
      be against the public interest for those not entitled to asylum to  be
      granted asylum.   However, on the facts of  this  case  the  issue  of
      internal relocation is not  something  which  the  Adjudicator  should
      obviously have considered. For the reasons the Tribunal have ready set
      out, we are not  satisfied  that  someone  in  the  first  applicant's
      circumstances whose risk arises because of her activities for the  MDC
      and the fact that she is a teacher would be able to relocate in safety
      elsewhere in Zimbabwe.  The  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      dismissed.

The second applicant

55.   The appeal of the second applicant turns substantially  on  the  issue
      of internal relocation.  The Adjudicator found that  he  had  given  a
      true account of events in Zimbabwe and that he would be at  risk  from
      ZANU-PF and war veterans in his home areas of  Murewa  and  Highfield,
      Harare.  The Adjudicator accepted that  he  was  at  risk  from  state
      agents.   He found that there would be no reason for him to be stopped
      at the airport and that he could avoid the risk in his  home  area  by
      relocating elsewhere.   The Adjudicator  referred  to  many  areas  as
      controlled by the MDC where he  could  safely  relocate.    There  are
      certainly areas where the MDC are in a majority in the sense that they
      have MDC representatives in Parliament  but  no  areas  which  can  be
      described as controlled by the MDC in  that  those  who  reside  there
      would be safe from the ZANU-PF or war veterans.  There was no evidence
      on which such a finding of fact could be made.

56.   For this reason, the Tribunal is satisfied that  the  Adjudicator  did
      err in law in his approach to the assessment of internal flight.    In
      our view the proper course is for the Tribunal to reassess this  issue
      in the light of the evidence currently available.  The  likelihood  is
      that on relocation inquires would be made about the  second  applicant
      which would lead to information being obtained about his activities in
      his home area.   These activities include active support for  the  MDC
      by himself and his father.   The second applicant has been the  victim
      of violence and his shop was partially burned down by  ZANU-PF  youth.
      This is consistent  with  a  reprisal  raid  following  the  election.
      Subsequently he was detained by ZANU-PF supporters  and  was  able  to
      escape from that detention.  His activities on behalf of the  MDC  are
      such that there is a real risk that he would be regarded as an  active
      supporter and a political opponent.   The Tribunal  is  not  satisfied
      that internal relocation is a viable option for the second  applicant.
       In the present atmosphere in Zimbabwe in our judgment he is unable to
      relocate in safety.   The issue of undue harshness does not  therefore
      arise.   The appeal by the second applicant will be allowed.

The third applicant

57.   It is submitted on behalf of the third applicant that the  Adjudicator
      failed to take proper account of  the  background  evidence  and  also
      failed to consider the issue of internal relocation.    It  is  argued
      that she would be perceived as  a  political  opponent  and  in  these
      circumstances would be at real risk of persecution.  It is clear  that
      the Adjudicator sympathised with the  third  applicant  but,  for  the
      reasons he gave, was not satisfied that she would be at real  risk  of
      persecution on return.   In our judgment  the  Adjudicator's  findings
      were properly open to him on this issue.   It  is  unlikely  that  the
      third applicant would seek to return to the family farm in any  event.
       She is not someone who  has  any  record  of  political  activity  in
      Zimbabwe.   Although her father was a  member  of  the  MDC  and  made
      financial donations to  the  party  and  the  third  applicant  was  a
      supporter, she never took any active part in politics in Zimbabwe  and
      has never herself  come  to  the  attention  of  ZANU-PF  or  the  war
      veterans.  Even if the CIO does have a file, which in our view is very
      unlikely, there are no reasonable grounds for finding that  she  would
      now be of any adverse interest to the CIO.

58.   The Adjudicator considered the issue of  internal  protection  on  the
      basis that if the third applicant returned to her home area she  would
      be at risk.   He found that it would not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
      harsh to expect her  to  relocate  in  Harare.   He  was  entitled  to
      conclude that it was not unreasonable to expect her to do this as  she
      was educated and in all likelihood would be able to  find  employment.
      The Tribunal is not satisfied that there  would  be  anything  on  the
      files or any information network which would put  her  at  risk.   The
      evidence from Professor Ranger which the Tribunal accept is that being
      white by itself would not now put  her  at  risk.   The  fact  that  a
      photograph has been taken outside  the  Embassy  does  not  provide  a
      sufficient basis for a finding that she would be at  risk  on  return.
      In the light of the evidence about the number of photographs taken and
      the records kept by the authorities it is  unlikely that she would  be
      identified on return from the photograph and even less likely that the
      authorities would regard her as an  active  opponent  of  the  regime.
      The  risk  is  so  small  that  it  can  reasonably   be   discounted.
      Compassionate though the  third  applicant's  circumstances  are,  the
      Tribunal is not satisfied that the Adjudicator erred  in  law  in  his
      assessment of  the  risk  on  return  or  on  the  issue  of  internal
      relocation.

Decisions

59.   For the reasons the Tribunal have given, the appeal by  the  Secretary
      of State in respect of the first applicant's appeal is dismissed,  the
      appeal by the second applicant is allowed and the appeal of the  third
      applicant is dismissed.


                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

Appendix 1:  Expert Evidence

Report from Professor Ranger dated 7 February 2005

Appendix 2:  Documents

First appeal

Teachers in Zimbabwe:  We are very afraid 19 August 2004
BBC News Report (Teachers Targeted) 8 February 2002
Mugube Bends Minds in Hatred Camps - The Sunday Times
9 February 2003
Teaching them a lesson report on the  attack  on  the  Zimbabwean  teachers.
Zimbabwean Human Rights NGO Forum 20 September 2002
Zimbabwe fear spreads BBC News 6 June 2000
Zimbabwe Atol of Impunity Amnesty International

Second Appeal

CIPU Report October 2004
Human Rights Watch World Report 2005 Zimbabwe 13 January 2005
Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum Political Violence Report
October 2004
Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum Political Violence Report
September 2004
Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum Political Violence Report
August 2004
The Guardian : Mugube accused of election torture - 19 August 2004
US Department of State Country Reports 2003

Third appeal

Telegraph Report Forces more whites out of Zimbabwe - 10 July 2004
Telegraph Report Rape Gangs Targetting Whites in Zimbabwe
7 February 2004
ZW News Government Intensifies Farm Evictions - 2 February 2005
ZW News Zimbabwe Agricultural Welfare Trust - 2 February 2005
BBC News Mugube warns white Zimbabweans - 13 December 2002
BBC News Mugube threatens White Farmers - 7 April 2000
Africa News Mugube threatens Zim Whites - 2 July 2001
The Zimbabwe Situation (extracts)
US State Department Report 2003

Documents produced by Secretary of State

CIPU report October 2004
UK Home office IND Zimbabwe Bulletin 2/2004

Other documents produced at the hearing

Amnesty International Report 2004 Zimbabwe 26 February 2004
A Gustapo Welcome for Zimbabwe Deportees from New Zimbabwe
To March 2005
SW Radio Africa - 4 February 2005

Appendix 3:

Cases cited or referred to
MN (Risk - MDC) Zimbabwe [2002]UKIAT 02246
BN (MDC) Zimbabwe  CG [2002] UKIAT 05518
FN (Risk - relocation -MDC) Zimbabwe CG [2003 ]UKIAT 00163
LS (Persecution - CIO) Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT 03342
P & M  v  Secretary of State [2004] EWCA Civ 1640
Mhute [2003] EWCA Civ 1029
Ndlovu [2004] EWCA Civ 1567

Approved for electronic distribution





