
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (Piccadilly)              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 November 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                     and

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                     MM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellant:   Mr P Simm (Solicitor)
 Respondent:  Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  Where there is a defect or impropriety of a procedural  nature  in  the
    proceedings at first instance, this may amount to a material  error  of
    law requiring the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be
    set aside.


(2)  A successful appeal is not  dependent  on  the  demonstration  of  some
    failing on the part of the FtT. Thus an error of law may  be  found  to
    have occurred in circumstances where some material evidence, through no
    fault of the FtT, was not considered, with resulting unfairness (E &  R
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

1.  Both members of this panel of the Upper  Tribunal  have  contributed  to
    this     determination

2.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the Tribunal")  which  dismissed  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (hereinafter "The Secretary of  State"),  dated  10th  April
    2013, refusing her application for asylum and, further determining that
    she did not qualify for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of
    the Immigration Rules or for protection under Article 3 ECHR.

THE REFUSAL OF THE APPELLANT'S ASYLUM CLAIM

3.   In order to understand the context and focus  of  this  appeal,  it  is
    necessary to outline briefly  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  and  the
    reasons for its rejection by the Secretary of State.

4.   The Appellant is aged 31 and claims to be of Sudanese  nationality  and
    Arabic ethnicity.  She entered the United  Kingdom,  with  a  visitor's
    visa, on 3rd October 2012.  She claimed  asylum  on  15th  March  2013.
    The customary screening and asylum interviews followed.   The Secretary
    of State's decision refusing her application is dated 10th April  2013.



5.   In brief compass, the Appellant's claim for asylum was composed of  the
    following ingredients:

      a) She has been a Coptic Christian since birth.


      b) In April 2008, she was arrested on account of inappropriate  attire
         and detained by the police.   A Court sentenced her to  50  lashes.
         Prior to her release from custody, three police officers raped her.



      c) She was one of many Christians arrested by the police  in  November
         2011, allegedly stimulated  by  the  dissemination  in  the  United
         States of a video which criticised Islam.


      d) She was arbitrarily arrested by police on other occasions.

      e) In September 2012, she was detained again by the same three  police
         officers who had raped her in April 2008.  They attempted  to  rape
         her again, unsuccessfully.

      f) The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3rd October  2012,  for
         the purpose of visiting her sister.  Shortly afterwards, her mother
         informed her that the same three police officers had  come  to  the
         family home daily looking for her.  This prompted her  decision  to
         claim asylum.

6.   The Secretary of  State,  in  determining  the  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum, while accepting that she is  a  Sudanese  national,  found  the
    following elements of her claim unworthy of belief:

       i) The claim that she had been a Coptic Christian since birth.


      ii) Her claims about arrests by the police.

     iii) Her allegations of rape and attempted rape by police officers.

         In  making  these  assessments,  the  refusal  letter  highlighted
    specified inconsistencies and discrepancies in the  Appellant's  story.
    It was further considered, in the alternative, taking  the  Appellant's
    claim at its zenith, that certain  rogue  officials,  rather  than  the
    Sudanese authorities, were the cause of her fear and she would be  able
    to avoid them by relocating to another part of Sudan. Her case was also
    considered, and rejected, under Article 3 ECHR and  paragraph  339F  of
    the Immigration Rules.

THE ISSUE IN THIS APPEAL

7.   The grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was based on  a
    piece of evidence which was not considered  at  first  instance.   This
    consists of a letter dated 9th April 2013 addressed by the  Appellant's
    solicitors to the UKBA North West Enforcement and  Compliance  Division
    in Liverpool.   At the outset,  we  record  our  finding  that,  having
    considered all the evidence and the representations of both parties, we
    are satisfied that this letter was transmitted by fax on the date which
    it bears, 9th April 2013 and received by the addressee  on  that  date.
    We  shall  describe  this  document  hereinafter  as  "the  solicitor's
    letter".

8.   We preface our consideration of the solicitor's letter by  highlighting
    certain features of the UKBA interviews of the  Appellant,  which  were
    conducted on 15th March and 4th April 2013 respectively.  These are the
    following:

     a) The Appellant described her primary language  as  Arabic  and  both
        interviews  were  conducted  with  the  assistance  of  an   Arabic
        interpreter.


     b) She attributed the various forms of persecutory  treatment  alleged
        by her to her Christian denomination.

     c) She was accompanied by  her  solicitor  during  the  main  (second)
        interview, which had a duration of two hours.

     d) She is recorded as having confirmed that she was  feeling  fit  and
        well,  understood  the  interpreter  and  understood  all  of   the
        questions.

9.   The solicitor's letter was written five days after  the  second  asylum
    interview.  Referring to the Appellant, it begins:

         "She subsequently attended our  office  for  a  read  back  of  the
         substantive interview.  We would now like  to  make  the  following
         further representations on her behalf.  We must start by  informing
         you that our client  has  informed  us  that  on  the  day  of  the
         substantive  interview  your  interpreter  did  not  interpret  all
         questions correctly.  After the interview our client consulted  her
         brother in law regarding some of the questions and noted that  some
         questions asked were interpreted completely differently."

    The letter proceeded to list a lengthy series of  "clarifications":  21
    in total.  This list was followed by the statement:


         "Our client agreed that your  interpreter  on  the  day  was  fully
         understood as she did  not  realise  that  the  questions  she  was
         answering were at some points completely different to what you were
         asking."

10.      Seven of the 21 "clarifications" concerned a  series  of  questions
    and answers recorded  relating  to  the  Appellant's  professed  Coptic
    Christian faith.  We are mindful of the methodology employed in  asylum
    interviews of this kind.   The  interviewing  official  formulates  the
    question  in  English,  the  question  is  then   translated   by   the
    interpreter, the interviewee answers in his/her  native  language,  the
    interpreter translates the  answer  and  the  interviewer  records  the
    answer as translated by the interpreter.   In  essence,  the  complaint
    made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  was  that   the   interpreter   had
    misinterpreted various biblical terms,  events  and  dogmas,  with  the
    result that the Appellant was not answering the questions formulated in
    English by the interviewer.  This, the letter claimed, gave rise  to  a
    mismatch between  the  interviewer's  questions  as  recorded  and  the
    Appellant's answers as recorded.

11.  It is common case that the Secretary of State  did  not  reply  to  the
    solicitor's letter. Mr McVeety confirmed that a copy of that letter had
    not reached the Presenting Officer's file by the time  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is further agreed that  the  letter
    did not form part of the evidence considered by the Tribunal  at  first
    instance, confirmed by the fact that it was not included in the  bundle
    of documents prepared by the Appellant's solicitors.   In  a  carefully
    constructed determination, the Judge stated, at paragraph [26]:

         "I  find  that  this  case  turns  upon  the  credibility  of   the
        Appellant's claim to be a Coptic Christian and the  credibility  of
        her claim that  she  was  raped  in  April  2008  by  three  police
        officers, that in November 2008 she was arrested  at  her  home  by
        police officers following the release  in  the  USA  of  the  video
        defaming the Prophet Mohammed,  that  in  September  2012  she  was
        arrested again at her home by police officers who attempted to rape
        her and finally upon the credibility of her claim  that  since  her
        arrival in the UK the same police  officers  have  been  repeatedly
        visiting her mother's home and that one of the police officers  has
        been demanding that the Appellant becomes his girlfriend  and  that
        if she refuses to do so he will ensure that she becomes everybody's
        girlfriend."

     As this passage demonstrates, the Judge, in common with the  Secretary
    of State, recognised that the Appellant's claim to be a lifelong Coptic
    Christian is a key element of her story, as she  relates  her  espousal
    and manifestation of this faith to all of the persecutory acts alleged.



12.  The Determination, which consists  of  50  paragraphs,  devotes  22  of
    these to the issue of the Appellant's credibility.  In paragraph  [36],
    the Judge, adverting to a particular aspect  of  the  asylum  interview
    record and noting a  significant  inconsistency  with  the  Appellant's
    witness statement, records the Appellant's answer, in cross examination
    at the hearing, that the interview record was "wrong".  This passage of
    the determination continues:

         "She was asked by [the HOPO] when it came to her attention that the
         interview record was wrong and she replied that  it  was  three  or
         four hours after the  interview  when  she  had  gone  through  the
         interview record with her brother in law .....


         She was asked why neither she nor her solicitors had contacted  the
         Home Office to inform them that  the  interview  record  was  wrong
         .....


         The Appellant  stated  that  she  discussed  this  issue  with  her
         solicitor who told her that she would send a  letter  to  the  Home
         Office pointing out the mistake."

     It is clear from all the evidence that the person to whom reference  is
    made in the last paragraph of this passage is a case worker (identified
    elsewhere in the evidence) in the employment of  the  solicitor's  firm
    concerned who  discharged  a  number  of  roles:  she  accompanied  the
    Appellant  during  the  second  asylum   interview,   she   wrote   the
    aforementioned solicitor's letter and she liaised with the Appellant in
    preparing for the hearing at first instance.  In  the  next  succeeding
    paragraph, the Judge continues:

         "Whilst I accept that matters can be overlooked by busy solicitors,
         I find the fact that the Appellant's solicitors did  not  write  to
         the Home Office pointing  out  such  a  significant  error  in  the
         Appellant's interview record damages the credibility of  her  claim
         that she instructed her solicitor to do so. I find  therefore  that
         the fact that the Appellant has given an inconsistent account as to
         whether it was the same three police officers who had raped her  in
         April 2008, who subsequently attempted to  rape  her  in  September
         2012 is a material inconsistency which damages both the credibility
         of the Appellant's claim and her credibility generally."

              [Our emphasis.]

13.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  on  the  sole
    ground that the solicitor's letter was neither mentioned  nor  produced
    at  the  first  instance  hearing.   The  Judge   granting   permission
    considered this to be an arguable "procedural irregularity".

EVERY LITIGANT'S RIGHT TO A FAIR HEARING: THE GOVERNING PRINCIPLES

14.  The matrix of this appeal, rehearsed above, prompts reflection  on  the
    content and reach of one of the cornerstones of the common law,  namely
    the right of every litigant to a fair hearing. The  right  in  play  is
    properly described as fundamental, irreducible and inalienable.

15.   The  law  reports  and  texts  are  replete  with   formulations   and
    manifestations of this right.  For present  purposes,  and  bearing  in
    mind the doctrine of precedent,  we  focus  upon  two  of  the  leading
    decisions of the superior courts. The first of these is R - v  -  Chief
    Constable of Thames Valley Police, ex parte Cotton [1990] IRLR 344.  It
    may be observed that, in both the reported cases and the  leading  text
    books, this decision has not received the prominence it plainly merits.
     This might be attributable to its appearance in one  of  the  minority
    series of law reports. Having  said  that,  Cotton  has  been  recently
    quoted with approval and applied by Moses LJ in McCarthy v Visitors  to
    Inns of Court and Bar Standards Board [2013] EWHC 3253 (Admin)  and  by
    Underhill J in R (Hill) v Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 555.  In Cotton, the issue, in a  nutshell,  was  whether  the
    decision of the  Chief  Constable  to  dismiss  a  police  officer  was
    vitiated by procedural unfairness on account of  inadequate  disclosure
    to the officer of the case  against  him.   We  distill  the  following
    principles from Cotton:

       i) The defect, or impropriety, must be procedural in  nature.   Cases
          of this kind are not concerned with the  merits  of  the  decision
          under review or appeal.   Rather,  the  superior  court's  enquiry
          focuses  on  the  process,  or  procedure,  whereby  the  impugned
          decision was reached.


      ii) It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt  the  two  stage  process  of
          asking whether there was a procedural irregularity or  impropriety
          giving rise to  unfairness  and,  if  so,  whether  this  had  any
          material bearing on the outcome. These are, rather,  two  elements
          of  a  single  question,  namely  whether  there  was   procedural
          unfairness.

     iii) Thus, if the reviewing or appellate Court identifies a  procedural
          irregularity or impropriety which, in its view, made no difference
          to the outcome, the appropriate conclusion is that  there  was  no
          unfairness to the party concerned.

      iv) The reviewing  or  appellate  Court  should  exercise  caution  in
          concluding that the outcome  would  have  been  the  same  if  the
          diagnosed procedural irregularity or impropriety had not occurred.

16.  These last two propositions are expressed  with  admirable  clarity  in
    the judgment of Simon Brown J, which was under appeal (at page 13B/D):


         "It is sufficient if an Applicant can establish  that  there  is  a
         real, as opposed to a purely minimal, possibility that the  outcome
         would have been different."

     The complaint in Cotton was that certain information, damaging  to  the
    police officer's case, had not been disclosed to him.   Simon  Brown  J
    concluded that even if this disclosure had taken place -

         "... there would have been no real,  no  sensible,  no  substantial
         chance of any further observation on the Applicant's  part  in  any
         way altering the final decision in his case."

     The Court of Appeal  upheld  both  his  conclusion  and  the  governing
    principle which he formulated: see  the  uncritical  rehearsal  of  the
    Applicant's argument in the judgment of Slade LJ (at pages 10 - 11) and
    the endorsement of the conclusion of Simon Brown J by all three members
    of the Court of Appeal.  Slade LJ espoused the following formulation of
    the governing principle:

         "Natural  justice  is  not  concerned  with   the   observance   of
         technicalities, but with matters of substance."

              [At page 14.]

    In the second of the three judgments delivered, Stocker  LJ  considered
    the threshold for intervention by the Superior Court to be "a real risk
    of injustice or unfairness" [page 15].


17.  The third judgment,  that  of  Bingham  LJ,  contains  a  comprehensive
    review of the authorities, which commences with the following statement
    [page 16]:

         "Judges of high authority have held that the subject of a  decision
         who has been denied a right to be heard cannot complain of a breach
         of natural justice (or unfairness) unless  he  can  show  that  the
         decision might have been different if he had been heard."

              [Emphasis added.]

     Having referred to two of the leading text book  commentaries,  Bingham
    LJ continued:

         "While cases may no doubt arise in which it can  properly  be  said
         that denying the subject of a decision an adequate  opportunity  to
         put his case is not in all the circumstances unfair, I would expect
         these cases of be of great rarity."


         [Our emphasis.]

     The reasons formulated by Bingham LJ in  support  of  this  proposition
    included the following:

        "(1) Unless the subject of the decision has had an  opportunity  to
             put his case it may not be easy to know what case he  could  or
             would have put if he had had the chance.


        (2)  ... Experience shows that that which is  confidently  expected
             is by no means always that which happens ....


        (4)  In considering whether the complainant's representations would
             have  made  any  difference  to  the  outcome,  the  Court  may
             unconsciously stray from its proper province of  reviewing  the
             propriety of the decision making  process  into  the  forbidden
             territory of evaluating the substantial merits of a decision.


          5) This is a field in which appearances are generally  thought  to
             matter.


          6) Where a decision maker is  under  a  duty  to  act  fairly  the
             subject of the decision may properly be said to have a right to
             be heard and rights are not to be lightly denied."

18.      The fourth of  the  principles  expounded  by  Bingham  LJ  in  the
    passage set out  above  invites  reflection,  given  that  the  present
    context is that of an appeal on a point of law from a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal, to  be  contrasted  with  an
    application for judicial review based on alleged procedural unfairness.
     Such appeals are governed by section 11 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, which provides in subsection (1):

         "For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to  a  right  of
         appeal is to a right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  any  point
         of law arising from a decision  made  by  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
         other than an excluded decision."

     We are satisfied that  the  fourth  of  the  principles  formulated  by
    Bingham LJ (supra) applies fully to appeals of this genre, for two main
    reasons.  The first is that where either party to an appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal is denied a fair hearing, this constitutes an error
    of law.  The second is that in determining appeals,  this  Tribunal  is
    not concerned with the merits of the decision of  the  lower  Tribunal.
    Rather, its function is to decide whether, within the  compass  of  the
    grant of permission to appeal, the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal
    is vitiated by a material error of law.  This analysis is reinforced by
    section 12 of the 2007 Act.  This provides, inter alia, that where  the
    Upper Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal "involved the making of an error on a point of law" and orders
    that the decision be set aside, it may re-make  the  decision.   If  it
    decides to do so, it will, in effect, conduct an appeal on the  merits,
    either applying the correct legal principles in  play  to  findings  of
    fact preserved from the First-tier Tribunal determination or, in  cases
    where those findings have given rise to  the  relevant  error  of  law,
    evaluating all the evidence, forming its own views and making  its  own
    findings  and  conclusions.   The  timing  of  this   exercise,   where
    performed, is telling: it is separated from the error of  law  hearing,
    whether it is conducted immediately thereafter or,  where  unavoidable,
    at a later date. It is a re-making exercise.

19.  Of unmistakable importance also, in the context of this appeal, is  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in E & R - v - Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49. As  appears  from  the  opening
    paragraph of the judgment of Carnwath LJ, one of the two central issues
    raised in this appeal concerned cases decided  by  the  first  instance
    Tribunal (in that instance, the Adjudicator) where it  is  demonstrated
    that -

         ".... an important part of its reasoning was based on ignorance  or
         mistake as to the facts ...."

     Drawing particularly on the speech of Lord Slynn in R -  v  -  Criminal
    Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte A [1999] 2 AC 330 (at pages 333 -
    336), Carnwath LJ stated:

         "[63]    In our view, the CICB case points to the way to a separate
             ground of review, based on the principle of fairness ....  the
             unfairness arose from the combination of five factors:


                i) An erroneous impression created by a mistake  as  to,  or
                   ignorance  of,  a  relevant  fact  (the  availability  of
                   reliable evidence to support her case);


               ii) The  fact  was  'established',  in  the  sense  that,  if
                   attention had  been  drawn  to  the  point,  the  correct
                   position  could  have  been  shown   by   objective   and
                   uncontentious evidence;

              iii) The Claimant could not fairly be held responsible for the
                   error;

               iv) Although there was no duty on the Board  itself,  or  the
                   police, to do the Claimant's work of  proving  her  case,
                   all  the  participants  had  a  shared  interest  in  co-
                   operating to achieve the correct result.

                v) The mistaken impression played a  material  part  in  the
                   reasoning."

    The learned Lord Justice added:


        "[64]     It is in the interests  of  all  parties  that  decisions
             should be made on the best available information."

     He continued:

         "[66]    In our view, the time  has  now  come  to  accept  that  a
             mistake of fact giving rise to unfairness is a  separate  head
             of challenge in an appeal on a point of law, at least in those
             statutory contexts where the parties share an interest in  co-
             operating to  achieve  the  correct  result.   Asylum  law  is
             undoubtedly such an area.   Without  seeking  to  lay  down  a
             precise code, the  ordinary  requirements  for  a  finding  of
             unfairness are apparent  from  the  above  analysis  of  CICB.
             First, there must have been a mistake as to an existing  fact,
             including a mistake as to the availability of  evidence  on  a
             particular matter.  Secondly, the fact or evidence  must  have
             been 'established', in the sense that it was uncontentious and
             objectively  verifiable.   Thirdly,  the  Appellant  (or   his
             advisors) must not have  been  responsible  for  the  mistake.
             Fourthly,  the  mistake  must  have  played  a  material  (not
             necessarily decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning."

20.  The principles relating to the impact upon  proceedings  of  unfairness
    arising from error of fact were reconsidered by the Court of Appeal  in
    R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 in which decision  the  Court
    of Appeal conducted a detailed review of categories  of  error  of  law
    frequently encountered.  Brooke LJ said the following:
       "Part 6.  Error of law: unfairness resulting from a mistake of fact
       1. The next matter we must address relates to the  circumstances  in
          which an appellate body like the IAT, whose primary  role  during
          the relevant period was restricted to identifying and  correcting
          errors of law, could entertain an argument to the effect that the
          outcome in the lower court was unfair as a result of a mistake of
          fact, and that this constituted an error of law which entitled it
          to interfere.
                In E & R v Home Secretary [2004] EWCA Civ 49; [2004] QB 1044
                this court was concerned to provide a principled explanation
                of the reasons why a court whose jurisdiction is limited  to
                the correction of errors of  law  is  occasionally  able  to
                intervene, when fairness demands it, when a minister  or  an
                inferior body or tribunal has taken a decision on the  basis
                of a foundation of fact which was demonstrably wrong. ...
       1. At para 64 Carnwath LJ said that there was a  common  feature  of
          all these cases, even where the  procedure  was  adversarial,  in
          that the Secretary of State or the particular statutory authority
          had a shared interest with both the particular appellant and with
          any tribunal or other decision-maker that might  be  involved  in
          the case in ensuring  that  decisions  were  taken  on  the  best
          information and on the correct  factual  basis.  At  para  66  he
          identified asylum law as  representing  a  statutory  context  in
          which the parties shared an interest in co-operating to achieve a
          correct  result.  He  went  on  to  suggest  that  the   ordinary
          requirements for a finding of unfairness  which  amounted  to  an
          error of law were that:
                (i) there must have been a mistake as to an  existing  fact,
                including a mistake as to the availability of evidence on  a
                particular matter;
                (ii) it must be possible to categorise the relevant fact  or
                evidence  as  "established"  in  the  sense  that   it   was
                uncontentious and objectively verifiable;
                (iii) the appellant (or his advisers)  must  not  have  been
                responsible for the mistake;
                (iv)  the  mistake  must  have  played   a   material   (not
                necessarily decisive) part in the tribunal's reasoning."
    Notably, the learned lord Justice made clear that he was not seeking to
    lay down a precise code. Brooke LJ continued:
       1. "Needless to say, such a mistake could not be identified  by  the
          supervising or appellate court unless it was willing to admit new
          evidence in order to identify it. Paragraphs  68  to  89  of  the
          judgment in E and R contain an analysis of relevant case  law  on
          the  power  to  admit  new  evidence.  It  concluded   with   the
          observation that the case of Khan v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 530 that
          gave rise to the problem summarised in (viii) above  was  a  good
          example  of  the  need  for  a  residual  ground  of  review  for
          unfairness arising from a simple mistake  of  fact  and  that  it
          illustrated the intrinsic difficulty  in  many  asylum  cases  of
          obtaining reliable evidence of the facts that gave  rise  to  the
          fear of persecution and the need  for  some  flexibility  in  the
          application of Ladd v Marshall principles (infra).
       1. The reference to the Ladd v Marshall principles is a reference to
          that part of the judgment of Denning LJ in [1954] 1 WLR 1489 when
          he said (at p 1491) that where there had been a trial or  hearing
          on the merits, the decision of the judge could only be overturned
          by resort to  further evidence if it could be shown that:
                (1) the new evidence could  not  with  reasonable  diligence
                have been obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);
                (2) the new evidence must be such that, if given,  it  would
                probably have had an important influence on  the  result  of
                the case (though it need not be decisive);
                (3) the new evidence was  apparently  credible  although  it
                need not be incontrovertible.
       1. By way of a final summary of the position, Carnwath LJ said in  E
          and R at para 91 that an appeal on a question of law might now be
          made on the basis of unfairness resulting from  "misunderstanding
          or ignorance of an established and relevant fact"  and  that  the
          admission of new evidence on such an appeal was subject to Ladd v
          Marshall principles, which might be departed from in  exceptional
          circumstances where the interests of justice required".
21.  As we have observed, the context  of  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in E & R - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department was an
    appeal from the Adjudicator to the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal.  As
    a result of subsequent statutory reforms, the  equivalent  judicialised
    bodies  are  now  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper   Tribunal
    respectively.  In our judgment, simple logic impels inexorably  to  the
    conclusion that the decision in E & R applies fully to appeals from the
    First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal.

22.  We consider it important to emphasise that in appeals  of  the  present
    kind the criterion to be applied is not that of reasonableness. In this
    respect, the present case is a paradigm of  its  type.   Judge  Levin's
    conduct of the hearing at first  instance  was  beyond  reproach.   The
    irregularity which has been exposed is entirely unrelated  to  how  the
    hearing was conducted.  The judge cannot possibly be  faulted  for  the
    non-emergence of the solicitor's letter.  On  any  showing,  the  judge
    acted  responsibly  and  reasonably  throughout.    However,   as   the
    authorities demonstrate clearly, the criterion to be applied on  review
    or appeal is fairness, not reasonableness.

23.  Alternatively phrased, the terminology of sections 11  and  12  of  the
    2007 Act does not exclude the possibility of correcting  unfairness  on
    the basis that the problem does not arise because of any failure by the
    Tribunal itself. By way of illustration, in R (Ignaoua) v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWHC 2512, at paragraph 26, Cranston J said this:

         "[26] The third  strand  of  principle  is  that  statutory  power,
         although expressed in general terms, should not be construed so  as
         to authorise acts which infringe the basic rules and principles  of
         the common law. Parliament is presumed  not  to  have  intended  to
         change  the  common  law  unless  it  has  clearly  indicated  that
         intention  either  expressly  or  by  necessary  implication:  R  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998]
         AC 539, 573E-F, 575D, per Lord Browne-Wilkinson. In his judgment in
         the same case Lord Steyn  stated  the  principle  broadly:  "Unless
         there is the clearest provision to the contrary, Parliament must be
         presumed not to legislate contrary to the rule of law. And the rule
         of law enforces minimum standards of fairness, both substantive and
         procedural": 591F."

    This principle  is  recognised  also  by  the  authors  of  Macdonald's
    Immigration Law & Practice, (8th edition) at paragraph 19.35:

         "... The duty of fairness imposed on  the  Tribunal  is  thus  more
         likely to be derived from the high common law standards of fairness
         applied by the higher courts...."


     The point to be emphasised is that the judge's conduct of  the  hearing
    is not to be evaluated by reference to  a  test  of  reasonableness  or
    fault. Common law fairness is of a quite distinct hue and unfairness is
    not dependent on demonstrating either.

CONCLUSION

24.   We apply the principles rehearsed above to the matrix of  this  appeal
    in the following way.  The solicitor's letter was, on any  showing,  an
    important piece of evidence.  It derived this status  from  the  course
    which the hearing took when the Appellant, in cross  examination,  made
    the claim that the interview record was  erroneous  and  that  she  had
    promptly instructed her solicitors to this effect and had been informed
    by them that they would write to the Secretary of State in  appropriate
    terms.  The Judge made a  positive  finding  that  there  was  no  such
    letter.  Building on this finding, he found  that  this  reinforced  "a
    material inconsistency", namely the  evident  discrepancy  between  the
    contents of the asylum interview record  and  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement.   The  Judge  plainly  disbelieved  the  Appellant's   claim
    concerning her instructions to her solicitors and their  response  that
    they would write a letter.  This belief was founded substantially on  a
    mistake of fact, namely the erroneous belief that no such  instructions
    had been given by the Appellant and no such letter  had  been  written.
    When one considers the key passages in paragraphs [36] - [37] in  their
    full context,  the  conclusion  that  this  was  a  material  error  is
    inescapable.  The Judge, in terms, found the Appellant to be mendacious
    and this became one of the important building  blocks  in  his  overall
    assessment that her claims were not worthy  of  belief.  The  resulting
    unfairness to the Appellant is palpable.

25.  The pivotal importance of the error of fact upon  which  the  reasoning
    of the judge was demonstrably based helps to explain  why,  in  appeals
    raising issues of international protection, there is room for departure
    from an inflexible application of common law rules and principles where
    this is necessary to redress unfairness. This is  especially  so  where
    the respondent has, in the words of Carnwath LJ in  E  &  R,  paragraph
    [66], failed to co-operate to achieve a  correct  result.  As  we  have
    seen, generally, the first of the Ladd v Marshall  principles  requires
    that the new evidence which was not considered at the  earlier  hearing
    could not with reasonable diligence have been obtained at  that  stage.
    Plainly that cannot be said here because the letter was written by  the
    very solicitors who were presenting the case before the Tribunal and so
    it was available. It is established that neither the rule in Al-Mehdawi
    v SSHD [1990] 1  AC  876  (that  a  procedural  failure  caused  by  an
    appellant's own representative did not  lead  to  an  appeal  being  in
    breach of the rules of natural justice) nor a failure to meet the first
    of the Ladd v Marshall principles applies with full  rigour  in  asylum
    and human rights appeals: see, e.g. FP (Iran) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    13.  The decision of the Court of Appeal in E & R v Secretary of  State
    points towards a broader approach, in which the common law right  to  a
    fair hearing predominates.  We consider that this appeal  must  succeed
    accordingly.

A FINAL OBSERVATION

26.  By section 12 of the 2007 Act, where the Upper Tribunal concludes  that
    the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and decides to set the decision aside, it must either
    remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  remake  the  decision
    itself.  We consider that, as a fairly strong  general  rule,  where  a
    first instance decision is set aside on the basis of an  error  of  law
    involving the deprivation of the Appellant's right to a  fair  hearing,
    the appropriate course will be to remit to a newly  constituted  First-
    Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  This is so because the  common  law
    right to a fair hearing is generally considered to rank as a  right  of
    constitutional importance and it  is  preferable  that  the  litigant's
    statutory right of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  should  be  triggered
    only where the former right has been fully enjoyed.

DECISION

27.  For the reasons elaborated above, we conclude that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a  material  error  of  law.
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted, to be determined afresh by a different constitution  of  that
    Tribunal, with no findings of fact preserved.



                                             [pic]

                                               The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                  Date:     13 February 2014

