
[pic]

PP (female headed household; expert duties)  Sri  Lanka  [2017]  UKUT  00117
(IAC)

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Given orally on 24 January 2017   |
|On 17 and 24 January 2017 substantively  |Promulgated on 06 February 2017   |
|[Listed on sundry previous dates]        |                                  |
|                                         |..................................|
|                                         |.....                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                                     PP
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



      I) A Tamil female single head of  household  residing  in  the  former
         conflict zone of Northern and North Eastern Sri  Lanka  may  be  at
         risk of sexual abuse and exploitation  perpetrated  by  members  of
         police, military and paramilitary State agents.




     II) The existence and measurement of this risk  will  be  an  intensely
         fact sensitive question in every case.  The case-by-case assessment
         will be informed by  the  presence  or  absence  of  positive  risk
         factors and decreasing risk factors.



    III)  The positive risk factors are living in isolation from others, low
         socio-economic  status,  dependence  upon   the   distribution   of
         Government aid or the provision of other services by  the  security
         forces and  a  perception  of  former  LTTE  membership,  links  or
         sympathies.  These positive factors do not necessarily have  to  be
         satisfied cumulatively in every case: context  will  invariably  be
         everything.




     IV) The countervailing factors are higher socio-economic status, little
         dependence on Government aid or services and the  support  of  male
         relatives or neighbours.  The context of the particular  case  will
         dictate the force and weight of each of these factors, individually
         or cumulatively, in any given case. These too will be assessed on a
         case-by-case basis.


      V) Experts' reports and evidence must comply fully and  strictly  with
         the Senior President of Tribunal's Practice Direction.




     VI) The methodology of every expert witness should always be patent  on
         the face of the report.  If  not,  it  should  be  provided  via  a
         supplement, accompanied by a full  and  frank  explanation  of  the
         omission.  Experts and practitioners are reminded of the  decisions
         of the Upper Tribunal in MOJ and Others [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), at
         [23] - [38] and MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's  powers  -  Article  4
         ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 226 (IAC), at [68] - [69].




Representation

For the Appellant:         Ms S Jegarajah, of counsel, instructed by
Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                DECISION


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal of unfortunately elderly vintage.  Insight into  this
    circumstance is provided by the earlier directions and rulings  of  the
    Upper Tribunal to which reference  can  be  made  if  necessary.   This
    appeal dates from 2011 and  has  been  the  subject  of  a  substantive
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT"), two decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (dated 09 May 2012 and 24 September  2013  respectively)
    and, ultimately,  a  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  whereby  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed and the case was remitted to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for fresh consideration.  The hearing of  this  sadly  delayed
    appeal was, ultimately, completed on 24 January 2017.  The decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal was announced immediately upon completion.


The Underlying Decision

 2. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (the
    "Secretary of State"), dated 11 August 2011, whereby the application of
    the Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, then aged 24 years, for  asylum
    was refused.  This decision is susceptible to the following breakdown:




      a) It was accepted that the Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.


      b) The Appellant's claims relating to the disappearance  and  possible
         death of her uncle, arising out of arrest by the army for allegedly
         providing  information  to  the  "Tamil   Tigers"   ("LTTE"),   was
         disbelieved.


      c) Ditto her claim about the alleged forcible apprehension of  her  13
         year old brother by LTTE.


      d) An inconsistency relating to whether her  brother  is  a  surviving
         member of her family was noted.


      e) Ditto her claim of duress by LTTE members in September  2009  given
         certain evidence that LTTE had been defeated by May 2009.


      f) No weight would be attached to the  document  purporting  to  be  a
         death certificate relating to the Appellant's father.


      g) The assertion that her father had been murdered  by  the  army  was
         disbelieved.


      h) Ditto her assertion,  in  the  context  of  her  claim  of  adverse
         interest from the security forces, that her  sister  had  not  been
         arrested on account of her age (8 years).


      i) No weight was attached to a document purportedly emanating from the
         Sri Lanka Human Rights Commission.


      j) The Appellant's answers relating to her treatment by  the  security
         forces during an  episode  of  alleged  detention  were  considered
         inconsistent and the detention claim was rejected accordingly.


      k) Inconsistencies in the Appellant's account when juxtaposed with the
         content of a supposed extract from a "police information book" were
         also noted.


      l)  There  was  an  assessment  of  further  inconsistencies  in   the
         Appellant's claim to have been  detained  by  the  security  forces
         during a period of some weeks.


      m)  The  Appellant's  account  of  her  escape  from  detention  circa
         September 2009 was disbelieved.


      n) Ditto her claim relating to further detention, coupled with torture
         and rape, in February 2011.


      o) The Appellant's ability to transit Colombo Airport upon leaving Sri
         Lanka was also noted, to her detriment.




 3. In the  remaining  passages  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,
    consideration was given to, inter alia, the question  of  risk  in  the
    event of the Appellant's  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   This  was  assessed
    through the lens of the most recent country guidance  decision  of  the
    IAC, namely TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009]  UKAIT  00049.
    It was considered that none of the  risk  factors  identified  in  this
    decision applied to the Appellant.



Subsequent Judicial Decisions

 4. The FtT made certain findings favourable to the Appellant, namely:


      a) She had been arrested three times.


      b) She had been released on payment of a bribe.


      c) She had never been a member or supporter of LTTE.


      d) Her younger brother had been forced to join LTTE  and  nothing  had
         been heard of him since.


    The FtT further found:


         "There is no evidence that she has  suffered  scarring  but  having
         regard to the low standard of proof I am just  prepared  to  accept
         that she was arrested three times  but  conclude  that  these  were
         general roundups of Tamils and I do not accept that  she  was  ever
         specifically targeted because of her brother's LTTE activities.   I
         further accept that she became pregnant as a result of rape when in
         detention and that her pregnancy has been terminated ....


         I am not satisfied as to her evidence regarding her father's  death
         .....


         Further, it is left entirely unexplained why the Appellant  delayed
         fleeing Sri Lanka until her third application for  a  student  visa
         was granted.  It is entirely clear that she never had  any  genuine
         intention in studying in this country  and  did  not  do  so.   She
         therefore misled the Entry Clearance Officer."




    The FtT also gave consideration to the risk factors  identified  in  LP
    (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT 00076.
     All of this gave rise to the following omnibus conclusion:


         "Looked at in the round I find that an appellant with this  profile
         will not be at risk on return."

    Her appeal was dismissed accordingly.




 5. On 03 November 2011 permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted on the basis that the FtT had failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for concluding that the Appellant would not  be  at  risk  upon  return
    notwithstanding the finding of past persecution.  Next, by its decision
    dated 09 May 2012, the Upper Tribunal diagnosed an error of law in  the
    decision of the FtT.  At a subsequent hearing it  proceeded  to  remake
    said decision.  This rehearing was characterised by, in particular, the
    intervening decision of the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  In its  decision
    dated 24 September 2013, the Upper Tribunal stated:


         "There is no finding that the Appellant is of  continuing  interest
         to the security forces in Sri Lanka and  no  finding  that  she  is
         [the] subject [of]  any  outstanding  Court  orders  or  an  arrest
         warrant .....


         As it is accepted that a person who is detained will be at risk  of
         persecution, the issue is whether an appellant is at risk of  being
         detained by the security forces either at the airport or  following
         a visit once they have returned to their home address ....."




      The Judge made the following specific finding:


         "The Appellant has not provided evidence to show that  as  a  Tamil
         female, she would be at risk in Sri Lanka and there is no  evidence
         to suggest that females in  Sri  Lanka  form  a  risk  category  in
         addition to the risk categories identified in the case of GJ."


    Finally, the Judge reasoned that given  the  defeat  of  LTTE  and  the
    subsequent re-alignment  of  the  political  situation  in  Sri  Lanka,
    coupled with the characterisation of the Appellant's detention on three
    occasions "on general round-ups" and the very limited conclusions to be
    drawn from her brother's forcible recruitment to LTTE -


         "....  The evidence does not show that  the  Appellant  falls  into
         that category of persons who will be regarded as being a threat  to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state .... And a person  who
         is not regarded as a Tamil  activist  working  to  destabilise  the
         state, is not reasonably likely to be detained."


    The  omnibus  conclusions  that  the  Appellant  was  not  at  risk  of
    persecution and did not qualify for international protection were  made
    accordingly.




 6. The Appellant's case subsequently reached the level  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal through the protracted route of permission to appeal having been
    refused by both the Upper Tribunal and a single Judge of the  Court  of
    Appeal, followed by an oral hearing when another single  Judge  of  the
    Court of Appeal took a different view.  All of this  culminated  in  an
    order dated 11 December 2014 allowing the appeal.


 7. The aforementioned order is, helpfully, accompanied  by  the  appellate
    court's decision.  It is this decision which provides the framework for
    the remittal/remaking exercise in which  I  am  now  engaged.   In  her
    judgment Arden LJ referred to the most recent country guidance decision
    of GJ and Others.  She noted in particular the quotation from  a  UNHCR
    publication, at [11] and the Tribunal's consideration of the UNHCR list
    of groups in need of "particularly careful examination".  Her  Ladyship
    then noted certain evidence to  which  the  appellate  court  had  been
    referred (apparently new evidence), namely a passage  relating  to  the
    risks concerning Tamil war widows.


 8. I pause at this juncture to observe that it is far from clear that  the
    case, including the evidence,  advanced  before  the  Court  of  Appeal
    replicated that pertaining to the tribunal proceedings.  Be that as  it
    may, the appellate court was persuaded to allow the  appeal  and  remit
    the case on the basis of an interpretation of the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal and an assessment that more detailed reasoning and enquiry  in
    its decision was lacking.  The Court of  Appeal,  finally,  highlighted
    the evidence pertaining to  the  risk  to  female  heads  of  household
    arising out of the high levels  of  militarisation  in  "Tamil  areas",
    which remain "militarised": see [35].


The Appellant's Case


 9. As the outline in [2]-[8] above demonstrates, the Appellant's case  has
    evolved not inconsiderably.

10. The first component of the Appellant's case consists  of  the  judicial
    findings previously made, summarised in [4] above.   At  this  stage  I
    turn to the task of making  further  material  findings,  based  on  my
    evaluation of all the evidence and taking into  account  matters  which
    were not disputed on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.   My  further
    findings are:


      a) The Appellant's mother was alive when the Appellant left Sri Lanka,
         but is now deceased.


      b) The Appellant's sister continued to reside in the family home until
         recently.


      c)  The  Appellant  and  her  family  were  at  all  material   times,
         economically disadvantaged, by reason of the war and remain so.


      d) All are/were of Tamil ethnicity and Hindu religion.


      e) The Appellant's age ranged from 17 to 22 during the period when the
         events giving rise to the findings in [4] above occurred.


      f)  The  Appellant  did  not  complete  her  education  and  her  only
         employment in Sri Lanka was as a  trainee  clerk  in  the  Bank  of
         Ceylon between 2007 and 2009.


      g) A student visa procured through an agent  secured  the  Appellant's
         entry to the United Kingdom on 10 February 2011.


      h) Following her flight  from  Sri  Lanka,  the  Appellant  maintained
         telephone contact with her mother until the latter  died  in  April
         2016.


      i) The army continued to  harass  her  mother,  employing  tactics  of
         visits and threats, and learned of the Appellant's  flight  abroad.
         They consider the Appellant to have been a terrorist.


      j) The Appellant maintained  weekly  contact  with  her  sister  until
         recently.


      k) Government agents have continued to visit the family home from time
         to time.


      l) Most recently the Appellant's sister has desisted  from  living  in
         the family home and her whereabouts are currently unknown.


      m) In the event of the Appellant returning  to  Sri  Lanka,  her  most
         likely destination is the former family home, where she will reside
         either alone or with her sister.




      Expert Psychiatric Evidence


11. I turn to consider the medical evidence.  In a report  dated  22  April
    2016, Dr Katona, Consultant Psychiatrist, diagnoses  the  Appellant  as
    suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. He  attributes  this  to
    her traumatic experiences in Sri  Lanka,  as  recounted  to  him.   His
    report  further  describes  certain  "depressive  symptoms"  which   he
    considers to be "secondary to her PTSD".   Dr  Katona  considered,  and
    rejected,  the  possibility  that  the  Appellant   was   feigning   or
    exaggerating her symptoms.  He recommended treatment  consisting  of  a
    combination of anti-depressive  medication  and  cognitive  behavioural
    therapy, noting from the information available that there had been some
    improvement in her depressive  symptoms  following  the  initiation  of
    medication and counselling.






12. Dr Katona also opines in relation to the scenario  of  the  Appellant's
    forced return to Sri Lanka.  This -


         "...  would  significantly  worsen  her  already  severe  PTSD  and
         associated depressive symptoms .... [which] ... would be likely  to
         render her unable to work and support herself  and  to  secure  her
         basic needs (such as food and accommodation) ....  She continues to
         have distressing suicidal  thoughts.   There  is,  in  my  clinical
         opinion,  a  significant  risk  that  she  would  attempt   suicide
         (potentially with fatal consequences) if she lost all hope of being
         allowed to remain in the UK ....


         Because of the likely worsening of her PTSD [the  appellant]  would
         in my clinical opinion,  be  unable  to  'take  stock'  if  offered
         objective reassurance about her safety following her return to  Sri
         Lanka."




13. Reassessing the Appellant some three months ago,  Dr  Katona  expresses
    the opinion that her mental  health  has  "deteriorated  considerably",
    having progressed to "severe depression", while she continues to suffer
    from PTSD.  She requires a protracted course of  individually  tailored
    psychotherapy.  Dr Katona considers that  the  risk  of  the  Appellant
    attempting suicide in the event of returning to Sri Lanka is now high.


    Expert "Country" Evidence

14. The third component in the Appellant's case is formed  by  two  reports
    the  authors  whereof  are  put  forward  as  experts.   I  preface  my
    consideration  of  these  reports  with  a  brief  outline  of  certain
    significant features of the other  voluminous  evidence  adduced.   The
    context within which this evidence is to be evaluated is, briefly,  the
    following.  The conflict in Sri Lanka was concentrated in the North and
    North East  regions  of  the  country;  there  the  rebels,  the  LTTE,
    controlled and administered a de facto state (Vanni); Tamil women  were
    involved actively as combatants; the conflict ended in May  2009,  with
    the conclusive defeat of the rebels; the  aforementioned  regions  have
    been heavily  militarised  subsequently,  with  associated  repression;
    since  the  termination  of  the  conflict,  the  phenomenon   of   the
    perpetration of sexual violence against Tamil women by members  of  the
    armed forces has become well recognised; and the indigenous  population
    of the regions  concerned is Tamil, while the members of  the  security
    forces are Sinhalese.  I elaborate on  certain  aspects  of  this  lean
    summation infra.

15. There is a report of one Eva Buzo, dated 30 November  2016,  which  was
    supplemented by live evidence received via the mechanism of video link.
     Ms Buzo is conducting research in three countries in  the  context  of
    preparing a MA thesis.  The areas embraced by her research include  the
    northern and eastern provinces of Sri  Lanka.   I  have  considered  Ms
    Buzo's written and oral evidence in its entirety.

16. The report of Ms Buzo focuses on a discrete category of the  population
    of Northern and Eastern  Sri  Lanka,  mainly  female  single  heads  of
    household.  With specific reference to the security forces, the risk to
    such women is described by Ms Buzo as "harassment, unwanted visits ....
     and threats of  violence".   Ms  Buzo  bases  this  on  "the  research
    participants both in 2016 and my research conducted in 2013".  In other
    parts of her report she uses broader terminology such as "sexual  abuse
    and exploitation suffered by  female-headed  houses  at  the  hands  of
    members of the Sri Lankan military  forces".   Ms  Buzo  expresses  the
    following opinion:


         "Should the applicant [sic] be returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  there  is
         reason to believe that she would be at a  high  level  of  risk  of
         sexual violence ...  [and] ...  there is neither the political will
         nor the  institutional  infrastructure  available  to  protect  the
         applicant or prosecute offenders."


    The "risk factors" identified as applying  to  the  Appellant  are  her
    gender; her ethnicity; the region; the ethnicity of the  soldiers;  the
    absence of a husband  or  male  relatives;  and  the  security  forces'
    knowledge of and alertness to the Appellant.


17. In her live evidence, Ms Buzo stated that  her  report  is  based  upon
    interviews of two politicians and  three  NGO  workers  in  the  region
    concerned.    She  did  not  elaborate  on   the   characteristics   or
    credentials of these three persons, other than to say that  their  work
    involves the provision of support to certain types of needy women, such
    as victims of violence.  She stated that one of the politicians  has  a
    particular interest in representing women in the region.  She testified
    that single female heads of household are at particular  risk  if  they
    have no male family or community support, live in an isolated area  and
    are economically insecure.  The latter she described as  a  "key"  risk
    factor.  Conversely, where one or more of these factors is not present,
    it is less likely that female heads of household will be at risk.

18. Ms Buzo, notably, did not interview any  Tamil  female  victim  of  the
    sexual violence identified.  When asked by me whether she is  advancing
    the thesis that all single female heads of  household  in  the  regions
    under scrutiny are at risk of such treatment she replied that she  does
    not have the "quantitative data" to enable this thesis to be  advanced,
    describing her data  as  "qualitative".   In  response  to  a  specific
    question,  namely  whether  she  was  contending  that   there   is   a
    "generalised risk" to  all  members  of  the  category  concerned,  she
    replied in the negative.

19. The further expert testimony upon which the Appellant relies is that of
    Dr Gowrinathan, who specialises in the subjects of gender and  violence
    and sexual violence.  The subject of her  doctorate  was  the  role  of
    women in LTTE.  Dr Gowrinathan did not prepare a report for the purpose
    of this appeal.  She is, however, the  co-author  of  a  "White  Paper"
    published by a New  York  university  in  August  2015,  entitled  "The
    Forever Victims? Tamil Women in Post-War Sri Lanka".


20. The gist of this report is quickly gleaned from  the  "Abstract".   The
    authors, who conducted over 50 interviews, examined the impact  of  six
    years of militarisation on Tamil women in Northern Sri Lanka.   Members
    of this group, the authors suggest:


         "...  still face the risk of rape and harassment  by  the  security
         forces present throughout the region, but their lives are even more
         negatively impacted by the climate of fear and by a worrying uptick
         [sic] in violence against women within the  Tamil  community.   The
         ever present threat of violence by the military has  led  to  women
         leading  tightly  circumscribed   lives,   limiting   their   daily
         activities in order to minimise their risk of sexual assault ....


         And the measures taken by  the  community,  by  the  state  and  by
         international actors to address their  needs  have  only  made  the
         situation worse.  Hasty marriage for protection, well being schemes
         that  entail  isolation  and   exposure   to   state   agents   and
         disempowering livelihood programmes have further  undermined  their
         economic and political position."




    The report documents a decline in sexual violence  perpetrated  by  the
    military    against  Tamil  women.   It  advances   the   thesis   that
    diminishing  social  and  economic  power  has  made  such  women  more
    vulnerable to victimisation.  The authors  argue  that  the  risk  will
    continue for as long as the military remains deployed in the region.




21.  The  discrete  phenomena  of  exploitative  and  transactional  sexual
    relationships are also described.  A culture of impunity or  abuses  of
    women is highlighted.  Another culture, that of the protection of Tamil
    women by the male members of their community,  is  noted.   The  report
    contains just one short passage relating to female heads of households:




         "In addressing the stigma and  exclusion  of  widows,  one  of  the
         military plans most deprived by activists and beneficiaries  alike,
         is the creation of villages  meant  exclusively  for  female-headed
         households."


    There is no indication that this plan has been implemented, though  the
    Tribunal was informed of the witnesses' belief that one such settlement
    has subsequently been developed.


22. The structure of the  report  is  noteworthy:  through  the  medium  of
    footnotes,  the  authors  identify  the  sources  of   the   individual
    substantive contents.   Notably,  personal  interviews  constitute  the
    great  majority  of  the  footnotes.   Just  some  five   reports,   or
    publications are mentioned:


       . "War Crimes in Sri Lanka" (International Crisis Group - May 2010).


       . "Sri Lanka: Women's Insecurities in  the  North  and  East"  (same,
         December 2011).


       . "Sri Lanka Between Elections" (same, August 2015).


       . "Sri Lanka: Women's Insecurities in  the  North  and  East"  (Human
         Rights Watch, December 2011).


       . A publication (possibly two publications) of the Oakland  Institute
         in May 2015.




23. With specific reference to the above, Dr Gowrinathan, in  her  evidence
    via live video link, expressed the belief that one of the  contemplated
    "women only" villages has now been constructed.  She further testified,
    with particularisation, that she had the role of lead researcher in the
    second of the five publications listed above  and  had  a  consultative
    role in the last of them.  She confirmed that  none  of  these  reports
    addresses the specific issue of risk to Tamil female heads of household
    at the hands of members of the Sri Lankan security forces. Her evidence
    was broadly consistent with that of the other expert, Ms Buzo.




    Expert Evidence: General


24. It was evident from counsel's responses to the bench and  the  evidence
    elicited by questioning that the main purpose of arranging for Ms  Buzo
    and Dr Gowrinathan to give live evidence  was  to  explore  in  greater
    detail the methodology  employed  in  their  respective  reports,  also
    eliciting from them a degree of emphasis in respect of certain sections
    of the reports.  It was clear to me from the exchange of questions  and
    answers that there was a host of material issues not addressed  in  the
    reports.  Nor were they pursued in examination in  chief.  I  canvassed
    several of these with the witness in questioning: the definition of the
    "state" groups/agents who pose a threat to  certain  Tamil  women;  the
    role of and threat posed by paramilitaries; the distinction between the
    north and the east of the country; the distinction between armed  state
    actors and unarmed state actors; the various subcategories  within  the
    generic category of Tamil women; evolving policies of  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government; the second author's involvement in the  country  postdating
    the White Paper publication; her plans for further research in the near
    future; actual prosecutions for rape and kindred crimes by state actors
    in Sri Lanka; changing cultural attitudes to conduct of this kind;  and
    the age ranges of most Tamil women victims.


25. This exercise quickly exposed the wholly unsatisfactory  way  in  which
    expert evidence was deployed in  this  appeal.   There  was  no  proper
    report from either of the two country  experts.   A  properly  compiled
    expert report will always  be  comprehensive.   Insofar  as  there  are
    omissions or  issues  requiring  clarification  or  elaboration,  these
    should be addressed via the medium of a  supplementary  report  or  the
    inter-partes exchange of questions to the expert and  replies  thereto:
    this practice is well  established  in  this  forum.  But  it  was  not
    observed in this appeal. Furthermore, it should never be necessary  for
    an  expert  in  a  case  of  this  kind  to  explain  the   methodology
    underpinning the written evidence.  This should always be patent on the
    face of the report. If missing, it should be provided via a supplement,
    accompanied by a full and frank explanation of the omission.


26. Many of the requirements of paragraph 10.9 of the Senior  President  of
    Tribunal's Practice Direction were infringed by  both  experts.   There
    were also breaches of the "Statement of Truth" requirement enshrined in
    paragraphs 10.10 and 10.11.  While I have taken note of  a  pre-hearing
    letter sent to the Tribunal by the Appellant's  solicitors,  containing
    certain information,  this  was  wholly  inadequate  to  rectify  these
    significant omissions.  Furthermore, the unsatisfactory presentation of
    the Appellant's case resulted in both the Tribunal and the Respondent's
    representative being taken by surprise and gave rise to  the  need  for
    lengthy judicial questioning - a return to the dark days  of  haphazard
    cloak and dagger litigation.  All of  this  was  regrettable  and  pre-
    eminently avoidable.


27. While the experts must bear responsibility for some of  the  criticisms
    levelled above, their culpability for many of these serial defects  may
    lie primarily with others.  In particular, there is no indication  that
    they were  alerted  to  the  requirements  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Direction or that they were advised of the need for compliance
    with the decision of this Tribunal in MOJ and Others [2014] UKUT  00442
    (IAC) at [23] - [38].  This decision,  figuratively,  appears  to  have
    fallen on deaf ears in the present  case.   Moreover,  this  Tribunal's
    sister decision given subsequently  in  MS  (Trafficking  -  Tribunal's
    Powers - Article 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 226 (IAC), at [68]-  [69]
    especially, was evidently ignored.


28. Notwithstanding the shortcomings highlighted above, I am persuaded that
    both witnesses possess the credentials necessary  to  qualify  for  the
    designation of experts.


29. There is one further report which, in tandem with the  psychiatric  and
    other expert reports outlined above, appeared at one stage to belong to
    the forefront of the Appellant's case.   This  is  the  report  of  the
    United  Nations  Committee  Against  Torture  relating  to  Sri  Lanka,
    published on 16 November 2016.  The main focus of this report  is  ill-
    treatment of persons detained by  state  agents.   It  also  notes  the
    impunity  of  public  officials  perpetrating  such  treatment,   while
    highlighting the role of the National Human Rights Commission in  inter
    alia receiving complaints from victims and their representatives.

30. This report was floating in and out of the Appellant's  case  for  some
    time.  Ultimately, forgiving a breach of the Tribunal's  multiple  pre-
    hearing directions, I admitted it in  evidence  on  the  first  day  of
    hearing notwithstanding the  absence  of  any  application  under  Rule
    15(2A).  It quickly became apparent that  six  of  the  report's  eight
    pages were missing from the version provided to the Tribunal.  This was
    rectified only minutes before the beginning of the final day of hearing
    and only following proactive action on the part of the Tribunal.   When
    the final session commenced, I observed at the hearing that the  report
    contains no reference to Tamil female heads of household in Sri  Lanka.
    This was acknowledged by counsel on behalf of the Appellant and, in the
    event, no submission based on this report was made by  counsel  and  it
    was not mentioned in the skeleton argument.




Other Evidence

31. In the Appellant's hearing bundles there is no  shortage  of  bulk.   I
    have identified  above  those  parts  of  the  written  evidence  which
    featured in the presentation of the Appellant's case.  The Tribunal was
    referred to none of  the  remainder,  in  either  oral  submissions  or
    written argument.  Nor was the Tribunal invited at any time to read any
    of this substantial quantity of material.  This is  reflected  in  this
    judgment.  One regrettable consequence of this was  that  the  Tribunal
    was left to its own devices, delving speculatively into the  voluminous
    papers  in  the  hope  of  discovering  and  identifying  anything   of
    importance.  This  was  yet  another  unsatisfactory  aspect   of   the
    presentation of this appeal.  Furthermore, at the end of  the  hearing,
    the Tribunal was alerted to yet another deficiency in  the  Appellant's
    bundles relating to certain UNHCR  material:  unsurprisingly  (at  this
    stage) this  deficiency  could  not  be  rectified  since  the  missing
    materials had not been brought to the hearing.


32. I have found it necessary to draw attention to the matters addressed in
    [24] - [31] above firstly to ensure that the true basis  and  scope  of
    this decision are properly understood and in order to  properly  inform
    any future Sri Lankan case in which the issue of giving effect  to,  or
    developing,  this  decision  may  arise.   Secondly,   I   trust   that
    representatives will ensure that the multiple unsatisfactory aspects of
    the presentation of this appeal will not be repeated.


Conclusions

33. I begin with the expert country evidence.   The  evidence  of  Ms  Buzo
    suffers from four particular shortcomings.  First, her report does  not
    disclose her supposed expert credentials  or  qualifications.   Second,
    there are significant  breaches  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Direction and the  decisions  of  this  Tribunal  noted  above.   These
    decisions rehearse extensively the duties and principles in  play.   No
    explanation of these  failings  of  Ms  Buzo's  report  was  proffered.
    Third, as noted in [24] above, this report  suffers  from  the  frailty
    that it was necessary to call the author  as  a  witness  in  order  to
    explain her research methodology: see also [17] - [18] above.


34. This does not, of course, mean ipso  facto  that  the  Tribunal  should
    disregard the  live  evidence  of  Ms  Buzo  on  this  discrete  issue.
    However, having regard to the way in which this particular evidence was
    given, which included the witness's acknowledgement (in response  to  a
    question from the Tribunal) that she had only a vague advance  idea  of
    the issues to be canvassed with her in questioning,  I  am  obliged  to
    treat her evidence, particularly on the issue of research  methodology,
    with caution.  It was given ad hoc and  left  far  too  many  questions
    unanswered.

35. The fourth shortcoming in Ms Buzo's evidence is that without laying the
    necessary foundations she initially purported to canvas the very  broad
    thesis that all members of the group constituted  by  female  heads  of
    household in all of Northern and Eastern  Sri  Lanka  are  at  risk  of
    sexual abuse and exploitation at the hands of the  government  military
    forces.   Given the contents of Ms Buzo's report and her examination in
    chief, this appeared to the Tribunal a somewhat extravagant claim.  Its
    unsustainability emerged only when the witness  was  gently  probed  in
    questioning by the Tribunal.  In the specific context of this appeal, I
    consider that Ms Buzo's duties were (a)  to  candidly  acknowledge  and
    confront the  limitations  of  her  research  methodology  and  (b)  to
    proactively acknowledge that the quantitative  data  available  to  her
    were manifestly insufficient to make good the sweeping claim noted.  It
    should not have been necessary to leave these important issues  to  the
    vagaries of  judicial  questioning,  particularly  in  the  context  of
    evidence  given  by  video  link   and   the   enhanced   communication
    difficulties thereby involved.


36. Notwithstanding the reservations expressed  above,  I  am  prepared  to
    accept Ms Buzo's evidence relating  to  increased  and  decreased  risk
    factors pertaining to female heads of household  in  the  Northern  and
    North - eastern zones of Sri Lanka.   This  particular  aspect  of  her
    evidence was plausible and was not  challenged  in  cross  examination.
    Furthermore,  it  chimes  well  with  other  parts  of  the  voluminous
    documentary evidence which I have read,  including  in  particular  the
    UNHCR report of December 2012 and the unqualified adoption  thereof  by
    the Home Office in its Operational Guidance Note of July 2013, together
    with the second expert's evidence.

37. While the evidence of Dr Gowrinathan suffers from the first and  second
    of the shortcomings applicable to Ms Buzo  noted  above,  the  research
    methodology of Dr Gowrinathan and her co-authors is manifestly superior
    to that of Dr Buzo.  However, the report says nothing  of  significance
    about female heads of household in the context of the  present  appeal.
    The fleeting and undeveloped reference to female heads of household  in
    the former conflict zone, noted in [21] above, is  of  particular  note
    when one takes into account the methodology employed in the compilation
    of the report: it is based upon the interviews of some 50 [the  precise
    number  is  not  given]  Tamil  women  in  the  Northern  region,  duly
    supplemented by what the authors describe as "extensive primary source,
    secondary source and field research on the broader  post-war  context".
    The witness did not satisfactorily explain this feature of  her  report
    when questioned about it by the Tribunal.

38. There were two particularly significant features of the evidence of  Dr
    Gowrinathan.  The first is  the  research  methodology  noted  in  [37]
    above.  The second is that Dr Gowrinathan, in measured  and  manifestly
    objective terms, gave evidence  which  in  no  way  detracted  from  or
    devalued those aspects of Ms Buzo's evidence  which  the  Tribunal  has
    accepted: see [36] above.


Conclusions

39. Based on my evaluation of the evidence and findings as set out above, I
    make the following principal conclusions:


   a. A Tamil female  single  head  of  household  residing  in  the  former
      conflict zone of Northern and North Eastern Sri Lanka may be  at  risk
      of sexual abuse and exploitation perpetrated  by  members  of  police,
      military and paramilitary State agents.


   b. The existence and measurement of this risk will be an  intensely  fact
      sensitive question in every case.  The case-by-case assessment will be
      informed by the presence or  absence  of  positive  risk  factors  and
      decreasing risk factors.


   c.  The positive risk factors are living in isolation  from  others,  low
      socio-economic status, dependence upon the distribution of  Government
      aid or the provision of other services by the security  forces  and  a
      perception of former LTTE  membership,  links  or  sympathies.   These
      positive factors do not necessarily have to be satisfied  cumulatively
      in every case: context will invariably be everything.


   d. The countervailing factors are higher  socio-economic  status,  little
      dependence on Government aid or  services  and  the  support  of  male
      relatives or neighbours.  The individual  context  of  the  particular
      case will dictate the force and  weight  of  each  of  these  factors,
      individually or cumulatively, in any given case.  These  too  will  be
      assessed on a case-by-case basis.




40. The well established legal test is whether the Appellant is at risk  of
    a reasonable degree of likelihood of persecution in the  event  of  her
    forcible return to her country of  origin,  Sri  Lanka.   There  is  no
    dispute that single  Tamil  female  heads  of  household  constitute  a
    particular social group in Sri Lanka and I so find.  Nor is  there  any
    dispute that the threatened behaviour under scrutiny  would  constitute
    persecution as a matter of law. Furthermore, it is plain - and  not  in
    dispute - that the Appellant's fear is well founded. In  addition,  the
    possibility of  safe  internal  relocation  does  not  feature  in  the
    Secretary of State's impugned decision and was not raised before me.

41. The application of  the  template  set  forth  in  [38]  above  to  the
    Appellant's case readily yields the conclusion that all of the positive
    risk factors are present and these are not counter balanced by  any  of
    the countervailing factors. There is no evidence of any of  the  latter
    in relation to  the  Appellant's  present  and  predicted  context  and
    circumstances.

42. The Appellant's case highlights the importance  of  individual  factors
    and characteristics.  In her case there is  the  additional  factor  of
    very significant mental vulnerability.   This  is  established  by  the
    evidence summarised in [11] - [13] above which I  find  persuasive  and
    balanced and which was not challenged on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.   This  dimension  elevates  significantly  the  risk   in   the
    Appellant's case.  Having regard to the  combination  of  the  positive
    risk factors, the  absence  of  any  decreased  risk  factors  and  the
    Appellant's vulnerable and compromised mental state,  I  conclude  that
    she would  be  at  real  and  substantial  risk  of  sexual  abuse  and
    exploitation perpetrated by agents  of  the  Sri  Lankan  state  namely
    military forces, police and state sponsored paramilitaries in the event
    of returning to her former place of residence in northern Sri Lanka.


43. It follows inexorably, bearing in mind the lower standard of  proof  in
    play, that the Appellant has discharged her onus  of  establishing  her
    entitlement to the protection of asylum.  I would add that she has done
    so comfortably.  The Appellant is a clear winner in this appeal.

44. On essentially the same grounds and for substantially the same reasons,
    the Appellant's case satisfies the tests adumbrated in  GJ  and  Others
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  In particular, the ill-treatment of  which  the
    Appellant would  foreseeably  be  at  risk  includes  degrading  sexual
    assault and rape, of which there may be multiple instances.  It follows
    that the Appellant's case under Article 3 ECHR succeeds also.


45. Given the aforementioned two conclusions, it is unnecessary to consider
    either  the  Appellant's  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  or  her
    discrete Article 3 claim based on risk of suicide.




DECISION

46. I remake the decision  of  the  FtT  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the dismissal of her asylum and Article 3 ECHR claims.




                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 31 January 2017
