
Sun Myung Moon (Human rights, entry clearance, proportionality) USA [2005]
                                   UKIAT 00112                           | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                        Date:  14 March 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              30th June 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)

Between:

                           REVEREND SUN MYUNG MOON
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Seoul
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances
For the Appellant:     Mr D Pannick QC & Ms K Gallafent, instructed by Mark
                 Brann & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss M Carss-Frisk QC, and Mr T de la Mare
instructed by
                 Treasury Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



     This appeal concerns the  refusal  in  September  2003  by  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer Seoul to grant entry clearance to the  Reverend  Sun
     Myong Moon for a six-month visit visa  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
     Reverend Moon is the spiritual leader of  the  Family  Federation  for
     Unification and World Peace, the umbrella body for the  activities  of
     the Unification Movement.  He lives in the USA and is 85 years old.


  1. This case is not anonymised because the Appellant's  leading  role  in
     the Unification Movement is crucial to his claim and it would be  very
     difficult for the decision to be understood if it were  so  anonymised
     that neither he nor his organisation could  be  identified.   Anything
     less would enable his identity readily to be inferred.   He  does  not
     face persecution and requires none of the protection  which  anonymity
     might afford, nor does he seek it.


History

  3. We can set out the history of the application briefly.

  4. The Appellant last visited the United Kingdom in 1978.   In  1978,  an
     appeal had been allowed against the Secretary of  State's  refusal  to
     extend the Appellant's permission to stay as a visitor on  the  ground
     that he might not leave at the expiry of the extension.  In 1989,  the
     Secretary of State decided that the Appellant should not  be  admitted
     to the United Kingdom  because  of  his  character  and  conduct.   An
     Adjudicator again allowed the appeal  and  the  necessary  letters  of
     consent were then issued in 1991 and 1992, but were not taken up.

  5. In 1995, the Secretary of State  decided  that  the  presence  in  the
     United Kingdom of the Appellant would not be conducive to  the  public
     good, but that decision was quashed on Judicial Review  because  of  a
     want of procedural fairness in telling the Appellant what had  changed
     since the issue of the two letters of consent.  The Secretary of State
     then undertook a review of the decision  and  invited  representations
     from the Appellant and a number of others who were interested  in  the
     exclusion of the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

  6. By a letter of  12  April  2001,  the  Secretary  of  State  told  the
     Appellant that he was minded to exclude him on the  grounds  that  his
     presence in the United Kingdom would not be conducive  to  the  public
     good, and inviting representations before a final decision  was  made.
     The representations  of  others  were  also  invited.   Correspondence
     between the Appellant's solicitors and the Secretary of  State  ensued
     but ultimately the Secretary of State decided to exclude the Appellant
     in his decision of 8 May 2003, notified on 15 May 2003.   This  was  a
     decision which he made personally, on the grounds that the presence in
     the United Kingdom of the Appellant would  not  be  conducive  to  the
     public good.  There was some debate about the role of public order  as
     the basis for concern as to the public good.

  7. An application for entry clearance as a visitor  for  six  months  was
     made in July 2003 and in a  decision  dated  28  September  2003,  the
     application was refused, as it had to be under paragraph 320(6) of the
     Immigration Rules.  There were two earlier purported such decisions in
     July and September 2003, which the Secretary of State  recognised  had
     flaws in them.

The Legal Framework

  8. The 2002 Act confers a  right  to  appeal  from  a  refusal  of  entry
     clearance:  section 82(1) read  with  (2)(b).   Where  a  decision  to
     refuse entry clearance is made wholly or partly on the ground that the
     Secretary of State has directed that the exclusion of  the  person  to
     whom the decision relates  is  conducive  to  the  public  good,  that
     person's appeal to an Adjudicator is limited to the  ground  that  the
     decision is unlawful under section 6 of the HRA as being  incompatible
     with the Appellant's Convention rights:  sections 84(1)(c)  and  90(1)
     and (4).

  9. Article 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights provides that:

           "The High Contracting Parties shall secure  to  everyone  within
           their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in Section  1
           of this Convention".

 10. Article 9 of the Convention states :

           "1    Everyone has the right to freedom of  thought,  conscience
                 and religion; this right includes  freedom  to  change  his
                 religion  or  belief  and  freedom,  either  alone  or   in
                 community with others and in public or private, to manifest
                 his religion or belief, in worship, teaching, practice  and
                 observance.


           2     Freedom to manifest one's religion  or  beliefs  shall  be
                 subject only to such limitations as are prescribed  by  law
                 and are necessary in a democratic society in the  interests
                 of public safety,  for  the  protection  of  public  order,
                 health or morals, or for the protection of the  rights  and
                 freedoms of others".





     Article 10 of the Convention states :


           "1    Everyone has the right to  freedom  of  expression.   This
                 right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive
                 and impart information and ideas without interference by  a
                 public authority and regardless of frontiers.  This article
                 shall not prevent states from requiring  the  licensing  of
                 broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.


           2     The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries  with  it
                 duties  and  responsibilities,  may  be  subject  to   such
                 formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties  as  are
                 prescribed  by  law  and  are  necessary  in  a  democratic
                 society, in the interests of national security, territorial
                 integrity  or  public  safety,  for  the   preventing   the
                 disclosure of information received in  confidence,  or  for
                 maintaining  the  authority   and   impartiality   of   the
                 judiciary."


 11. Article 11 of the Convention states :


           "1    Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and
                 of freedom of association with others, including the  right
                 to form and to join trade unions for the protection of  his
                 interests.


           2     No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise  of  these
                 rights other than such as are prescribed  by  law  and  are
                 necessary in a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
                 national security or public safety, for the  prevention  of
                 disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
                 or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
                  This article shall not prevent the  imposition  of  lawful
                 restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members  of
                 the armed forces, or the police or other administration  of
                 the State."


 12. Article 14 of the Convention states :


            "The enjoyment of the rights and  freedoms  set  forth  in  this
           Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground
           such as sex, race, colour, religion, political or other opinion,
           national or social origin, association with a national minority,
           property, birth or other status".




The Appeal


 13. The Appellant appeals to the IAT from the dismissal of his  appeal  by
     an Adjudicator, Mr M A Clements, promulgated on  19  April  2004.   In
     essence he repeats  the  grounds  upon  which  he  relied  before  the
     Adjudicator, although  taking  issue  with  a  number  of  conclusions
     reached by the Adjudicator and drawing on the decision of the Court of
     Appeal in Huang and others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 105.

 14. The grounds of appeal, shortly, are:

           (1)   That the Adjudicator erred in  law  in  holding  that  the
                 Appellant could not rely on any Article of the  ECHR  other
                 than Article 8 as a basis for saying that  the  refusal  of
                 entry clearance breached his Convention rights;   he  could
                 rely on Articles 9, 10 and 11 as the binding decision in  R
                 (Farrakhan) v SSHD [2002] QB 1391 made  clear  and  as  was
                 correct even if Farrakhan were not binding to that effect;


           (2)   On the merits, there was a breach of Convention rights and
                 the Adjudicator was wrong not to find such a breach;   even
                 if the IAT were against the Appellant on the first  ground,
                 it was asked nonetheless to reach a view on the latter.

 16. The Secretary of State contended that the Adjudicator was right as  to
     the limited ambit of the Convention  in  entry  clearance  cases,  and
     Farrakhan reached no decision binding on the  Adjudicator  or  on  the
     IAT.  In any event, there had been no  violation  of  the  Appellant's
     rights;  indeed they were not materially engaged.

 17. The purpose for which entry clearance was  sought  was  that,  as  the
     spiritual leader of the Unification Movement, the Appellant wanted  to
     meet with members of the Federation in the United Kingdom and to  give
     them advice, guidance and inspiration and also to speak at  invitation
     only events.  This put shortly was the basis upon which Articles 9, 10
     and 11 of the ECHR were relied on.


The effect of the decision in Farrakhan


 18. The first submission by Mr Pannick QC on behalf of the  Appellant  was
     that the decision in Farrakhan was binding  and  to  the  effect  that
     Articles of the ECHR other than Article 8 could be relied on  for  the
     purpose of entry clearance into the United Kingdom.  That case notably
     concerned Article 10.  The Adjudicator had distinguished Farrakhan  on
     the basis  that  the  discussion  of  Article  10  was  based  upon  a
     concession made for the purposes of that case, that Article  10  could
     be relied on by Farrakhan.  Miss Carss-Frisk QC for the  Secretary  of
     State maintained that the issue  of  "extra-territoriality"  had  been
     dealt with by concession and not by consideration or decision. It  had
     only considered what rights could be engaged regardless of that point.

 19. We turn to Farrakhan.  He was a United States citizen  who  wished  to
     visit the United Kingdom.  He was excluded by the personal decision of
     the Secretary of State on conducive grounds, similar to those  in  the
     present case.  He wanted to speak to possible supporters or interested
     hearers of his preaching and moral teaching.

 20. The arguments  as  to  what  the  Court  of  Appeal  meant  pose  some
     difficulties.   The  arguments   cannot   be   understood,   and   the
     difficulties appreciated without extensive citation from the decision.

 21. Paragraphs 32 to 34 read as follows:

           "32   Mr Pannick, who appeared for the Secretary of State before
                 Turner J, had conceded that the facts of the  case  engaged
                 article 10 of the Convention.  We gave advance  warming  to
                 counsel that we wished to hear submissions as to  why  this
                 was so.  This led Miss Carss-Frisk, who  appeared  for  the
                 Secretary of State before us, to submit that article 10 was
                 not in fact engaged.  Mr Farrakhan had been  refused  entry
                 because his presence in this country was not desirable.  In
                 those circumstances article 10 gave him no right to  demand
                 entry in order to exercise his  freedom  of  speech  within
                 this country.


           33    Before the hearing  of  this  appeal  we  had  entertained
                 doubts as to whether  article  10  was  engaged  where  the
                 authorities of a state refused entry to an alien,  even  if
                 their sole reason for dong so was that they  did  not  wish
                 him to exercise a freedom to express  his  opinions  within
                 their territory.  Article 10 requires the authorities of  a
                 state to permit  those  within  its  boundaries  freely  to
                 express their views, even if these are deeply offensive  to
                 the majority of the community.  It did not seem  to  us  to
                 follow that those authorities should be  obliged  to  allow
                 into the state a person bent on giving  its  citizens  such
                 offence.


           34    It is a remarkable fact that almost all  the  articles  of
                 the   Convention  which  permit,  for  specified  purposes,
                 restrictions on the freedoms that  they  guarantee  do  not
                 include in  those  purposes  the  exercise  of  control  of
                 immigration.  This strongly suggests to us that  those  who
                 negotiated  the  Convention   only   envisaged   that   its
                 obligations would apply to the treatment of individuals who
                 were within the territory of the  member  state  concerned.
                 This impression is enhanced by the fact that, under article
                 5(1)(f), an exception to  the  right  to  liberty  is  "the
                 lawful arrest or detention  of  a  person  to  prevent  his
                 effecting an unauthorised entry  into  the  country".   The
                 Convention  is,  however,  a  living  instrument  and,   in
                 accordance with the requirement of section 2 of  the  Human
                 Rights Act 1998, we must  have  regard  to  the  Strasbourg
                 jurisprudence when considering whether article  10  imposes
                 obligations  in  relation  to  an  alien  who  is   seeking
                 admission to a member state.  In  this  context  we  should
                 record that, for the purposes of this case,  the  Secretary
                 of State was prepared to  accept  that  the  fact  that  an
                 individual was neither a citizen  of  a  member  state  nor
                 within the territory of a member state did not, of  itself,
                 preclude  the  application  of  the  Convention.   We  have
                 proceeded on the basis of that concession without examining
                 whether or not it is correctly made."

 22. So far so good, and Miss Carss-Frisk understandably put great emphasis
     on those paragraphs and the last two sentences in particular.   It  is
     what then follows immediately and without further  explanation,  which
     has been a source of debate.  She had  the  advantage  of  making  the
     concession and therefore of knowing what she meant but that  may  only
     take us part of the way.

 23. Paragraphs 35 and 36 then say:

           "35   A similar issue to that with which we are concerned  arose
                 in relation to article 8 of the  Convention  in  Abdulaziz,
                 Cabales and Balkandali v United Kingdom (1985) 7 EHRR  471.
                 The applicants were women settled in the United Kingdom who
                 complained that their rights to  respect  for  family  life
                 were  infringed  because  their   husbands   were   refused
                 permission to enter in order to join them.  The  Government
                 argued that article 8 did not apply to immigration control.
                  Both the European  Commission  of  Human  Rights  and  the
                 European Court of Human Rights rejected this submission, at
                 pp 494-495, para 59, holding that immigration controls  had
                 to be exercised consistently  with  Convention  obligations
                 and the exclusion of a person from a state where members of
                 his family were living might raise an issue  under  article
                 8.


           36     The  court  observed  in  the  next  paragraph  that  the
                 applicants were not the husbands but the  wives,  who  were
                 complaining not of being refused leave  to  enter,  but  as
                 persons lawfully settled in the country of  being  deprived
                 of the society of their spouses there.  However, the  court
                 observed, at p 497, para 67:


                       'in the area now under consideration, the extent of a
                       state's  obligation  to  admit   to   its   territory
                       relatives of settled immigrants will  vary  according
                       to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the   persons
                       involved.  Moreover, the court cannot ignore that the
                       present case is concerned not only with  family  life
                       but also with immigration and that, as  a  matter  of
                       well-established international law and subject to its
                       treaty obligations, a state has the right to  control
                       the entry of non-nationals into its territory.'"


 24. After further citation of Article 8 case law, the Court then said:


           "38   It is apparent, however, that an immigration decision  can
                 bring article 8 into play.  Furthermore, we have  no  doubt
                 that if a state were to refuse entry  with  the  motive  of
                 preventing  the  enjoyment  of  family  life  because,  for
                 instance, of a policy of opposing the intermarriage of  its
                 citizens with aliens the court would hold  that  article  8
                 was infringed.


 25. This could be read, and it was submitted, should be read as containing
     a decision on the role of Article 8 in  entry  clearance  cases.   The
     Court then turned to Article 10.

 26. The consideration of Article 10 involved, in Agee v UK (1976) 7DR 164,
     a deportation case.  The Court contemplated that there might have been
     a justified complaint of a breach of human rights if  the  deportation
     had been because of the manner in  which  any  rights  to  freedom  of
     expression had been exercised.  But the Court then turned to  Piermont
     v France [1995] 20 EHRR 301;  a German MEP  entered  French  Polynesia
     and denounced French nuclear tests in the Pacific;  she was  expelled.
     She was  also  excluded  from  entry  to  New  Caledonia  because  her
     activities were likely to cause a breach of  public  order  during  an
     election.  The expulsion was held  to  be  disproportionate,  but  the
     refusal of entry was an interference with Article  10;  she  had  been
     detained upon arrival at the New Caledonia Airport.  The  interference
     was again disproportionate.

 27. Two further cases were identified:   the  first  was  Omkarananda  and
     Divine Light Zentrum v Switzerland (1981) 25 DR  105.   The  Applicant
     alien was expelled from Switzerland for  public  order  reasons.   His
     complaint was brought under Articles 9, 10  and  11.   The  Commission
     ruled the complaint inadmissible.  As the alien had no right  to  stay
     in the country, deportation did not as such constitute an interference
     with the Convention rights unless it was done to suppress those rights
     and stifle his followers.  He had not been subject to restrictions  in
     Switzerland on his religious  activities;   there  was  no  reason  to
     suppose that the suppression of his faith was a main  purpose  of  his
     expulsion in view of the  public  order  concerns  which  legitimately
     existed.

 28. The second was Adams and Benn v UK [1997] 88-ADR 137;  Adams (who  was
     in NI) had been excluded from Great Britain under  the  Prevention  of
     Terrorism Act 1989, by an order which prevented him from accepting  an
     invitation from an MP to speak at the House of  Commons.   Article  10
     was engaged but the availability of other means for Adams to make  his
     views known and the sensitive and complex issues in  Northern  Ireland
     made the exclusion proportionate.

 29. We note that in  all  these  cases  the  claimant  had  actually  been
     physically present in the territory of the state party,  even  in  the
     case of the MEP who was refused entry at the airport in New Caledonia.
      Most concern the interaction between the right of a state  to  remove
     an alien and the exercise or  interference with the  rights  which  an
     alien may have under the Convention  whilst  in  the  territory  of  a
     member state.

 30. The Court of Appeal then set  out  its  discussion  of  the  cases  in
     paragraphs 52-56.  It concluded that where entry  was  refused  to  an
     alien for reasons wholly independent of  the  exercise  of  Convention
     rights, there was no breach of  the  Convention  simply  because  that
     exclusion would have the effect of  preventing  him  exercising  those
     rights  in  the  country  from  which  he  had  been  excluded.    But
     exceptionally, as illustrated by Article 8 cases, exclusion  could  be
     overridden by Convention rights.  The  Convention  would  be  directly
     engaged where refusal of entry or expulsion was solely for the purpose
     of preventing the alien from exercising a right within  the  territory
     or as a sanction for having exercised such a right.  So the refusal of
     entry solely in order to prevent  an  alien  expressing  his  opinions
     within the territory would engage Article 10.  The proportionality  of
     that  decision  would  fall  to  be  assessed  by  reference  to   the
     considerations in Article 10(2).

 31. The Court then turned to consider the issue of proportionality and the
     factors  which  weighed  heavily  with  the  court  in  upholding  the
     Secretary of State's exclusion decision, in a finely balanced case.

 32. Mr Pannick elaborated his submissions, contending that the  concession
     by the Secretary of State had simply  been  that  the  Convention  was
     capable of applying to Farrakhan although he was neither a citizen nor
     present in the territory of a member state.  That was said  to  remain
     the Secretary of State's position, because of the stance he adopted in
     Article 8 cases.  Once that stance was adopted, there was no reason in
     principle to  confine  the  application  of  the  Convention  in  such
     circumstances  to  Article  8.   The  fact  that  the  concession  was
     seemingly still not at issue  was  reinforced  by  the  new  statutory
     rights of appeal in section 82(2)(b), combined with sections  84(1)(b)
     and (c) and 90 of the 2002 Act,  which  enables  appeals  against  the
     refusal of entry clearance to be brought on human rights grounds.  The
     Secretary of State had written to the Appellant in  June  2003  saying
     that he could appeal against a refusal of  entry  clearance  on  human
     rights grounds.  The Appellant was  in  no  different  a  position  in
     principle from Farrakhan.

 33. The argument seemed to develop from a contention about  what  actually
     had been conceded into a contention that the concession was inevitable
     then and now because of the Article 8 and ECtHR cases,  and  that  the
     Court of Appeal's decision would inevitably have been the  same,  even
     if no concession had been made or recorded.  This  argument  therefore
     foreshadowed the submissions on the applicability of  the  Convention,
     if Farrakhan had not decided what Mr Pannick contended it had.

 34. Miss Carss-Frisk submitted that the effect  of  her  concession  meant
     that Farrakhan could not have decided  whether  in  principle  someone
     seeking entry clearance could rely  upon  any  Article  of  the  ECHR,
     whether Article  8,  9  or  10.   The  passages  at  paragraphs  52-56
     summarised above, and upon which  Mr  Pannick  relied  in  this  case,
     therefore dealt only with  "the  engagement  of  rights".   The  ECtHR
     jurisprudence relied on by the Court of Appeal dealt only with  people
     who were present in the territory of the member state.  The very issue
     which was now being discussed was the same as that which was conceded,
     ie whether the Convention was capable of applying to someone  who  was
     not present in the territory of the state. This present case  had  not
     yet reached the stage of considering whether the  application  for  or
     refusal  of  entry  clearance  "engaged"  human  rights.   There   was
     substantial jurisprudence yet  to  be  analysed  in  relation  to  the
     availability of the ECHR to such individuals, which  showed  that  the
     concession was not inevitable  simply  because  of  the  decisions  in
     Article 8 cases.  The provisions of sections 82, 84 and 90 of the 2002
     Act did not mean that the Secretary of State's position had  been  now
     undermined or eliminated by Parliament.  Nor could  the  Secretary  of
     State's letter of June 2003 create a right where  none  existed;   and
     anyway it only acknowledged the possibility of such a ground of appeal
     rather than avowing its existence.

 35. We accept Miss Carss-Frisk's submissions.  The concession  was  clear:
     it was to the effect that Farrakhan could contend that the refusal  of
     entry clearance "engaged" Article 10 and breached it having regard  to
     Article 10(2), even though he was not present in  the  United  Kingdom
     nor was a citizen of it.  It was the significance  of  those  provisos
     which was not at issue in Farrakhan, as a result  of  the  concession,
     but which is very much at issue here.  The Court  of  Appeal  did  not
     decide that issue.  We recognise that the language used in  paragraphs
     35 to 38 by the Court of Appeal permits the argument put forward by Mr
     Pannick but we do not think that it is the correct reading.

 36. First, it would  involve  treating  the  Court  of  Appeal  as  having
     contradicted itself in accepting the concession  and  saying  that  it
     would not decide the point, and then doing precisely the opposite.  If
     it had been deciding what had been conceded, it would most surely have
     said so.  Secondly, it would involve such a decision being  undertaken
     in breach of elementary rules of fairness:  deciding a  point  without
     warning or argument in the knowledge that the disadvantaged party  had
     made a concession rather than argue the point.  We would  not  readily
     suppose that it had done so.  Third, it would involve the Court having
     decided a difficult and important issue on the basis of what it  would
     have known was very incomplete argument;  the way in which  the  issue
     has been argued before us is testimony  to  that.   It  made  no  such
     suggestion as to the adequacy of the argument.

 37. The Court of Appeal was deciding what were the circumstances, if  any,
     in which someone, who was not in  principle  excluded  from  asserting
     that  his  Convention  rights  were  engaged  because  of   what   may
     conveniently be termed "territoriality", could say in  an  immigration
     context that his rights under the ECHR were engaged and breached.  The
     Court of Appeal reached its  decision  on  that  without  drawing  any
     distinction between entry and removal cases.  The Secretary of State's
     concession had made that  distinction  irrelevant.   Yet  it  is  that
     distinction which is now at the heart of the argument here.   All  the
     cases which the Court of Appeal considered were  cases  involving  the
     physical presence in the territory of a  member  state  of  those  who
     claimed that the immigration decision  breached  their  human  rights,
     including the exclusion of the MEP from New Caledonia, and the Article
     8 spouse cases.  (The ECtHR does not draw the distinction which United
     Kingdom law creates between presence and entry).

 38. But the conclusion that Farrakhan did not decide the point in relation
     to "territoriality" because it proceeded on the basis  of  the  SSHD's
     concession, does not mean that the conclusion had  no  effect  on  the
     Court's  approach  to  the  issue  which  was  contested,  i.e.   were
     Farrakhan's rights engaged or, if engaged, breached?

 39. It is possible to see how the removal of someone who is present in the
     territory may engage his ECHR rights;  he has those rights  by  virtue
     of being in the territory.  Although the motive which lies  behind  an
     alleged breach is not relevant in some instances, it  may  be  when  a
     qualified right is at issue.  The presence in the country leads to the
     individual having the rights under Article 10; removal for  exercising
     such rights would not be permitted by Article 10(2) unless there  were
     a sound and proportionate basis within the qualifications  in  Article
     10(2) for removing someone.  Thus, as the Court of  Appeal  concluded,
     the exercise by the state of its powers to remove an alien who has  no
     right to remain, may "engage" ECHR rights where the purpose of removal
     is to prevent their exercise.  By "engagement" we mean that the  human
     rights which he has, as someone present in  the  United  Kingdom,  are
     potentially infringed and that infringement may require  justification
     if the sole reason for his proposed removal is to prevent his exercise
     of a right or as a sanction for having exercised it.

 40. But it is very different when one comes to entry.  That logic  becomes
     much more difficult to apply.  The mere fact that someone is  a  legal
     person, albeit outside the territory  of  a  member  state,  obviously
     cannot mean  that  he  enjoys  the  rights  conferred  or  obligations
     enforceable against a state by the ECHR.  The Court of Appeal does not
     suggest that the simple fact that he has made an application for entry
     clearance through attendance at or correspondence with United  Kingdom
     diplomatic premises or officials confers by itself  any  rights  under
     Article 10(1);  nor that if it did, there was  a  right  of  entry  to
     exercise them subject only to the application of the qualifications in
     the qualified Articles,  and  subject  to  no  qualifications  if  the
     Article were itself unqualified, such as Article  3.   It  would  have
     been remarkable if it had done so.  The basis of the Court of Appeal's
     decision appears to be that it is the refusal of entry clearance,  for
     the sole reason that the state wishes to prevent the exercise  of  the
     ECHR rights, which engages ECHR.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  why  the
     interference with what was not a right then creates  the  right;   but
     that appears to be the  reasoning.   And  it  is  different  from  the
     reasoning applicable to a removal case, yet the Court of Appeal  draws
     no distinction between the two.

 41. These difficulties are entirely attributable to the concession  which,
     although cast as a concession in relation to the significance  of  the
     actual presence of the individual in the country,  in  fact  resonates
     through to the very basis of the assertion  that  the  ECHR  could  be
     engaged.  It does not operate as a neat single isolated argument.   It
     led to the Court of Appeal considering the "engagement" of the ECHR as
     if Farrakhan were already present or as if it  were  a  removal  case,
     with no distinction to be drawn between those  situations  and  entry.
     Hence the impression that the Court was deciding something  which  was
     conceded.  Hence the absence of consideration of the distinction, here
     crucial, between entry and removal cases.   The two  were  treated  as
     indistinguishable because of the concession;  what  if  here  a  vital
     distinction was made irrelevant by  the  concession?   The  concession
     altered the whole basis upon which "engagement" was  considered.   The
     "territorial" issue and the basis for any right of  entry  itself  are
     not truly separable.  If there is a "territorial" issue, what  is  the
     basis for any ECHR right being involved, from the  standpoint  of  the
     alien applicant, in an application  for  entry  clearance  or  in  the
     decision on it?  If there is no "territorial issue", why  even  debate
     whether someone could assert any ECHR rights  to  advance  his  entry?
     There could be no distinction  between  being  within  and  not  being
     within the territory for these purposes.  Yet that is the  very  issue
     to which the concession was addressed.

 42. We consider that the concession then affects the  whole  reasoning  of
     the Court of Appeal, because the  concession  does  not  relate  to  a
     wholly discrete point in reality.  There is a very real difficulty  in
     separating the notion of "territoriality" from the  basis  upon  which
     someone's circumstances could engage the ECHR, and in an entry case it
     is even more difficult.  It is that which has led to the difficulty in
     some of the reasoning.  The effect of the concession was to remove the
     need to consider whether there was a distinction to be  drawn  between
     entry and removal cases in terms of whether, how and subject  to  what
     qualifications Article 10 could be considered.

 43. Accordingly, the Adjudicator did not err in  deciding  that  Farrakhan
     did not  determine  the  appeal  in  favour  of  the  Appellant.   The
     provisions of the 2002 Act are irrelevant to whether Farrakhan decided
     the issue which arises in this case.  We shall  deal  with  them  when
     considering the next issue.

Can the Appellant assert any ECHR rights?

44.   The second issue is whether the  Appellant,  who  is  not  within  the
     territory of a member state, has any Convention rights  which  he  can
     assert either through  his  application  for  entry  clearance  or  in
     consequence of the exclusion  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
     rights which would have then been breached if the  exclusion  decision
     were disproportionate.  The Appellant acknowledged that the notion  of
     the scope of the ECHR was essentially territorial and that it was only
     exceptionally that rights could be asserted outside  the  jurisdiction
     or territory of the  member  state.   He  sought  to  distinguish  two
     issues:  (1) was a decision of an Entry Clearance Officer  capable  of
     being an act within the United Kingdom's  jurisdiction  as  to  engage
     Convention rights?  (2) If so, which Convention rights could  lay  the
     foundations for an ECHR based challenge to an exclusion decision?

45.   The Appellant contended that the Adjudicator  erred  in  holding  that
     only Article 8 gave rise to a basis for an extra-territorial claim  to
     enter.  The Appellant's argument, as  it  developed  orally,  focussed
     more on the logic that if the Convention  could  apply  in  Article  8
     cases, then there were clearly exceptions in the immigration field  to
     the notion of territoriality,  and  the  task  was  to  ascertain  the
     principle which underlay the Article 8  exceptions  and  to  test  its
     applicability to other Articles.  The Article 8 cases, as the IAT  had
     itself recognised, permitted someone not in the  territory  to  assert
     that his Convention  rights  were  breached  by  a  refusal  of  entry
     clearance, where he wished to enter to  enjoy  an  established  family
     life with  someone  already  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   This
     exception, it was submitted,  recognised that the rights of the family
     member settled here would be breached if entry clearance were  refused
     to the spouse or child.

46.   There were, it was submitted, analogies to  be  drawn  between  family
     relationships which were thus protected and the relationship between a
     religious leader and his adherents in the manifestation  of  religious
     beliefs, in the freedom to receive the leader's expression of  beliefs
     and support and to impart to him their concerns  and  needs,  and  for
     those purposes to associate with him and the leader with  them.   Just
     as in the Article 8 cases, there would  have  been  a  breach  of  the
     Convention rights of those settled here if entry  clearance  had  been
     refused, so here one could extend to other  Articles  that  principled
     basis for the Article 8 exception by recognising that those with  whom
     the Appellant wished to associate, or communicate or provide religious
     inspiration to, were settled here and would be entitled to assert that
     their Convention rights were breached by his exclusion.

47.   The counter arguments for the Secretary of State stressed  the  recent
     and authoritative jurisprudence of the ECtHR itself,  identifying  the
     essentially territorial basis for the operation of the  Convention  in
     Bankovic v Belgium (2001) 11 BHRC 435.  This had  been  considered  in
     three important United Kingdom cases:  B  v  Secretary  of  State  for
     Foreign and Commonwealth  Affairs  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1344,  R  (Quark
     Fishing Ltd) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
     [2004] 3 WLR 1, and Al Skeini v Secretary of State for Defence  [2004]
     EWHC Admin 2911.  These demonstrated the limited  nature  of  the  so-
     called exceptions to the notion of "territoriality":  effective member
     state  control  over  an  area,  and  specific  acts  of  consular  or
     diplomatic officials and the like;  but not all  that  they  did  fell
     within that concept.  In R (European Roma Rights Centre) v Immigration
     Officer at Prague Airport [2004] UKHL 55, [2005] 2 WLR 1, Lord Bingham
     had expressed grave doubts at paragraph 21  as  to  whether  functions
     performed by Entry Clearance Officers abroad could possibly be said to
     be the exercise of jurisdiction over non-United Kingdom nationals.   A
     further type of exception, but in our view it may be  related  to  the
     second, is the exercise by a state of power over its nationals abroad.
      There is also the type of exception, often described as  not  a  true
     exception, seen in removal cases where the removal is in breach of the
     Convention because of the treatment which will be  meted  out  in  the
     country to which the individual will  be  returned.   These  decisions
     demonstrated that the idea that the Convention was engaged  simply  by
     the effect or impact of the acts of the state abroad,  eg  by  bombing
     people, was wrong.

48.   The Article 8 cases properly analysed  all  involved  those  who  were
     settled in the state, and the exception  was  narrowly  circumscribed.
     They refuted the notion that there was  scope  for  any  extension  by
     analogy to other Articles.  There was no true analogy  anyway  between
     family life, which needs cohabitation for it to be fully enjoyed,  and
     the free communication and association  which  is  part  of  religious
     practice but which can  be  carried  on  without  such  proximity  and
     through other means of communication.

49.   We can take the  general  principles  very  shortly.   We  accept  the
     Secretary of State's submissions which we  have  summarised  above  in
     relation to the territorial approach and the exceptions to  it.   They
     are borne out by the cases cited and we do not wish to add to what Rix
     LJ said in paragraphs 244-280 in Al Skeini, which is authoritative and
     compelling.

50.   The particular difficulty is in analysing the extent  to  which  entry
     clearance comes within the scope of the "consular exception"  at  all.
     Some reliance was placed by the Appellant on the observation  of  Lord
     Steyn in R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26, [2004]  2  AC
     323, paragraph 36, to the effect that the basis of  the  reasoning  of
     the ECtHR in Abdulaziz and Others v UK [1985] 7 EHRR 471, was an over-
     arching conclusion that in the field of  immigration,  decisions  must
     respect the rights in Article 8.  It was said that  that  showed  that
     the decision was not  exclusively  dependant  on  the  fact  that  the
     applicants to the ECtHR included the wives who were settled here.   We
     do not think that that observation bears the weight  put  on  it.   It
     reflects what the Court itself said;  the Court was  not  saying  that
     non-nationals abroad could claim entry based on the ECHR,  but  rather
     it was scotching the idea that the field of immigration,  which  might
     have been thought an area entirely outside  the  scope  of  the  ECHR,
     could never engage Convention rights.  But  it  did  not  address  the
     issue of whose rights could do  so  and  whether  they  included  non-
     nationals who were not in the territory.

51.   The question of the scope of the "consular  or  diplomatic"  exception
     was considered in both B and Al Skeini.  In B, it was assumed that the
     boys  in  the  Melbourne  Consulate  were  sufficiently   within   the
     jurisdiction, although it was an assumption which the  Court  appeared
     content to make, pointing out not the mere presence of the boys within
     the building, but also the degree of protection given to the boys  and
     reassurance as to their safety by consular staff.

52.   In Al Skeini, at paragraph 269 on, Rix LJ refers to the  exception  to
     territoriality created by the lawful presence of the  consular  agents
     and rejects an argument that it was only their  acts  in  relation  to
     nationals which could engage the ECHR.  However, it is clear that when
     in paragraph 272 he considers the consular exception he deals with  it
     in the context relevant for that case, which concerned confinement and
     physical control over an  area  within  the  jurisdiction  of  another
     state.  We derive no further assistance from those cases.

53.   We note the comment of Lord Bingham  in  the  Roma  rights  case  upon
     which Miss Carss-Frisk relied, which clearly supports an argument that
     no Entry Clearance Officer decision as it affects a  non-national  can
     bring that individual within the jurisdiction so as to enable  him  to
     assert ECHR rights.

54.   We do not find assistance in relation to  the  consular  exception  in
     any of the ECtHR Article 8 cases:  Abdulaziz above, Sen v  Netherlands
     (2003) 36 EHRR 81 or Advic v UK (25525/94).  In none was the issue  of
     territoriality considered.  Bankovic came before Sen,  but  the  Court
     was silent about the issue of territoriality.  It is likely that  this
     was because in each instance there were applicants who were settled in
     the country seeking the admission of  family  members  who  were  not.
     True it is that the  ECtHR  does  not  draw  any  obvious  distinction
     between the two categories of persons, but  it  is  of  limited  value
     therefore in seeking any  guidance  as  to  any  general  approach  to
     territoriality and the consular exception, whatever it may  say  about
     Article 8.

55.    The  Appellant  attributed  significance  in  this  context  to   the
     statutory appeal provisions, which we reject.  The  appeal  provisions
     in the 2002 Act provide in section 90(1) that a  right  of  appeal  is
     only available to someone who seeks to  enter  as  a  visitor  if  the
     application was made for the purposes of  visiting  a  member  of  the
     applicant's family.  Section 90(4) provides that subsection  (1)  does
     not prevent the bringing of an appeal on  human  rights  grounds.   It
     might be thought that that enabled an appeal to be  brought  on  human
     rights grounds  only  by  a  visitor  who  had  a  family  connection.
     Subsection (1) restricts who can appeal as a visitor,  and  subsection
     (4) limits the grounds upon which such an appellant can appeal.   That
     would mean that  this  Appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal  at  all.
     However, that was not the point taken by the Secretary of  State,  and
     we do not need to decide whether that  was  a  concession  and  if  so
     whether correctly made.  The effect of the provision is therefore, for
     the purposes of this appeal, simply to restrict the grounds of  appeal
     which a non-family visitor may deploy to those which relate  to  human
     rights.

56.   On that basis, the ground of appeal in section 84(1)(c)  is  that  the
     decision  is  incompatible  with  the  Appellant's  rights  under  the
     Convention.  But if there are no Convention  rights  available,  there
     are none which can be asserted.   The enactment of section 90 may have
     involved an understandable uncertainty as to the  ability  of  a  non-
     national abroad to rely on the ECHR,  and  Parliament  preserved  that
     right insofar as it existed.  It did not create a right which did  not
     otherwise exist under the Convention as its language makes clear.  The
     existence of the right cannot be advanced by the  provision;   it  can
     merely be protected if it exists.   At  best,  it  could  evidence  an
     erroneous Parliamentary assumption, if  we  are  right,  as  we  later
     conclude, as to the extent to which an application for entry clearance
     (necessarily by a non-national) can engage the ECHR.  If those  rights
     had existed, then any interpretation of the Act which  excluded  those
     rights would have been incompatible with the ECHR and  it  would  have
     had to be read down so as to make it compatible.   But  none  of  that
     advances the notion that the provisions themselves provide  an  answer
     here.  Nor have we seen anything which suggests that the HRA 1998  was
     intended to create, and certainly the 2002 Act was not intended to  do
     so, rights which were more extensive territorially than those  created
     within the confines of the ECHR and  Article  1.   Such  a  suggestion
     would be contrary to section 84(1)(c) anyway, and to  the  authorities
     on the continuing effect of the unscheduled Article 1 ECHR.

57.   The IAT considered the issue of  the  existence  of  the  ECHR  rights
     available in making entry clearance applications in H (Somalia) [2004]
     UKIAT 00027, a case decided after Bankovic but before the more  recent
     domestic cases.  It related to the 1999 Act.  The  issue  was  whether
     Somali nationals could rely on Article 8 to challenge the decision  of
     the Entry Clearance Officer who had refused entry clearance within the
     Rules for them to join a relative settled in the United Kingdom.   The
     IAT took the view  that,  subject  to  any  particular  considerations
     arising out of Article 8 cases  decided  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
     ECtHR, an application for entry clearance did not give  rise  to  ECHR
     rights for the non-national.  The acts of the Entry Clearance  Officer
     were not sufficient to bring the applicant  within  the  jurisdiction.
     We said:

           "35.  The starting point, in our view, is  the  judgment  of  the
                Court of Appeal in R (Ullah) v A Special Adjudicator [2002[
                EWCA Civ 1856, [2003]  INLR  74.   This  pointed  out  that
                Article 1 ECHR imposed the same limitation on section 6  of
                the 1998 Act that it did on the operation of the Convention
                itself.  The question in that case, as in this,  is  as  to
                the limit which the words "within the  jurisdiction"  place
                on the operation of the ECHR and section 6.


           36.   Second, we accept that there  are  circumstances  in  which
                decisions and actions of diplomats, consular  officers  and
                Entry Clearance Officers can be acts of the Parties "within
                the jurisdiction".  This is borne out by Abbasi v Secretary
                of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs  [2002]  EWCA
                Civ 1598  at  paragraphs  74-76.   It  is  acknowledged  in
                Bankovic,  but  that  case   emphasised   the   restrictive
                territorial basis of the ECHR.


            37. However, third, we do not accept that this means  that  the
                activities  of  diplomatic  and  consular   agents   always
                constitute the exercise of powers within  the  jurisdiction
                for the purposes of ECHR Article 1.  Such an approach would
                extend to non-nationals with no right of entry, a series of
                rights upon which to base applications for entry  clearance
                simply by virtue  of  the  fact  that  an  Entry  Clearance
                Officer had to consider them and that a right of appeal lay
                against a refusal.  It would create a right of entry  based
                on Article 3, which would include persecution  for  a  non-
                Geneva Convention reason;  it  could  encompass  Article  8
                where there was no family in the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
                basis that family life could not be enjoyed in the  country
                of origin because  of  its  domestic  laws  on  divorce  or
                marriage or adoption.


            38. This would be a remarkable extension of the  scope  of  the
                ECHR, particularly as it  seems  that  the  Convention  was
                unlikely initially to have  been  intended  to  affect  the
                right of a State to control the entry and residence of non-
                nationals.  It has only come to do so in stages and  to  an
                uncertain degree as  Ullah  shows.   As  Lord  Phillips  MR
                pointed out in Ullah, at paragraph 24, the Strasbourg Court
                has repeatedly emphasised that Contracting States have  the
                right to control the  entry,  residence  and  expulsion  of
                aliens, subject to their Convention obligations.  It is the
                extent  of  those  which  is  far  from  clear,  as   Ullah
                illustrates.  But it would take  clear  authority  to  show
                that the mere fact of an application  for  entry  clearance
                and a subsequent appeal required the Parties to secure  all
                the Convention rights to those who applied  and  to  permit
                their entry for that purpose.  It  would  stand  in  marked
                contrast to the position under the Geneva Convention  where
                would-be  refugees  who  are  still  in  their  country  of
                nationality  cannot  claim  the  benefit  of   the   Geneva
                Convention and  have  no  right  in  international  law  to
                receive asylum or to access a country for  the  purpose  of
                making a claim;  European Roma Rights Centre v  Immigration
                Officer at Prague Airport and SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  666,
                [2003] INLR 374.


            39. Fourth, we do not accept the submission that the obligation
                on the Entry Clearance Officer under  paragraph  2  of  the
                Immigration Rules to carry out his duties, in  relation  to
                those seeking to enter the United  Kingdom,  in  compliance
                with the Human Rights  Act,  together  with  the  right  of
                appeal against the acts of  public  authorities,  including
                Entry Clearance Officers, on the ground that a decision  in
                relation to a person's "entitlement to enter or  remain  in
                the United Kingdom" was in  breach  of  his  human  rights,
                shows that the rights which  they  might  have  under  that
                Convention or Act are as extensive as the simple submission
                that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer brings the
                appellant within the jurisdiction would suggest.


            40. These  are  provisions  which  provide  a  jurisdiction  in
                relation to human rights without dealing with what  rights,
                if any, are to be secured to those seeking  entry  as  non-
                nationals and doing so outside the scope of  any  Rules  or
                policy-based discretion.  The duty and jurisdiction  exists
                in relation to whatever rights they may have in  the  light
                of their absence from the territory of the  United  Kingdom
                and the nature of what they seek.  For the reasons which we
                have given, those rights cannot  sensibly  be  regarded  as
                encompassing all the Convention rights which are  available
                to  those  within  the  territory.   The  same  applies  in
                relation to section 6 of the Human Rights Act:  it does not
                help in determining what those rights may be, in this  type
                of case.  It can be said that those provisions  evidence  a
                Parliamentary assumption that  those  seeking  entry  would
                have some rights which would engage the  ECHR,  but  unless
                the improbable assumption was made that  they  enjoyed  all
                the Convention rights, those  provisions  evidence  only  a
                lesser and more uncertain assumption as to those rights, an
                assumption which may or may not be right.  It would be very
                surprising if,  by  the  language  chosen,  Parliament  had
                intended to confer on any who might make an application for
                entry clearance, a right to enter to avoid treatment  which
                breached Article 3, where no such right  exists  under  the
                Geneva Convention."


58.   No submissions have been addressed to us which persuade us  that  that
     general approach is wrong.  Indeed, we would regard it  as  reinforced
     by the observations of Lord Bingham in  the  Roma  Rights  case.   The
     increasing  emphasis  in  the  domestic  cases  on   the   essentially
     territorial nature of the Convention would also support it.   None  of
     them directly address the scope of the "consular exception",  although
     it could cover the acts of the diplomatic agents  towards  those  over
     whom they had some physical control and towards whom they had accepted
     some responsibility as in B.  It seems  to  us  to  be  impossible  to
     contend that the exercise of every consular function engages the  ECHR
     for the person who has come into contact with a consular official.

59.   There may be distinctions to be drawn in areas  of  consular  function
     or activities, other than  immigration,  between  nationals  and  non-
     nationals, because of the degree of effective  power  or  jurisdiction
     which the state may claim over its nationals abroad.  The marriage  of
     nationals in a Consulate and the provision of  identity  documents  or
     entry papers to nationals, might engage the ECHR;   the  detention  of
     non-nationals in the Consulate or their deception  for  various  state
     purposes, e.g. to procure their departure from a  foreign  country  to
     the UK, might also engage the ECHR, even though the simple refusal  of
     entry to them would not do so.  It is unnecessary for us to   do  more
     than recognise the possibility of such a source for the entitlement to
     ECHR rights.  But even if the "consular exception" were to extend that
     far, it could not extend so far  as  the  ordinary  work  of  the  ECO
     considering applications to enter from non-nationals.

60.   Although it would be wrong  to  treat  the  field  of  immigration  as
     inevitably and always falling outside the ECHR, the extension  of  the
     ECHR to everyone who merely sought entry clearance would be to  reject
     the territorial foundation of the Convention.  It  would  require  the
     application of the most extensive version of  the  discredited  impact
     theory.  Put at its most brutal, it would be absurd for  the  ECHR  to
     treat the bombing of civilians abroad as outside the  Convention,  yet
     their applications for entry clearance, to avoid the breach of Article
     3 which that bombing involved, as within it.

61.   We do not regard Farrakhan as useful  in  answering  the  question  of
     whether any ECHR rights can be invoked by those who seek to  enter  so
     as to exercise,  with  those  already  here,  rights  of  association,
     communication and manifestation of  religious  beliefs.   As  we  have
     concluded, it does not address  the  issue  in  question  but  instead
     assumes the answer.  That  means  that  it  cannot  be  of  persuasive
     authority either.

62.   Were it not for the Article 8 cases in the ECtHR and in the  Court  of
     Appeal, we  would  regard  it  as  unarguable  but  that  neither  the
     application for entry  clearance  nor  the  exclusion  decision  could
     engage the ECHR for the benefit of the Appellant.  He is  not  "within
     the jurisdiction".  It is those cases, however, which give  pause  for
     thought.  Their reasoning does not really  address the  crucial  issue
     of whether the application to  or  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer could engage any rights for an applicant under the  ECHR.   It
     is essentially either an inference which can be drawn from them, or an
     assumption in them, that the decisions of an Entry Clearance  Officer,
     in respect of a non-national abroad, could engage the ECHR.   It  does
     not matter for these purposes that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
     abroad and the exclusion decision was taken by the Secretary of  State
     here;  it is the location of the individual applicant which matters.

63.   In R (Mahmood) v SSHD [2001] 1 WLR 840 at paragraph 65, the Master  of
     the Rolls said that if the applicant applied  for  settlement  as  the
     spouse of a person settled in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  application
     would be considered having regard to  his  Article  8  rights.   In  R
     (Ekinci) v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 765, Simon Brown  LJ  made  a  similar
     point, reflecting the position taken by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
     relation to the removal of someone enjoying family life in the  United
     Kingdom:  his application  for  entry  clearance  and  any  subsequent
     appeal  under  sections  59  and  65  would   give   the   Adjudicator
     jurisdiction to consider the appellant's human rights.  Those are  the
     predecessor provisions in the 1999 Act to sections 82 and  84  of  the
     2002 Act.  Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 [2003] INLR 170  was  to
     the like effect.

64.   In Sen v Netherlands [2003] 26 EHRR 7, the ECtHR referred  to  various
     criteria which established the extent of  the  state's  obligation  to
     admit to its territory, the relatives of settled immigrants.  In  that
     case, the three applicants consisted of the two  Turkish  parents  now
     legally settled in the Netherlands, and their eldest child, nine years
     old, who had been born in Turkey but left behind by them  aged  three.
     The outcome is immaterial for these purposes.

65.   In Ahmut v Netherlands [1996] 24 EHRR 62,  the  ECtHR,  again  without
     drawing a distinction between the  rights  of  the  sponsor,  who  was
     present in the Netherlands, and the son, who was in Morocco, looked at
     the family relationship as a whole rather than distinguishing  between
     those within and those outside the parties' territory.

66.   In Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v  UK  [1985]  7  EHRR  471,  the
     Applicants were established in the jurisdiction so the issue  did  not
     really arise.  The broader comment  to  the  effect  that  immigration
     control could not lead to the authorative disapplication of  ECHR  was
     not addressing  that issue but the broader contention that ECHR had no
     application to immigration decisions at all.

67.   We considered how the territorial ambit  of  the  Convention  and  the
     role of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  those  decisions  could  be
     reconciled in H (Somalia). In H, we concluded  that  the  position  on
     Article 8 and entry clearance was this:

           "42.  It seems to us that the answer to the existence of Article
                 8 rights for those outside the  United  Kingdom  is  to  be
                 found in the way in which the jurisprudence  of  the  ECtHR
                 has developed over time in relation  to  various  areas  of
                 human experience, here the  entry  of  non-nationals  to  a
                 country.  It is not always possible to trace a  clear  line
                 of reasoning from Article 1 through the  various  decisions
                 which that Court has reached so as  deduce  the  principles
                 which apply.  The decisions are not always  consistent  nor
                 do they deal with some  of  the  problems  which  might  be
                 thought to stand in the way of the result  reached.   Ullah
                 illustrates the  problems  of  some  of  the  reasoning  in
                 Soering v United Kingdom [1989] 11 HRR 439, and  then  with
                 the basis upon which Chahal v United Kingdom [1997] 23 EHRR
                 413 was said to be consistent with  it.   Similar  problems
                 arise in respect of the  ECtHR  approach  to  entry  cases.
                 But, rather than hunting for a clear line of  reasoning  or
                 principle which deals with the effect of Article 1, a  line
                 which seems unlikely to exist, the better solution  is  the
                 more pragmatic one of looking to see what has been  decided
                 by  that  Court  and  domestically  in  relation  to   this
                 particular area.


           43.   The issue was discussed in Ullah in  paragraphs  41-47  as
                 part of the more  general  discussion  of  Article  8.   In
                 particular, the Court was of the belief which we regard  as
                 well-founded, that Article 8 has  been  invoked,  but  only
                 successfully in an immigration case, including  refusal  of
                 entry, where that "has impacted on the enjoyment of  family
                 life of those already established within the jurisdiction".
                  The Court referred to its review of the cases in  Mahmood.
                 It noted that the basis of the ECtHR decision in Abdulaziz,
                 Cabales and Balkandali v United Kingdom [1985] 7  EHRR  471
                 was  that  the  applicants  were  established  within   the
                 jurisdiction and complained that they were  being  deprived
                 of the company of their husbands who were  not  within  the
                 jurisdiction;  the right of  the  State  to  control  entry
                 acted as a free-standing restriction on  Article  8  rather
                 than being a legitimate aim  within  Article  8(2).   Later
                 ECtHR cases, such as Bensaid v  United  Kingdom  [2001]  33
                 EHRR 10, [2001] INLR  325,  treat  immigration  control  as
                 falling within that qualification.  It appears to have been
                 assumed or decided in both Kugathas and  Ekinci,  that  the
                 effective trigger for the existence of  Article  8  rights,
                 enforceable against the United Kingdom by non-nationals who
                 are outside it, is the existence of family life with  those
                 who are established in the United Kingdom.


           44.   We have already referred to Sen v Netherlands and Ahmut  v
                 Netherlands, both of which are  consistent  with  what  the
                 Court of Appeal said in Ullah about the need for the family
                 relationship, of those relying on Article 8 as a basis  for
                 entry, to be with someone who was established in the United
                 Kingdom in order for them  to  have  Article  8  rights  in
                 respect of family life which are  enforceable  against  the
                 State with which they are seeking entry.


           45.    Accordingly,  we  consider,  on  the   basis   of   ECtHR
                 jurisprudence and Ullah, that the existence of family  life
                 with someone who  is  established  in  the  United  Kingdom
                 provides the basis for the existence of Article  8  rights,
                 enforceable against the United Kingdom and is the basis for
                 the examination of whether that life is interfered with  or
                 shown a lack of respect.  This  may  reflect  a  developing
                 ECtHR jurisprudence from the position in  Abdulaziz.   Such
                 an approach would reflect what the Court  of  Appeal  seems
                 consistently to regard as  the  position.   (We  have  some
                 reservations  about  the  basis  upon  which  Ms   Hanrahan
                 conceded the point because the short comment in Mahmood may
                 have been overtaken by the  greater  consideration  of  the
                 issue  of  jurisdiction  in  Ullah.)   It  does,   however,
                 represent an ad hoc extension of the Convention, but it  is
                 not as wide as that which would arise from full  acceptance
                 of the appellant's submissions.  But  it  also  makes  some
                 sense of the jurisdictional provisions  in  the  1998  Act,
                 with the  Parliamentary  assumption  seen  as  having  some
                 basis."

68.   It is not necessary  to  examine  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal
     whether that remains good law or whether in the light of Al Skeini, B,
     and the observations of Lord Bingham  in  the  Roma  rights  case,  it
     should be revisited.  Neither party sought  to  suggest  that  it  was
     wrong.  We would only say  that  the  difficulties  which  we  had  in
     finding a rational basis for the  earlier  decisions,  and  one  which
     grappled with the basis upon which a non-national could rely  upon  an
     application  for  entry  clearance  as  giving  a  right   under   the
     Convention, have not eased.  We entertain very considerable doubts  as
     to whether it is now correct to  say  that  any  ECHR  rights  can  be
     invoked by those who are non-nationals abroad  seeking  to  enter  the
     country.  The better view may well be that the rights to  be  asserted
     are those of the persons  settled  here  who  should  assert  them  by
     Judicial Review, as victims of the immigration decision.  It is  their
     right to family life which is engaged and falls to be  considered  but
     it cannot be done through the mechanisms of a  statutory  appeal.   We
     shall assume, however, for the purposes of this appeal, that  what  we
     said in H (Somalia) remains good law, and accordingly, we examine  the
     Appellant's position on that basis.  We reject the  analogy  which  Mr
     Pannick sought to draw  between  the  rights  to  family  life  within
     Article 8 and the rights which the Appellant  seeks  to  invoke  here,
     important though they are.  The essence of family life, which makes it
     possible that the ECHR extends to some non-nationals  outside  of  the
     territorial jurisdiction who seek respect for their family  life  with
     someone settled here, is the need for physical proximity between those
     persons.  This would cover the normal  relationships  between  husband
     and wife, parent and child and closely allied relationships.   We  did
     not conclude that Article 8 in this extended form covered all  aspects
     of personal and private life, or necessarily all  those  relationships
     which  could  come  within  the  notion  of  family  life  within  the
     Convention.  It  covers  the  basic  components  of  family  life,  of
     personal relationships which require a physical proximity in order for
     them to be enjoyed in any real sense.   We  emphasise  that,  in  this
     extended form, we were examining the issue from the standpoint of  the
     non-national out of country, rather than from the  standpoint  of  the
     family member settled  here.   Our  comments  do  not  bear  upon  the
     position of the latter were they to assert rights as in Abdulaziz.

69.    Those  Article  8  rights  bear  but  limited  comparison  with   the
     Convention rights involved here in terms  of  the  need  for  physical
     presence in the same place as others in order for them to be  enjoyed.
     Viewed from the standpoint of the non-national seeking entry,  whether
     as leader or follower, physical proximity may bring advantages in  the
     manifestation  of  religious  beliefs,  and   in   communication   and
     association but is not of its very essence.  The right to family  life
     is not a right of association.  Indeed, the Roma rights case  suggests
     that even if someone were persecuted for the  manifestation  of  their
     beliefs, they would not have a right of entry.

70.   From the standpoint of those settled here, these other rights  may  be
     greatly enhanced by the presence  and  words  of  a  spiritual  leader
     speaking  directly  to  a  gathering  of  his   followers.    Personal
     communication may be very important to  the  expression  of  religious
     beliefs;  there  are  rights  to  associate  which  his  presence  may
     enhance.  But there are other means of communication which  have  been
     developed over  time  from  the  letter  to  the  recording  and  live
     telephonic communication which may provide a  second  best  but  still
     enable some of the functions of religious life with a spiritual leader
     to be carried out.  Travel by the followers for the purpose of meeting
     the leader may well be possible, for it is not necessarily  the  case,
     and it is not here, that the followers wish to live with the leader or
     he with them in the United Kingdom.  It is a visit which  is  desired.
     We do not regard these considerations as comparable in  terms  of  the
     need for personal proximity to the closer family relationships without
     which the family unit and the very basis of an  individual's  personal
     and private life would perish.  There is a real difference  in  degree
     which goes to the fundamental basis of the exercise of the  rights  at
     issue in either instance.

71.   Just as the Soering case illustrates that the values  associated  with
     Article 3 permitted some form of extension to  the  operation  of  the
     Convention to protect those very basic rights, so  the  protection  of
     the basic family life rights of someone who can only enjoy  them  with
     someone who is settled here, may warrant an extension to the  ordinary
     operation of the Convention in respect of  non-nationals  abroad.   We
     would not see the rights invoked in this case as comparable  in  their
     demands upon the member state for the grant  of  entry  clearance,  to
     those invoked in the closer family relationships.

72.   We also accept that an essential feature of the  Article  8  cases  is
     the existence in the United Kingdom of someone whose rights  would  be
     breached if entry clearance were not granted  to  the  applicant.   We
     would accept that that enables some comparison to be drawn between the
     spouses, fiancs and parents in the Article 8  cases  and  the  fellow
     members of the Unification Church in the United Kingdom.   It  may  be
     that their rights under Articles 9, 10 and 11 would be breached by the
     exclusion of the Appellant, but that is not  how  the  case  has  been
     evidenced or essentially argued.  We take the view that that essential
     feature of the Article 8 cases is not the defining characteristic of a
     principled allowance of the availability of the Convention  rights  to
     those who would not normally have them.  It is simply that that is  an
     essential feature of that  very  particular  and  pragmatic  exception
     which is designed to meet a very particular problem.

73.   It would not be right to create enlarged areas  of  exception  on  the
     basis of the Article 8 cases;  rather  than  being  the  source  of  a
     principled extension to the normal territorial reach of the ECHR,  the
     principles of which can be ascertained and  applied  to  other  cases,
     those cases are an exception and should remain so.  The  jurisprudence
     of the ECtHR is pragmatic rather than always principled.  If there  is
     a principle to be established, the more obvious one is that  the  ECHR
     cannot be invoked by someone who is  not  in  the  normal  territorial
     jurisdiction so as to obtain entry.  It is the Article 8  cases  which
     are exceptional, to the extent that they suggest otherwise,  and  they
     should not be more generally applied.  The better  view  may  even  be
     that they are wrong in so far as they suggest that the application  to
     the Entry Clearance Officer engages the ECHR for the  benefit  of  the
     applicant.

74.   Of course, if the true basis of the Article 8 cases is only  that  the
     refusal of entry clearance is a breach of the human rights of  someone
     who is settled here, as in our view it ought to be, the proper way  to
     enforce that right is through judicial review of the decision  by  the
     victim spouse in this country.  That would focus the judicial decision
     on the substantive rights of the victim and not on the perhaps sterile
     debate here about whether someone is within  the  jurisdiction.   That
     problem only arises because of the differences between  the  statutory
     appeal which focuses on the Appellant, and judicial review which would
     look at the rights of others affected by the decision.

75.   The contention that it is the breach of the rights  of  those  settled
     here which permits an applicant for entry clearance  to  contend  that
     his Article 8 rights have been breached and that that principle should
     extend by analogy to Article 10 cases where refusal of entry clearance
     would breach the rights of those within the jurisdiction  or  who  are
     settled here, contains the seeds of its own destruction.  If  that  is
     the underlying principle, then its vindication lies  in  their  taking
     action by Judicial Review in respect of the decision which engages  or
     breaches their rights in this country.  And if  they  cannot  succeed,
     the principle does not apply.  The ECHR is thus  applicable  in  entry
     cases, but its territorial limits are respected.

76.   For the same reason, if the basis of the claim to enter is  also  that
     the Appellant's rights are engaged because his exclusion breaches  the
     rights of his followers here, the remedy is not a further extension or
     exception to the territorial limits of the Convention, but  for  those
     who say that his exclusion breaches their  rights  to  bring  Judicial
     Review proceedings.  This reflects Lord Steyn's comment in Ullah  that
     human rights are engaged in the field  of  immigration  and  does  not
     confine its engagement to removal cases.

77.   It may be that the  distinction  between  someone  who  comes  without
     entry clearance and claims that removal would breach his rights  under
     Articles 9, 10 or 11 in this country, and someone  who  stays  outside
     the country but seeks entry clearance and cannot  rely  on  the  ECHR,
     would appear to encourage the arrival without entry clearance of those
     whose cases may benefit from the application of the ECHR.  But it is a
     real distinction nonetheless and it is one which  has  some  value  in
     immigration control.

78.   Accordingly, we  reject  the  claim  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
     failing to hold that the Appellant had a right to enter or had  rights
     which were capable of being infringed.  The appeal will  therefore  be
     dismissed.


If ECHR rights were engaged, did  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  breach
them?


79.   The third issue is whether the Secretary of State would have  breached
     the Appellant's rights in excluding him, if he had been found to  have
     rights under the ECHR.  We were asked by the Appellant  to  deal  with
     that issue in the event that we were against him on the  prior  issues
     and we are prepared to do so.  Before doing so, we should set out what
     we assume to be the basis for a claim that  he  had  rights  which  he
     could invoke.

80.   The very difficulty of ascertaining the  mechanism  whereby  the  ECHR
     rights became engaged reinforces our views on  the  second  issue,  as
     does the  difficulty  of  ascertaining  how  those  rights  should  be
     approached.  Is the Appellant  to be treated as  having  a  Convention
     right engaged merely by his desire and application to  enter,  casting
     the burden on the Secretary of State to justify exclusion?  That would
     be very broad.  Does he acquire such a right if the purposes of  entry
     are to exercise what would be Convention rights were  he  here,  again
     casting the burden on the Secretary of State to justify excluding him?
      Again that would be a very broad  basis  for  entry.   Is  he  to  be
     treated as only acquiring Convention rights if exclusion is solely  in
     order to prevent  him  exercising  Convention  rights  in  the  United
     Kingdom?  This would echo Farrakhan.  Is the degree  of  interference,
     and hence of justification, to  be  measured  by  the  effect  on  his
     manifestation of religious  beliefs  resulting  from  exclusion,  even
     though there is no  interference  at  all  in  the  way  in  which  he
     practices his religion in the USA, or  communicates  with  the  United
     Kingdom?

81.   It would be illogical to say that it is the exclusion decision,  taken
     in order to prevent the exercise of Convention rights,  which  engages
     Convention rights and that he had no rights until he was told that  he
     could not enter. The Secretary of State must be  assumed  to  have  to
     consider the application on the basis that the right has been  engaged
     already.  We therefore assume that the Appellant had Convention rights
     because he wished to enter for the purposes of exercising here  rights
     under Articles 9, 10 and 11.   We think that it can only be the making
     of an application for entry  clearance  in  order  to  exercise  those
     rights which could engage the rights.  The degree of interference with
     them is to be judged by the impact on the way in which  the  Appellant
     is affected in the exercise of those rights vis--vis his followers in
     the United Kingdom, ie by the difference  which  a  physical  presence
     makes to his rights.  His followers' rights, if any, are not  directly
     relevant on statutory appeal.

82.   The Adjudicator set out the background to the decision of 8 May  2003,
     notified by letter of 15 May 2003 in which the Secretary of State says
     that he personally directs that  the  Appellant  be  excluded  on  the
     grounds that his presence here would not be conducive  to  the  public
     good "for reasons of public order".  There were no supporting  reasons
     at that stage.

83.   He referred to the subsequent letter of  28  November  2003  from  the
     Secretary of State which  sets  out  the  reasons  and  to  a  Witness
     Statement from the Secretary of State  which  elaborated  the  earlier
     representations in the light of the later materials,  the  Adjudicator
     concluded in paragraph 52:

           "I find that the Secretary of State,  over  a  period  of  time,
           moved from the public order reason, as set out  in  the  "minded
           letter" of 12 April 2001 (book 1,  page  35)  where  he  clearly
           stated that the basis of the presence  in  the  country  of  the
           Reverend Moon was not conducive to the public good  for  reasons
           of public order, to public interest.  I find that the  appellant
           was fully aware of the substance of the reasons for refusing him
           entry and the public order ground was a label, not the substance
           of the decision.  It was made clear to the  appellant  that  the
           Secretary of State had broader concerns as set out in the letter
           of 12 December 2001 (book 1, page 63), for example."

84.   The public order ground, away from which the Secretary  of  State  had
     moved, was to the effect that those who had been  harmed  by  or  were
     opposed to the past activities of the Unification Church might  create
     disorder at meetings which the Appellant attended.  He had moved to  a
     more general point about the problems which the revitalisation of  the
     Church and a return to its former contentious recruiting and retention
     methods might create.  ("Church" appears to be the normal  appellation
     for the Movement's activities in the United Kingdom.)

85.   The Adjudicator then examined the basis of the  decision  to  exclude,
     setting out the evidence and representations which  the  Secretary  of
     State had received and concluded in paragraph 62:

           "I find that when the Secretary of State  considers  whether  to
           exclude a person on grounds of public good the exercise  is  not
           one of deciding on the balance of probabilities whether  or  not
           someone will act contrary to the public good, but rather one  of
           risk assessment.  I find that the Secretary of State should take
           into account the experiences of people who  have  been  directly
           involved with the Unification Church together with the views  of
           their families.  I find it was reasonable for the  Secretary  of
           State to prefer those concerns outlined by FAIR and CIC and to a
           very limited extent  supported  by  Professor  Barker  when  the
           Secretary of State reached his decision."

86.   The Adjudicator then addressed the factors identified in Farrakhan  as
     relevant to the width of the margin of discretion to be accorded to  a
     decision of the Secretary of State taken personally in a case such  as
     this.  He accorded to the Secretary  of  State  a  "particularly  wide
     margin" which the Secretary of State had not  exceeded.   He  was  not
     motivated by a desire to prevent the  Appellant  from  expressing  his
     views.  He was entitled to approach matters on a precautionary  basis,
     and to act on his evaluation of risk. It  was  not  a  decision  taken
     lightly, and he was far better  placed  than  the  Court  to  reach  a
     decision as to the likely consequences of admitting the  Appellant  to
     the country.  He was accountable to Parliament for his decision.

87.   The Adjudicator thought that great weight should be given to the  very
     limited extent to which the Appellant's right to freedom of expression
     would be restricted.  He said:

           "The reality in this case is that the  Reverend  Moon  is  being
           denied the opportunity of coming to the United Kingdom, but  not
           to express his views and his religion.  There is no  restriction
           placed on the Unification Church in the United Kingdom or of him
           communicating with anybody in the United  Kingdom.   Freedom  of
           expression extends to receiving as well as imparting views.  The
           Reverend Moon will not be able to  meet  his  followers  in  the
           United Kingdom face to face.  There is  no  prohibition  on  his
           followers in the United Kingdom to go to the  United  States  of
           America and meet him there personally.  However, with the modern
           technology of live video-linking he will be able to  communicate
           effectively with his followers in the United Kingdom."

88.   It was not the Appellant's intention to  come  to  proselytise  or  to
     hold open meetings to which the public would be invited, so  his  aims
     could be met by live video-link.

89.   We now turn to the material  which  underlay  those  conclusions.   We
     start with the letter of 28 November 2003 which says that its  purpose
     is "to set out in full the reasons for  the  ...  exclusion".   It  is
     short and important.  It says:

           "The Home Secretary  decided  to  exclude  Revd  Moon  primarily
           because of the methods used by the Unification Church to recruit
           new members and the  adverse  impact  that  recruitment  has  on
           members  and  their  families.  As  founder  and  Head  of   the
           Unification Church, the Reverend Moon must  take  responsibility
           for these methods.  The Family Action Information  and  Resource
           (FAIR) states that people are subjected to intensive  persuasion
           and that after one week it becomes very difficult to  leave  the
           organisation.  FAIR also reports that  members  are  discouraged
           from contacting their families.  The Cult Information Centre has
           received numerous complaints from individuals and family members
           about the methods used by the  Unification  Church,  and  INFORM
           (Inform Network Focus on Religious Movements)  states  that  the
           Unification Church has caused considerable suffering to  British
           Citizens in the past.


           The Secretary of State considers that the Reverend Moon and  the
           Unification Church are synonymous, and that  the  Reverend  Moon
           directs the Unification Church as he would private  assets.   He
           appears to use Church members as unpaid, or  very  poorly  paid,
           workers, and uses members' assets, donated to the Church,  as  a
           source of Church income.  This appears to  have  happened  to  a
           considerable degree in The Unification Church's current projects
           in Brazil, for example,  where  numbers  of  Unification  Church
           members, who are paid very little, have been involved in setting
           up large Church estates.  The Secretary of  State  is  concerned
           that a visit by the Reverend Moon to the UK could result in  the
           recruitment of  further  British  Citizens  to  the  Unification
           Church, who would then be exploited in this manner.


           The Secretary of State is aware that the current  membership  of
           the Unification Church in the United Kingdom is small, and  that
           some of the methods of recruitment which gave  rise  to  concern
           are no  longer  used.   He  is  aware,  for  example,  that  the
           organisation in the United Kingdom no longer discourages members
           from contact with their families.  However, he also noted that a
           visit by Revd Moon could re-vitalise  the  organisation  in  the
           United Kingdom and  prompt  a  return  to  previous  methods  of
           recruitment and retention.  The Secretary of State believes that
           the exclusion of the Reverend Moon is necessary  in  the  public
           interest not only because of the possibility that  his  presence
           here could re-vitalise  the  Church,  but  because  of  his  own
           character and conduct as head of the Unification Church."


90.   It provoked a considerable response by the Appellant's  solicitor  who
     sought particulars of some  of  the  allegations,  of  the  underlying
     evidence and complained that the basis of  the  decision  had  changed
     from the  original  indication  that  it  was  concerned  with  public
     disorder.  The Secretary of State, in a letter  of  9  February  2004,
     accepted that it was not the Secretary of State's  position  that  the
     presence of the Appellant would lead to public disorder.

91.   The Witness Statement on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  from  Mr
     Troake, made no direct reference, any more than did the earlier letter
     of 28 September 2003, to the ECHR.  It  said  that  the  Secretary  of
     State had drawn particularly on the representations of CIC  and  FAIR,
     which he then summarised.  CIC had received numerous  complains  about
     the  Unification  Church  from  families  and  others  and  that   the
     recruitment methods continued to have an  adverse  impact.   FAIR  was
     established to help families who were  in  distress  as  a  result  of
     "losing" their children to the Church, after recruitment by  intensive
     mind-numbing persuasion, and discouragement from contacting  families.
     FAIR had said that the visit of the Appellant would cause distress  to
     its members, and increase the risk of the vulnerable being recruited.

92.   Mr Troake then said  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  taken  into
     account the Appellant's conviction in the USA in 1980 for tax  evasion
     for which he had served eleven months of an  eighteen-month  sentence.
     Paragraph 16 said:

           "Having taken account of all of these materials the Secretary of
           State formed the impression that the presence  of  the  Reverend
           Moon in the United Kingdom would lead to a real  risk  that  the
           Unification Church could be re-vitalised as a result  and  could
           involve the  use  of  undesirable  methods  of  recruitment  and
           retention.  The Secretary of State believed  and  believes  that
           the was entitled  to  approach  this  risk  on  a  precautionary
           basis."

93.   The letter of 28 November 2003 was described as an "accurate  summary"
     of the Secretary of State's reasons.   Previously,  it  had  been  the
     reasons "in full".

94.   The Appellant took issue with much of the material through  a  Witness
     Statement from Mr Read, the UK President of the umbrella body  through
     which the Unification Movement in  the  United  Kingdom  conducts  its
     activities, and from Dr B Wilson of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford,  an
     expert of great experience in the sociology  of  religion  and  cults.
     The latter dealt with many of the concerns about the  recruitment  and
     retention  methods  of  the  Unification  Church,  the  splitting   of
     families, the way in which members were or were not exploited for  the
     benefit of the Church or of the Appellant personally, and the  quality
     of the evidence provided to the Secretary of  State  by  those  groups
     opposed to the presence  here  of  the  Appellant,  notably  the  Cult
     Information Centre, or CIC, and  the  Family  Action  Information  and
     Resource, or FAIR.

95.   As the way in which  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  evolved  or
     changed formed a significant part of the challenge to his decision, we
     set out the concerns which he expressed.  In the  letter  of  15  June
     2001 from the  Secretary  of  State  seeking  representations  on  the
     Appellant's potential exclusion, of which the purpose was to  let  the
     Appellant know the issues upon which he had to focus as  a  result  of
     the unfairness found in  the  previous  decision-making  process,  the
     Secretary of State said:

           "It is established practice that, in certain circumstances,  the
           fact that an individual's presence in the United  Kingdom  would
           cause offence to the public may provide a basis for  a  decision
           to exclude.  The starting point in such  cases  is  whether  the
           views expressed by an individual are sufficiently  offensive  to
           groups resident in the United Kingdom.  If exclusion  is  to  be
           justified there should also normally be an  accompanying  threat
           to public order or reason to suspect that a criminal offence may
           be committed.  This would include the  possibility  of  offences
           being committed under the Public Order Act 1986.


           There are many people  and  organisations,  some  of  whom  have
           already made representations to  the  Secretary  of  State,  who
           would be vehemently opposed to the Reverend  Moon  entering  the
           United Kingdom.  This has led the Secretary of State to  believe
           that there could be considerable disruption, public protest  and
           possibly violent affray  should  the  Reverend  Moon  appear  in
           public or  congregate  with  his  followers  within  the  United
           Kingdom."

96.   The stance of the Secretary of  State  was  clearly  understood  as  a
     public disorder concern by Professor E Barker of the LSE, a  sociology
     professor with an especial expertise in the sociology of religion  and
     cults, who was consulted by the Secretary of State.  She dismissed the
     risk to public order in short form but was focussing on  the  reaction
     of those who might attend for  enlightenment  and  inspiration  rather
     than out of opposition, which was the Secretary of State's point.   It
     was also clearly  understood  in  that  way  by  the  Appellant  whose
     solicitor addressed the matter and  sought  further  detail  in  order
     better to respond.

97.   It was expanded on by the  Secretary  of  State  in  a  letter  of  19
     October 2003.  It was clear that the reaction feared was not  that  of
     supporters of the Appellant but of those hostile to him.   This  might
     be  occasioned  by  inflammatory  remarks  by  the  Appellant  or  his
     proselytising.

98.   On 12 December 2003, the Secretary of State  wrote  in  reply  to  the
     Appellant's solicitor, dealing with  various  aspects  of  the  public
     order concern, the absence of concern by the police that the Appellant
     would  generate  large-scale  disorder,  nor  was  it  said  that  the
     Appellant was seen as a potential criminal.  The letter also said:

           "As previously  stated  the  Secretary  of  State  is  reviewing
           whether the Reverend Moon's presence in the United Kingdom would
           be conducive to the public good because of the  risk  of  public
           disorder.  In particular we are  concerned  about  families  who
           believe that the Reverend Moon is responsible for  the  loss  of
           their children.  It is not our contention that any individual or
           group has made a specific threat to cause a public  disorder  or
           commit a criminal offence should your client visit the  UK.   It
           is accepted that the expression of an offensive view does not in
           itself constitute a criminal offence.  The Home  Office  accepts
           that the right to freedom of expression includes rights to  hold
           minority views  and  opinions  without  interference  by  public
           authority.  However the exercise of the  freedom  of  expression
           carries duties  and  responsibilities  and  may  be  subject  to
           restrictions necessary in a democratic society in the  interests
           of public safety, for the prevention of  disorder  and  for  the
           protection of the rights of others."

99.   Finally, it was said that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  give  due
     regard to the rights to freedom of expression  and  religion  and  the
     interests of the  followers  of  the  Appellant.   This  is  the  sole
     reference to the ECHR.

100.  The Appellant realised that here was something  of  a  development  in
     the Secretary of State's thinking and  sought  further  details.   The
     Secretary of State in turn sought the views of Professor  Barker,  CIC
     and FAIR in relation  to  the  evidence  of  any  "brainwashing",  the
     discouragement of family contact, the extent to  which  the  Appellant
     had benefited if at all from the Church members and whether the Church
     made it difficult for members to leave.

101.   Professor  Barker's  views  are  summarised  by  the  Adjudicator  as
     follows, and we include here her earlier comments:

           "Professor Barker in her letter dated 20  March  2002  (book  1,
           pages 72-74) replied to the respondent's letter that:-


           a)    almost all scholars throughout the  world  would  consider
                 that there is no evidence to suggest that  members  of  the
                 Unification Church have been brainwashed.  The Church  puts
                 pressure on  people  to  join  but  no  more  so  than  any
                 Protestant  Evangelical  churches  do.    Individuals   who
                 attended workshops in the late 1970s, when  accusations  of
                 brainwashing were at their height, were capable  of  saying
                 that they did not want to become members of the Church  and
                 those who did join showed no signs  of  being  particularly
                 suggestible or weak.  Studies have shown that  there  is  a
                 high turnover among those who have joined  the  Unification
                 Church, indicating that  if  the  movement  were  employing
                 brainwashing techniques, they were not very efficient.


           b)    there was a period when the Church encouraged members  not
                 to contact their families.  However, in Britain  there  has
                 been for the  past  twenty  years  a  general  policy  that
                 members should contact their parents.   Most  members  that
                 Professor Barker knows have contact with their families and
                 this has  become  even  more  the  case  since  the  second
                 generation came along.  [The respondent  has  now  accepted
                 that there is contact between followers and their  families
                 (book 1, page 88).]


           c)    the Reverend Moon  has  personally  benefited  financially
                 from members of the Unification Church.   He  appears,  she
                 says, to live  in  considerable  luxury  and  to  give  the
                 members of his family and others  costly  gifts  and  large
                 sums of money.


           d)     there  has  always  been  a  high  turnover  within   the
                 Unification Church and members not only can but do leave if
                 they choose to.  It has become considerably easier to leave
                 over the last ten to fifteen years.  Members no longer live
                 in communities, but with their own families.  There are few
                 large centres left.  Many members  are  very  much  on  the
                 borderline and slip between being a member and being a non-
                 member almost without realising that they have done so.

           Professor Barker was asked to comment by the  respondent  as  to
           monies which have been given by individuals to  the  Unification
           Church.  In a letter of 15 July 2002 (page  82),  she  responded
           that all religions benefit financially from  their  members  and
           she has not carried out a study of dates, names and amounts.  In
           the 1970s and 80s the real source of income would have been  the
           members' cheap labour.  However only a few  now  work  full-time
           for the movement and they earn wages which although not high are
           sufficient to keep them alive in their own homes.

           Professor Barker in her letter of 27 July 2001  (book  1,  p.46)
      concluded that:

           a)    it is hard to believe that a visit by Reverend Moon  could
                 do much more than "lighten the hearts  (and  no  doubt  the
                 pockets)" of those loyal followers.  She notes in the  last
                 paragraphs of her letter that nothing in what she has  said
                 means that she would  want  Reverend  Moon  to  be  granted
                 anything like a long-term stay,

           b)    she would not consider a short visit by Reverend  Moon  to
                 be a threat to public order based on what knowledge she has
                 acquired of the Unification Church over the  years.   Those
                 who are not followers tend  to  find  the  Reverend  Moon's
                 public speeches incredibly dull and boring.

           c)    Reverend Moon and his movement  have  caused  considerable
                 suffering to several British  citizens  over  the  past  30
                 years or so.

           d)    Reverend Moon's financial dealings have  not  always  been
                 entirely transparent and he has spent some  time  in  a  US
                 jail for tax evasion in the 1980s.

           e)    Reverend Moon's political involvement  was  questioned  by
                 the Fraser Committee  in  1978  when  "the  conclusion  was
                 rather like that of a Scottish "not proven", ie we are damn
                 sure you are guilty but can't make it stick".

           f)    Reverend Moon's moral behaviour does not seem to  coincide
                 with his teachings which tend to have a "do as  I  say  not
                 what I do" air about them.

           g)    Reverend Moon's followers have worked for  minimal  or  no
                 wages, sometimes being neglected in times of sickness, with
                 no pension or insurance for their old age.

           h)    These are not reasons to  restrict  entry  to  a  religious
                 leader to visit his followers.  At most they might be  used
                 to provide the basis of arguments that the Reverend  Moon's
                 presence is not conducive to the public  good  but  "not  I
                 think for reasons of public order.""

102.  CIC responded with reference to material from a libel  case  involving
     the  Daily  Mail  in  1981  which  had  successfully   justified   its
     allegations in respect  of  brainwashing  and  family  break-up.   The
     Appellant clearly benefited from the wealth  of  the  Church,  members
     found it difficult to leave and there had been  complaints  in  recent
     years from those who had loved ones in  the  Church.   The  letter  is
     bereft of detail.   FAIR  provided  a  more  detailed  description  of
     recruitment techniques which it described as having many  features  of
     brainwashing.  It asserted family break-up as a result but there  were
     no up-to-date examples referred to.  The wealth of the Church, derived
     from its members and sent to the Appellant, was asserted but there was
     no material to back up the assertion in  the  letter.   It  was  still
     difficult to leave.  Complaints  had  reduced  since  the  Church  had
     stopped recruiting on the streets, but its  methods  had  become  more
     insidious.

103.  In April  2002,  the  Secretary  of  State  replied  to  the  concerns
     expressed by the Appellant that the  case  had  changed,  saying  that
     there had been no new decision and providing  information  about  what
     the other persons consulted had said.  The focus was clearly switching
     to the activities of the Church.  None of those consulted who had been
     and continued to be opposed to  the  presence  of  the  Appellant  had
     suggested that their reaction would be in any way disorderly.   On  24
     July 2002, the Secretary of  State  wrote  about  further  allegations
     concerning the exploitation of members  as  cheap  labour,  generating
     wealth for the Church and the Appellant.

104.  A number of these allegations are dealt with in the  statement  of  Mr
     Read and Dr Wilson.

105.  The complaints made  about  the  Adjudicator's  determination  by  the
     Appellant can be summarised as  follows.   First,  he  had  failed  to
     recognise the significance of the failure of the Secretary of State to
     consider the effect of the ECHR on  the  rights  of  entry  which  the
     Appellant had.  That was demonstrated by the correspondence.   Second,
     the correspondence showed that the Secretary of State had  in  reality
     abandoned the public order ground on which he  had  originally  relied
     for the exclusion of the Appellant and the Adjudicator ought  to  have
     so found.  What this meant for the Adjudicator's decision was that  he
     ought to have subjected the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
     greater scrutiny and ought to have  been  less  willing  to  give  any
     significant margin of discretion to him.

106.  Third, the Secretary  of  State  was  given  too  large  a  margin  of
     discretion because that would only be  justified  in  cases  involving
     public disorder as in Farrakhan;  that  was  a  Judicial  Review  case
     whereas here the statutory appeal  provisions  meant  that  that  wide
     margin of discretion did not apply.  In effect,  the  Adjudicator  had
     also applied the Wednesbury test to the Secretary of State's  decision
     but that was no longer appropriate following Huang and Others  v  SSHD
     [2005] EWCA Civ 105.  Fourth, and this was closely related, it was for
     the Adjudicator to carry out therefore an  independent  assessment  of
     the evidence and this he had not done.

107.  Fifth, when analysed there was no factual basis for the  Secretary  of
     State's conclusions and the interference with the  Appellant's  rights
     was wholly disproportionate to any risk which he created  in  relation
     to the activities of the Church.

108.  The Secretary of State responded that,  following  Farrakhan,  he  was
     entitled to a particularly wide margin of  discretion,  which  he  had
     exercised having regard to the representations  made  to  him,  taking
     account of the Appellant's conviction for tax evasion,  assessing  the
     risk which might be posed for a revitalisation  of  the  Church  on  a
     precautionary basis, and noting the very limited interference with the
     rights to freedom of religion, of  expression  and  association  which
     exclusion created for the Appellant.

109.  The Secretary of State had considered the case on the balance  between
     the various relevant factors and having said that  he  would  consider
     the Appellant's ECHR rights and the interests of his followers in  one
     letter, he did not need to repeat it in a  later  one.   Whatever  may
     have been the evolution of the Secretary of State's  reasoning,  there
     was no doubt about what the reasons were and that the  Appellant  knew
     of the substance and was able to  address  those  reasons.   Farrakhan
     could not be distinguished by reference to the public order  point  or
     to the appeal system.  The Adjudicator had all the  evidence  in  mind
     and carried  out  the  appropriate  proportionality  assessment.   The
     overall assessment could not be challenged other than on a rationality
     basis and there would have been no justification for  the  Adjudicator
     interfering.

110.  Miss Carss-Frisk submitted that the role of  the  IAT  in  considering
     the appeal was simply that of deciding whether or not the  Adjudicator
     had erred in law according  to  Wednesbury  and  ordinary  public  law
     principles.   Mr  Pannick  submitted  that,   following   Huang,   the
     identification of an error of law was different.  The Adjudicator  had
     to say whether or not the decision of the Secretary of State  breached
     the human rights of the Appellant because it was disproportionate.  If
     the IAT reached the view that it was disproportionate, that meant that
     it had concluded that there was an error of law in  the  Adjudicator's
     decision which had not so found.  Any other approach would mean that a
     decision which was disproportionate had been found not to be  unlawful
     when it was in breach of the ECHR.  That would conflict also with  the
     obligation of the IAT under section 6 of the HRA 1998.   The  converse
     applied too:  if the  Adjudicator  decided  that  a  decision  of  the
     Secretary of State was disproportionate when the IAT thought  that  it
     was not, it would be erroneous in law for such a  decision  to  stand.
     The effect of Huang was to make decisions as to  proportionality  ones
     for the Adjudicator and thus for the  IAT.   Proportionality  had  now
     become recognised as a legal test like rationality.

111.  We start by considering the role of the IAT in  the  light  of  Huang.
     The jurisdiction is limited to that of error of law.  But the question
     is whether the decision in Huang means that  a  different  view  about
     proportionality is an error of law.  This is the second case in  which
     distinguished advocates have argued that that is so.  There  is  force
     in the argument that,  following  Razgar  [2004]  2  AC  368,  if  the
     decision on proportionality is to the effect  that  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision must be reversed because to  uphold  it  would  be  a
     breach of section 6 HRA, as inevitably it must have been concluded  to
     be in such circumstances, the same applies if the decision is seen  as
     disproportionate by the IAT.

112.  We do not think that Huang should be read  as  saying  that  the  fact
     that the Adjudicator  may  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision is disproportionate and hence unlawful,  means  that  such  a
     conclusion inevitably gives rise to an issue of law.  The  conclusion,
     pre-Razgar,  that  a  decision  of  the   Secretary   of   State   was
     disproportionate would also have involved the same conclusion that  it
     was unlawful;  and if the Appellant's argument here were correct  such
     a decision would necessarily have given rise to an appeal on  a  point
     of law.  Yet it did not do so.  We see nothing in Huang which suggests
     that the approach to error of law set out in A (C) v SSHD [2004]  EWCA
     Civ 1165, required re-examination.

113.  We do not accept the  argument  either  that  section  6  of  the  HRA
     requires intervention by way of  the  error  of  law  jurisdiction  on
     appeal wherever the IAT would have  reached  a  different  view  as  a
     matter of fact and degree as to whether  exclusion  or  removal  would
     have breached the ECHR.  It does  not  follow  that  an  Adjudicator's
     conclusion that a decision is proportionate and  therefore  lawful  is
     itself a decision on a point of law.  It is a decision  on  the  facts
     and an assessment of degree.  If it itself is to be held unlawful,  it
     has to be shown that the judgment involves an error of law, judged  by
     modified Wednesbury standards.  If it does not itself involve an error
     of law, it follows that there has been no  breach  of  the  HRA  which
     requires the intervention of the Tribunal to provide a  remedy  or  to
     avoid a breach of its own duty.  The fact that a reasonable body could
     take a different view of the facts or  of  the  assessment  of  degree
     would not convert the decision into an error of law or a breach of the
     HRA.

114.  However, that does not set out  the  approach  which  the  Adjudicator
     should have adopted, with the benefit of hindsight, in  the  light  of
     Huang.  Huang says:

           "The true position in our judgment is that the HRA  and  s.65(1)
           require the adjudicator to allow an appeal  against  removal  or
           deportation brought on Article 8 grounds if,  but  only  if,  he
           concludes that the case is  so  exceptional  on  its  particular
           facts that the imperative of proportionality demands an  outcome
           in the appellant's favour notwithstanding that he cannot succeed
           under the Rules.


           In such as case the adjudicator is not  ignoring  or  overriding
           the Rules.  On the contrary it is a signal feature of  his  task
           that he is bound to respect the balance between public  interest
           and  private  right  struck  by  the  Rules  with   Parliament's
           approval.  That is why he is only entitled on Article 8  grounds
           to favour an appellant outside the Rules where the case is truly
           exceptional;   This,  not  Wednesbury   or   any   revision   of
           Wednesbury,  represents  the  real  restriction  which  the  law
           imposes on the scope of judgment allowed to the adjudicator.  It
           is not a question of his deferring to the Secretary  of  State's
           judgment  of  proportionality  in  the  individual  case.    The
           adjudicator's decision of the question whether the case is truly
           exceptional is entirely his own.  He does defer  to  the  Rules;
           for this approach recognises that  the  balance  struck  by  the
           Rules will generally dispose of proportionality  issues  arising
           under Article 8; but they  are  not  exhaustive  of  all  cases.
           There will be a residue of truly exceptional instances.  In  our
           respectful view such an  approach  is  also  reflected  in  Lord
           Bingham's words in Razgar??, which we have already cited:


                 "Decisions  taken  pursuant  to  the  lawful  operation  of
                 immigration control will be proportionate  in  all  save  a
                 small minority of exceptional cases, identifiable only on a
                 case by case basis.""

115.  In MB (Croatia) (Huang-proportionality-Bulletins) [2005] UKIAT  00092,
      the IAT examined the implications of Huang for the ordinary case.   We
      concluded that the Immigration Rules were the starting point  for  the
      assessment of proportionality.  If an individual had  no  case  within
      the Rules or the extra-statutory policies and  concessions,  it  would
      have to be a truly exceptional case on its facts  for  an  Adjudicator
      properly to conclude that an immigration decision was disproportionate
      and unlawful.  We said:

           "32.  Where a Rule or extra-statutory provision covers the  sort
                 of circumstance upon which an individual  relies  eg  entry
                 for marriage, study, medical treatment or delayed decision-
                 making, but  the  individual  falls  outside  the  specific
                 requirements or limits of the otherwise applicable Rules or
                 policy, that is a very clear  indication  that  removal  is
                 proportionate.  It is not for the judicial  decision-maker,
                 except in the clear and truly exceptional case to set aside
                 the  limitations  set  by  the  executive,  accountable  to
                 Parliament, and, in the  case  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
                 approved by Parliament.


           33.   Where Rules or  extra-statutory  provisions  do  not  make
                 provision at all for circumstances which an individual  may
                 rely on for the purposes of overcoming the qualification to
                 an ECHR right which is provided by the legitimate interests
                 of immigration  control,  his  case  cannot  rationally  be
                 considered more favourably than one whose circumstances are
                 covered in principle by some provision of the Rules  or  of
                 an extra-statutory policy but whose  circumstances  do  not
                 meet the detailed requirements of the Rules or policy.


           34.     The   starting   point   for   the   consideration    of
                 proportionality is the Rules and then the effect of  extra-
                 statutory policies.  It will  be  necessary  in  each  case
                 where an exception is made in respect of an individual  who
                 has no basis to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  to
                 state clearly why those approved and  qualified  provisions
                 in the Rules or policies should  not  be  regarded  as  the
                 conclusive negative answer to that claim."

116.  In this case,  the  only  applicable  Immigration  Rule  is  paragraph
     320(6), which provides that the personal decision of the Secretary  of
     State to exclude the Appellant on  the  grounds  of  the  public  good
     precludes the grant of entry clearance.  This is not  an  instance  in
     which the Rules have  provided  for  qualifications  to  a  particular
     provision governing entry which the applicant cannot satisfy.  Nor  is
     this an instance where the Rules have simply made no provision for the
     situation.  The Rules simply preclude entry clearance.   We  take  the
     view that that gives rise to no difference of  principle.   That  Rule
     provides for a bar to entry save to the extent, on the hypothesis upon
     which we are proceeding, that its application gives rise to  a  breach
     of Articles 9, 10 and 11.

117.  It is no different, however, in the light of Huang  and  Razgar,  from
     those instances where  the  Rules  make  no  provision  for  entry  or
     remaining or those cases in which the Rules make  some  provision  but
     impose restrictions which an applicant cannot satisfy.   It  would  be
     illogical for the consideration  of  the  Convention  rights  and  the
     assessment of proportionality by an Adjudicator to be wholly at large,
     notwithstanding the  exclusion  decision  under  appeal.   It  is  the
     absence from the Rules of provision helpful to the applicant,  or  the
     presence of qualifications which cannot be met, which must be taken as
     the proportionate and considered response of the  executive,  approved
     by Parliament, together with extra-statutory policies, to  the  varied
     needs and circumstances which arise in the immigration context.  Hence
     the fact that it will only be in the exceptional case that a  decision
     which conforms to those Rules and policies  will  be  disproportionate
     and a breach of any applicable human rights.

118.  The same  applies  to  a  Rule  which  prohibits  entry  clearance  in
     circumstances where the Secretary of  State  has  reached  a  personal
     decision that exclusion is necessary in the public interest, for which
     he is answerable to Parliament.  It will only be  in  the  exceptional
     case that that conclusion will be disproportionate.   It  is  for  the
     Adjudicator to reach that assessment and that can only  be  overturned
     as erroneous in law if it falls outside the admittedly narrow range of
     circumstances in  which  he  could  hold  the   Secretary  of  State's
     decision to be disproportionate.

119.  We  would  add  that  the  Adjudicator  is  not  exercising  a  review
     jurisdiction and the considerations in Samaroo v SSHD [2002] INLR  55,
     referred to in paragraph  61  of  Huang,  do  not  arise.   As  he  is
     exercising a statutory appellate jurisdiction, he is also entitled and
     obliged,  in  assessing  whether  he  considers  that  a  decision  is
     disproportionate, to consider the evidence which  is  properly  placed
     before him even  though  it  may  not  have  been  placed  before  the
     Secretary of State.

120.  Does this leave any room for the factors relied on  by  the  Secretary
     of State, drawn from Farrakhan, as showing that deference is  required
     to his personal decision?  We take the view that there is no room  for
     further deference or, in more appropriate language, for  extra  weight
     to be given to the particular  role  and  responsibilities  which  the
     Secretary of State carries out.  That factor is already allowed for in
     the approach of Huang, applied in this case to the Rule  in  question.
     It would be a double helping of "deference" to  include  it  again  in
     seeing whether the decision was disproportionate.  That is not to  say
     that those factors are not allowed for as part of the reasoning  which
     requires a case such as this to be exceptional.  It would have  to  be
     exceptional because  it  is  a  personal  exclusion  decision  by  the
     Secretary of State after  consideration  of  representations  and  for
     which he is answerable to  Parliament.   It  involves  issues  of  the
     public interest and the nature and degree of the risk to it.

121.   Although  the  Adjudicator  expressed  himself  in  the  language  of
     Farrakhan, and he cannot be criticised for  that,  we  have  concluded
     that that approach has been overtaken by Huang, and Razgar.  We do not
     consider that that leads by itself to a material error of law, ie  one
     which would have affected the outcome of the case.   This  is  because
     the practical difference between the application of the reasonableness
     approach and the exceptional case approach, is very small  and  likely
     to be of no importance in most cases.  The obligation on  Adjudicators
     to reach their own conclusions  on  proportionality,  but  within  the
     strict confines of Huang  and  recognising  the  significance  of  the
     judgments inherent in the Rules and the extra-statutory policies, does
     not appear to be likely to change the permissible range  of  decisions
     in very many cases.

122.  It is important in looking at whether an error has been  made  by  the
     Adjudicator, and at whether a decision is  exceptional,  to  recognise
     that the notion of deference or respect  goes  more  strongly  to  the
     concept of what is in the public interest, the balancing of  competing
     private and public interests and to the evaluation  of  risk.   It  is
     much less easy to see that any particular respect is required  for  an
     analysis of fact where the Adjudicator has the same material  and  can
     see if there has been an error.  Putting it another way, it  would  be
     somewhat easier to find that the Secretary of State had erred and made
     a disproportionate decision where his error was  in  the  fact-finding
     area than it would be in the evaluative areas.

123.  We accept that the Secretary of State has not  carried  out  a  proper
     balancing exercise himself in relation to the  various  matters  which
     the ECHR requires.  The brief reference, in his letter of 12  December
     2001, to giving due regard to the rights to freedom  of  religion  and
     expression, says nothing about how that would be done.   None  of  the
     later material refers back to that or is any more explicit  about  how
     it was to be done.  Indeed, the letter of 28 November 2003, nearly two
     years later, which says that the full reasons have been given  in  it,
     and the Witness Statement of Mr Troake, are completely silent  on  the
     point.  Certainly no basis for any conclusion  in  relation  to  human
     rights is given, and  neither  the  reasons  letter  nor  the  Witness
     Statement assert that they were taken into account.  But the  question
     for the Adjudicator was not whether the Secretary of State's  approach
     had itself been lawful; it was whether  the  decision  breached  human
     rights, on the hypothesis that they were engaged.   It  would  however
     diminish any weight given to the SSHD's assessment of matters.

124.  We also accept that the Secretary of State changed the  focus  of  his
     concerns away from public order to a broader  concept  of  the  public
     interest.  He was entitled to do so, and the Appellant had the  change
     signalled to him clearly enough and was able  to  deal  with  it.   By
     itself that would not give rise to an error of law, though  we  accept
     the point that, as a matter of  the  merits  consideration  which  the
     Adjudicator was  required  to  give,  it  would  naturally  leave  the
     impression that the Secretary of State had switched to a lesser  point
     as the primary point could not be made out.

125.   This  submission  cannot  be  separated  wholly,  however,  from  the
     contention  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  make  an   independent
     assessment of the merits  of  the  case.   For  the  purposes  of  the
     assessment  of  proportionality,  he  has  to  make   an   independent
     assessment of the facts and their  evaluation  as  part  of  the  risk
     assessment, the former within  a  wider  framework  than  the  latter,
     following Huang.  It is accepted that the  assessment  of  risk  is  a
     necessary part of the equation:   it  is  not  simply  a  question  of
     whether the applicant's activities will probably generate disorder  or
     will probably be harmful to the public interest in other ways.  It  is
     accepted that the precautionary principle is relevant, subject to  the
     facts of any particular case.

126.  There are a number of areas in which  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  our
     view.  First, he and the Secretary of State did not grapple  with  the
     evidence provided by Professor Barker.  She is of undoubted  expertise
     and that is why she was consulted.  Her responses to the Secretary  of
     State show that she was not parti pris.  The essential feature of them
     was that there had indeed been the sort of conduct in the past in  the
     recruitment and retention of members of which CIC and FAIR complained.
      But that conduct did not now occur and had not  done  so  for  years.
     What was said by CIC and FAIR  about  the  recruitment  and  retention
     methods of the Church, which clearly lay at the heart of the Secretary
     of State's concerns, and which would plainly have justified  exclusion
     if there were a risk of their continued use or revitalisation were the
     Appellant to return to the United Kingdom, was  based  on  experiences
     which were twenty years old and which were not supported by  any  more
     recent material, at least so far as was  shown  to  the  Secretary  of
     State.  The evidence of Professor Barker was much  more  recent.   Was
     her material rejected as a  matter  of  the  factual  input  into  the
     assessment of risk, and if so why?  It is not as simple as saying that
     the Secretary of State was entitled to prefer one to  the  other;   he
     had to recognise as the Adjudicator was also required to do, that  the
     two sources were not necessarily or even obviously talking  about  the
     same era;  that aspect had to be brought into  the  factual  equation.
     The CIC and FAIR material was either clearly very old or  not  clearly
     updated so as to contradict what Professor Barker had said.

127.  Nor does that material explain why the visit of  the  Appellant  could
     cause those activities to be resumed;  and neither does the  Secretary
     of State.  Merely revitalising the Church could not sensibly  be  said
     to be objectionable and that itself was not  the  point  anyway.   The
     concern over revitalisation was  what  would  then  ensue  by  way  of
     recruitment and retention methods  and  financial  exploitation.   But
     that is very dependant on the way in which  the  Church  now  operates
     both in the United Kingdom and in the USA and has done for some years.
      The clearly up-to-date material before the Secretary of State and the
     Adjudicator was really all one way;  it  was  wholly  unclear  whether
     FAIR had anything up-to-date to say and CIC did not appear to.

128.  Second, as this is not Judicial Review and as the Adjudicator  had  to
     reach his own assessment upon the material put before him, whether  or
     not it had been put before the Secretary of State,  it  is  surprising
     that the Adjudicator made so little of the evidence of Mr Read and  Dr
     Wilson.  Both of those statements  went  to  concerns  raised  by  the
     Secretary of State, yet there is no evaluation of  their  significance
     and weight.  They are almost ignored.  This is particularly  important
     because of the critical evaluation of the reliability and  objectivity
     of the views of CIC and FAIR upon which the Secretary of State  placed
     so much weight.  We should point out that this material, although post-
     dating the Secretary of State's decision, did not fall foul of section
     82(5)  of  the  2002  Act,  because  it  dealt   with   "circumstances
     appertaining" at that time.

129.  Third, the significance  of  the  variability  of  the  views  of  the
     Secretary of State for the weight which can be  attached  to  them  is
     ignored.  We do not say that as a matter  of  law,  a  more  sceptical
     approach was called for, but it  was  something  which  needed  to  be
     assessed in the independent examination of the material.   The  change
     from disorder to public interest in another form does raise a question
     over how much weight the Secretary of State himself attached  to  that
     latter aspect.  But this variability  is  particularly  noticeable  in
     relation to the 1980 conviction.  The Secretary of State said that the
     28 November 2003 letter contained the full reasons, not a summary from
     which any matters of significance had been omitted.  The reference  to
     the "character  and  conduct"  of  the  Appellant  is  not  clearly  a
     reference  to  the  conviction  in   the   light   of   the   previous
     correspondence which made no reference to  it.   It  is  difficult  to
     avoid the conclusion  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  struggling
     somewhat with the evidential basis for the exclusion of the Appellant,
     when he introduced that matter in the Witness Statement of Mr  Troake.
     It had been rejected  by  an  Adjudicator  in  1991  as  an  issue  of
     importance for very cogent reasons, albeit that it had then  been  the
     sole basis for exclusion, whereas here it  was  just  another  factor;
     that Adjudicator had said that it attracted little weight.

130.  Fourth, there was an issue about the Appellant's personal wealth  over
     which  Professor  Barker,  the  Appellant's  solicitor  and  Mr   Read
     differed.  In particular, there was an issue over the extent to  which
     there was any exploitation of the  members  of  the  Church  as  cheap
     labour, upon which Professor Barker was not really at  odds  with  the
     Church's arguments.  It is surprising that  those  two  separated  but
     related  issues  did  not  call  for  specific  consideration  by  the
     Adjudicator.  It might have been that he accepted what  the  Secretary
     of State said as a legitimate appraisal but this was in part at  least
     a factual issue and even applying deference  as  the  Adjudicator  was
     doing, no especial deference was called for in the assessment  of  the
     facts.  But the point could not simply be disposed of as a matter upon
     which the Secretary of State's view  was  reasonable  without  further
     consideration of the material before the Secretary of  State  and  the
     Adjudicator.

131.  We have to say that the approach of the Adjudicator read  as  a  whole
     was far too deferential to the Secretary of State's appraisal, even if
     the Farrakhan tests represented the correct  approach  to  adopt.   We
     note in particular  the  language  of  paragraphs  62  to  66  of  the
     determination.  If that degree of deference was called for, it had  to
     be earned by the care with which the Secretary of State had  addressed
     the relevant issues, and had come to a reasoned and balanced decision.
      It is difficult to characterise the Secretary of State's decision  in
     that way.  It then had to withstand the effect  of  the  new  material
     before the Adjudicator.  Deference took the place of a proper analysis
     of the case put forward, and in particular on  factual  matters  where
     the justification for any deference is much  diminished,  as  we  have
     said.

132.  We regard all those  errors  as  errors  of  law.   They  involve  the
     ignoring of material considerations, or a failure adequately to reason
     the decision, grappling with the major points at issue.  The  approach
     was also erroneous in the degree of deference allowed.

133.  We would therefore regard the  proportionality  assessment  as  flawed
     and would  make  the  assessment  ourselves.   True  it  is  that  the
     interference with the  rights  in  question  is  limited  in  the  way
     described by the  Adjudicator  in  paragraph  68,  and  there  was  no
     intention  to  engage  in  public  meetings  or  proselytising.    His
     religious activities in  the  USA  and  his  communications  with  his
     followers in the  United  Kingdom  are  entirely  unaffected  in  that
     current form.  There is no right to manifest religious beliefs in  any
     particular way.

134.  But there is interference and that has to be justified.  It is  modest
     interference but real, in that we accept that for a spiritual  leader,
     physical proximity to followers, his presence  among  them  can  be  a
     necessary part of the manifestation of belief,  and  more  so  of  the
     freedom of expression and association.

135.  We do not consider that it has to be shown that  the  motive  for  the
     exclusion is the prevention of the exercise of the ECHR  rights;   the
     question is whether the interference which exclusion would produce  is
     justified by the interests which are to be found in the qualifications
     to the Articles relied on.  In one sense, it is the  exercise  of  the
     rights which gives rise to the  concerns  and  so  the  basis  of  the
     exclusion is to prevent their exercise.  But that is not the right way
     to look at an  exclusion  case.   The  public  interest  lies  in  the
     protection of those members of the public who are not members  of  the
     Church and to discourage the return to former ways which might  affect
     those who are or were members.   The  issue  is  whether  that  public
     interest has been shown to be at risk through the  activities  of  the
     Appellant were he to enter the country and then whether it is  a  risk
     that warrants the interference with  the  assumed  ECHR  rights  which
     exclusion entails.

136.  The case for exclusion on the basis of the risk that the Church  would
     be revitalised and would therefore return to its  undesirable  methods
     of recruitment and retention is very thin indeed.  We cannot  see  how
     the material from Professor Barker and now  Dr  Wilson  could  not  be
     regarded as having a far greater significance than  that  of  CIC  and
     FAIR.  The former are concerned, objective and up-to-date.  The latter
     are properly concerned about what has happened in the past, but do not
     provide any material which suggests that it is now  happening  or  has
     happened for many years anywhere.  We recognise that the Secretary  of
     State is concerned about risk, but his view as to risk is  based  upon
     representations which do no more than point to the past and  seemingly
     ignore the position as it has been  for  many  years.   The  financial
     exploitation of the members, in the absence  of  coercive  recruitment
     and retention methods, is a question for the free will of the members,
     as is their desire to belong to a Church in which the leader seems  so
     well off, even if just to free him from the more prosaic cares of  the
     world as Mr Pannick put it, whilst they may labour to keep  him  thus.
     That aspect is therefore closely related to the assessment of the risk
     emerging that those former recruitment and retention methods would  be
     used again.  The conviction was a makeweight point.

137.  Of course, the Secretary of State is  not  obliged  to  accept  expert
     material and can prefer the experiences of those with direct  contact,
     who  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  subjective  and  hostile.   The
     Adjudicator can do likewise.  The Secretary of State  is  entitled  to
     take a precautionary approach.  The problem is  that  the  views  upon
     which he relied do not contradict the views  of  Professor  Barker  so
     much as deal with a different point in time and fail to  grapple  with
     the position as it is and has been for many years, as set out by  her.
     If CIC and FAIR had provided current evidence of  abusive  recruitment
     and  retention  methods,  the  Secretary  of  State  would  have  been
     entitled, the Adjudicator also, to reject any contrary expert view.

138.  This is a case, however, where the  decision  was  based  on  material
     which did not warrant the conclusion reached, and especially so in the
     light of the later material before the Adjudicator, notably that of Dr
     Wilson.  This is not a disagreement with  an  evaluation  as  to  what
     constitutes the public interest or as  to  a  balance  struck  between
     competing public and private interests and rights, but a judgment that
     the factual material simply does not justify the Secretary of  State's
     conclusion as to the factual basis for the existence of a  risk.   Had
     the risk been shown to be soundly based, we would not have  interfered
     with the decision.  This is therefore one of  those  very  exceptional
     cases in which we conclude that the decision of the Secretary of State
     was disproportionate.  It may be better to say that it was  not  shown
     to have any sound basis.  The appeal would have been allowed if we had
     concluded that the Appellant could rely upon the Convention.

139.  However, the appeal is dismissed for the reasons which we  have  given
     earlier.  It is reported for what we say about the application of  the
     ECHR in entry clearance cases, and the approach to proportionality.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

