
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of AM) v Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council (AAJR)
[2012] UKUT 00118 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision                     |
|on 10 and 11 October 2011, and                |                             |
|at Field House                                |                             |
|on 12 October 2011                            |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                            Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                                Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane


                       The Queen on the application of

                                     AM

                    (by his litigation friend James Whitehouse)

                                                                    Claimant



                                     -v-

               SOLIHULL METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL       Defendant

Representation:

For the Claimant:      Mr Adrian Berry, instructed by Public Law Solicitors
For the Defendant:    Mr Jon Holbrook, instructed by Solihull MBC

                       DETERMINATION AND REASONS Introduction


1. The claimant claims to be a minor,  born  in  1994.  He  arrived  in  the
   United Kingdom in January 2010 and claimed asylum.  He  was  placed  with
   foster parents, Mr and Mrs Patel, and  attended  Washwood  Heath  School.
   Quite soon, the school expressed doubts about his claimed age, and at the
   school's request Solihull MBC, in whose  area  Mr  and  Mrs  Patel  live,
   undertook an age assessment.

2. Solihull has undertaken two assessments, one  in  May  2010  and  one  in
   December 2010, and concluded that it would be  right  to  assign  to  the
   claimant a nominal date of birth of 1 January 1992, making  him  over  18
   when he came to the United Kingdom. It is the second assessment, dated 17
   December 2010 that the claimant  challenges  in  these  proceedings.  The
   claim form was not issued until 17 March 2011. It was accompanied  by  an
   application for urgent consideration and interim relief. Blake J declined
   to grant interim relief before permission, remarking that  "it  could  be
   said that the  claimant  has  not  acted  promptly  in  the  adverse  age
   assessment" and extended time for the acknowledgement of service.  Walker
   J ordered the application for permission into court and by order dated 14
   April 2011 granted permission and interim  relief,  and  transferred  the
   claim to this Tribunal.

3. Meanwhile, the Secretary of State considered  his  asylum  claim.  On  31
   March 2010 the claimant was issued with what is  called  an  "Immigration
   Status Document", indicating the British Government's recognition of  him
   as a refugee and describing him as born on 1 September 1994. On the basis
   of that status he has limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom until
   13 March 2015. But following the second age assessment by  Solihull,  the
   Secretary of State wrote on 22 December 2010 to the claimant,  indicating
   that she proposed to cancel refugee status for the following reason:

      "You made an asylum claim as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child and
      your asylum decision was made on that basis.  However,  it  has  since
      been deemed by Social Services that you are over 18 years of age."

       We  are  not  directly  concerned  with  that   question   in   these
proceedings.

4. Whilst  the  claim  was  before  the  High  Court,  the  claimant  had  a
   litigation friend in the person  of  the  official  solicitor.  Following
   transfer, the question was raised  whether  the  Tribunal  had  power  to
   appoint a litigation friend, and if so who that should be.  The  Tribunal
   considered the matter on 28 July 2011 and decided that (i)  the  Tribunal
   has  power  to  operate  through  a  litigation  friend;  (ii)   in   the
   circumstances of this case it was appropriate for one to be appointed and
   (iii) it was appropriate to appoint James Whitehouse.

5. We heard evidence on 10  and  11  October  2011  and  submissions  on  12
   October. In addition to the  oral  evidence  we  take  into  account  the
   written evidence given at various stages.

Our Task

6. The starting point is the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  R  (A)  v
   Croydon LEC [2009J UKSC 8. Lady Hale JSC, who gave the first speech,  set
   out the importance of a decision  as  to  the  age  of  a  young  person,
   particularly an unaccompanied asylum seeker. She then considered whether,
   in Judicial Review proceedings challenging an  assessment  by  the  Local
   Authority, the latter could adequately defend itself by showing that  its
   decision had in every respect been made appropriately on the basis of the
   material available; or whether it was open to the claimant to show  that,
   even if that were the case, it was  factually  wrong.  After  considering
   certain questions that  she  described  as  "evaluative  questions",  she
   turned to the duty under s. 20 (1) of the  Children  Act  1989.  That  is
   expressed in the Act as follows:

         "Every local authority shall provide accommodation for any child in
         need within their area",

    and by s.105 (1) of that Act,

         ""Child" means. a person under the age of 18".

7. Lady Hale JSC said this:

         "[27] But the question whether a person is a "child" is a different
         kind of question. There is a right or a wrong  answer.  It  may  be
         difficult to determine what that answer is. The decision-makers may
         have to do their  best  on  the  basis  of  less  than  perfect  or
         conclusive evidence. But that is true of  many  questions  of  fact
         which regularly come before the courts. That does not prevent  them
         from being questions for the courts rather than for other kinds  of
         decision-makers

         [32l However, as already explained, the Act does draw a distinction
         between a "child" and a "child in need" and even does so  in  terms
         which suggest that they are two different kinds  of  question.  The
         word "child" is  undoubtedly  defined  in  wholly  objective  terms
         (however hard it may be to decide upon the facts of the  particular
         case).  With  a  few  limited  extensions,  it  defines  the  outer
         boundaries of the jurisdiction of both courts and local authorities
         under the 1989 Act. This is an Act for and about children. If  ever
         there were a jurisdictional fact, it might be thought, this is it.

         [33} The final arguments raised against such a conclusion are of  a
         practical kind. The only remedy available is  judicial  review  and
         this is not well suited to the determination of disputed  questions
         of fact. This is true but it can be so adapted if the need  arises:
         see R (Wilkinson) v Broadmoor Special Hospital Authority  [2002]  1
         WLR 419. That the remedy is judicial review does  not  dictate  the
         issue for the court to decide or the way in which it should do  so,
         as the cases on jurisdictional fact illustrate. Clearly,  as  those
         cases also illustrate, the public authority, whether the children's
         services authority or the UK Border Agency, has  to  make  its  own
         determination in the first instance and it is only if this  remains
         disputed that the court may have to intervene. But the  better  the
         quality of the initial decision-making, the less likely it is  that
         the court will come to any different decision upon the evidence. If
         the other members of the  court  agree  with  my  approach  to  the
         determination of age, it does not mean that all the other judgments
         involved in the decision whether or  not  to  provide  services  to
         children or to other client groups must be subject to determination
         by the courts. They remain governed by conventional principles.


         [46] .... The result is that if live issues remain about the age of
         a person seeking accommodation under section 20(1) of the 1989 Act,
         then the court will have to determine where the truth lies  on  the
         evidence available."


8.  Lord  Hope  DPSC,  in  a  concurring  judgment,  offered  the  following
   observations amongst others on this issue:

         "[51] It seems to me that the question whether or not a person is a
         child for the purposes of section 20 of the 1989 Act is a  question
         of fact which must ultimately be decided by the court. There is  no
         denying the difficulties that the social worker is likely  to  face
         in  carrying  out  an  assessment  of  the  question   whether   an
         unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is  not  under  the  age  of  18.
         Reliable documentary evidence is  almost  always  lacking  in  such
         cases. So the process has to be one of  assessment.  This  involves
         the application of judgment on a variety  of  factors,  as  Stanley
         Burnton J recognised in R  (B)  v  Merton  London  Borough  Council
         [2003] 4 All ER 280, para 37. But the question is not  whether  the
         person can properly be described as a child. Section 105(1)  of  he
         Act provides: "In this Act ... 'child' means, subject to  paragraph
         16 of Schedule 1, a person under the age of 18."  The  question  is
         whether the person is, or is not, under  the  age  of  18.  However
         difficult it may be to resolve the issue, it  admits  of  only  one
         answer. As it is a question of fact,  ultimately  this  must  be  a
         matter for the court.

         [53] If, as the respondents contend, and Ward LJ in  the  Court  of
         Appeal [2009} PTSR 1011, para 25 accepted,  the  phrase  "child  in
         need" which sets the threshold for the provision  of  accommodation
         under section 20 must be taken as a whole, the judgment  that  must
         be made will fall ll1to the latter category. But the definition  of
         "child" in section 105(1) applies to the Act as  a  whole,  without
         qualification or exception. The question whether the child  is  "in
         need" is for the social  worker  to  determine.  But  the  question
         whether a person is or is not a child  depends  entirely  upon  the
         person's age, which is an objective fact. The  scheme  of  the  Act
         shows that it was not Parliament's intention to leave  this  matter
         to the judgment of the local authority.

         [54] As for the practical consequences, the process begins with the
         carrying out of an assessment of the person's  age  by  the  social
         worker. Resort to the court will only be necessary in the event  of
         a challenge to that  assessment.  So  I  do  not  accept  that  our
         conclusion   will   inevitably   result   in    an    inappropriate
         judicialisation of the  process.  It  may,  of  course,  require  a
         judicial decision in some cases. But I would  hope  that  that  the
         fact that the final decision rests with the court  will  assist  in
         reducing the number of challenges. The initial decision taker  must
         appreciate that no margin of discretion is  enjoyed  by  the  local
         authority on this issue. But the issue is not to be determined by a
         consideration of issues of policy or by a view as to whether resort
         to a decision by the court  in  such  cases  in  inappropriate.  It
         depends entirely on the meaning of the statute.  We  must  construe
         the Act as we find it. As I  have  said,  when  the  subsection  is
         properly construed in the light of what  section  105(1)  provides,
         the question admits of only one answer."

9.     It is said that the Administrative Court  is  not  set  up  in  order
    routinely to make findings of fact on  dispute  of  evidence;  and  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  Upper  Tribunal  has  experience
    particularly in considering evidence from  asylum  claimants,  and  has
    judicial  review  jurisdiction  under   the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act  2007.  This  claim,  like  a  number  of  others,  has
    therefore been transferred to the  Upper  Tribuna1  under  arrangements
    which are expected to continue. But, after transfer, the claim  remains
    a claim for judicial review, and that has a number of consequences.  We
    were invited by Mr Berry to conclude that the effect of the decision of
    the Supreme Court in A v Croydon is that the Local Authority's decision
    has no weight once it has been challenged. We do not think that can  be
    right.

10.   It must in any event be  the  case  that  an  assessment  by  a  Local
    Authority that is not the subject  of  any  challenge  stands,  however
    wrong it may happen to be. An assessment that is challenged must surely
    stand until the challenge succeeds, otherwise there would be  no  basis
    upon which any provision for the claimant could be made.  Whether  more
    can be said than that at present, we doubt. There is clearly  a  danger
    that the possibility of judicial review  will  encourage  unmeritorious
    challenges, by claimants who may have nothing to lose: not even  costs,
    if they are legally aided and entitled to fee exemption.

11.  Mr Berry suggested that the need for the claimant to obtain  permission
    to bring judicial review proceedings forms an adequate filter in  these
    cases as in any other. Only a claim that ought to be allowed to proceed
    will be heard substantively. It followed, he submitted, that  there  is
    no vice in proceeding on the basis that, although the claim  itself  is
    not sufficient to displace the Local Authority's decision, the grant of
    permission should do so, leaving the question  of  the  claimant's  age
    undetermined until the Tribunal rules on it. That cannot  be  right  in
    principle, because it would mean that nobody could adopt  any  view  of
    the claimant's age between the grant of permission and final  judgment.
    But, in any event, the grant of permission is too readily obtainable in
    cases of this nature to  provide  any  useful  filter.  In  particular,
    permission is not to be refused simply on the basis that  the  evidence
    appears to the single judge not to be worthy of  credit.  The  test  is
    that set out by the President of the Queen's Bench Division giving  the
    judgement of the court in R (FZ) v Croydon LBC [2011] EWCA  Civ  59  at
    [9]:

         "We consider that at the permission stage in an age assessment case
         the court should ask whether the material before the court raises a
         factual case which, taken at its highest could not properly succeed
         in a  contested  factual  hearing.  If  so,  permission  should  be
         refused. If not, permission should normally be granted, subject  to
         other discretionary factors such as delays."

    The test is repeated in similar terms at [26].

12.  Thus, there is in the ordinary case no effective filter,  and  a  claim
    made on the basis of  evidence  that  could  be  believed  will  obtain
    permission. When we originally  prepared  this  judgment  we  had  been
    inclined to accept many of Mr Holbrook's submissions about the role  of
    the Tribunal, and about how the development of this field  of  the  law
    should be able to realise what was clearly the aspiration of Lord  Hope
    at least, that we should not reach the position that a large number  of
    assessments come to be made judicially rather than administratively. Mr
    Holbrook had relied on the statement of his task set out by  Ouseley  J
    in R (CD) v Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23 (Admin), particularly
    at [126]-[128]. We then heard that the Court of Appeal were to hear  an
    appeal against that decision, and  their  judgments,  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1590, are  now  to  hand.  In  these  circumstances,  where  the  court
    exercises its supervisory jurisdiction, and although  the  question  is
    one of fact to be determined on the evidence, Pitchford LJ,  with  whom
    Laws LJ and Lloyd Jones J agreed, said at [23]: the  application  of  a
    legal burden is not the correct approach. There is no hurdle which  the
    claimant must overcome. The court will decide whether, on a balance  of
    probability, the claimant was or was not at the material time a  child.
    The court will not ask whether the local authority has established on a
    balance of probabilities that the claimant was an adult;  nor  will  it
    ask whether the claimant has established on a balance of  probabilities
    that he is a child.

13.    A claimant therefore has a minimal hurdle to  overcome  in  obtaining
    permission,  and  none  at  all  in  the   substantive   hearing.   The
    implications for the  resources  of  local  authorities  remain  to  be
    explored. For our part, we simply turn to the evidence in  the  present
    case, and to making our assessment on the basis of it.

General Observations

14.   As well as hearing oral evidence in the present proceedings,  we  have
    had the advantage of reading the judgements of a number  of  those  who
    have had a task of making a judicial assessment of  a  claimant's  age.
    Those judgements set out some of the  difficulties  in  making  an  age
    assessment, but they also indicate some  approaches  to  the  available
    evidence. It is convenient to set out  here  our  observations  on  the
    evidence in general.

15.   In the present case the evidence is wide ranging. It may therefore  be
    appropriate to make some  general  observations  about  the  impact  of
    evidence of various sorts and from various  sources  in  this  type  of
    case.  First,  we  think  that  almost   all   evidence   of   physical
    characteristics is likely to be of very limited value. That is because,
    as pointed out by Kenneth Parker J in R (R) v Croydon [2011] EWHC  1473
    (Admin) there is no clear relationship between  chronological  age  and
    physical maturity  in  respect  of  most  measurable  aspects  of  such
    maturity.

16.   The difficulty is exacerbated by the lack of any  clearly-based  data.
    In relation to Afghans in particular, our understanding is  that  there
    is no group of Afghans in Afghanistan of certain age. It  is  obviously
    difficult to see how the assessment of one individual can be  justified
    if it is  based  not  on  similarity  to  the  development  of  another
    individual whose age is known, but merely on similarity of  development
    to another individual whose age is also only assessed. Secondly,  those
    individuals  who  raise  questions  of  the  assessment  of  their  age
    typically have a history, or claimed history, beginning with  childhood
    and early youth in a country of relative  poverty,  continuing  with  a
    long and arduous journey that is claimed to  have  taken  place  during
    their mid-teens, and concluding with a period living in  a  country  of
    relative affluence such as the United Kingdom. So far as we are  aware,
    no, or no sufficient, work has been done to identify what affect such a
    history might have on their physical  maturity  at  various  dates.  In
    particular (although we accept that we are  relying  more  on  instinct
    than anything else) physical maturity may be attained  more  slowly  in
    conditions of poverty and malnutrition  and  that  on  arrival  such  a
    person may look less physically mature than his chronological age might
    suggest. After his arrival it may be that physical changes  take  place
    more quickly than they would otherwise do, but it may (or may  not)  be
    that a person with such  a  history  is  less  physically  mature  than
    anybody might expect for his age.

17.   We have used the word "mostly" in those observations. Looking  at  the
    authorities and the literature as we have, it appears to us that  there
    are two physical indicators which may be of some assistance,  but  only
    at the very top end of the range. The first is general  growth.  As  an
    individual matures, he increases in height, and  then  his  body  fills
    out, so he increases in weight. When his body is mature,  the  rate  of
    increase of both height and weight drops very considerably.  Unless  he
    is becoming obese, there comes a point when there is little  change  in
    either.  That  is  a  matter  that  cannot  be  assessed  by  a  single
    measurement. Nor do we think that very much assistance can be gained by
    attempting to assess any perceived difference or levelling off  in  the
    individual's increase in height or weight. Where, on  the  other  hand,
    accurate measurements of the claimant's height and weight are available
    extending back over a considerable period of time  (say  18  months  or
    more) and show no, or no significant, change, we  think  that  that  is
    likely to be a sign that the individual is now over about 18.

18.    The other sign of physical maturity to which we must  make  reference
    is that relating to the eruption of the third molar. As  the  paper  by
    Olze and others, 121 Int J Legal  Med  445  (2007)  makes  clear,  both
    racial and sexual differences are observable. There are no figures  for
    Afghan males: perhaps there could not be,  because  of  the  difficulty
    about accurate aging to which we have referred. But it does appear that
    it would be right to say that the full emergence of the third molar  is
    typically a characteristic of adulthood  rather  than  adolescence.  It
    would be quite wrong to say any more than that. We are, we hope,  fully
    aware of the dangers of misuse of material of this sort. But these  two
    physical features seem to us to be so characteristic of the  period  of
    adolescence having finished that it may be  right  to  give  them  some
    weight, although they will, we think, never be of any help  in  picking
    an age within the teenage years.

19.  Our second observation relates to mental  maturity  and  demeanour.  So
    far as mental development is concerned, it is very difficult indeed  to
    see how any proper assessment can be made from a position of  ignorance
    as to the individual's age. Most assessments of mental development are,
    in essence, an assessment of whether the individual is at  average,  or
    below or above average, for his chronological age. Without knowing  the
    age, a person who appears to have a mental age of (say) 15 may  be  15,
    or he may be a bright 13 or 14 year old, or a dull 16 or 17  year  old.
    There is simply no way of telling. So far as demeanour is concerned, it
    seems to us that there may be value to be obtained from observations of
    demeanour and interaction with others made over a long period  of  time
    by those who have opportunity to observe an individual going about  his
    ordinary life. But  we  find  it  difficult  to  see  that  any  useful
    observations of demeanour or social interaction or maturity can be made
    in the course of a short interview between an individual and a  strange
    adult. There  may  of  course  be  cultural  difficulties  in  such  an
    interview but there are the ordinary social difficulties as well.

20.   The asserted expertise of a social worker conducting an  interview  is
    not in our judgement sufficient to  counteract  those  difficulties.  A
    person such as a teacher or even a family  member,  who  can  point  to
    consistent attitudes, and a  number  of  supporting  instances  over  a
    considerable  period  of  time,  is  likely  to   carry   weight   that
    observations made in the artificial surroundings of an interview cannot
    carry.

21.   Reactions from the  individual's  peers  are  also  likely  to  be  of
    assistance if they are available. We do not suggest  that  other  young
    people are qualified specifically to give evidence about the age  of  a
    colleague of theirs, nor should they be encouraged to do so. But  those
    who work with groups of young  people  see  how  they  react  with  one
    another and it seems to us likely that evidence of such interaction, if
    available, may well assist in making an age assessment, particularly if
    any necessary allowance for cultural differences can be made.

22.   Thirdly, we have, like others, used the phrase "expert evidence" as  a
    description of the evidence of the social workers called to support the
    claimant's case.  It  is,  however,  worth  pointing  out  that  expert
    evidence has, as such, no specific  place  in  Tribunal  procedure.  In
    court proceedings, governed by rules of evidence, however tenuous  they
    may now be in civil cases, the person demonstrating  qualifications  as
    an expert is thereby  entitled  to  give  evidence  which  may  contain
    opinions, and may be based on hearsay.  Neither  opinion  evidence  nor
    hearsay evidence  is  excluded  from  Tribunal  proceedings.  There  is
    therefore no specific status for an expert. Nevertheless, witnesses are
    tendered on the basis of their expertise, and we accept that what  they
    have to say may be more or less helpful according to  their  expertise.
    But, in our judgement, the assistance they can give  us  is  even  more
    closely linked to what it is that they have to say, and their basis for
    saying it.

23.    Finally, we should note that, as the task of age  assessment  is  for
    the court or the Tribunal, it is important that the court  or  Tribunal
    be given the material to perform  that  task.  When  all  the  material
    available has been gathered in, the judicial decision-maker  will  need
    to reach a final conclusion on it, and in reaching that conclusion  may
    want to, or decline to, act on evidence that is unsupported, and may in
    doing so decide that it can fairly resolve any doubts it has in  favour
    of one side or the other. In order for that to be  done,  the  judicial
    decision-maker needs to have the raw evidence. It needs to be told  the
    range of ages to which the evidence appears to point. It  needs  to  be
    advised as how to select an age within  that  range.  It  is  extremely
    unhelpful if, instead, the court is offered  an  opinion  which  itself
    purports to be a final determination of age, not giving any range  but,
    instead, selecting a particular age because the writer of  the  opinion
    has decided to give (or, it may be, refused to  give)  the  benefit  of
    doubt to the individual. The fact that a witness might wish, if  he  or
    she were the final decision-maker, to make the decision in that way  is
    of no assistance to, or even relevant to, the court or Tribunal.  If  a
    claimant is to be given the benefit of the doubt, that will be  because
    the judicial decision-maker concludes that that is the right  thing  to
    do on the basis of all the evidence, not merely that which  the  writer
    of an individual report took into account and not because the writer of
    that report thought that it would be right to do so.

24.   In the present proceedings, much time was  devoted  to  attempting  to
    disinter the actual information included in reports prepared on  behalf
    of the claimant which did not give any  proper  indication  as  to  the
    range of the possible ranges, but, instead, presumed (partly  silently)
    to make assumptions in favour of the  claimant.  As  we  say,  that  is
    unhelpful. If reliance is placed on such reports there is a risk of the
    benefit of the doubt being given a number of times;  there  is  a  risk
    amounting almost to a certainty that the court will be asked to act  on
    an opinion which is based on less evidence than the court  itself  has;
    and if the report is phrased in that  way  the  court  is  deprived  of
    having the evidence in a form on which it can properly act.

The Evidence


25.  The evidence falls into three broad categories. First,  there  is  what
    may be broadly described as "lay evidence". The claimant and his foster
    carers Mr and Mrs Patel have each given evidence describing  their  own
    experiences.  Secondly,  there  is   evidence   from   social   workers
    commissioned by and on behalf of the claimant to write 'expert reports'
    for the purposes of these proceedings. Thirdly, there is evidence  from
    various professionals, occupying various roles within  the  defendant's
    sphere of activity. This latter evidence is adduced principally for the
    purpose for supporting the assessments the defendant has  made  and  to
    which they have, in one way or another, contributed.

Lay evidence

26.  Because of his asylum claim, there is a considerable written record  of
    statements made by the claimant at various  stages.  Obviously  he  can
    give no direct evidence of the date of his birth. The statements he has
    made relate  to  his  reasons  for  movement  between  Afghanistan  and
    Pakistan; his journey to the United Kingdom; and his taskara. His claim
    to a date of birth giving him the age he asserts is, as  we  understand
    it, based solely on his taskara: he himself does not seek to support it
    in any other way. Indeed, in one of his witness statements he says that
    he did not know that he was the age he claims  until  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom and was told that this was the impact  of  the  date  of
    birth he claimed on the authority of what he had been told was  in  his
    taskara.

27.   The evidence about the taskara is partly curiously precise and  partly
    curiously vague. The claimant says that his brother got it for him, and
    that his mother gave it to  him,  but  he  gave  it  back  to  her  for
    safekeeping, because he knew it was an important  document.  Before  he
    left, to travel to the United Kingdom, his mother gave it back to  him.
    Or, at any rate, that is what he said in most of his evidence. Right at
    the end, he said that it was his maternal uncle who had given it to him
    to carry on his journey.  But his evidence was that it was  his  mother
    who told him that his brother had got it for him and advised him not to
    lose it.

28.   It is now lost. The circumstances are unknown. The claimant says  that
    he lost it some time on the journey and that he is sometimes careless.

29.   Before  it  was  lost,  however,  he  had  a  conversation  about  it.
    Somewhere on the journey, he cannot now  remember  where,  or  when,  a
    "friend", whose name  he  cannot  remember  (he  cannot  even  remember
    roughly how many people where travelling together at the  time)  looked
    at it. He looked at it because the claimant had asked him to look at it
    to ascertain his age. There had been some discussion between  the  boys
    on the journey and he was the one that did not  know  his  age.  So  he
    asked his friend to read the taskara and the friend did so. He told the
    claimant that the taskara said that he was born in the  year  AH  1373.
    The friend also told the claimant the month, but  the  claimant  cannot
    remember whether he was told that it was the sixth month or  the  ninth
    month and, as we have said  he  does  not  even  say  that  after  this
    conversation he knew his age. He knew only that the taskara  said  that
    he was born in AH 1373 and he claims to remember  that  date  with  the
    greatest precision, although he can remember so little else  about  the
    circumstances or content of the conversation.

30.   The claimant was asked a number of questions by Mr Holbrook on  behalf
    of the defendant about whether he  understood  the  importance  of  the
    taskara and the importance of being able to establish that he was under
    18. His answers amounted to a claim that  he  did  not  understand  the
    importance of anything. Despite asserting that he knew the document was
    important because he had been told so when  he  received  it  from  his
    mother (or uncle), he claims that he subsequently had no conception  of
    its importance. Despite needing it to be read in order to ascertain his
    age, for comparison with other people he was travelling with, he claims
    that, once it had been read, he did not know what his age was  and  had
    to be told after his arrival in this country.

31.    If the claimant had a taskara giving age 1373 as his date  of  birth,
    that would not resolve the issue of his age.  A  taskara  is  merely  a
    statement of inexpert opinion. It  is  obtained  by  making  assertions
    about identity and age to the local authority in Afghanistan.  But,  as
    it is the information upon which the claimant chiefly  relies  for  his
    own opinion of his own age, it is essential that we reach a view  about
    it.

32.   We have come to the conclusion that the claimant is  not  telling  the
    truth. First, some of the  details  given  about  the  history  of  the
    taskara are inconsistent. That may not be  a  matter  of  the  greatest
    importance, but the most glaring inconsistency is at just the point  at
    which this important document is  being  handed  over  to  him  with  a
    statement of its importance. Secondly, we regard  the  account  of  its
    reading on the journey and of what the claimant can  remember  of  that
    incident as wholly implausible. The one thing the  claimant  claims  to
    remember is the one thing that now helps him in his claim, even  though
    he asserts that he had no idea of its meaning or that it was important.



33.   Thirdly, we are confident that the claimant is not  in  general  being
    frank about his history or circumstances. EURODAC records show that  he
    was fingerprinted in Greece in October 2008. He has  never  volunteered
    that information: in his asylum interview he claimed  not  to  remember
    having been  fingerprinted.  Further,  he  has  never  admitted  having
    travelled for such a long time that he was in Greece by then and took a
    further period of over a year to  travel  from  Greece  to  the  United
    Kingdom. We do not think that the claimant has been  honest  about  his
    journey.

34.   There are other reasons for doubting the claimant's credibility.

35.   It is dear from the evidence derived from  the  education  authorities
    and the claimant's own social worker, and  not  as  we  understand  the
    matter challenged either at the time or before us,  that  the  claimant
    copied a signature of either Mr or Mrs Patel onto a document  on  which
    the school required their signatures, but which  they  had  refused  to
    sign.

36.    It is also clear from the defendant's evidence that the  claimant  is
    willing to pretend to have  less  education  (and,  particularly,  less
    English) than is in fact the case. When he first had contact  with  the
    education authorities in this country, he claimed to speak no  English.
    Three of the defendant's witnesses give good reasons for thinking  that
    that was not the true position. Ms Keen had originally assessed him  as
    having virtually no English, whereas a few weeks later he had much more
    than could possibly have been learnt in the interval.  She  gives  more
    details in the report she made to the  assessors  in  relation  to  the
    second age assessment, and in her second  witness  statement  dated  10
    October 2011. Ms  Cameron  said  in  her  witness  statement  that  the
    claimant was not open about his knowledge of English, and in  her  oral
    evidence said that his apparent ability to learn  so  much  in  such  a
    short time had caused her to doubt her own  experience.  Ms  Birdi  had
    already recorded in a note dated 17 March that  "surely  he  must  have
    learnt some English before he arrived?!", and in an  email  of  8  June
    2010, said this:

           "He certainly appears to understand far  more  than  an  average
           Afghan student who has only been in the UK for a matter of weeks
           and who is categorical that they  never  learnt  English  before
           coming to the country. In my experience  dealing  with  overseas
           students I would say that he has had access to far more  tuition
           than he says."

37.   So by March he had sufficient English for it to be  thought  by  those
    with experience of such matters that he must have spoken English before
    the date of his claimed arrival in the United Kingdom. By April he  was
    able to have a conversation  with  Ms  Keen,  one  of  the  defendant's
    witnesses, expressing himself in an assertive way, But then it looks as
    though in May he was again purporting to  speak  very  little  English,
    because a summary  minute  of  that  month  says  "speaks  very  little
    English", and in September he pretended not to understand a teacher who
    was telling him off in English.

38.  Mr Berry asked the claimant and other witnesses a number  of  questions
    about the claimant's linguistic abilities. The claimant  gave  evidence
    through an interpreter at the hearing. We make no criticism of him  for
    that, but it is clear that although he represented his understanding as
    minimal, he was able to understand many questions in English  and  when
    it came to the date "1373" he replied giving that date in English.

39.   There is no evidence that the claimant is a linguistic genius,  as  he
    would have to be in order to make progress that he  would  appear  from
    the evidence to have made between January and April 2010, if his  claim
    to understand no English on his arrival in January 2010 were the truth.
    And if he had made that progress it is difficult to understand  how  he
    could have failed to continue to make similar progress  in  the  period
    between then and the hearing. Our conclusion is that he has  a  greater
    knowledge of English than he is prepared to admit, and  in  general  it
    seems to us that he is a dishonest person who is  prepared  to  attempt
    deception to secure his ends.

40.   Mr and Mrs Patel, who it is said have looked after him since  he  came
    to the United Kingdom, gave oral evidence. They had recently  qualified
    as foster carers, and although they had no language in common with  the
    appellant, he was assigned to them as their first (and  so  far  as  we
    know, to date only) charge. He was with them until after the first  age
    assessment, the council withdrew its support for his foster  care,  and
    relocated him in a hostel. The claimant has said that  he  hated  being
    there, and the evidence is that he left the hostel and came back to  Mr
    and Mrs Patel. They told us that he lived  with  them,  and  that  they
    considered him as a member of a family. As a result, the position is at
    the date of the hearing before us, it is said  that  the  claimant  had
    lived with the Patels for about 21 months, all but a few days.

41.   In that context it is astonishing that they were able to  tell  us  so
    little about him. Mrs Patel seemed clear that her opinion was that what
    the claimant said about his age that is to say, that he was 15 when  he
    came to live them -was the truth. She described  his  getting  on  well
    with her own youngest son, who is 17. She was able to  give  two  -  we
    think only two -examples showing that he is not mature. He does not put
    his clothes away, and he said he would mend a bicycle but took a hammer
    to it and broke it.

42.   There is a record of an interview conducted by the defendant's  social
    workers with Mrs Patel alone, in which it is  recorded  that  she  said
    that the claimant might be 18 or 19. In her oral  evidence  she  denied
    saying that and reasserted that she thought that the claimant  was  the
    age that he claimed.

43.   Mr Patel has, if the account of the claimant's  present  circumstances
    is to be believed, taken on the role of his father.  Mr  Patel  is  the
    senior male in the house in which it is said that the claimant has been
    living. Mr Patel is unemployed: he is at home all  the  time.  He  says
    that he accompanies the claimant to prayers four times  a  day  in  the
    mosque. But he was entirely unable to say  anything  substantial  about
    the claimant as a person save that he used to leave his clothes  around
    and used to leave lights on and did not clean the bath. Mr  Patel  said
    that he had had no conversation with  the  claimant  about  whether  he
    shaved, which we do consider rather remarkable in a relationship  which
    is said to be that of foster father and adolescent son.

44.   What was also  remarkable  about  Mr  Patel's  evidence  was  that  he
    described the time in which the claimant lived in his house  as  having
    been nine months and as being in the past. When he  was  challenged  on
    that, he gave an answer which, so far as we were able to understand it,
    amounted to saying that he was only counting the  period  when  he  was
    receiving payment for the claimant's residence with him.

45.   We simply do not know what the truth of the matter  is.  Although  the
    claimant and the Patels say that they live together  as  a  family,  it
    looks as though part of Mr Patel's evidence is either that they do  not
    live together, or that he does not regard the claimant as a  member  of
    his family unless he  is  receiving  payment.  Neither  of  the  Patels
    appears to have the knowledge that one would expect of two  adults  who
    have been living in the same household as  a  boy  for  a  considerable
    period of time, even if they had not been, as they claim to have  been,
    taking an interest in him almost  as  a  son.  Mr  Holbrook  sought  to
    persuade us to discount their evidence on the basis that  they  have  a
    financial interest in establishing that the claimant is under  the  age
    of 18, because it is only if he is, that  they  are  paid  for  looking
    after him. We do not need to take that view. We say simply that Mr  and
    Mrs Patel are not experts in age assessment. They  appear  to  have  no
    perception of the cultural differences between their own  children,  of
    Guajarati background and  English  upbringing,  and  the  claimant  who
    claims  to  have  a  wholly  Afghan   background.   Despite   all   the
    opportunities which it is said that they have had, they do not  cite  a
    wealth of observations to show the claimant behaving as a child. We  do
    not think that it can be said  that  in  reality  their  evidence  adds
    anything to the claimant's case.

The claimant's expert evidence

46.   Elaine Fehrman describes herself as an independent social worker.  She
    is currently in  full  time  employment  in  healthcare.  She  received
    instructions on 17  February  2010,  interviewed  the  claimant  on  19
    February 2010 and prepared and completed her report, 41 pages,  on  the
    same day. In her report she details at some length  what  the  claimant
    told her about his history. She then embarks on a criticism of the  age
    assessments already made by Solihull, remarking in particular that  (a)
    no detailed references were made to the use of interpreters or to their
    qualifications;  (b)  there  was  a  lack   of   specificity   as   the
    qualifications of Solihull's social workers (c) there was reliance on a
    report that the claimant's third molars were all  present  on  17  June
    2010 without providing the report to her; (d)  there  was  reliance  in
    general on the claimant's physical presentation as pointing to  an  age
    older than he claimed, and (e) there was a failure to give reasons that
    she considered adequate. After that critique, Ms  Fehrman  goes  on  to
    make her assessment. It is that  "there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
    undermine [the claimant's] credibility", and, at paragraph 16.7:

           "I am of the view that there is no credible evidence to indicate
           that [the claimant's] assertion that he is not 18 years old  and
           is age 16 is untrue. I conclude that [his]  age  is  as  he  has
           claimed in that he will be 17 years old in  September  2011.  He
           should therefore  benefit  from  the  safeguards  in  place  for
           children of the asylum process, should this be granted."

47.   That last  phrase,  and  a  similar  phrase  used  in  the  subsequent
    paragraph, shows that Ms Fehrman was not aware that  the  claimant  had
    been granted asylum nearly a year previously. Perhaps he did  not  tell
    her. Clearly she did not have,  or  apparently  seek,  a  comprehensive
    knowledge even of those aspects of  his  situation  that  were  readily
    ascertainable. As a result of Mr Holbrook's questions to her in  cross-
    examination, she accepted that  some  of  the  criticism  she  made  of
    Solihull's process were misplaced.

48.    She was asked why she had reached the particular assessment that  she
    had. She said that it was because Home Office policy was  to  give  the
    benefit of the doubt to the person claiming to be a child.  That  is  a
    further reflection of what must be regarded as  her  ignorance  of  the
    purpose of the assessment. The Home Office were not  currently  in  any
    way involved; the Home Office had made its decision. But, in any event,
    as we have said, what is required from a person such as an  independent
    social worker is an assessment of relevant facts, giving the  range  of
    possible conclusions so that the final decision-maker, whoever that may
    be, can assess the age, giving at that stage, whatever benefit of doubt
    appears to be applicable. What, on the contrary, Ms Fehrman appears  to
    have done is to have discounted all the evidence  tending  against  the
    claimant's claim, reached her own view that  he  was  credible  in  his
    account of the taskara, and made her assessment  by  reference  to  his
    claim. That is done specifically on the basis that there is nothing  in
    his presentation, account or demeanour to show that his  claim  is  not
    the truth. What Ms Fehrman entirely fails to do is  to  decide  whether
    there is anything showing that it is the truth.

49.   The latter became perfectly apparent when she was asked  to  say  what
    she thought were the youngest and oldest ages that the  claimant  could
    be. She first said that she was not  prepared  to  give  a  figure  for
    either boundary, although she was also unable to say how  it  was  that
    she was able to fix an age without any  conception  of  the  boundaries
    within which she was doing so. She then, as it appears  to  us,  simply
    tried to minimise the damage to her own written report that was  caused
    by the questions being asked. She accepted that what she  described  as
    "the publications" indicated a margin of error of 5 years  either  way.
    She was asked again what the range was for this claimant. She  said  12
    to 22: in other words, she gave a range of 5 years each side of her own
    assessment. But she also accepted that there was no question  that  the
    claimant was not 12. She declined to accept that  the  realistic  range
    was about 17 to 26, and that 16 or 17 was the very  youngest  that  the
    claimant might be. She was unable to give any reason for her refusal to
    accept that, nor did she provide any explanation  of  what  giving  the
    claimant the benefit of the doubt meant, if it did  not  mean  allowing
    him to establish an age at the lower end of the applicable range.

50.    Ms Fehrman's report is, in our judgement, wholly unsatisfactory.  She
    brings nothing to the assessment of the claimant's age other  than  his
    own claim about the taskara and  her  largely  unmerited  criticism  of
    others. She declines to take into account evidence which is  likely  to
    be of some relevance (for example that relating to the emergence of his
    molars) and is ill-informed about his status and whether the report  is
    being compiled for the purposes of the Home Office. Whether the defects
    in her report are attributable, or partly attributable, to  the  period
    of what must  have  been  less  than  48  hours  between  her  original
    instructions and her completion of a quite lengthy document, we do  not
    know. In any  event,  her  report  does  not  assist  us  to  make  any
    assessment of the claimant's age.

51.    Ms Fehrman's oral evidence added little to  the  report,  other  than
    indicating very clearly that she was more concerned to adopt  what  she
    described as "anti-oppressive" attitude to the claimant than  to  reach
    any independent view of his age.  Her  acceptance  that  even  her  own
    opinion gave a possible range of  12  to  22  for  the  claimant's  age
    necessarily deprives her evidence of much of its possible relevance  or
    force. It is clear that she did  not  have  in  mind  a  range  equally
    distributed around the age she assessed, however, because  she  herself
    said that 12 was impossible and her assessment gave  the  claimant  the
    benefit of the doubt. The 10 year range for the purposes of reading her
    report must in truth be one which has its  boundaries  at  considerably
    more than 12 and 22 respectively.

52.    Simon Shreeve  and  Carey  Baff  prepared  a  report  and  gave  oral
    evidence.

53.    The report is dated 21 July 2011 and is signed by both of them.  They
    interviewed the claimant and Mr Patel and considered  information  from
    other sources. Towards the end of the report they write as follows:

         "The following 'weighting scale' has been devised by the  assessors
         [sic] to help demonstrate the apportioned  weight  applied  to  the
         information gathered within this assessment"

    A number of factors are then set out, grouped or divided in a way  that
    is not immediately apparent, and to each  group  there  is  assigned  a
    "weight", a number which the keys set out below the table  shows  could
    be between 0 and 5, although in fact there are no Os and no 5s. Some of
    the factors identified  point  to  greater  maturity,  others  to  less
    maturity; sometimes factors pointing in opposite directions are grouped
    together and given a single "weight". For example, the  first  item  in
    the list is as follows:

            "Physical appearance and demeanour:

         His body hair, adam's apple and general physical appearance suggest
         he is past his mid-teenage years and possibly an  adult.  Demeanour
         during  assessment  was  of  an  adolescent  who  had  not  reached
         adulthood.
          Weight: 4".

54. No information is given as to how the weighting is ascertained from the
    factors pointing in different directions, and in fact the  conclusions,
    which  immediately  follow  this  list,  make  no  reference   to   the
    weightings. We will set out the conclusions in full:

         "[AM] does not claim to have definite knowledge of his age, but has
         reported what he was told by a relative stranger.  The  only  doubt
         about his credibility would arise if his fingerprints were taken in
         Greece in October 2008. However the information he believes  to  be
         on his Taskera cannot be tested or held  as  reliable  information.
         Therefore it is believed necessary to evaluate his age entirely  on
         the  basis  of  his  presentation  and  on  the  other  information
         available.

         Had [AM] been 18 in January 2010 he would now be over 19  years of
         age, but neither his behaviour during the interview and as reported
         by Mr Patel, nor the  extent  of  his  body  hair  growth  and  the
         presence of acne spots suggest a young person of that age. Further,
         for the  reasons  elaborated  in  section  7  [health  and  medical
         assessments] it is not believed that  the  assessments  of  May  to
         September 2010 and December 2010 gave  reasons  to  retrospectively
         assess his  age  to  January  2010.  A  considerable  body  of  the
         information included in these assessments have been available  from
         at least mid January 2010, but had not then caused [AM's] age to be
         doubted.

         It is believed probable that he was at  or  near  the  end  of  his
         growth to adulthood when he was admitted to  care,  which  is  more
         indicative of a young person who is then  somewhat  older  than  15
         years 3 months, and very probably at least 16 years of  age.  While
         the  presence  of  third  molars  cannot  be  the  sale  basis  for
         evaluating age by June 20103114 of [AM's] third  molars  had  fully
         erupted: the research reported by Olze et al (ibid) does not assist
         in dearly evaluating age from this  data  although  and  [sic}  the
         lower age for the eruption of both upper and lower third molars  in
         the research by Chagula, cited by Olze et al is  17.  Sheila  Birdi
         also believed he was aged between 17 and 19.

         The majority of professionals with significant  contact  with  [AM]
         have believed him to be older than his given age, but there  is  no
         consensus that he was an adult at the beginning of 2010 or  even  6
         months later.

         Taking this into account and the expressed  views  of  Mr  and  Mrs
         Patel along with other professionals, it is concluded [AM]  was  at
         least 16  years of age when he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         Assessors are aware of the duty to award the benefit of  the  doubt
         to [AM] and on this basis we find it very likely he was below 16  
         years of age on arrival in the UK and therefore we conclude he  has
         probably attained his 18th birthday in the recent past.

         DOB is estimated to be 1 June 1993."

55.  Certainly  on  its  face  the  report  appears  to  be  a  careful  and
   comprehensive analysis of the information with attention being also given
   to the  differing  value  that  various  observed  factors  may  have  in
   assessing the claimant's age. It may well have been a report in this form
   that prompted the comments of Mr Neil Garnham QC in his  judgement  in  R
   (N) v Croydon [2011] EWHC 862 (Admin) at [23]:

        "I turn to the final social worker evidence, namely the evidence of
        the independent social worker Simon Shreeve. His is, if I  may  say
        so, by far the most impressive analysis of the issues that arise in
        this case that I have seen. Whilst it can fairly be  said  that  he
        saw the claimant alone and it might have been preferable if he  had
        conducted the interview with another social worker, nonetheless his
        is a balanced and well reasoned report. His formal age  assessments
        record issues of significance that point away from  the  claimant's
        primary case. His report strikes me as more compelling as a  result
        of that willingness to  contemplate  and  address  the  alternative
        point of view".

56. Before us, as we have indicated, both of the authors of the report  gave
   evidence, and it is the answers that they  gave  particularly  in  cross-
   examination that causes us to differ very  substantially  from  the  view
   expressed by Mr Garnham.

57. Although she gave evidence  second,  we  will  take  Ms  Baff  first.  A
   surprising feature of the evidence of the two authors of the  report  was
   that they were unable to agree on who had produced the  first  draft.  Mr
   Shreeve said he had; Ms Baff, challenged in  cross-examination,  insisted
   that she had. Ms Baff added that she had  not  previously  been  familiar
   with the weighting scale used by Mr Shreeve, although the  report  itself
   describes the weighting scale as having been devised  by  the  assessors,
   that is to say both of them. Her evidence was  that  the  assessment  was
   accurate to within a year either side. That, as we  shall  see,  is  very
   different from what Mr Shreeve  said.  Further,  and  very  surprisingly,
   despite the clear assessment that at the date of the report the  claimant
   was just over 18, Ms Baff said that she did not think he was. So  far  as
   her own methodology is concerned, she told us that she  had  thought  the
   claimant's demeanour pointed to an age of  15  to  16,  but  that  other
   factors pushed the age up. She declined to accept  the  possibility  that
   the claimant had been deliberately adopting  the  demeanour  of  a  young
   person. She said that she would have been "very surprised" to learn  that
   the claimant was over 18 on his arrival.

58. We can only assume that Ms Baff's cooperation in the production  of  the
   report was sought by Mr Shreeve in order to meet the  point  made  by  Mr
   Garnham that it would have been better to have two social workers. It was
   quite clear from her oral evidence that Ms Baff did not fully  understand
   the contents of what she had signed; it is further obvious from comparing
   her oral evidence with that of Mr Shreeve that they took  very  different
   views of the assessment of the material as a whole. Ms Baff  gave  us  no
   real reason for preferring her oral evidence to that of the report  which
   she had signed, and offered no explanation for the differences.  Her  own
   method of assessing age appears to be purely impressionistic, and she  is
   apparently content to use that method after a  single  meeting  with  the
   claimant. It does not appear to  us  that  her  evidence  added  anything
   useful to the case at all. Nor do we think that she had  any  real  input
   into the report, which we shall refer to as the 'Shreeve Report'.

59. We look then in more detail at  the  Shreeve  Report  and  at  the  oral
   evidence given by Mr Shreeve.

60. Mr Shreeve said that he had performed a similar number  of  assessments,
   but had only once previously been subject to any cross-examination. Thus,
   as it seems to us, the evidence about the real  meaning  of  his  report,
   given in the course of the present case, is of considerable importance.

61. Only one clear feature showed itself. That  was  Mr  Shreeve's  decision
   that, on the basis of his assessment of  the  claimant's  credibility  in
   relation to his own story, he should assign to the claimant an  age  very
   near the lowest possible age for the evidence he was evaluating.  We  are
   inclined to agree with Mr Holbrook that Mr Shreeve was seeking  to  avoid
   indicating the boundaries within which he had selected the age  (or  date
   of birth) identified in  his  report.  He  claimed  that  he  was  always
   accurate within a year, and that he could sometimes estimate age  with  a
   tolerance of 6  months.  But  further  questioning  revealed  that  those
   figures were hopelessly ambitious. He accepted that, from the material he
   had seen, the claimant could, on his arrival in the United Kingdom,  have
   been between about 16  and 22 or 23 years old. He had chosen the age  he
   had, in order to give the claimant the benefit of the doubt.  There  was,
   so far as we could understand his evidence, no other reason for  choosing
   that age rather than any of the other ages within the available range.

62. That evidence is very troubling. There is no suggestion at  all  in  the
   Shreeve Report that the evidence would have been capable (indeed, so  far
   as we understand the matter, equally capable) of supporting an age of  22
    on arrival, 6 years more than that assessed.

63. We have already given our observations on the role  of  the  benefit  of
   the doubt and its application by decision-makers  other  than  the  final
   decision-maker. Here we pause only to inquire into the basis  upon  which
   Mr Shreeve attributed so much benefit to the claimant. We are  completely
   unable to understand  it.  In  the  table  of  weightings  there  is  the
   following entry:

       "Social history and family composition:
      His account of leaving Afghanistan  and  the  journey  to  the  United
      Kingdom has been consistent, although if his fingerprints  were  taken
      in Greece in October 2008 there would be significant doubts about  the
      veracity of his account.
      Weight: 1"

64. The weighting of "Figure l" means, according to the key  to  the  table,
   "unsupported/unable    to    substantiate,    but     cannot     entirely
   discredit/discount." There is no other entry in the  list  of  weightings
   that relates to the claimant's credibility as  to  his  history.  If  the
   judgement of credibility was to be given only a weight of  1,  we  cannot
   understand how it came to have such a massive impact in choosing  an  age
   at the very bottom of the available range.

65. Whilst giving his evidence, Mr Shreeve was asked to look at the  EURODAC
   record of the claimant's fingerprinting in Greece, and after  looking  at
   it, he said that he accepted it, but commented that the Home  Office  had
   been aware of that material but had accepted the  claimant's  account  of
   his age. But he did not say that the weighting needed to be changed,  nor
   did he say that his award of the  benefit  of  the  doubt  needed  to  be
   changed.

66. There are other matters that cause concern. In the course  of  his  oral
   evidence, Mr Shreeve said that he himself had looked  at  the  claimant's
   teeth, and had noted that the molars had fully erupted. He accepted  that
   that was an  important  indicator  of  adulthood,  and  agreed  that  the
   claimant's tooth development was more indicative of an adult in his  20's
   than his claimed age. But the fact that  his  third  molars  had  erupted
   fully is not mentioned in the report itself but only in the  conclusions.
   In the report, where the evidence is set out, it is said  is  first  that
   they had "erupted"; and then "all third molars were present  at  least  a
   year ago" is given a weighting of 4. Mr Shreeve was  aware  of  the  Olze
   paper, he refers to it. He was therefore aware that the stage of eruption
   is of importance. He knew from his own observation that  this  claimant's
   molars had reached the last stage. But instead of looking at  the  matter
   dispassionately in the course of setting out the evidence, he  cites  the
   paper only to show that the age he has chosen is not  wholly  ruled  out.
   Despite the weighting, the matter is virtually discounted in the  overall
   assessment which we have set out above.  That  is  the  converse  of  the
   process we have noted in relation to the claimant's credibility.  Whereas
   on that matter, material with a low weighting had a great effect, on  the
   present, a high weighting has very little effect.

67. In his oral evidence, Mr Shreeve accepted  that  the  claimant's  height
   and weight and cessation of growth pointed to his adulthood. That is  not
   different from what was said in  the  report,  but,  as  we  have  noted,
   'general physical appearance' is given a weighting  only  in  combination
   with an assessment of demeanour pointing in the opposite  direction.  Now
   that we know the way the  Shreeve  Report  treats  one  physical  feature
   pointing clearly towards an older age, this treatment of another physical
   feature strikes us as somewhat suspicious. There is another difficulty in
   relation to acne. Acne is not mentioned in  the  list  of  features  with
   weighting, but is mentioned in the conclusions, as set out above.  It  is
   there clearly indicated that the claimant's acne suggests that he is  not
   as old as 19  at the date of the report. In oral  evidence,  Mr  Shreeve
   said that young men often have acne in their early 20's.

68. In the course of his oral evidence Mr Shreeve indicated that he did  not
   claim that his assessment was any more accurate than those undertaken  by
   the defendant. Indeed he acknowledged  that  his  having  only  seen  the
   claimant on one occasion might make it less reliable; but added that  the
   defendant might be regarded as having an interest in asserting  that  the
   claimant was an adult, whereas he, Mr Shreeve, was entirely independent.

69. Mr  Shreeve's  evidence  makes  it  clear  to  us  that  he  is  neither
   independent nor reliable. The position is that the material  he  gathered
   showed merely that the claimant was between about 16  and about 22 (or a
   little more) on  arrival,  and  18  months  older  at  the  time  of  his
   examination. Given that bracket, he selected almost the  lowest  possible
   age, on the basis of a judgement of credibility which he regarded  as  of
   little importance and which collapses in the light of the  actual  facts.
   The truth of the matter is  that  Mr  Shreeve  had  no  good  reason  for
   choosing a particular date of birth between about the summer of 1987  and
   the summer of 1993. His choice of the latter date  to  the  exclusion  of
   others shows, in our judgement, a clear intention to assist the  claimant
   rather than to assist any other fact finder.

70. It seems to us that the Shreeve Report is a rather  dangerous  document.
   It looks as though it has been written by  somebody  who  takes  all  the
   relevant evidence into account. That appearance is misleading.  It  looks
   as though it was written by someone who applies a  clear  methodology  of
   weighting to the evidence pointing in various directions. That appearance
   too is misleading. It looks as though there  must  be  some  good  reason
   behind the eventual assessment of the subject's age. That appearance  too
   is misleading.

71. Mr Shreeve's willingness to accept as a co-assessor, who signs a  report
   with him, Ms Baff, who, as we discovered, neither fully  understands  the
   impact of the report nor agrees with its  conclusions,  further  detracts
   from Mr Shreeve's professional  credibility.  Again,  the  appearance  of
   validation given by a second signature is seriously misleading.

72. Anybody reading the report alone,  might  conclude  that  it  should  be
   given considerable weight and that there was good reason to suppose  that
   the claimant's date of birth was about 1 June 1993. Without oral evidence
   we might have taken precisely that view. When the full picture  as  seen,
   it is clear that all that can be  said  on  the  basis  of  Mr  Shreeve's
   evidence is that the claimant was, at the date of its writing,  somewhere
   between about 18 and about 25 years old. We find it difficult to see  how
   the report in its present form can be regarded as honest.

The defendant's evidence

73. As well as written material, the defendant  called  oral  evidence  from
   six witnesses. The formal age assessments were made by Helen Guizani  and
   Chris Collins in May 2010 and Cornelia Heaney and Shamayla  Anwer  on  17
   December 2010. All gave oral evidence with the exception of  Ms  Guizani.
   There was also oral evidence from Sheila Birdi (formerly  Corkery),  Kate
   Keen and Lisa Cameron, all of whom have encountered the claimant  in  the
   course of his education. The formal age  assessments  take  into  account
   material from other sources as well, including the claimant  himself  and
   Mr and Mrs Patel, as well as other informants, in particular, Emma  Rose,
   the claimant's social worker.

74. None of those eight people considered that the claimant was as young  as
   he claimed. The formal age assessments both adopted and assessed date  of
   birth of 1 January 1992. In their witness statements, the assessors  gave
   their more recent view, and sometimes a span. Ms Collins  said  that  she
   believed he was over 18 on his arrival in the United Kingdom and  in  her
   oral evidence said that he might have been as much as 22 or  23  at  that
   time. Ms Guizani's witness statement indicated her  confidence  that  the
   claimant was an adult in January 2010 and was at least  21  by  3  August
   2011. Mr Berry challenged Ms Collins on some of the methods she had  used
   in gathering information and making the first assessment.  She  responded
   that she had taken a view against the credibility of the claimant and  Mr
   Patel. She thought in particular that the latter had misled her and as  a
   result she had perhaps not put as much to him as she might have done.  Ms
   Heaney has considerable experience working with children  of  known  ages
   between 14 and 17, and with care  leavers.  Her  view  expressed  in  her
   witness statement and confirmed at the hearing was that it  was  "not  at
   all likely" that the claimant was the age he claimed. She  was  confident
   that he was an adult when he arrived, and that by June 2011 he  might  be
   as old as the oldest care leaversl that is to say 24: she thought it  was
   more likely that he was around 21. Her co-assessor, Ms  Anwer,  also  has
   experience working with those up to 24. She thought the claimant was more
   like a care leaver than a looked after child. She thought it  was  highly
   unlikely that the claimant is the age he states and was confident that he
   is an adult but "may be under the age of 24 years".

75. In answer to  Mr  Berry's  questions  in  cross-examination,  Ms  Heaney
   accepted that she had not interviewed Mr Patel, because she had been able
   to speak to Mrs Patel and did not think that  she  did  not  have  enough
   material to make the assessment.  She  said  that  she  took  a  cautious
   attitude to the possibility of regarding the claimant's  account  of  his
   travel as lacking in credibility, despite the difficulties caused by  the
   EURODAC evidence. She was also cautious about accepting  dental  evidence
   as providing proof of adulthood. In  his  questions,  Mr  Berry  did  not
   specifically challenge Ms Heaney's assessment as contained in her witness
   statement and her oral evidence.

76. Ms Keen has experience of dealing with children and  adults  of  various
   nationalities as learners of English. She  was  responsible  for  initial
   assessment of his abilities in English. She does not claim  expertise  in
   age assessment, but in comparison with others with whom she has dealt  in
   the course of her work, she thought that the claimant seemed  older  than
   the age he claimed. She had what she called a "gut sense" that he was  an
   adult or at least a very mature young man, and significantly  older  than
   his claimed age of 15 when he was at her unit in early 2010. In her  oral
   evidence she said that she thought that he was most likely to  have  been
   about 19, but thought his age might be anything between  17  and  25.  In
   cross-examination she emphasised that she had  concerns  related  to  the
   impact of what she might say about her views of his age. She did not want
   him to be deprived of the help that  education  could  give  him,  whilst
   appreciating that if her suspicions were right, he  was  too  old  to  be
   entitled to the services he was receiving.

77. Ms Cameron's professional knowledge is also as  a  teacher  of  English.
   She has worked with people between the ages of 16  and  21.  She  thought
   that the claimant was older than his claimed age of 15  when he  was  at
   the unit at which she was working in early 2010. At the hearing she  said
   that the lowest age he could have been at that time was 17 .  The  upper
   age would have been 21 to 22, but she considered it most likely  that  he
   had been aged about 19. Ms Birdi has experience working with speakers  of
   other languages learning English, from a large variety of backgrounds and
   of various ages. She first encountered the claimant in March 2010 and was
   from the beginning suspicious of his claimed age and background.  In  her
   witness statement she summarised views she had received from  colleagues,
   including one teacher who thought he was much older than his claimed age,
   one that he seemed older than the rest of the  class,  two  who  made  no
   comment on his age, and one who said that she had no concerns  about  his
   age. She had contact with Ms Rose  in  relation  to  allegations  of  his
   misbehaviour. Based on her professional experience as a secondary  school
   teacher, she estimated the claimant to be "more like  a  17  to  19  year
   old".

78. Material from Ms Keen, Ms Cameron and Ms Birdi and Ms  Rose,  was  taken
   into account by  Ms  Heaney  and  Ms  Anwer  in  making  the  second  age
   assessment. There are two particular features which in our judgement  are
   of importance. We have set them out at paragraphs 35-39 above; we  return
   to them briefly here.

79. There seems to us to be no reason to doubt either of these  elements  of
   the evidence, or of their implications. They confirm the  view  that  the
   claimant is not a person who is entitled to credit: on the  contrary,  he
   is prepared to practice deception in order to secure his  ends.  Further,
   the conclusion that we reach, on the basis  of  the  educators'  evidence
   that the claimant had more  knowledge  of  English  than  he  could  have
   acquired since his arrival in the United Kingdom, does not  merely  throw
   doubt on his account of his history: it indicates that there are parts of
   his life as yet undisclosed by him. That in itself suggests that he  must
   be older than he claims, because the account of  his  life  that  he  has
   given has no space for his having previously learnt any English.

80. That factor goes towards our conclusion that his evidence is not  worthy
   of credit. We see no reason to believe that he ever had a taskara  giving
   his date of birth as AH 1373. That does not  mean  that  he  is  the  age
   assessed by the Local Authority. It simply means that his own  evidential
   input to the process is of minimal weight.

Our Assessment

81. We must make the best assessment of the claimant's age that we  can,  on
   the basis of the evidence we have heard and seen, and the  opinions  that
   have been shared with us. We have concluded, for  a  number  of  reasons,
   that the evidence from the Local Authority's side is, on the whole, to be
   preferred.

82. There is in our judgement reason to doubt the truth,  in  partiality  or
   integrity, in part  at  least,  of  all  the  claimant's  witnesses.  The
   claimant himself has not been truthful about his taskara, he has not been
   frank about his travel, he has claimed to have less knowledge of  English
   than he has, and he has shown other signs of dishonesty. Mr and Mrs Patel
   were prepared to say astonishingly little about the claimant's life  with
   them and their opportunities  for  observing  him.  Mr  Patel's  evidence
   appeared to be given on the basis that  the  claimant  was  not  in  fact
   living with them at the time of the hearing. Ms Fehrman's report is of no
   assistance; Mr Shreeve's was clearly written with an aim of assisting the
   claimant rather than the court. In contrast, there  was  nothing  in  the
   Local Authority evidence that caused us to think  that  to  any  material
   extent it had any of the vices we have identified in the evidence on  the
   claimant's behalf.  Indeed,  many  of  the  individual  elements  of  the
   evidence, and the opinions, were not challenged by Mr Berry in his cross-
   examination. Further, the Local Authority had access to,  and  used,  the
   evidence of those who had seen the claimant with others  of  his  claimed
   age group, and who themselves had wide experience of dealing  with  young
   people of various ages. As we have said above, we consider  this  feature
   to be of some importance.

83. We think that the first age assessment by  Ms  Collins  and  Ms  Guizani
   does have some defects. It was clear from her evidence  that  Ms  Collins
   took an early and adverse attitude to the information being received from
   the claimant and the Patels. We do not think it would  be  right  to  say
   that she closed her mind to the possibility that her judgement was wrong,
   but it may well be that the assessment that she made, whether or  not  it
   was right, was based on more limited  information  than  it  should  have
   been. We are content to say that, as an  assessment,  it  should  not  be
   relied upon: we do not, however, take the view that that means  that  the
   matters recorded in it are of no value.  The  second  assessment,  by  Ms
   Heaney and Ms Anwer, is one which does appear to have taken into  account
   all relevant matters and done so in  a  balanced  way.  We  have  already
   mentioned Ms Heaney's clear evidence that she was not swayed  by  general
   opinion as to the adverse effect of untruths about a claimant's  journey,
   or evidence of the development of his teeth. She appears  to  have  taken
   particular care in relation to the evidence she received from Mrs Patel.

84. Ms Heaney and Ms Anwer, in making their assessment, and  in  common,  as
   it seems to  us,  with  all  those  who  provided  information  from  the
   defendant's side, made no attempt to put the claimant's age at either end
   of any span that they identified. On the contrary, they all  appeared  to
   have made a genuine attempt to give a span and to judge an age within it.
   That in itself contrasts with Ms Fehrman and Mr  Shreeve,  each  of  whom
   selected an age, did not initially disclose a span, and were subsequently
   shown to have chosen an age at the very bottom of the span  they  had  in
   mind.

85. Although the formal  assessment  by  Ms  Heaney  gave  the  claimant  an
   estimated date of  birth  of  1  January  1992,  Ms  Heaney's  considered
   evidence in her witness statement and at the hearing was that he might be
   as old as 24 but was more likely around 21 in June  2011.  Assessing  the
   claimant's age at 21 on that date would thus be in  accordance  with  the
   opinion of the most senior Local Authority social  worker  and  would  be
   consistent with almost all the other  credible  evidence  in  this  case,
   including the assessments of the other Local  Authority  social  workers,
   the age span  eventually  adopted  by  Mr  Shreeve  and  that  grudgingly
   accepted by Ms Fehrman, and two of  the  three  witnesses  who  had  been
   involved in the claimant's education.  Only  Ms  Birdi's  evidence  would
   exclude that age: her suggested span would give a maximum age  of  20  on
   the date in question.

86. It seems to us that  it  is  appropriate  for  us  to  decide  that  the
   claimant was aged 21 at the end of June 2011. If that is so, his  twenty-
   first birthday may have occurred on any date between June 2010  and  July
   2011. We assign to him a nominal birthday of 1 January, which is  halfway
   between those two dates, and assess his date of birth as 1 January 1990.

Conclusion

87. On the basis of our assessment, the claimant was not  a  minor  when  he
   entered the United Kingdom, and was not and is not entitled  to  services
   as a minor or a former relevant child. His claim is dismissed.

88. There will be a declaration that the claimant  was  born  on  1  January
   1990, and the orders for anonymity and interim relief will be discharged.
   We will hear counsel if they cannot agree on the form of the order.


                                             C M G OCKELTON
                                             VICE PRESIDENT, UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                             IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
