
                                                       [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

KG (Gurkhas- overage dependants - policy) Nepal [2011] UKUT 00117 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|on 24 January 2011                   |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                         SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McKEE


                                   Between


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     KG
                                      Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr John Parkinson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     Mr Christian Howells, instructed by N.C. Brothers  &
Co.

Neither the concession in Limbu [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin)  nor  the  judgment
of Blake J can be regarded as giving any rights  to  an  over-age  dependant
family member of a former Gurkha.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  On 8 May 2008 Miss KG, a citizen of Nepal then aged 35 (who is  now  the
respondent before the Upper Tribunal,  but  whom  I  shall  for  convenience
continue to refer to as 'the appellant'), applied  for  entry  clearance  as
the dependant of her father, who had retired from the Brigade of Gurkhas  in
1984, but in 2006 had obtained settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
strength of his military service.  Her application was  refused  on  4  June
2008 under paragraph 317 of the Immigration  Rules,  and  on  23  June  2008
notice of appeal was given, contending that the application  ought  to  have
been considered under the  policy  set  out  at  Chapter  29  of  the  Entry
Clearance Guidance, dealing with 'Settlement entry for former members of  HM
Forces and their dependants'. In  particular,  the  appellant  was  said  to
satisfy the criteria laid down at paragraph 29.14, while Article 8 ECHR  was
also invoked.  Despite this, when the decision  was  reviewed  by  an  Entry
Clearance Manager on 15 June 2010, regard was had  instead  to  Chapter  15,
section  2A,  paragraph  13.2  of   the   Immigration   Departmental   (sic)
Instructions, which require "exceptional circumstances"  before  an  overage
child can be admitted.

2.  The gap of nearly two  years  between  the  original  decision  and  the
review is to be explained by the celebrated High Court proceedings in  Limbu
& ors [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin) and the policy  review  which  followed.   In
this case, Mr Justice Blake considered Chapter 29  of  the  Entry  Clearance
Guidance (or Diplomatic Service  Procedures,  as  they  are  called  in  his
judgment) in so far as they provided for the admission  of  Gurkhas  seeking
settlement in the United Kingdom after their discharge from HM  Forces,  who
were not admissible under paragraphs 276E-K of the  Immigration  Rules.   In
particular, his Lordship had to analyse the discretion given to  ECOs  under
paragraph 29.4  "where  an  applicant  does  not  meet  the  requirement  of
discharge from the British Army in Nepal after 1  July  1997,  or  discharge
not more than 2 years prior to the date of application.  Discretion  may  be
exercised to waive those  requirements  in  cases  where  there  are  strong
reasons why settlement in the UK is appropriate."  Four  bullet  points  are
then set out, listing factors which should be considered in  exercising  the
discretion.  "If one or more of the factors listed above are  present",  the
paragraph  continues,  "ECOs  may  exercise  discretion  and   grant   entry
clearance for settlement in the UK."

3.  In his submissions to the High Court, recorded at  paragraph  58(iv)  of
the judgment, counsel  for  the  defendant  Secretary  of  State  and  Entry
Clearance Officers said this about the discretion  given  by  Chapter  29.4:
"This is a judgment formed by the individual ECO  using  the  factors  as  a
guide.  If one or more of the identified factors existed  discretion  should
be exercised favourably, but it could be so exercised if  other  unspecified
considerations led to the same conclusion."  In the end,  however,  Blake  J
concluded (paragraph 71) that "the instructions given to ECOs  are  unlawful
and need urgent revisiting."  It was up to the Home  Office  to  revise  the
policy, so as to honour the historic debt  owed  to  Gurkhas  who  had  been
discharged before 1 July 1997, having given loyal service to this country.

4.  His Lordship had nothing to say about the policy  in  Chapter  29.14  of
the DSPs, which was the focus of the present  appeal  when  it  came  before
Designated Immigration Judge Bowen on 24 August  2010.   This  paragraph  is
headed 'Dependants over the age of 18', and  I  will  set  it  out  in  full
below.

      "It is not the intention to split  a  family  unit  solely  because  a
      dependant is 18 years of age or  over.   Applications  for  settlement
      from dependants who are 18 years of age or over will be considered and
      discretion to grant settlement outside the Rules may be  exercised  in
      individual cases.   Dependants  over  the  age  of  18  need  to  make
      separate, individual applications and pay  the  appropriate  fee.   In
      assessing whether settlement in the  UK  is  appropriate  ECOs  should
      consider the following factors:

    . One parent or a relative of the applicant is present and  settled,  or
      being admitted for, or being granted, settlement in the UK  under  the
      HM Forces rule;
    . The applicant has previously been granted limited leave as a dependant
      of a member of HM Forces;
    . The applicant has been, and wishes to continue, pursuing  a  full-time
      course of studies in the UK;
    . Refusal of the application would mean  that  the  applicant  would  be
      living alone outside the UK and is financially dependent on the parent
      or relative present and settled, or being granted settlement in the UK
      under the HM forces rule;
    . The applicant would find it very  difficult  to  function  because  of
      illness or disability without the help and support of their parent  or
      close relative in the UK.

   If one or more of the factors listed  above  are  present,  the  ECO  may
   exercise discretion and grant entry clearance for settlement in the UK."

5.  DIJ Bowen found that this policy had not been considered either  by  the
ECO who made the original decision in June 2008 or by the ECM  who  reviewed
that decision in June 2010.  That, Judge Bowen held, made the decision  'not
in accordance with the law' in terms of  s.  84(1)(e)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and it is not in dispute that he was  right
so to hold.  It is what he did next that has caused the appeal to reach  the
Upper Tribunal.  Having found on the evidence before him that the  appellant
was living alone in Nepal, was financially dependent on her  father  settled
here, and would because of an illness or disability find it  very  difficult
to  function  without  the  help  and  support  of  her  father,  the  judge
considered that the appellant met the requirements of the first, fourth  and
fifth bullet points set out in Chapter 29.14.  While acknowledging that  the
normal course,  where  a  relevant  policy  has  not  been  applied  by  the
respondent, is for the immigration judge to allow the appeal to the  limited
extent that the decision under appeal was not in accordance  with  the  law,
so that the application remains outstanding  before  the  respondent,  Judge
Bowen took the view that the terms of this policy were so precise, and  were
so  clearly  satisfied  by  this  appellant,  that  only  one  outcome   was
rationally possible.  He allowed the  appeal  outright,  and  directed  that
entry clearance be granted.

6.  As justification for this unusual course,  the  judge  cited  AG  &  ors
(policies; executive discretions; Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT  82
and IA (applying  policies)  Mauritius  [2006]  UKAIT  82.   In  particular,
reliance was placed on paragraph 50 of AG:

      "For  ourselves,  we  have  little  doubt  that  -  contrary  to   the
      submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State before us - there  are
      cases in which a finding that a decision is 'not  in  accordance  with
      the law' on the ground of failure to apply a policy should lead  to  a
      substantive decision in the claimant's favour, with a  direction  that
      leave be granted. ... But the cases in question are unusual.  They are
      those in which (1) the  claimant  proves  the  precise  terms  of  the
      policy, which (2) creates a presumption, on the facts of his case,  in
      favour of granting leave, and (3) there is either nothing  at  all  to
      displace the presumption, or nothing that,  under  the  terms  of  the
      policy, falls for consideration.  If all those factors  apply  to  the
      case, the appeal should be allowed, with a direction as indicated."

7.  In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it  was  contended  that
no such presumption as is mentioned in AG (Kosovo) was  created  by  Chapter
29.14 of the Entry Clearance Guidance.   It  was  also  contended  that  the
First-tier judge had erred in giving a  direction  to  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer, this being contrary to EA (family visitor, directions,  mistake  of
fact - unfairness) Ghana [2005]  UKAIT  108.   The  second  ground  was  not
pursued before me, but it may be worth remarking  that  EA  (Ghana)  is  not
authority for a proposition that an immigration judge should  never  make  a
direction in an entry clearance  case.   Indeed,  AG  (Kosovo)  specifically
enjoins a judge who, in the very unusual  circumstances  described  therein,
allows an appeal outright under a policy, to give a direction for  leave  to
be granted.

8.  The first ground was, on the other hand, the focus  of  very  lucid  and
persuasive submissions when the appeal came before me today.   I  shall  not
set out those submissions in extenso, but shall refer to them in  giving  my
reasons for concluding that the policy contained in  Chapter  29.14  of  the
Diplomatic Service Procedures/Entry Clearance Guidance  (and  more  recently
appearing in the document SET 12) is not of such a kind that an  immigration
judge can allow an appeal outright if he thinks  that  the  appellant  comes
within the terms of the policy.  Bullet  points  being  a  feature  of  this
particular policy, I shall give my reasons also in bullet point form.

    . Mr Howells sets great store by the fulsome praise  bestowed  upon  the
      Gurkhas by both the Prime Minister and the  Home  Secretary  when,  in
      2004, a new policy was announced which would permit settlement in  the
      United Kingdom by Gurkhas discharged from the British Army  after  the
      handover of Hong Kong to China, provided that they had served  for  at
      least four years in the Brigade of Gurkhas  and  that  they  had  been
      discharged  not  more  than  two  years  before  the  date  of   their
      application for indefinite leave.  This policy entered the Immigration
      Rules on 25 October 2004 as paragraphs 276E-K of HC 395.  It does not,
      of course, provide for the admission of Gurkhas who left  the  British
      Army before 1 July 1997, and the sponsor in the instant case left  the
      Army in 1984.  Mr Howells contends  that  the  acknowledgment  by  the
      holders of two of the Great Offices of State that  this  country  owes
      the Gurkhas a great debt  of  gratitude  somehow  invests  the  policy
      catering for Gurkhas who fall outside the Immigration Rules, and their
      family members, with a peculiar status,  requiring  its  terms  to  be
      applied broadly and generously.  I do not think, however, that Chapter
      29 of the DSPs can be distinguished in this way from other policies.
    . Mr Howells prays in aid the concession made on behalf of the Secretary
      of State in Limbu, when Steven Kovats of counsel suggested  a  way  of
      exercising the discretion  embodied  by  Chapter  29.4,  dealing  with
      Gurkhas who did not meet the requirements of paragraphs 276E-K  of  HC
      395.  If one or more of the factors listed at the four  bullet  points
      were present, then the guidance that "ECOs may exercise discretion and
      grant entry clearance" ought to  be  read  as  "ECOs  should  exercise
      discretion."  In the same way, says Mr Howells, the  identical  phrase
      at Chapter 29.14 ~ "If one or more of the  factors  listed  above  are
      present, the ECO may exercise discretion and grant entry clearance"  ~
      ought to be read with 'should'  being  substituted  for  'may'.   That
      cannot, in my view, be right.  Chapter 29.14 was  wholly  outside  the
      purview of the Limbu case, which was only concerned with the admission
      of Gurkhas, not with  the  admission  of  the  overage  dependants  of
      Gurkhas.  Besides, Chapter 29.14 concerns not just the  dependants  of
      Gurkhas,  but  the  dependants  of  other  foreign  and   Commonwealth
      nationals who were members of HM Forces.
    . There is a stronger reason for not construing  the  terms  of  Chapter
      29.14 as if they were contained in a statute or, given  the  elevation
      of the Immigration Rules - as held in Pankina [2010] EWCA  Civ  719  -
      into quasi-law, in  an  immigration  rule.   Policies  are,  by  their
      nature, intended to be implemented flexibly and  sensibly.   They  may
      well be drafted  more  loosely  that  a  rule  or  statute.   That  is
      certainly the case here.  The first of the five bullet points requires
      the applicant to have a parent or a  relative  settled,  or  about  to
      become settled, here under the HM Forces rule (i.e. paragraphs  276E-Q
      of HC 395, covering both Gurkhas and other  foreign  and  Commonwealth
      nationals who have been discharged from HM forces). But that  is  also
      required by the minor children of former members  of  HM  Forces,  who
      have an entitlement to indefinite leave under paragraphs 276X-Z of  HC
      395.  If the policy were to be read literally, and if its  terms  were
      mandatory, then entry  clearance  for  settlement  would  have  to  be
      granted to overage dependants, since having a parent settled under the
      HM Forces rule is one of the five factors listed in  the  policy,  and
      only one  of  the  factors  need  be  present  for  discretion  to  be
      exercised.  That would eliminate any distinction between  overage  and
      minor children, and  render  the  other  four  bullet  points  otiose.
      Indeed, the policy is not confined to overage  children  but  embraces
      any relative over 18 of a former soldier.  It would be astonishing  if
      the policy envisaged the admission of all  dependent  relatives.   The
      first bullet point does not even require dependency.
    . A further example of how the policy is not to be  construed  with  all
      the strictness of a statute comes at  the  fourth  bullet  point.   Mr
      Parkinson is, I think, right when he says that the wording "refusal of
      the application would mean that the appellant would  be  living  alone
      outside the  UK"  envisages  a  situation  where  the  ex-soldier  has
      obtained settlement in the UK and is calling his wife and children  to
      join him.  One of those children is over 18, and if the  rest  of  the
      family depart for the UK, he  will  be  left  behind  as  a  'stranded
      sibling'.  That is the kind of scenario which the fourth bullet  point
      is intended to avoid, says  Mr  Parkinson.   It  is  not  intended  to
      facilitate the admission of a middle-aged child who has not lived with
      his parents for many years.  But on a literal reading, a child of  any
      age would have  to  be  admitted,  if  living  alone  and  financially
      dependent.
    . There is a problem with  the  interpretation  of  "living  alone".  Mr
      Howells cites KC & ors [2007] EWCA Civ 327 as an aid to  construction,
      but in that case the court was looking at the phrase as it  occurs  in
      paragraph 317(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules, and could not  see  what
      it  added  to  the  already  high  hurdle  of  "the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances."  The court did not in  fact  venture  to
      define what "living alone" meant, but thought that a mother who  would
      have the support  and  companionship  of  two  teenage  children  (the
      scenario in KC itself) could not be described as 'living  alone'.   In
      the instant case, the appellant is living at her father's house, which
      she shares with her uncle  and  his  children.   She  is  not  without
      support and companionship from them.

9.  Mr Parkinson also regards the fifth bullet point as loosely worded,  but
enough has been said, I think, to show that this is not the kind  of  policy
whose terms are so precise that an immigration judge can  pronounce  himself
satisfied that, on his findings of fact, the terms of the policy  have  been
met and that  the  appeal  should  accordingly  be  allowed  outright.   The
correct course, if the ECO has not considered the policy, is  to  allow  the
appeal only to the extent that the application for entry  clearance  remains
outstanding, for a lawful decision to be taken.  DIJ Bowen  therefore  erred
in law by allowing the instant appeal outright under the policy.

  10. The judge did not  consider  the  appeal  at  all  under  Article  8,
      although that had been raised in the Notice of Appeal, because he was
      allowing the appeal on a  different  basis.   That  actually  is  the
      opposite way round to what is recommended by AG (Kosovo),  the  first
      headnote to which runs as follows:


      "If human rights are argued, they should be determined in  advance  of
      any argument based on  discretion:  if  the  claimant's  human  rights
      entitle  him  to  enter  or  remain  in  the   United   Kingdom,   any
      discretionary power to allow him to do so is otiose."

11.  As it was now incumbent upon me to re-make the decision on the  appeal,
and as human rights had been raised but not dealt with at first instance,  I
proposed to the parties that I would consider whether the appeal  should  be
allowed under Article 8.  If it were, that would be the end of  the  matter.
If it did not succeed under Article 8, the application for  entry  clearance
would still have to be considered by the ECO under the policy.  The  sponsor
(the appellant's father) was present at the hearing, as was the  appellant's
brother, who is himself serving in the Brigade of Gurkhas and  is  currently
stationed in this country.  But Mr Howells was content to proceed by way  of
submissions only, based upon DIJ Bowen's findings of  fact,  which  had  not
been challenged in  the  application  for  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.  Mr Parkinson warned that the evidential foundation  for  some  of
those findings might be somewhat shaky, but in the end that turned  out  not
to be so.  Again, I shall not attempt to set out fully the  representatives'
very thorough and detailed submissions,  but  will  refer  to  them  in  the
course of my findings below.

12.  Although DIJ Bowen does not expressly say  so,  it  is  plain  that  he
finds the account given of  the  appellant's  situation,  both  in  her  own
witness statement and in the witness statement  and  oral  evidence  of  her
father, to be entirely credible.  Essentially, the  appellant  always  lived
with her parents until, in  2006,  they  went  as  visitors  to  the  United
Kingdom to attend her brother's passing out parade, and it  was  ascertained
that her father could settle here.  The appellant had been left in the  care
of her paternal uncle, but her mother  returned  to  Nepal  after  obtaining
indefinite leave to remain, and has spent much of the intervening period  in
Nepal, looking after the appellant.

13.  The appellant suffers from what a cardiologist  described  in  2008  as
"seizure disorders with mental retardation",  but  a  CT  scan  taken  by  a
radiologist when the appellant was 25 years old (the date is  given  in  the
Nepalese  calendar,  but  the  year  would  be  1998)  detected   no   brain
abnormalities.  The two most recent  medical  notes  both  date  from  April
2010, and in one Dr Thapa, a senior  consultant  physician,  certifies  that
the appellant is suffering  from  mental  retardation  and  chronic  seizure
disorder, while in the other certifies  that  the  appellant  "is  otherwise
physically fit  and  not  suffering  from  any  communicable  disease."   Mr
Parkinson thought the medical evidence unclear and contradictory, but  I  do
not think there is any contradiction  between  Dr  Thapa's  two  letters  of
April 2010, while there is in the  Appellant's  Bundle  a  whole  series  of
attendance notes and prescriptions showing visits to hospitals  and  doctors
over many years, and indicating a continuous need  for  medication.   It  is
clear that there is something the matter with the  appellant,  even  if  the
diagnosis is not as precise as one would  expect  in  this  country.   Apart
from anything else, the fact that the appellant has reached the  age  of  38
without being married strongly suggests that  a  malady  has  prevented  her
from doing what would be expected of her in her culture.

14.  Albeit the appellant has had to rely on her uncle when her  mother  has
not  been  there,  the  sponsor  facilitates  this   by   sending   generous
remittances to Nepal, amounting to �1,000 a year for her upkeep and for  her
medication.  I accept the sponsor's explanation that he did not arrange  for
her visa application sooner, because he needed to establish himself in  this
country first, and get  a  job.   He  is  clearly  very  keen  to  have  the
appellant live here, where her four siblings are all  now  established,  and
he has gone to considerable trouble and expense to try to bring this about.

15.  Turning now to the five questions  posed  by  Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar
[2004] UKHL 27, I find that there is family life between the  appellant  and
her parent, going beyond the normal emotional ties  spoken  of  in  Kugathas
[2003] EWCA Civ 31 between an adult child and  her  parents,  and  that  the
refusal of entry clearance interferes with that  family  life  in  a  manner
sufficiently grave to engage the operation of Article  8.   The  appellant's
mental state renders her dependent upon her parents in a way that  a  normal
adult would not be.  The third and fourth questions are to  be  answered  in
the affirmative, but in coming to  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise
required by the  fifth  question,  I  think  that  the  public  interest  in
maintaining firm and fair immigration control is not as strong as usual.

16.  There are two reasons for this.   First,  the  existence  of  a  policy
outside the Rules, providing for  the  admission  of  overage  relatives  of
former soldiers on much more  generous  terms  than  paragraph  317  of  the
Rules, makes the exclusion of  this  overage  relative  harder  to  justify,
especially as she appears  to  meet  criteria  in  the  policy  which  would
attract a favourable exercise of discretion.  Secondly, if Gurkhas  had  not
had to wait until  2004  before  becoming  able  to  settle  in  the  United
Kingdom, it would have been possible for  the  appellant  to  come  to  this
country while she was still a minor.  This may not be an 'historical  wrong'
as severe as that perpetrated upon female British Overseas  citizens,  which
played  a  part  in  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  conducted  by   a
Presidential panel of the Tribunal in NH (female BOCs,  exceptionality,  Art
8, para 317) India [2006] UKAIT 85, and subsequently approved in NH  (India)
[2007] EWCA Civ 1330.  But it was acknowledged by same Home  Secretary  that
it had been wrong to prevent Gurkhas from settling here with their  families
in the past.  Mr Howells handed up the case of JB (India)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
234, in which Lord Justice Sullivan acknowledges that  "where  there  is  an
interference  with  family  life  sufficient   to   engage   Article   8(1),
recognition that the family has been the victim of  a  'historic  injustice'
may  well  be  relevant,  in  some   cases   highly   relevant,   when   the
proportionality of the interference is considered under Article  8(2)."   In
the present case, the long overdue recognition that Gurkhas should have  had
their service to this country rewarded by being allowed to settle here  does
reduce the weight to be put into the public interest side  of  the  balance,
even if not by very much.  But the upshot is  that  the  Article  8  balance
comes down in the present case on the side of the appellant and  her  family
in this country.


DECISION

17. The appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Signed

Senior Immigration Judge McKee,
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
