
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

EH (PTA: limited grounds; Cart JR) Bangladesh [2021] UKUT 00117 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 March 2021                     |28 April 2021                        |
|Further submissions on 31 March 2021 |                                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     EH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Symes and Ms A Nizami, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

    (1) When the Upper Tribunal grants permission to appeal from the First-
    tier Tribunal, even on limited grounds, its decision is not amenable to
    judicial review  under  the  Cart  procedure,  which,  as  specifically
    indicated by CPR 54.7A, is  available  only  when  the  Upper  Tribunal
    refuses permission.


    (2) Rule 22(2)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
     has the effect that in the  absence  of  any  direction  limiting  the
    grounds which may be argued before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  grounds
    contained in the application for permission are the grounds  of  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, even  if  permission  is  stated  to  have  been
    granted on limited grounds.


    (3) Rule 22(2)(b) has the complementary effect that any  limitation  on
    the grounds of appeal must be by direction and, as a direction, can  be
    the subject of an application to  amend,  suspend  or  set  aside  that
    direction under rule 5(2) of the 2008 Rules.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


A.  THE APPELLANT AND HIS APPEAL

 1. On 15 January 2020, the First-tier Tribunal heard  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant, a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to deport him to  Bangladesh.   On  19  December  2007,  the
    appellant had killed his wife in the United Kingdom and on  1 December
    2008 he was convicted of murder and  sentenced  to  life  imprisonment,
    with a recommendation that he serve a minimum of  twelve  years  before
    release.  The appellant made a  protection  claim,  asserting  that  he
    would be at real risk of  serious  harm,  if  returned  to  Bangladesh,
    because his late wife's family would kill him there.  Second,  he  said
    that he had converted from Islam to Christianity and  so  would  be  at
    real risk of serious harm in Bangladesh as  an  apostate.   Third,  the
    appellant claimed that he was bisexual and wanted  to  live  openly  as
    such, but that he would be at real risk of serious harm, if he  did  so
    in Bangladesh. The respondent refused the appellant's protection  claim
    and the appellant exercised his  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. On 4 February 2020, following a hearing the previous month, the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated a decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds.  He sought permission to appeal  on
    seven grounds.  On  3  March  2020,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused
    permission to appeal.  The appellant then renewed  his  application  to
    the Upper Tribunal, on each of the seven grounds.

 3.  On 26 May 2020, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  made  a  decision  as
    follows: "Application for permission to appeal is granted in respect of
    Grounds 4 and 7 only" (original emphasis).



B.  THE JUDICIAL REVIEW

 4. CPR 54.7A(1) provides as follows:-

         "Judicial review decisions of the Upper Tribunal

         54.7A-(1)     This rule  applies  where  an  application  is  made,
         following refusal by the Upper Tribunal  of  permission  to  appeal
         against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal, for judicial  review
         -
         (a)  of the decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing permission to
             appeal; or
         (b)  which relates to the decision of the First Tier Tribunal which
             was the subject of the application for permission to appeal"
             (our emphasis).

 5. On 6 July 2020, the appellant  applied  for  permission  to  judicially
    review UTJ Sheridan's decision.  Paragraph 1 of the Statement of  Facts
    and Grounds that accompanied the application stated that  UTJ  Sheridan
    had "granted permission to appeal in respect of two grounds, grounds  4
    and 7, and refused permission on all other grounds".  Under the heading
    "Relief  sought",  however,  the  application  stated  that  what   was
    requested was  "an  order  quashing  the  permission  decision  of  UTJ
    Sheridan granting permission only on limited  grounds",  together  with
    "an order that permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal be granted on
    the grounds which were refused by the Upper Tribunal".

 6. On 28 August 2020, the High Court granted permission to bring  judicial
    review.  In the High Court's order, under the  heading  "Observations",
    there is the following:-

         "CPR 54.7A applies to this case.

         I consider that the  grounds  advanced  are  arguable  and  have  a
         reasonable prospect  of  success,  and  that  the  case  raises  an
         important point or practice (particularly the need to  address  the
         question  of  why  a  person  might   be   discreet   about   their
         sexuality/religion), and that there is a compelling reason for  the
         grounds of appeal to  be  heard  given  that  permission  has  been
         granted on other grounds such that an appeal will be heard  in  any
         event, and it  is  unlikely  that  these  additional  grounds  will
         significantly add to the time required for the appeal."

 7. On 15 February 2021, Master Gidden, having noted that  no  request  had
    been made under CPR 54.7A(9) for a substantive  hearing,  ordered  that
    "the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to  appeal  is
    quashed".



C.  THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HEARING

 8. On  25  February  2021,  the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber issued directions, as follows:-

         "1.  This appeal will be listed for a hearing by remote means on 24
             March 2021 at  10.30.   A  Notice  of  Hearing,  with  joining
             instructions will be sent out shortly.

           2. The  parties  must  on  that  occasion  be  prepared  to  make
             submissions before a senior panel  on  the  effects  of  rules
             22(2) and 5(2) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  in  this
             case and generally; on the effect of the  Order  of  the  High
             Court in this case,  and  on  the  further  progress  of  this
             appeal."

 9. On 24 March, Mr Symes appeared for the appellant.   Mr  Symes  had  not
    previously been involved in the appeal.  He prepared a helpful skeleton
    argument, for which we are grateful.  We heard oral submissions from Mr
    Symes and Mr Lindsay. Following the hearing, the parties were given the
    opportunity to file  and  serve  further  written  submissions  on  the
    question of whether it is possible  or  necessary  to  bring  a  "Cart"
    judicial review challenge in the event of a partial or limited grant of
    permission by the Upper Tribunal. Mr Lindsay informed us that  no  such
    submission would be made by him. For the appellant,  Mr  Symes  and  Ms
    Nizami filed written submissions on 31 March 2021, which we have  found
    helpful.




D. LEGISLATION

(a) Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007

10. So far as relevant, sections 11 and 13 of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 provide as follows:-

         "11. Right to appeal to Upper Tribunal

             (1)  For the purposes of subsection (2), the  reference  to  a
                  right of appeal is to a  right  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
                  Tribunal on any point of law arising from a decision  made
                  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than   an   excluded
                  decision.

             (2)  Any party to a case has a right  of  appeal,  subject  to
                  subsection (8).

             (3)  That right may be exercised only with permission (or,  in
                  Northern Ireland, leave).

             (4)  Permission (or leave) may be given by-

                  (a)  the First-tier Tribunal, or

                  (b)  the Upper Tribunal, on an application by the party.

             ...

         13.  Right to appeal to Court of Appeal etc.

             (1)  For the purposes of subsection (2), the  reference  to  a
                  right of appeal is to a right to appeal  to  the  relevant
                  appellate court  on  any  point  of  law  arising  from  a
                  decision made by the Upper Tribunal other than an excluded
                  decision.

             (2)  Any party to a case has a right  of  appeal,  subject  to
                  subsection (14).

             (3)  That right may be exercised only with permission (or,  in
                  Northern Ireland, leave).

             (4)  Permission (or leave) may be given by-

                  (a)  the Upper Tribunal, or

                  (b)  the relevant appellate court, on  an  application  by
                      the party.

             ...

             (8)   For  the  purposes  of  subsection  (1),  an   'excluded
                  decision' is-

             ...

                  (c)  any decision of the Upper Tribunal on an  application
                      under section 11(4)(b) (application for permission or
                      leave to appeal),

                  ..."



(b)  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014

11.  The  following  provisions  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 are relevant  for
    our purposes:-

         "Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal

         33.-(1)  A party seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
         must make a written application to the Tribunal for  permission  to
         appeal.

         ...

         Tribunal's consideration of an application for permission to appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal

         34.-(1)  On receiving an application for permission to  appeal  the
                  Tribunal  must  first  consider  whether  to  review   the
                  decision in accordance with rule 35.

              (2) If the Tribunal decides not to  review  the  decision,  or
                  reviews the decision and decides  to  take  no  action  in
                  relation to the decision, or part of it, the Tribunal must
                  consider whether to give permission to appeal in  relation
                  to the decision or that part of it.

              (3) The Tribunal must send a record of  its  decision  to  the
                  parties as soon as practicable.

             (4)  If the Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it must send
                  with the record of its decision-

                  (a)  a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and

                  (b)  notification of the right to make an  application  to
                      the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  and  the
                      time within which, and  the  manner  in  which,  such
                      application must be made.

             (5)  The Tribunal may give permission  to  appeal  on  limited
                  grounds, but must comply with paragraph (4) in relation to
                  any grounds on which it has refused permission."



(c) Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

12. For our purposes, the following are  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "Case management powers

         5.-(1)   Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act  and  any  other
                 enactment,  the  Upper  Tribunal  may  regulate   its   own
                 procedure.

            (2)   The Upper Tribunal may give a direction  in  relation  to
                 the  conduct  or  disposal  of  proceedings  at  any  time,
                 including a direction amending, suspending or setting aside
                 an earlier direction.

            (3)   In particular, and without restricting the general powers
                 in paragraphs (1) and (2), the Upper Tribunal may-

         ...

                (c)    permit or require a party to amend a document;

         ...

         Application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal

         21.-(1)  ...

             (2)  A person may apply to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission
                  to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of
                  another tribunal only if-

                   (a) they have  made  an  application  for  permission  to
                      appeal  to  the  tribunal  which  made  the  decision
                      challenged; and

                  (b)  that application has been refused  or  has  not  been
                      admitted or has been granted only on limited grounds.

                  ...

         Decision in relation to permission to appeal

         22.-(1)  Except where rule 22A  (special  procedure  for  providing
                  notice of a refusal of permission to appeal in  an  asylum
                  case) applies, if the Upper Tribunal refuses permission to
                  appeal  [or  refuses  to  admit  a  late  application  for
                  permission], it must send written notice  of  the  refusal
                  and of the reasons for the refusal to the appellant.

             (2)  If the Upper Tribunal gives permission to appeal-

                  (a)  the Upper Tribunal must send written  notice  of  the
                      permission, and of the reasons for any limitations or
                      conditions on such permission, to each party;

                  (b)  subject to any direction by the Upper  Tribunal,  the
                      application for permission to appeal  stands  as  the
                      notice of appeal and the Upper Tribunal must send  to
                      each  respondent  a  copy  of  the  application   for
                      permission to appeal and any documents provided  with
                      it by the appellant; and

                  ...

             (3) Paragraph (4) applies where the Upper Tribunal, without  a
             hearing, determines an application for permission to appeal-

             (a) against a decision of-

             (i) the Tax Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal;

             (ii) the Health, Education and  Social  Care  Chamber  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal;

             (iia)  the  General  Regulatory  Chamber  of  the   First-tier
             Tribunal;

             (iib) the Property Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal;

             (iii) the Mental Health Review Tribunal for Wales; or

              (iv) the Special Educational Needs Tribunal for Wales; or

             (b) under section 4 of the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups  Act
             2006.

         (4) In the circumstances set out at paragraph (3) the appellant may
         apply for the decision to be reconsidered at a hearing if the Upper
         Tribunal-

             (a) refuses permission to appeal or refuses to  admit  a  late
             application for permission; or

             (b) gives permission to appeal on limited grounds  or  subject
             to conditions.

         (5) An application under paragraph (4) must be made in writing  and
         received by the Upper Tribunal within 14 days  after  the  date  on
         which the Upper  Tribunal  sent  written  notice  of  its  decision
         regarding the application to the appellant.




         Notice of appeal

         23.-(1)  ...

             (1A) In an asylum case or an immigration  case  in  which  the
                  First-tier  Tribunal  has  given  permission  to   appeal,
                  subject to any direction of the First-tier Tribunal or the
                  Upper Tribunal, the application for permission  to  appeal
                  sent or delivered to the First-tier Tribunal stands as the
                  notice of appeal and accordingly paragraphs (2) to (6)  of
                  this rule do not apply.

         ..."




E.  DISCUSSION

13. The first issue is to determine the effect of what happened in the High
    Court in the proceedings under CPR 54.7A.  Until that is  done,  it  is
    not  possible  to  establish  the  current  position  in  these  appeal
    proceedings.  As we have seen, CPR 54.7A(1) states in  terms  that  the
    rule applies "following refusal by the Upper Tribunal of permission  to
    appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal".  It  is  plain
    that the High Court was aware of the fact that permission to appeal  to
    the Tribunal  had  been  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan.
    Indeed, that fact was part of the court's rationale  for  deciding  the
    second appeal criteria were satisfied, in that "an appeal will be heard
    in any event, and it is unlikely that  these  additional  grounds  will
    significantly add to the time required for the appeal".  This reasoning
    might, with respect, be considered problematic, in that it would render
    the second appeal criteria in 54.7A(7)(b) otiose, in all cases in which
    the judicial review challenge is to the rejection of some, but not all,
     of the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

14. That problem is, however, subsumed in the larger  question  of  whether
    CPR 54.7A has any application at all,  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    granted permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal.  As  can  be
    seen from  rule  22  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules,  the  legislature
    contemplates that the Upper Tribunal can respond to an application  for
    permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal  in  three  ways.  It
    can:-

    (1) give permission to appeal;

    (2) refuse permission to appeal; or

    (3) refuse to admit a late application for permission to appeal.

15. In the case of certain applications for permission, described  in  rule
    23(3)(a), an appellant may apply for a decision taken without a hearing
    to be reconsidered at a hearing.  Rule 22(4)(a) provides that this  may
    occur where the Upper Tribunal refuses permission or refuses to admit a
    late application.  Rule 22(4)(b) is significant for  our  purposes,  in
    that it gives a right  to  reconsideration  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
    "gives  permission  to  appeal  on  limited  grounds  or   subject   to
    conditions".  This means, in our view,  that  it  is  not  possible  to
    extrapolate  from  rule  22  any   inference   that   the   legislature
    contemplated that a limited grant of permission can  be  treated  as  a
    refusal of permission.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  clear  that,
    according to the Rules, a grant is a grant, whether limited or not; and
    whether or not subject  to  conditions.   Unlike  the  CPR,  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules have Parliamentary authority.

16. It is necessary to compare the position under the Upper Tribunal  Rules
    with that in the First-tier Tribunal Rules.  As we have seen,  rule  34
    of those Rules specifically requires the First-tier Tribunal, if giving
    permission to appeal on limited grounds, to comply with rule  34(4)  in
    relation to any grounds on which it has refused permission.  In respect
    of such grounds, the First-tier Tribunal must send "notification of the
    right to make an application to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal".  This ties directly into rule 21(2)(b) of the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules, which expressly contemplates an application  for  permission  to
    appeal where the First-tier Tribunal has granted  permission  "only  on
    limited grounds". Paragraphs  48  and  49  of  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance 2019 No 1: Permission to appeal to UTIAC deal with "limited or
    restricted grounds" of permission. In paragraph 48, reference is  made,
    in the context of rule 21(2)(b), to permission having been "refused  on
    some grounds". Whilst  that  formulation  is  unobjectionable  in  that
    context, it is not, of course, dispositive of the general  meaning  and
    effect of a permission granted on limited grounds.

17. It  could,  nevertheless,  be  argued  that  the  very  fact  that  the
    "permission interface" between the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal expressly caters for a means of challenging a limited grant of
    permission requires an expansive reading  of  CPR  54.7A(1)  in  which,
    despite the wording of rule 22 of the Upper Tribunal Rules, a  judicial
    review may be brought in the High Court, where the Upper  Tribunal  has
    granted permission to appeal on limited grounds. At paragraph 26 below,
    we deal with a case in which the Court of Appeal dealt with a challenge
    of this kind. It is, however, necessary first to address the genesis of
    CPR 54.7A.

18. Some support for the expansive reading just described might be said  to
    lie in the actual case which led to the creation of  the  procedure  in
    CPR 54.7A and which has, in practice, given its name to that procedure:
    R (Cart) v the Upper Tribunal and R (MR) Pakistan v the Upper  Tribunal
    ((Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 28;  [2011]  Imm  AR  704.   As  is  plain  from
    paragraph 3 of the judgment of Lady Hale, Mr Cart's judicial review was
    brought against  the  refusal  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  Administrative
    Appeals Chamber of permission to appeal on one of four grounds.   Since
    CPR 54.7A was introduced to give effect to the judgments  in  Cart,  it
    could, therefore, be said to be wrong to read the words "refusal by the
    Upper Tribunal of permission to appeal" as excluding  cases  where  the
    Upper Tribunal has granted permission on limited grounds.

19. There are, however,  powerful  arguments  in  favour  of  the  opposite
    conclusion, which are, in our view, persuasive. The judgments  in  Cart
    show the Supreme Court was anxious that judicial review  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's permission to appeal functions  should  be  kept  in  narrow
    bounds.  Although  the  case  itself  concerned  a  limited  grant   of
    permission, the wording of CPR  54.7A  shows  an  appreciation  of  the
    important fact that the right of challenge to a decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in this area is needed where that  decision  disposes  of  the
    appeal proceedings. A limited grant of permission does not  dispose  of
    the appeal proceedings. There is still an appeal to be decided  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, which:

    (1) is not jurisdictionally circumscribed by the terms of the grant  of
    permission; and

    (2) is subject to onward rights of appeal under section 13 of the  2007
    Act.

20. We shall deal first with the jurisdictional position. Rule 22(2)(b)  of
    the Upper Tribunal states  that,  subject  to  any  direction  by  that
    Tribunal, the application for permission to appeal stands as the notice
    of appeal.  What this means is that unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes
    such a direction, then, even if it has  granted  permission  to  appeal
    only on limited grounds, the notice of appeal puts all of  the  grounds
    at issue in the Upper Tribunal proceedings.  In the present case, there
    was no such direction. The High Court was, therefore,  being  asked  to
    adjudicate on a non-existent issue.

21. It is instructive at this point to  look  beyond  the  immigration  and
    asylum jurisdiction of the  Upper  Tribunal.   At  paragraph  4.214  of
    Jacobs: Tribunal Practice and Procedure (5th Edition, 2019), the author
    considers that "the power to give permission on limited grounds may not
    be of practical significance".  The authority  for  this  statement  is
    paragraph 3 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Administrative  Appeal  Chamber's
    decision in DL-H v Devon Partnership NHS Trust [2010] UKUT  102  (AAC),
    where it held as follows:-

         "3.  I reject the argument that an appeal is necessarily limited to
             the grounds in the application on which permission  was  given
             and  that  further  permission  is  required  to  raise  other
             grounds.  The right of appeal is conferred by  section  11  of
             the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.  It   is
             discretionary  and  subject  to  the  grant   of   permission.
             Permission is governed by the rules of procedure.   The  rules
             contain three provisions  for  restricting  the  scope  of  an
             appeal: (i) limited permission; (ii) the control of the issues
             on which the tribunal  requires  submissions;  and  (iii)  the
             power to strike out a party's case.  The rules confer power on
             the First-tier Tribunal to give  permission  only  on  limited
             grounds: rule 47(5)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
             Tribunal) (Health, Education and Social  Care  Chamber)  Rules
             2008 (SI No 2699).  The Upper Tribunal has equivalent power in
             respect of an  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  limited
             grounds: rule 45(5) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
             Rules 2008 (SI No 2698).  There is no express  power  for  the
             Upper Tribunal to give limited permission to appeal to itself.
              However, the rules envisage this possibility: rule  22(4)(b).
             This is, presumably, permissible without express authority and
             in the exercise of the tribunal's discretion.  The rules  must
             be interpreted and applied to give effect  to  the  overriding
             objective under rule 2. As  a  matter  of  interpretation,  it
             would not be fair and just to restrict the scope of an  appeal
             to the grounds in the  application  on  which  permission  was
             given.  The rules apply to the whole of the work of the  Upper
             Tribunal, not just mental health. The Secretary of  State  for
             Work and Pensions is the respondent to the  vast  majority  of
             appeals before the Administrative Appeals Chamber and takes  a
             neutral and objective approach to appeals,  often  identifying
             issues favourable to a claimant.  It would not be desirable to
             hinder that  approach,  as  many  appellants  are  either  not
             represented at all or not professionally represented.   Mental
             health cases are different in  that  the  patient  is  usually
             professionally represented.  But it  is  not  possible,  as  a
             matter of  interpretation,  to  draw  a  distinction  on  that
             ground.  That is a matter, if it is relevant at all,  for  the
             application of the rules.  My interpretation does not allow  a
             party complete freedom to raise additional  grounds  at  will.
             The Upper Tribunal has ample power to control the issues  that
             will be considered on an appeal.  As well as  the  possibility
             of giving limited permission,  rule  15(1)(a)  authorises  the
             tribunal to give directions as  to  the  issues  on  which  it
             requires submissions.  In an extreme case,  the  tribunal  may
             even strike out all or part of a party's case under rule 8(3).
               Those  provisions  should  be  sufficient  to  ensure   that
             additional grounds are only considered if that would  be  fair
             and just."

22. There  are  nuanced  differences  between  the  Administrative  Appeals
    Chamber and the Immigration and Asylum Chamber, which were explored  by
    the latter in Ferrer (limited appeal grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  304
    (IAC). Notwithstanding these, and leaving aside the fact  that,  in  an
    immigration and asylum appeal, the power to  strike  out  is  extremely
    circumscribed,  the  basic  point  made  in  DL-H  holds  good  in  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber.  There is  no  relevant  jurisdictional
    fetter upon the Upper Tribunal's consideration of an  appeal  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The scope of the appeal is subject to  procedural
    constraints.  Those constraints must be exercised compatibly  with  the
    overriding objective in rule 2.  The power to give directions  in  rule
    5(2) expressly includes  the  power  to  make  "a  direction  amending,
    suspending or setting aside an earlier direction".  Whilst  that  power
    must, of course, be  exercised  on  a  principled  basis,  the  overall
    position in the Upper Tribunal is such that an appellant who  has  been
    subjected to a grant of permission on limited grounds does  not,  as  a
    general matter, need to resort to the Administrative Court. That is so,
    even if there has been a direction of the  kind  contemplated  by  rule
    22(2)(b).

23. In so finding, we are cognisant of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
    in Sarkar and another v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 195; [2014] Imm  AR  911.   In  that  case,  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal on a ground relating  to  section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  In his reasons
    for granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer said he had taken
    the provisional view that the appeals should be allowed on this limited
    basis.  The  appellants'  application  for  permission  had,  in  fact,
    included a ground  based  on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Neither  the
    appellants  nor  the  respondent  responded  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    invitation to react to the judge's provisional view,  with  the  result
    that he proceeded to set aside the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision
    and re-make the decision in the appeal, by allowing it on  the  section
    47 ground.

24.  The appellants obtained permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal,
    contending that the Upper Tribunal should have dealt with the Article 8
    issue.  Giving the only reasoned judgment, Moore-Bick LJ said:

         "17. In the  present  case  the  apparently  unqualified  grant  of
             permission to appeal must  be  read  in  the  context  of  the
             reasons which Judge Spencer gave for his decision, which  make
             it quite clear that he intended to limit it to the ground that
             he had identified based on  section  47  of  the  Immigration,
             Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   I  accept  that  the  Upper
             Tribunal could have granted permission to appeal in respect of
             the question whether the First-tier  Tribunal  ought  to  have
             considered the article 8 claim (that being the  only  relevant
             point of law arising  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal) and if it had done so would have had jurisdiction to
             decide that question.  In fact, however, it is clear from  the
             order that Judge Spencer was refusing to grant  permission  to
             appeal on the article 8 ground.  I  also  accept  that  in  an
             appropriate case the tribunal has jurisdiction to consider new
             points that have not been included in an appellant's  original
             grounds of appeal - see DL-H v  Devon  Partnership  NHS  Trust
             [2010] UKUT 102 (AAC) at paragraph 3 - but  that  is  not  the
             same as saying  that  the  tribunal  can  re-open  a  decision
             refusing permission to appeal on a particular  ground.   I  am
             inclined to think that Mr. Roe was right in  submitting  that,
             having refused an application  for  permission  to  appeal  in
             relation to the article 8 claim, it was no longer open to  the
             Upper Tribunal to entertain it, but it is unnecessary to reach
             a final view on that question for the purposes of the  present
             appeal, since, for the reasons I  have  already  given,  I  am
             satisfied that the grant of permission was limited to the sole
             ground on which the appeal was allowed.  In any event, if,  as
             I think, the tribunal was entitled  to  refuse  permission  to
             appeal on the article  8  ground,  I  can  see  no  basis  for
             suggesting that it committed an error of  law  in  failing  to
             deal with it."

25. As can  immediately  be  seen,  Moore-Bick  LJ's  observations  on  the
    jurisdictional position of the Upper Tribunal were obiter.  It does not
    appear that the court was referred to the relevant  provisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Rules, which we  have  set  out  above.   The  case  is,
    nevertheless, instructive, in that  it  highlights  the  second  reason
    given in paragraph 19 above why judicial review of a limited  grant  of
    permission by the Upper Tribunal  is  unnecessary;  namely,  because  a
    party who is dissatisfied with the way in which the Upper Tribunal  has
    acted under its procedural powers to limit the scope of the appeal  may
    apply for permission to appeal to the relevant appellate court  against
    the resulting substantive decision.

26. Finally, mention must be made of the case foreshadowed in paragraph  17
    above: JH  (Palestinian  Territories)  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration
    Asylum Chamber) and Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
    EWCA Civ 919.  The judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  concerned  the
    position in costs, following a judicial review brought pursuant to  CPR
    Rule 54.7A.  The judicial review proceedings involved the challenge  to
    a decision of the Upper Tribunal,  refusing  permission  to  appeal  in
    respect of grounds that had been rejected by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and which were then subject to an application to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    pursuant to rule 34(4)(b) of the First-tier  Tribunal  Rules  and  rule
    21(2)(b) of the Upper Tribunal Rules.  The Court  of  Appeal  judgments
    did not address the question of whether CPR  54.7A  is  appropriate  in
    this situation.  Although the points we have made regarding the  nature
    and scope of appeals in the Upper Tribunal  apply  equally  where  that
    Tribunal is seized of an appeal that has come to it following a limited
    grant for permission by the First-tier Tribunal,  the  fact  that  rule
    21(2)(b) of the Upper Tribunal Rules provides expressly for a right  of
    application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  this
    discrete basis may mean that,  anomalously,  a  refusal  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal at that stage to expand the limited grounds is to  be  treated
    as on all fours with an outright refusal of  permission.   We  do  not,
    however, consider that JH means the words "refusal ... of permission to
    appeal" in CPR 54.7A must be generally read as  including  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal.

27. Although both members of the present panel sit  in  the  Administrative
    Court, we are, of course, here acting as judges of the Upper  Tribunal.
    Our analysis of the ambit of CPR 54.7A has  been  necessitated  by  the
    fact that, in order to give effect to the High Court's decision in  the
    judicial review, we have had to establish the nature and effect of that
    decision.  In the  light  of  the  conclusions  we  have  reached,  the
    decision of the Master  to  order  that  "the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal is quashed" cannot be  read  as
    it stands, because there was no such decision. Since the only  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal was to grant permission on  limited  grounds,  it
    would seem the only way of giving express effect to the Master's  order
    would be to treat it as having quashed the Upper  Tribunal's  grant  of
    permission.


28. It is unnecessary for us to have  to  adopt  such  a  course.  This  is
    because, there being no direction  to  the  contrary,  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal, in their entirety, stand as the grounds of appeal to
    the  Upper  Tribunal.   Since  that  is  the  outcome  the  High  Court
    envisaged, an express acknowledgment of  that  fact  by  this  Tribunal
    accords proper respect to the proceedings in the High Court.  And since
    that also coincides with the appellant's aim, and is not opposed by the
    respondent, we hereby formally record that the  appellant  may  advance
    all his grounds of appeal at  the  forthcoming  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  If we are wrong, and it is necessary for the Upper  Tribunal
    to grant permission, we do so on that basis.

29. We can sum up the position as follows:


    (1) When the Upper  Tribunal  grants  permission  to  appeal,  even  on
    limited grounds, its decision is not amenable to judicial review  under
    the Cart procedure, which, as specifically indicated by CPR  54.7A,  is
    available only when the Upper Tribunal refuses permission.


    (2) Rule 22(2)(b) of the Upper Tribunal Rules has the  effect  that  in
    the absence of any direction limiting the grounds which may  be  argued
    before the Upper Tribunal, the grounds contained in the application for
    permission are the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  even  if
    permission is stated to have been granted on limited grounds.


    (3) Rule 22(2)(b) has the complementary effect that any  limitation  on
    the grounds of appeal must be by direction and, as a direction, can  be
    the subject of an application to  amend,  suspend  or  set  aside  that
    direction under rule 5(2).

30. As envisaged in the further submissions of 31 March, this case  affords
    an opportunity to explain why it is inappropriate to seek to  challenge
    in the High Court by  way  of  judicial  review  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    limited grant of permission to appeal. Those acting for  the  appellant
    at the relevant time did not,  of  course,  have  the  benefit  of  the
    analysis we have set out above; and we are fully  satisfied  that  they
    acted in good faith  in  furtherance  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant. For the future, however, practitioners will be  expected  to
    be mindful of this decision.


31. The appeal will be listed for hearing in the Upper Tribunal.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                      Signed


                      Mr Justice Lane


                      28 April 2021




                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
