

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th & 27th September; 24th October;       |                              |
|20th November and 11th December 2017          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     as
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Naik QC, Ms B Poynor and Mr B Bundock of
                    Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Singh QC, instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department


                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE


   Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban

     i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a
        senior government or security services official, or a spy)  is  not
        at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.


   Internal relocation to Kabul

    ii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul
        as well as the difficulties faced by the  population  living  there
        (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other returnees,  which
        are not dissimilar to the conditions  faced  throughout  may  other
        parts of Afghanistan); it will not, in general be  unreasonable  or
        unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health to relocate  to
        Kabul even if he does not have any specific connections or  support
        network in Kabul.


   iii) However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual  applicant
        must be taken into account in the  context  of  conditions  in  the
        place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
        of  support  network/connections  with   Kabul/Afghanistan,   their
        physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,  education  and
        vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
        the general position set out above.


    iv) A person with a support network or specific connections in Kabul is
        likely to be in a more advantageous position on return,  which  may
        counter a particular vulnerability of an individual on return.


     v) Although Kabul suffered the highest number of  civilian  casualties
        (in the latest UNAMA figures from 2017) and the number of  security
        incidents is increasing, the proportion of the population  directly
        affected by the security situation is tiny.  The  current  security
        situation in Kabul is not at such a level  as  to  render  internal
        relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.

   Previous Country Guidance


    vi) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive remains unaffected by this decision.


   vii) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the  (un)reasonableness  of  internal
        relocation  to  Kabul  (and  other  potential  places  of  internal
        relocation) for certain categories of women remains  unaffected  by
        this decision.


  viii) The country guidance in AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
        [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also remains unaffected by this decision.














                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

|                                             |               |
|Description                                  |Paragraphs     |
|Introduction                                 |1-4            |
|The Country Guidance Question                |1              |
|                                             |               |
|The Appeal                                   |5-13           |
|                                             |               |
|The Legal Framework                          |14-44          |
|Burden of Proof                              |41-44          |
|                                             |               |
|The Evidence                                 |45-171         |
|The Experts                                  |47-66          |
|Evidence on risk                             |67-97          |
|Internal Relocation                          |98-154         |
|Returns                                      |155-171        |
|                                             |               |
|Findings and Reasons                         |172- 252       |
|Risk                                         |173-188        |
|Reasonableness                               |189-235        |
|Previous Country Guidance                    |236-240        |
|Summary of general conclusions               |241            |
|The Appellant's claim                        |242 -252       |
|                                             |               |
|Notice of Decision                           |               |
|                                             |               |
|Appendix A                                   |               |
|Schedule of Background and Expert Evidence   |               |
|considered by the Tribunal                   |               |
|                                             |               |
|Appendix B                                   |               |
|Extract from EASO Country of Origin          |               |
|Information Report, Afghanistan: Security    |               |
|Situation" (August 2017).                    |               |
|                                             |               |
|Appendix C                                   |               |
|Error of Law Decision                        |               |
|                                             |               |
|Appendix D                                   |               |
|Senior President's Practice Direction No 10  |               |
|(2010)                                       |               |






                                  GLOSSARY



|AMASO           |- Afghanistan Migrants Advice and Support Organisation     |
|AAN             |- Afghan Analysts Network                                  |
|AGEF            |- Experts in the Fields of Migration and Development       |
|AGEs            |- Anti-government elements                                 |
|AVRR            |- Assisted Voluntary Return and Reintegration              |
|DTM             |- Displacement tracking matrix                             |
|EASO            |- European Asylum Support Office                           |
|ERIN            |- European Reintegration Network                           |
|GBV             |- Gender based violence                                    |
|GDP             |- Gross domestic product                                   |
|HRW             |- Human Rights Watch                                       |
|IDPs            |- Internally displaced persons                             |
|IEDs            |- Improvised explosive devices                             |
|IOM             |- International Organisation for Migration                 |
|IPSO            |- International Psychosocial Organisation                  |
|IRA/IFA         |- Internal relocation alternative/Internal flight          |
|                |alternative                                                |
|ISKP            |- Islamic State of the Khorasan Province                   |
|NGOs            |- Non-governmental organisations                           |
|UN              |- United Nations                                           |
|UNAMA           |- UN Assistant Mission in Afghanistan                      |
|UNFPA           |- UN Population Fund                                       |
|UNHCR           |- UN High Commissioner for Refugees                        |
|UNOCHA          |- UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs       |


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The question posed by the Upper Tribunal for country guidance  in  this
    case is:

       "Whether the current situation in Kabul is  such  that  the  guidance
       given in AK (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) needs  revision  in
       the context of consideration of internal relocation."

 2. The guidance in AK on this point at B is as follows:


       "(iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of  Article  15(c)
       in which the respondent asserts that Kabul city  would  be  a  viable
       internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account
       (both in assessing "safety" and "reasonableness") not only the  level
       of violence in that city but also  the  difficulties  experienced  by
       that city's poor and  also  the  many  Internally  Displaced  Persons
       (IDPs) living there, these considerations will not  in  general  make
       return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.


       (v) Nevertheless, this position is qualified  (both  in  relation  to
       Kabul and other potential places of internal relocation) for  certain
       categories of women.  The purport of the current Home Office  OGN  on
       Afghanistan is that whilst women with a male support network  may  be
       able to relocate internally, "... it would be unreasonable to  expect
       lone women and female heads  of  household  to  relocate  internally"
       (February 2012 OGN, 3.10.8) and the Tribunal sees no basis for taking
       a different view."

 3. Also important in the specific context of the  question  posed  in  the
    present country guidance case are the fuller findings in paragraph  243
    of AK, which appear immediately prior to the conclusion set out in (iv)
    above:


       "As regards Kabul city, we have already discussed  the  situation  in
       that city and we cannot see that for the purposes of deciding  either
       refugee eligibility or subsidiary protection eligibility (and we  are
       only formally tasked with deciding the  latter)  that  conditions  in
       that city make relocation  there  in  general  unreasonable,  whether
       considered under Article 15(c) or under 15(b) or 15(a).  We emphasise
       the words "in general" because it is plain from Article 8(2) and  our
       domestic  case  law  on  internal  relocation  (see  AH  (Sudan)   in
       particular) that in every case there needs to be an enquiry into  the
       applicant's individual circumstances; and  what  those  circumstances
       are will very often depend on the nature of  specific  findings  made
       about the credibility of an appellant in respect of such  matters  as
       whether they have  family  ties  in  Kabul.   But  here  our  premise
       concerns an appellant  with  no  specific  risk  characteristics  and
       someone found to have an uncle in Kabul: see above paras 3,  5,  154,
       186 and below, paras 250-254).  ..."


 4. When considering the question posed for the present case,  we  bear  in
    mind that the focus in AK was on Article  15(c)  of  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on Minimum Standards for the  Qualification
    and Status of Third Country Nationals or Stateless Persons as  Refugees
    or as Persons Who  Otherwise  Need  International  Protection  and  the
    Content of the Protection Granted (the "Qualification  Directive")  and
    eligibility  for  subsidiary  protection,  rather  than  the  issue  of
    internal relocation in the context of the Refugee Convention  and  that
    the evidence before that panel  on  the  socio-economic  conditions  in
    Kabul was relatively limited compared to  what  is  before  us  in  the
    present appeal.  We also bear in mind that the decision in AK was based
    principally on evidence from 2010 to 2011 and on any view,  there  have
    been rapid and significant changes in both Kabul and Afghanistan  as  a
    whole in the intervening period.


The Appeal

 5. The Appellant, a national  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1986,
    appealed the Respondent's decision dated 12 February 2015 to refuse his
    asylum and human rights claim.  His appeal was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bradshaw in a determination promulgated on 30 July 2015.
     Although Judge Bradshaw accepted that the Appellant would be  at  risk
    on return to his home area from the  Taliban,  his  asylum  appeal  was
    dismissed on the basis that he could internally relocate to Kabul.  The
    Appellant's human rights appeal was dismissed on the basis  that  there
    would be no disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right to
    respect for private and family  life  contrary  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.


 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds,  first,  that
    the Judge failed to  properly  consider  submissions  made  to  him  on
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  and  secondly,  that  she
    failed to properly  consider  the  evidence  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation.  Permission was granted on both grounds by UTJ Taylor on  2
    October 2015.  At an early stage, the appeal was identified as possible
    country guidance.


 7. In his decision promulgated  following  a  hearing  on  27  April  2017
    (Appendix C) UTJ O'Connor found an  error  of  law  such  that  it  was
    necessary to set aside the decision of Judge Bradshaw.  In so  finding,
    he stated that "The findings of primary fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal have not been the subject of challenge and are  preserved,  as
    is the conclusion that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  of  suffering
    persecutory treatment in his home area."  In addition, the finding that
    the Appellant is not at risk on return to his home  area  or  elsewhere
    from the Afghan government has not been challenged and stands.


 8. For the purposes of the present appeal and, in particular,  the  letter
    of instruction to the experts, the following are agreed facts.


     a) The Appellant (dob 1 January 1986)  is  a  single  man  from  Kardai
        village, Laghman province, Afghanistan.  He is thus 31 years of age.




     b) The Appellant's father was the imam of the local  mosque  and  well-
        known in the village, where the Taliban have a presence.  He refused
        to cooperate with them or propagate for  them  and  was  labelled  a
        government agent.  In 2006 the Taliban killed him.

     c) The Appellant's  brother  reported  their  father's  murder  to  the
        authorities and 10 days later there  was  an  attack  on  the  local
        Taliban by government forces.  The Taliban suspected the Appellant's
        brother of spying for the government and killed him in 2007.


     d) Sometime later the Taliban abducted the Appellant from his house and
        detained him  away  from  the  village  along  with  others.   While
        detained, he was not fingerprinted or photographed by  the  Taliban.
        A  week  later,  the  Appellant  escaped  during  a  night  raid  by
        government forces and returned  to  Kardai  village,  whereupon  his
        maternal uncle passed him to a friend and then to an agent  to  take
        him out of Afghanistan.


     e) The Appellant fled Afghanistan clandestinely in 2008 and entered the
        United Kingdom towards the end of that year, having  passed  through
        other countries en route.  The Appellant's mother,  younger  brother
        and maternal uncle remained in Kardai village.


     f) The Appellant would be at risk of persecution  if  returned  to  his
        local area.


 9. For the purposes of instructions to the experts, there were a number of
    facts which they were asked to assume although  they  were  not  agreed
    aspects of the Appellant's account between the parties.  These included
    the Appellant's claim that when in Afghanistan he attended  school  for
    nine years and thereafter worked with his brother in farming;  that  he
    has not had contact with his mother, younger brother and maternal uncle
    since arriving in the United Kingdom; and that  the  Appellant  has  no
    family or support in Kabul.


10. In summary, the Appellant's case is that he is at risk from the Taliban
    in his home area and also in Kabul, where there would be no sufficiency
    of protection from such risk.  In any  event,  internal  relocation  to
    Kabul  is  not   reasonable   because   he   is   at   risk   of   harm
    (kidnapping/extortion of money) on account of his westernised  profile;
    because he has no family or other support network in  Kabul  to  assist
    him in obtaining accommodation and/or employment; because he is at risk
    of being in conditions comparable to those of an IDP (with greater risk
    of unemployment, limited access to adequate housing, limited access  to
    water and  sanitation  and  food  insecurity)  and  that  reintegration
    assistance will not relieve these issues.


11. It is important to note at the outset that it is  not  the  Appellant's
    case that treatment in Kabul would be in breach of  Article  3  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  or  Article   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.


12. In summary, the Respondent's case is that although the Appellant  would
    be at risk of persecution if returned to his local area in Afghanistan,
    he would be able to safely and reasonably internally relocate to  Kabul
    and for this reason is not entitled to be recognised as a refugee under
    the Refugee Convention nor be granted humanitarian protection.


13. It is important to note at the outset, that  the  Respondent  does  not
    rely on there being a sufficiency of protection for the Appellant  from
    the Taliban in Afghanistan, or in  particular  in  areas  where  he  is
    accepted to be at  risk.   The  Respondent  acknowledges  that  however
    willing the Afghan authorities are, they would  usually  be  unable  to
    offer effective protection.   For  this  reason,  we  do  not  in  this
    decision, set out in any detail the substantial evidence before  us  on
    the capacity of the Afghan  forces,  issues  of  corruption  and  human
    rights abuses within them, nor do we set out evidence before us on  the
    judiciary in Afghanistan.


Legal framework

14. By Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a  person  who
    is out of the country of his or her nationality and  who,  owing  to  a
    well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  reasons  of  race,  religion,
    nationality or membership of a particular  social  group  or  political
    opinion, is unable  or  unwilling  to  avail  him  or  herself  of  the
    protection of the country of origin.


15. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive provides as follows:


      1. As part of the assessment  of  the  application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.
      2. In examining whether  a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.
      3. Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
         to the country of origin.


16. The Immigration Rules provide in Rule 339O(i):

      i)     The Secretary of State will not make:
           a)    a grant of refugee status if in part  of  the  country  of
              origin a person would not have a well founded fear  of  being
              persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected to stay
              in that part of the country; or
           b)    a grant of humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
              country of return a person would not  face  a  real  risk  of
              suffering serious harm, and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
              expected to stay in that part of the country.
       (ii)   In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
           country of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of
           State, when making a decision on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
           humanitarian  protection,  will  have  regard  to  the   general
           circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to  the
           personal circumstances of the person.
       (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to
           the country of origin or country of return.


17. From the above, a person is not a refugee if  they  can  reasonably  be
    expected to live in another part of their home country where they would
    not have a well-founded fear of persecution.  In such circumstances,  a
    person has the option of internal relocation, also known as an internal
    flight alternative.  Once the issue of  internal  relocation  has  been
    raised there are two discrete questions to determine whether  there  is
    an option of internal relocation.  First, does the person have a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in the proposed place  of  relocation?   If
    yes, then there is no internal relocation option and the  person  is  a
    refugee.  There is also no internal relocation  option  if  the  person
    would be subject to inhuman or degrading treatment within  the  meaning
    of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (the "ECHR") in
    the proposed place of relocation or if it would be in breach of Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  If not, then secondly there must
    be an assessment of whether in  all  the  circumstances,  it  would  be
    reasonable or not unduly harsh to expect the person to relocate to that
    place.


18. Lord Bingham summarised the approach  to  reasonableness  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, at [21]:

       "The decision-maker, taking account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
       pertaining to the claimant and his country  of  origin,  must  decide
       whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
       whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so... There  is,
       as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of  cases.
       The decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such material as is
       available, where on the spectrum the  particular  case  falls...  All
       must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts."

19. Further, at [47], Lord Hope stated the position as follows:

       "The question where the issue of internal relocation is  raised  can,
       then, be defined quite simply ... it is whether it  would  be  unduly
       harsh to expect a claimant who is being persecuted for  a  Convention
       reason in one part of his country to move  to  a  less  hostile  part
       before seeking refugee status abroad.  The words "unduly  harsh"  set
       the  standard  that  must  be  met  for  this  to  be   regarded   as
       unreasonable.  If the claimant can  live  a  relatively  normal  life
       there by the standards that prevail in  his  country  of  nationality
       generally, and if he can reach the less hostile  part  without  undue
       hardship or undue difficulty, it will not be unreasonable  to  expect
       him to move there."


20. The test was considered further by the House of Lords in AH  (Sudan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] 1 AC 678, upon  which
    we had detailed submissions from the parties as to  the  scope  of  the
    test of reasonableness of internal relocation.  We  therefore  set  out
    more fully the judgements in that case and the  principles  which  flow
    from it, not all of which were controversial between the parties.


21. First, Lord Bingham, having referred to his own judgement  at  [21]  of
    Januzi, (set out above), went on to say at [5]:

       "Although specifically directed to a secondary  issue  in  the  case,
       these observations are plainly of general  application.   It  is  not
       easy to see how the rule could be more simply or  clearly  expressed.
       It is, or should be, evident that the enquiry must be directed to the
       situation of the particular applicant, whose age, gender, experience,
       health, skills and family ties may all be very relevant.  There is no
       warrant for excluding,  giving  priority  to,  consideration  of  the
       applicant's way of life in the place of  persecution.   There  is  no
       warrant for  excluding,  or  giving  priority  to,  consideration  of
       conditions generally prevailing  in  the  home  country.   I  do  not
       estimate the difficulty of making decisions in some cases.   But  the
       difficulty lies in applying the test,  not  in  expressing  it.   The
       humanitarian  object  of  the  Refugee  Convention  is  to  secure  a
       reasonable measure of protection for those with a  well-founded  fear
       of persecution in their home country or some part of it; it is not to
       procure general levelling-up of living standards  around  the  world,
       desirable though of course that is."

22. Baroness Hale confirmed at [20] that the House was all agreed that  the
    correct approach was that set out by Lord Bingham in Januzi and further
    endorsed  the  following  submission  from  the  United  Nations   High
    Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) of the correct approach:


       "The correct approach when  considering  the  reasonableness  of  IRA
       [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all the  circumstances
       of the individual's case holistically and with specific reference  to
       the individual's personal circumstances (including  past  persecution
       or fear thereof,  psychological  and  health  condition,  family  and
       social situation, and survival capacities).  This assessment is to be
       made in the context of the conditions  in  the  place  of  relocation
       (including basic human rights,  security  conditions,  socio-economic
       conditions, accommodation, access  to  health  care  facilities),  in
       order to determine the impact on that individual of settling  in  the
       proposed place of relocation and whether the individual could live  a
       relatively normal life without undue hardship."


23. The assessment must therefore consider the particular circumstances  of
    the individual applicant in the context of conditions in the  place  of
    relocation.  The test of reasonableness is  one  of  great  generality,
    excluding only a comparison with conditions  in  the  host  country  in
    which protection has been sought, per Lord Bingham at [13] and Baroness
    Hale at [27].


24. Secondly, the test of reasonableness is not  analogous  to,  or  to  be
    equated with, the test under Article 3 of the ECHR, per Lord Bingham at
    [9] and Baroness Hale at [21-22 and 26].  If,  however,  conditions  in
    the proposed place of relocation do  breach  Article  3  of  the  ECHR,
    internal relocation would automatically be unreasonable without more.


25. Thirdly, the correct comparator by which to judge reasonableness is not
    against the conditions for the worst of the worst in that country.  Put
    another  way,  it  is  not  a  consideration  of  whether  a   person's
    circumstances will be worse than the circumstances of  anyone  else  in
    that country, per Baroness Hale at [27-28].


26. Finally, Lord Brown, who expressly agrees  with  the  opinion  of  Lord
    Bingham (and both of whom are expressly agreed with  by  Lord  Hope  at
    [18]), expanded upon the test of reasonableness at [42] as follows:

       "As mentioned, one touchstone of  whether  relocation  would  involve
       undue hardship, identified in the UNHCR guidelines referred to in the
       passage already cited from para 47 of Lord Hope's speech  in  Januzi,
       is whether "in the context of the country concerned" the claimant can
       live "a  relatively  normal  life".   The  respondents  are  fiercely
       critical of the Tribunal's approach to this question in  the  present
       case.  In particular they criticise the Tribunal's conclusion  as  to
       "the subsistence level existence in which people in  Sudan  generally
       live".  To my mind, however, this criticism is misplaced.  It is  not
       necessary to establish that a majority  of  the  population  live  at
       subsistence level for that to be regarded as  a  "relatively  normal"
       existence in the country as  a  whole.   If  a  significant  minority
       suffer equivalent hardship to that likely to be suffered by  claimant
       on relocation and if the claimant is as well able to bear it as most,
       it may well be appropriate to refuse  him  international  protection.
       Hard-hearted  as  this  may  sound,  and  sympathetic  although   one
       inevitably feels towards  those  who  have  suffered  as  have  these
       respondents (and the  tens  of  thousands  like  them),  the  Refugee
       Convention, as I have sought to explain, is really intended  only  to
       protect those threatened with specific forms of persecution.   It  is
       not  a  general  humanitarian  measure.    For   these   respondents,
       persecution is no longer a risk.  Given that they can now  safely  be
       returned home, only prove that their lives on return would  be  quite
       simply intolerable compared even to the problems and deprivations  of
       so many of their fellow countrymen  would  entitle  them  to  refugee
       status.  Compassion alone cannot justify the grant of asylum."

27. It is the Respondent's reliance on this last paragraph at [42] of  Lord
    Brown's speech, in particular, the reference to a significant  minority
    of the population, that  the  Appellant  took  significant  issue  with
    during the course of the hearing before us for the  following  reasons.
    First, it was submitted that this could not be relied upon  because  it
    was an obiter dicta comment (because in fact the conditions  considered
    in Sudan were those of the majority of the population), expressed in  a
    minority judgement (not expressly endorsed by  Lord  Bingham,  Baroness
    Hale or Lord  Hoffmann)  and  therefore  not  binding  upon  the  Upper
    tribunal.


28. Secondly, there has  been  no  application  of  the  proposition  of  a
    comparison with a significant minority of the population in  any  Court
    or Tribunal since AH (Sudan).


29. Thirdly, the proposition was inconsistent with the ratio in AH  (Sudan)
    as articulated by Lord Bingham, with whom  all  agreed,  which  was  to
    expressly approve of the test set out in Januzi  without  excluding  or
    giving priority to consideration of the applicant's way of life in  the
    place of persecution or the conditions generally prevailing in the home
    country.


30. Fourthly, the proposition is also inconsistent with  the  judgement  of
    Baroness Hale in AH (Sudan) as it would inevitably lead to a comparison
    with the very worst lives led by fellow nationals.


31. Fifthly, it is  inconsistent  with  the  UNHCR  guidelines  which  were
    endorsed by Lord Bingham in Januzi as giving "valuable guidance"  on  a
    proper approach to assessing reasonableness.


32. Sixthly, it is inconsistent with the ratio of the Court of Appeal in AA
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    579, specifically with the judgment of Buxton LJ who referred  to  some
    conditions in the place of relocation as  being  unacceptable  even  if
    widespread in that place.


33. Finally, the proposition is inconsistent with the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in FB (Lone Women - PSG - internal relocation  -  AA  (Uganda)
    considered) Sierra Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090, in which it was reiterated
    that there are some forms or degrees of hardship which will  be  unduly
    harsh irrespective of how many others endure them.

34. In response, Mr Singh relied upon the fact that Lord Brown's speech  in
    AH (Sudan) had been expressly approved by Lord Hope and also by  Buxton
    LJ in AA  (Uganda),  who  described  Lord  Browne's  judgment  at  [42]
    "valuably explain[ing] some further aspects  of  the  jurisprudence  of
    undue harshness".

35. As to what a significant minority would be,  it  was  submitted  by  Mr
    Singh that significant minority was simply something sufficiently great
    in number to be worthy of attention and the opposite to  insignificant.
    In reality, he submitted that the population of Kabul is a  significant
    minority of the  population  in  Afghanistan  and  even  a  significant
    minority of the population of Kabul itself  could  still  amount  to  a
    significant minority of the population of Afghanistan as a whole.

36. We do not consider that Lord Brown's judgment in AH (Sudan)  is  either
    strictly obiter dicta or a  minority  judgment  such  that  it  is  not
    binding on the Upper Tribunal.  This is because first, it was expressly
    approved by Lord Hope;  secondly,  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
    speeches of Lord Bingham or Baroness Hale in AH (Sudan);  and  thirdly,
    in any event it was expressly approved by  Buxton  LJ  in  AA  (Uganda)
    which is itself binding on us.

37. When assessing the reasonableness of internal relocation, the  language
    used in Januzi and AH (Sudan) is of standards or  conditions  generally
    prevailing in the home country and of  whether  a  person  can  live  a
    relatively normal life.  There is of course no single standard  or  set
    of conditions which apply throughout a country, but a range of examples
    of 'normal' or conditions which are experienced  either  in  particular
    parts of the country, or throughout it by groups of  people.   One  can
    envisage for example, that there will almost inevitably in any  country
    in the world be differences between standards generally  prevailing  in
    urban as opposed to rural areas,  and  between  the  capital  or  large
    cities and other areas.  That is not to say that because  the  majority
    of the population live in, for example a rural area, the conditions  in
    urban areas could not said to be normal or include conditions generally
    prevailing  in  the  home  country.   We  consider  that  Lord  Brown's
    reference to a significant minority of the population is  expanding  on
    what is contained in the speeches of Lord Bingham  and  Baroness  Hale,
    and is simply a way of expressing what is,  in  practice,  required  to
    identify standards or  conditions  generally  prevailing  in  the  home
    country, reflecting that there is not  a  single  standard  or  set  of
    conditions which apply to a simple numerical majority of the population
    throughout the entire geographical territory of a country.

38. In support of this, we rely on what was said by Buxton LJ in AA Uganda,
    which expressly endorses Lord Brown's speech, including the significant
    minority point at his [42]:

       "16. Whilst Immigration Judge Coker did not have the benefit  of  the
       House of Lords in AH (Sudan) she clearly had the  jurisprudence  that
       their Lordships confirmed in mind when she said, at the  end  of  her
       �38, that the situation facing AA was the same as that of many  other
       young women living in Kampala, and quoted Lord Hope of Craighead, who
       asked whether the claimant could live a relatively normal life judged
       by  the  standards  that  prevail  in  his  country  of   nationality
       generally: those standards, or the relevant hardship, being  as  Lord
       Brown of Eaton-under-Haywood  explained  in  AH  (Sudan)  that  of  a
       significant minority in the country.  The evidence before the AIT  in
       this case did not reveal how widespread in the context of Uganda as a
       whole are the conditions reported by Dr Nelson, and did  not  suggest
       that they affect anyone other than young women.  The factual case  is
       therefore significantly different from that in AH (Sudan) where  slum
       conditions were widespread in Sudan, and affected everyone, men women
       and children alike, and of all ages.  Immigration Judge Coker  should
       therefore have considered whether it was  appropriate  to  apply  the
       test formulated by Lord  Hope  of  Craighead  to  a  case  where  the
       comparator or constituency in the place of relocation is  limited  to
       persons who suffer from the same specific characteristics that expose
       the applicant to danger and hardship in the place of relocation.

       17. There is, however, a further and more fundamental reason  why  it
       is difficult or impossible to apply the jurisprudence of  AH  (Sudan)
       to  the  present  case.   There,  the  conditions  in  the  place  of
       relocation included poverty, disease and the living of  a  life  that
       was structured quite differently from that from which the  appellants
       had come in Darfur.  It had  been  open  to  the  AIT  to  hold  that
       exposure to those conditions, shared by many of the refugees' fellow-
       countrymen, did not amount to undue harshness.  But the present  case
       is different.  On the evidence accepted by the AIT, AA is  faced  not
       merely with poverty and lack of any sort of accommodation,  but  with
       being driven into prostitution.  Even if that is the likely  fate  of
       many of her fellow countrywomen, I cannot think that either  the  AIT
       or the House of Lords that decided AH (Sudan) would have felt able to
       regard enforced prostitution as coming within the category of  normal
       country conditions that the refugee must be expected to put up  with.
       Quite  simply,  there  must  be  some  conditions  in  the  place  of
       relocation that are unacceptable to  the  extent  that  it  would  be
       unduly harsh to return the applicant to them even if  the  conditions
       are widespread in the place of relocation."

39. The test, or comparator for the purposes of  assessing  reasonableness,
    is as set out in AH (Sudan), including as expressly  set  out  by  Lord
    Brown, with  the  caveat  that  there  are  some  conditions  that  are
    unacceptable even if widely suffered in the place of relocation.   That
    particular point was confirmed and expanded upon by the Upper  Tribunal
    in FB (Lone women - PSG - internal relocation - AA (Uganda) considered)
    Sierra Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090, which held at [39] that "[AA (Uganda)]
    is affirmation, in line with AH (Sudan) that [internal] relocation must
    be reasonable, in other words, that it must not have such  consequences
    upon the individual as to be unduly harsh for her.  Inevitably, it will
    be unduly harsh if an appellant is unable for all practical purposes to
    survive with sufficient dignity to reflect her humanity.   That  is  no
    more than saying that if survival  comes  at  a  cost  of  destitution,
    beggary, crime or prostitution, then that is a price too high."

40. The final principle that therefore flows from AH (Sudan) is  that  when
    considering the standards or conditions  prevailing  generally  in  the
    country of nationality,  it  is  not  necessary  to  establish  that  a
    majority of the population live in  those  particular  conditions,  but
    only that a significant minority suffer  equivalent  hardship  to  that
    likely to be suffered by the applicant on relocation.  What follows  is
    then a personalised assessment of whether the  applicant  would  be  as
    well able to bear it ia most or whether those  conditions  are  in  any
    event  unreasonable,  for   example   because   they   involve   crime,
    destitution, prostitution and the like.  There is no requirement for  a
    specific numerical, geographical or other qualification on  what  is  a
    significant minority  of  the  population.   That  phrase  carries  its
    ordinary and natural meaning  of  something  of  a  sufficiently  great
    number to be worthy of attention in the context of  the  population  of
    the home country and not insignificant and its  application  should  be
    self-evident on an assessment of the factual evidence in  the  majority
    if not all cases.   If  interpreted  this  way,  there  is  no  central
    inconsistency  with  Baroness  Hale's  speech  in  AH   (Sudan)   which
    highlighted, inter alia, the concern that the comparator should not  be
    with the poorest of the poor in a particular country.

Burden of Proof

41. The burden of proof is on the Appellant  to  establish  that  he  is  a
    refugee.  The degree of likelihood of persecution needed  to  establish
    an entitlement to asylum is decided on a basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of  probabilities.   This  is  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That standard of probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

42. We received submissions from both parties as to the correct  burden  of
    proof on the test of reasonableness for internal relocation.  On behalf
    of the Appellant it was submitted that in  accordance  with  the  UNHCR
    guidelines and the Michigan  Guidelines  on  "The  Internal  Protection
    Alternative", the burden is on the decision-maker (both the  Respondent
    and the First-tier Tribunal/Upper Tribunal) or in the alternative  that
    there was a shared burden between an applicant and the Respondent.


43. On behalf of the Respondent, Counsel relied  on  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in AMM and others (conflict: humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;
    FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  00445  (IAC),  that  where  the  issue  of
    internal relocation is raised, an  applicant  must  make  good  on  the
    submission that relocation would not be reasonable.


44. As confirmed most recently by the Senior President of the Tribunals  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v SC (Jamaica)  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 2112 (handed down after the hearing in the present appeal), at  36,
    there is no burden of proof in relation to the overall issue of whether
    it is reasonable for a person to internally relocate.
Evidence


45. We begin by identifying the experts who submitted written evidence  and
    gave oral evidence before us,  setting  out  their  relevant  areas  of
    expertise and our overall  impressions  of  that  evidence  in  general
    terms, including as to the weight to  be  attached  to  their  evidence
    generally.


46. We go on to consider below the evidence before  us,  both  written  and
    oral, first as to risk on return to Kabul and secondly as to safety and
    reasonableness of  internal  relocation  by  setting  out  the  current
    situation in Kabul in particular, but also in relation  to  Afghanistan
    more widely.  In line with  the  legal  framework  set  out  above,  we
    undertake a holistic assessment of the conditions generally  prevailing
    in Afghanistan to assess the reasonableness of internal relocation, but
    for practical reasons we separate out and very  broadly  summarise  the
    evidence in relation to particular topics sequentially which contribute
    to the holistic assessment.  The full list of evidence before the Upper
    Tribunal in this appeal is  set  out  in  Appendix  B  which  has  been
    considered by us in  its  entirety  and  the  absence  of  any  express
    reference to it in the summary included (which is of necessity a  brief
    summary) should not be taken as an indication that a  particular  piece
    of evidence or part of it has not been taken into account when reaching
    our conclusions set out below.


The Experts


47. Three experts were instructed, each of whom submitted  written  reports
    and gave oral evidence  before  us,  on  the  basis  of  joint  written
    instructions.  Further to receipt of  the  written  reports  from  each
    expert, the Respondent asked further questions  of  each  expert  which
    were responded to by way of supplementary written reports.  We set  out
    initially our overview of the experts and their evidence and go  on  to
    consider later the detail of that evidence by topic.


48. Dr Liza Schuster is a Reader in the  Department  of  Sociology  at  the
    University of London and has been employed as a researcher at both  the
    University of Oxford and the  London  School  of  Economics.   She  has
    visited and lived in Afghanistan for significant periods of time  since
    2011 (totalling around five years), during which  she  has  lived  with
    Afghan families and in different settings in Kabul.  Dr Schuster is one
    of less than a dozen non-Afghans who live and work  doing  research  in
    this field in Kabul.  Since November 2016, Dr Schuster has  been  based
    in Kabul undertaking a research project studying  migration  decisions,
    policy-making and migration culture based at the university there.


49. Of particular relevance for this  appeal,  Dr  Schuster  has  conducted
    research in Afghanistan since 2012 as to  the  consequences  of  forced
    return for  Afghan  migrants  and  their  families  and  the  migration
    decision-making process.  This involved a number of in-depth interviews
    with individuals and their  families.   In  the  initial  project,  she
    interviewed 32 young men who had been deported and the families  of  12
    others in Kabul and Pule Khumri.  In total, Dr Schuster has  spoken  to
    approximately 120 people who have been returned to Kabul against  their
    will from EU states.  She remains in touch with 12 of them, all of whom
    are no longer in Afghanistan.


50. In 2014, Dr Schuster set up the Afghanistan Migrants Advice and Support
    Organisation (AMASO) with Abdul Ghafoor, an Afghan man who was forcibly
    returned to Afghanistan following a failed application  for  asylum  in
    Norway.  AMASO was initially supported by money from Norway to  support
    others on return, for example by accessing IOM packages  and  providing
    advice to those who didn't understand what was happening.  Dr  Schuster
    trained Mr Ghafoor and provided initial funding, but he  now  runs  the
    organisation himself, funded  from  external  grants.   AMASO  provides
    information to those returned to Afghanistan and to  those  wishing  to
    leave the country, explaining processes to them,  options  and  support
    available, helping to channel  support  and  occasionally  facilitating
    skype or video-conferencing  for  out  of  country  appeals.   It  also
    provides limited accommodation for up to 10 men in Kabul.


51. In the last three years, Abdul Ghafoor has been contacted by more  than
    300 individuals and Dr Schuster remains in contact with him to  discuss
    cases.  Of that number, he has interviewed 180 people and  Dr  Schuster
    was present for about 40 of those interviews.   Of  those  300  people,
    they have lost touch with 75, about 65 have  left  Afghanistan  and  40
    remain in Afghanistan, of which 20 are in Kabul.


52. At present, Dr Schuster  is  following  18  families  after  return  to
    Afghanistan, which includes a range of ethnic tribes, people from  both
    Kabul and the provinces, and a mix  of  people  from  different  income
    groups and family sizes.  The project is looking at their plans,  hopes
    and fears for the future.


53. Dr Schuster was specifically asked about living conditions and economic
    survival  in  Kabul  and  the  present  humanitarian   situation.    In
    particular, she was asked to consider sources of  independent  support;
    employment   opportunities;   levels   of   subsistence;   destitution;
    shelter/accommodation and accessible  amenities;  and  availability  of
    healthcare; as well as the situation for IDPs.   Dr  Schuster's  report
    was based in part on fieldwork with those who  have  been  returned  or
    their families and in part informed by first-hand experience of time in
    the country, hearing comments, concerns and questions from Afghans.
54. Overall, we found Dr Schuster's evidence to  be  clear,  comprehensive,
    well-researched from both written sources and contacts  in  Afghanistan
    and based on her own in-depth experience from  living  in  Afghanistan,
    working with those who have been returned there and through AMASO.   We
    attach significant weight to Dr Schuster's evidence which we  found  to
    be of great value in understanding  the  socio-economic  conditions  in
    Kabul.  The only slight caution we have considered when  assessing  her
    evidence, which is in no way a criticism of it, is  to  note  that  the
    returnees that she has had direct or indirect exposure to  are  a  very
    small number of those who had been forcibly returned to  Kabul  in  the
    last five years, out of the hundreds  of  thousands  forcibly  returned
    from Pakistan, Iran and the west in the last 12 months alone  and  that
    those persons are likely to be in the most difficult situations to have
    sought  assistance  from  AMASO  (because  those  returnees  leading  a
    relatively normal life without significant difficulties in Kabul  would
    have no need to seek such assistance).


55. Dr Antonio Giustozzi is a Senior Visiting Professor at the War  Studies
    Department of Kings  College  London  and  was  previously  a  visiting
    research fellow  at  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political
    Science, Development Studies Institute.  Dr Giustozzi has been  working
    on issues in relation to Afghanistan since 2003, at its peak  he  would
    spend about three months a year there, it is currently down  to  a  few
    weeks each year depending on work.   He  has  had  numerous  books  and
    articles published in relation  to  Afghanistan  and  is  a  relatively
    frequent visitor to Afghanistan.  The methodology used by Dr  Giustozzi
    depends on the nature of the project but in general is less reliant  on
    written sources which there is  a  shortage  of,  and  relies  more  on
    interviews with the  government,  the  opposition,  civil  society  and
    opposition parties.  Dr  Giustozzi  has  two  researchers  or  research
    managers  in  Kabul  and  also  works  with  Afghans  and   experienced
    journalists for both contacts  and  information.   He  recognises  that
    sources may have their own agenda and he seeks out as many  sources  as
    possible to compare and test for reliability.


56. Dr Giustozzi has given expert evidence in a number of country  guidance
    cases before the Upper Tribunal  and  has  broadly  been  found  to  be
    knowledgeable with reliable analysis of the issues,  particularly  when
    his reports were limited to uncontentious facts rather than prepared on
    the basis of assumptions about a particular appellant.


57. In this appeal, Dr Giustozzi was specifically asked about  the  Taliban
    and any risk to the Appellant from them if he internally  relocated  to
    Kabul and whether there would be any sufficiency of protection from the
    Taliban in Kabul.

58. Overall, we found Dr Giustozzi to be knowledgeable about the  Taliban's
    activities and modus operandi in Afghanistan based on  his  significant
    experience and work in this field.  We found his written report  to  be
    relatively  brief  with  less  explanation  and   reasoning   for   the
    conclusions reached than could have been expected in the  circumstances
    of this appeal.  However, his oral evidence was much clearer, with more
    express analysis and reasoning to support his propositions.   We  found
    that he was clear as to where assumptions had been made  based  on  his
    experience and knowledge and where there was (or  was  not)  supporting
    evidence to the  views  given.   However,  there  were  inconsistencies
    within Dr Giustozzi's evidence which are difficult to reconcile,  which
    we deal with in the specific evidence sections below  and  there  is  a
    lack of support by other commentators for some of his conclusions (such
    as from Borhan Osman (a political analyst in the  Afghanistan  Analysts
    Network who focuses on insurgent groups) on the existence of the  black
    list and use of targeted hit teams, recorded in  the  EASO  Country  of
    Origin Information Report "Afghanistan - Individuals targeted by  armed
    actors in  the  conflict"  (December  2017)).   Overall,  we  found  Dr
    Giustozzi to have given thorough  evidence  to  which  we  also  attach
    weight.  We pause here to record  that  we  have  attached  significant
    weight to the EASO Country of Origin  Information  Reports,  which  are
    thoroughly researched and comprehensive reports from a broad  range  of
    sources.


59. In some respects, there was an overlap between  some  of  the  evidence
    given by Dr Schuster and Dr Giustozzi as to the need for  or  relevance
    of support networks in Kabul for employment and accommodation purposes.
     We pause at this point to note that their evidence on this  issue  was
    not entirely consistent and set out the detail below  in  the  relevant
    sections.

60. Ms Emily Winterbotham is a Senior Research Fellow at the  Royal  United
    Services Institute in the International  Security  Studies  Department,
    prior to which she has been a researcher for the  Afghanistan  Research
    and Evaluation Unit and as a Political Advisor for the  Office  of  the
    European  Union  Special  Representative.   She  lived  and  worked  in
    Afghanistan between 2009 and 2015 and since then has returned for  five
    weeks in total for various pieces of work.  She has  had  a  number  of
    papers, articles and reports published and has conducted research for a
    number of  different  bodies,  including  the  UK  Foreign  Office  and
    Department for International Development.


61. Ms Winterbotham was specifically asked about the security situation  in
    Kabul and to what extent this is changed  since  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    assessment in 2012 in AK.  In particular, she was asked about  security
    incidents,  casualties  and  human  rights  abuses  in  Kabul  and  the
    willingness and/or ability of the authorities to  offer  protection  to
    the population.  In addition, specific questions were asked  about  the
    risk  of  forcible  recruitment   by   anti-government   elements;   of
    kidnapping; of bonded or hazardous labour; and of  violence,  including
    sexual violence.


62. Overall, we found Ms Winterbotham's evidence  to  be  of  significantly
    less assistance and carry far less weight than the other experts due to
    her approach to writing  her  report  and  giving  evidence  generally.
    Although we accept that this was Ms Winterbotham's first experience  of
    appearing in the Upper Tribunal as  an  expert  witness  in  a  country
    guidance case, we find her approach to this task to be of concern.   In
    particular, it became apparent from her oral evidence that when writing
    her report, Ms Winterbotham approached the task by using material  that
    she already had available to her and had amassed over the years in  her
    work, rather than undertaking any specific further  investigation  into
    particular points or checking for updates to or additional  sources  to
    the material that she  did  rely  upon.   The  material  that  she  had
    available to her was collected for a range of different purposes over a
    period  of  time  which  preceded  her  instructions  and  whilst   not
    necessarily  irrelevant  to  the  questions  asked  of  her,  was   not
    specifically collected for this purpose nor was it  necessarily  up  to
    date or the most relevant material on which reliance  could  or  should
    have been placed.  In many instances, material relied upon  dated  back
    as far as 2008 and 2009, and a significant proportion of  sources  were
    from the period before AK was heard in the Upper Tribunal.   There  was
    also an example of a draft  article  being  relied  upon  as  a  source
    despite the fact it was not the final version which was published.


63. It was also clear during the course of her  oral  evidence  that  there
    were inaccuracies in the footnotes in Ms Winterbotham's report and that
    she had significant difficulty identifying whether her evidence was her
    own opinion or whether sourced from other evidence (both in the written
    report and in oral evidence).  Where there was a claimed  source,  some
    were wrongly identified in the footnotes and many were not specifically
    or even generally identified at all  for  various  reasons  which  were
    unexplained on the face of  the  report  and  at  best  only  partially
    explained in oral evidence.  Further, there was at least  one  instance
    where it was not clear whether a source was  an  editorial  or  a  news
    story.  This is in contrast to Dr Giustozzi's evidence during which  he
    could  identify  sources  (with  sufficient  generality  to  know   the
    organisation and level of person within it, even if not  by  name)  and
    identify where his evidence  was  based  either  on  particular  source
    material or his own conclusions.


64. In some parts, Ms Winterbotham also  accepted  in  oral  evidence  that
    risks based on particular  characteristics  (such  as  age,  which  she
    referred to as her nuance on the facts of this case further to  reports
    in  which  the  conclusions  were  much  broader,  for  example   being
    applicable to men of any age) in parts  of  her  report  were  included
    because they were the particular  characteristics  of  this  Appellant,
    rather than because there was any supporting evidence or reasoning  for
    that being separately identified as a risk or relevant  characteristic.
    That approach is particularly unhelpful in the  context  of  a  country
    guidance case where general guidance is to be given applicable to  many
    more people than  this  individual  Appellant  and  was  of  particular
    concern when this was not clear on the  face  of  her  written  report.
    Further, terminology used in the  report  was  not  defined,  and  used
    interchangeably, for example, there was a lack of clarity on whether  a
    reference was being made to an IDP or to a returnee, or both.   It  was
    accepted that an IDP was  distinct  from  a  returnee  but  there  were
    examples of Ms Winterbotham answering questions about an IDP by talking
    about returnees.


65. This approach to giving expert evidence  in  a  country  guidance  case
    falls below the standards  set  out  in  paragraph  10  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Direction  No  10  (2010)  (set  out  in  full  in
    Appendix D) and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MOJ  and  Others
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC),  which  we
    would have expected and consequently significantly reduces  the  weight
    which we have attached to the evidence as we are not persuaded that  it
    is comprehensive or up to date.  For the reasons set out above, we have
    approached Ms Winterbotham's evidence with caution.


66. However, we do acknowledge Ms Winterbotham's  extensive  experience  of
    living and working in Afghanistan as well as her detailed knowledge  of
    specific areas of work that she has been involved in and we do take her
    evidence into account for these reasons.



Evidence on risk

Risk from the Taliban

67. Before setting out the evidence, primarily from Dr  Giustozzi,  of  the
    specific situation in Kabul, we set out the  evidence  (also  primarily
    from Dr  Giustozzi)  as  to  Taliban  operations  and  priorities  more
    generally for background and context.


68. Dr Giustozzi gave evidence as to the  sophisticated  structure  of  the
    Taliban who have significant manpower  and  financial  resources.   The
    Taliban is of the view that  they  are  the  legitimate  government  of
    Afghanistan and seek to establish their own regime  there  with  shadow
    governments and departments,  albeit  with  a  decentralised  structure
    involving multiple centres of power and  a  weak  hierarchy.   In  some
    areas where they are in control (perhaps 40 to 50 districts out of  318
    in Afghanistan), the Taliban have set up a real  government,  including
    appointing a mayor, employing people to run basic  city  administration
    and setting up courts.  In contrast where they are not in control of an
    area, the Taliban operate  underground.   The  Taliban  have  extensive
    physical infrastructure and staff both in Afghanistan  and  abroad  and
    the total manpower exceeds  200,000  men  (including  paid  in  support
    elements), of which 150,000 are fighters (60,000 members of  full  time
    mobile units, the remainder are local militias)  and  on  top  of  that
    number Dr Giustozzi estimates there would be  a  few  hundred  thousand
    sympathisers and unpaid supporters.  The Taliban raise revenue  through
    tax on economic  activity  as  well  as  raising  money  from  external
    organisations and there are  estimates  that  they  have  a  budget  of
    between $1.5 and $2 billion a year from these sources.


69. Dr Giustozzi describes the decentralised structure of  the  Taliban  as
    including five or six Shuras (one, that  of  Mullah  Rasul  in  western
    Afghanistan is set apart from the others) which are autonomous  centres
    of power, away from a central leadership and who operate on  their  own
    authority.  There  are  Military  Commissioners  at  provincial  level.
    There are 10 districts in each  province  and  within  those  districts
    there are individual Taliban commanders.  The EASO Report  "Afghanistan
    - Individuals targeted by armed actors in the  conflict"  refers  to  a
    single Shura (the Rahbari Shura,  also  commonly  referred  to  as  the
    Quetta Shura) and to an ongoing decline in the provincial and  district
    structures.


70. The Taliban have dedicated units at the provincial level (at least  one
    in each province), with  a  team  of  20  or  so  Taliban  intelligence
    operatives tasked with hunting down and  executing  collaborators.   In
    Kabul, the Taliban have two separate networks.  The first is  dedicated
    to conflicts operations, for example  fighters  attacking  high-profile
    targets.  The structure of this network is insulated from other Taliban
    structures for security reasons  to  prevent  infiltration  or  complex
    attacks being compromised.  The second network focuses on collection of
    intelligence and routine targeting of wanted individuals,  for  example
    two-man assassination teams, planting mines on cars  and  other  small-
    scale attacks.  Dr Giustozzi referred to claims that there were  a  few
    hundred people in such networks, including those providing support such
    as safe houses and intelligence.  Those who carry out specific  attacks
    are normally from outside of Kabul, often coming from  Pakistan,  being
    brought into the city to be  deployed  a  few  days  before  a  planned
    attack.  The EASO report "Afghanistan - Individuals targeted  by  armed
    actors in the conflict" included evidence from  other  sources  casting
    doubt on the existence of such specific dedicated units operating.


71. Dr Giustozzi's oral  evidence  was  that  these  dedicated  units  each
    establish  their  own  targets  based  on  priorities   and   available
    intelligence, albeit his written report referred to evidence from Judge
    Safi (a Taliban Judge interviewed by one of Dr Giustozzi's  researchers
    on 23 June 2016) that priorities were set by  the  military  leader  of
    each province.  His evidence was  however  consistent  on  the  highest
    priority being those who posed the greatest threat  to  the  Taliban  -
    senior serving government officials, the security services  and  spies.
    At a lower priority  level  Dr  Giustozzi  referred  to  deserters  and
    collaborators although not necessarily in that order, depending on  how
    you defined both.  There are two types of deserters, those  who  simply
    left or quit the Taliban (such as for  personal  reasons  like  a  sick
    family member) and those who defected to the government, who  would  be
    seen as a collaborator.  The latter being more serious but there was  a
    need to discourage anyone leaving and a concern that someone may become
    an informant when they left.  Collaborators could include all those who
    defy Taliban rules or are seen  to  be  in-line  with  the  government.
    Collaborators   would   include   all   security   forces,   government
    authorities,  foreign  embassies,  the  UN,  NGOs  and  anyone  passing
    information to the government about the Taliban.   These  collaborators
    could number several hundred thousand people and Dr Giustozzi  accepted
    that the Taliban do not have the  resources  to  possibly  individually
    follow up on all of them.


72. Although successful targeting by the Taliban of high-profile targets is
    their highest priority because of the impact of  such  attacks,  it  is
    more difficult to achieve this given that they are the  best  protected
    and it involves larger teams of people, many of whom would be killed in
    the effort.  Dr Giustozzi explained that as the  Taliban  believe  they
    are the legitimate government, they need to demonstrate to  the  public
    that they are the legitimate authority whose goals and regulations  are
    to be respected.  It is therefore considered  necessary  to  also  take
    action against a person of  low-level  interest  when  the  opportunity
    arises rather than named individuals because of the Taliban's  need  to
    show that they are serious about  sentencing  people,  enforcing  their
    regulations and because  it  helps  to  scare  people  leading  to  the
    collapse of the government.  In these cases,  who  is  killed  is  less
    important than the numbers killed, with any assassinations still making
    the headlines.


73. The Taliban introduced a new system from around 2006,  which  has  been
    quite mature from 2010, for the  identification,  warning,  trying  and
    sentencing of persons before a sentence is carried out.  Those who  are
    targeted are limited to those who have  already  been  sentenced  by  a
    Taliban court.  Once a sentence has been  imposed  it  remains  forever
    until carried out.  It is only those who have been warned and sentenced
    who can legitimately be targeted by  the  Taliban.   However,  EASO  in
    their report "Afghanistan - Individuals targeted by armed actors in the
    conflict" refer to evidence of violence and targeting based on personal
    or local disputes outside of this system.


74. Dr Giustozzi describes a "blacklist", containing the  names  of  around
    14,500 people who are wanted by the Taliban.  He has never seen such  a
    list, nor does he have clear or comprehensive details on the nature and
    use of such a list and accepts that he has been unable  to  corroborate
    information about  the  blacklist.   The  EASO  report  "Afghanistan  -
    Individuals targeted by armed actors in the  conflict"  also  finds  no
    specific evidence to support the existence  of  or  details  about  the
    blacklist, although at least one source was also of the view  that  the
    Taliban does keep a blacklist of  priority  targets  and  another  that
    local commanders may have their own lists but  no  centrally  organised
    list.  Dr Giustozzi is of  the  view  that  the  blacklist  does  exist
    because of the information to that effect he has had from the  Taliban,
    because of the known warnings given to people and because it  would  be
    logical to maintain such a list.


75. Dr Giustozzi did  not  know  whether  there  was  a  single  or  master
    blacklist but referred to a central information hub in  Peshawar,  with
    connected small hubs in Afghanistan and he presumed  that  the  Taliban
    would make use of the computers they are known to have to maintain  the
    blacklist, by using their  sophisticated  infrastructure  in  Pakistan,
    Iran and Afghanistan.  Information about the blacklist would be  passed
    via a courier system, with messages being carried by individuals  using
    memory or writing.


76. In his written report,  Dr  Giustozzi  stated  that  information  about
    collaborators is exchanged  between  all  components  of  the  Taliban,
    excluding the Shura of Mullah Rasul  (or  Rasool,  both  spellings  are
    used, who has its own list) but in oral evidence  stated  that  it  was
    unknown whether the Shuras coordinate on such matters.  A complete copy
    of the blacklist would be available to all of the Shuras but not  at  a
    provincial or lower level.  Instead, a Shura would only share names  of
    people on the list who they thought were in  their  province  with  the
    Military  Commissioner  responsible  for  that  area.    The   Military
    Commissioner would then decide what names  to  share  at  the  district
    level, which would then in turn be shared with individual commanders in
    relation to people that intelligence showed were within  that  person's
    particular area.  As a  result,  an  individual  commander  would  only
    likely to have a few names from the  blacklist,  the  full  list  being
    unmanageable, a security risk and  impractical  to  carry  for  use  in
    printed form.  Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that the  blacklist  may  be
    given to members of the Taliban and paid agents (who may get a  version
    of the list) but it is not likely to be shared with  informers.   Local
    Taliban may, with permission, have access to the blacklist if a request
    for such access is justified, for example, to  check  whether  a  local
    suspect is wanted.


77. It is assumed that high profile individuals or those who pose a serious
    danger to  the  Taliban,  such  as  spies,  are  automatically  on  the
    blacklist as are wanted people, but for those at a  lower  level,  they
    would only be added if they had received two warnings from the  Taliban
    (which would be sent to or left at the address of the individual).   An
    individual failing to comply with two warnings would then be  sentenced
    for the crime of collaborating with the enemy.  The sentence takes  the
    shape of a third letter or  verbal  communication,  passed  on  to  the
    collaborator or somebody close to him.  A  sentence  implies  that  the
    individual has been added to the  blacklist.   Not  all  of  those  who
    received warnings would be added to the blacklist, as it allowed people
    an opportunity to change or repent, or to make deals with  the  Taliban
    instead.  A person could not be targeted simply  because  they  were  a
    relative of a person who is a target or a threat to  the  Taliban.   Dr
    Giustozzi assumed that the details included on the blacklist would be a
    person's name, father's name and place of birth as that  is  the  usual
    way to identify people in Afghanistan.


78. Dr Giustozzi's evidence on whether a person could be removed  from  the
    blacklist was that this was possible only in one of two  ways.   First,
    by death and secondly, by contribution to the Taliban's cause in such a
    way that the individual would be offered an amnesty.   In  his  written
    report, he said that sentences issued from 1996 onwards remained  valid
    and would be implemented by the  Taliban  whenever  possible  and  that
    events a significant time in the past would not affect that.   However,
    the likelihood of a particular target being picked from  the  blacklist
    depends on the Taliban's operational environment and in oral  evidence,
    he stated that a person who had done something a long time ago and  had
    a lower profile would be a lower priority for the Taliban as they would
    be likely to pose a lesser risk of damage to them.


79. Dr Giustozzi's evidence described the increasing sophistication of  the
    Taliban's intelligence operation and ability to track down individuals,
    by reference to a significant number  of  informers,  including  agents
    within the government and the  intelligence  services.   He  refers  to
    government officials' belief referred to in an article in 2011  in  the
    Los Angeles Times that even in  areas  of  weak  Taliban  presence  the
    Taliban are informed of everything that  happens.   Elders  in  Taliban
    villages have also confirmed the existence of informers  in  the  local
    area but who cannot be identified specifically.  The evidence  that  Dr
    Giustozzi relies on from Judge Safi is that the  Taliban  are  able  to
    monitor who enters Afghanistan that their intelligence  has  people  at
    Kabul airport and elsewhere  who  provide  regular  reports  about  new
    arrivals.  Arrivals in small places are easily spotted, but less so  in
    large cities and people living alone tend to attract attention  because
    it is highly unusual to live alone in Afghan society.


80. In terms of targeting of wanted individuals,  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence
    was that intelligence  is  used  to  track  a  person's  movements  and
    information is shared if there is specific intelligence that  a  person
    has moved into a different province or area or that  such  movement  is
    expected so that a temporary checkpoint can be erected by  the  Taliban
    to stop someone.  The Taliban uses temporary checkpoints in such  cases
    on the roads out  of  Kabul  to  identify  specific  targets  based  on
    specific intelligence about the type of car they would be travelling in
    and the time of travel.  These checkpoints may also have the benefit of
    stopping other individuals who have not been specifically targeted  but
    who, for example, look nervous or are dressed in a particular way  such
    as to arouse interest or adverse attention.


81. Despite this background primarily  from  his  written  report  and  his
    conclusions set out therein, in oral evidence Dr Giustozzi was  of  the
    view  that  unless  references  were  sought  specifically   from   the
    Appellant's home village (which would be required for stable employment
    or formally rented accommodation, not accommodation in a  dormitory  or
    casual labour), no one would know the Appellant's whereabouts and there
    would be very little chance that the Taliban would even know he was  in
    Afghanistan.  Taliban informers in Kabul  would  not  necessarily  know
    that the Appellant was wanted (even if he was on the blacklist).


82. The EASO report "Afghanistan - Individuals targeted by armed actors  in
    the conflict", relying on an interview with Abubakar Siddique (a senior
    correspondent specialising in coverage of Afghanistan and Pakistan  and
    editor of 'Ganhara' website), states that the list of people  for  whom
    the Taliban will invest resources and planning to track and target into
    the major cities is limited to between a few dozen and up to a  hundred
    persons.  Other than targeting involving personal  enmities,  rivalries
    or disputes, Mr Siddique's view was that the Taliban would probably not
    target lower level individuals or their family members after relocating
    to the cities.


83. As the Respondent accepts that there is no  sufficiency  of  protection
    from the Taliban in Kabul,  we  do  not  detail  in  this  decision  Dr
    Giustozzi's evidence reaching the same conclusion.

Risk of recruitment to an armed group

84. In the Afghan context, there appears  to  be  no  agreement  about  the
    meaning of forced recruitment to  armed  groups,  instead  commentators
    refer  to  mobilisation  of  fighters  and  agreement   within   social
    structures for recruitment, albeit with the use of coercion, duress  or
    force in some cases.  There is  also  the  possibility  that  the  term
    forced recruitment necessarily applies to children because they're  not
    old enough to make an informed choice as opposed to a more literal  use
    of force for their recruitment.


85. Dr Giustozzi and Ms Winterbotham gave evidence as  to  the  traditional
    method of Taliban recruitment, which works through family,  tribal  and
    ethnic local religious networks, also using local specialised cells  in
    Afghanistan and significant recruitment pools in Pakistan.  Recruitment
    would usually be because someone is a member of  a  tribal  or  kinship
    group and  is  instructed  to  join  by  elders.   Recruitment  is  not
    necessarily on an ideological basis but can be through  incentives  for
    individuals (such as protection, cash, motorcycles, mobile  phones  and
    credit for them) as well as through  coercion  or  direct  threats.   A
    person is most likely to be recruited through tribal,  clan  or  family
    ties.  Ms Winterbotham accepted that  there  was  limited  evidence  of
    armed groups using threats and coercion in order to  force  individuals
    to join them in Kabul and limited evidence of this elsewhere  as  well,
    albeit noting that there  was  a  lack  of  monitoring  information  in
    Afghanistan which meant the absence of documented instances should  not
    itself justify the conclusion that they did not occur.


86.  In  the  alternative  to  forced  recruitment  or   mobilisation,   Ms
    Winterbotham gave evidence as to individuals feeling compelled to  join
    armed groups, not limited to the Taliban.  She referenced a significant
    body of work relating to both developed  and  developing  countries  on
    radicalisation and recruitment by armed groups albeit noting  that  the
    theories do not necessarily apply in the context of different countries
    or conditions.   Overall,  she  stated  that  whether  a  person  feels
    compelled to join an armed group is  not  a  linear  assessment  but  a
    complex nonlinear process for which  it  is  not  possible  to  profile
    individuals.  Instead there are a number  of  factors  or  drivers  for
    recruitment which  may  be  relevant,  including  social  and  economic
    factors (such as lack of social structures, lack of  housing,  lack  of
    employment, issues of achieving manhood and desirability of  marriage),
    economic incentives, status for an individual  and  an  opportunity  to
    seek glory.


87. There is also the possibility of individuals joining armed  groups  for
    reasons of protection, or conversely for  honour  and  revenge  in  the
    context of the Pashtunwali code of honour.  Dr  Giustozzi  argues  that
    the importance of revenge should not be overstated given  that  revenge
    is most frequently directed at an individual, extending in  some  cases
    to male kin but not more general targets.


88. In addition to the above, Ms Winterbotham accepted that a person  could
    also choose to join the police or security forces  in  Afghanistan  for
    similar reasons, albeit this is a  less  attractive  option  given  the
    significant  casualties  suffered  from  these  groups,  that  salaries
    offered are lower than those from militant groups and recruitment  into
    the government forces requires a high degree of vetting.


89. Ms Winterbotham's evidence was that there  is  greater  evidence  about
    children being at risk of forced recruitment than adults, but there was
    a continuing vulnerability for teenagers and those into their  20s  and
    30s who are not married, extending to a general  risk  for  able-bodied
    men of any age.  In her oral evidence, Ms Winterbotham  was  unable  to
    substantiate her  view  that  risk  is  not  significantly  reduced  by
    increasing age per se and that able-bodied  men  are  all  at  risk  of
    recruitment into an armed group.

Risk due to westernisation

90.  The  EASO  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report   "Afghanistan   -
    Individuals targeted under societal and legal  norms"  (December  2017)
    includes a specific section on targeting of  Afghan  returnees  on  the
    basis of 'Westernisation' following time spent  in  Europe  or  Western
    countries.  Their broad conclusion on this is as follows:

       "Documented instances of individual targeting of returning Afghans on
       the basis of 'Westernisation' due to having travelled in or lived  in
       Europe, holding Western ID documents, or adopting ideas that seem  to
       be 'un-Afghan', 'Western' or 'European' following time spent  outside
       Afghanistan were scarce.  Varying descriptions by  sources  indicated
       that there  were  'occasional  reports'  of  alleged  kidnapping  and
       targeting, or, that not everyone is at risk, but  it  'does  happen,'
       though the scale and prevalence is 'difficult to quantify', or,  that
       targeting does not specifically occur because of having sought asylum
       or having travelled to Western countries."

91. Dr Schuster, in oral evidence stated that after a person has  been  out
    of Afghanistan it would be relatively easy for them on return to change
    their physical appearance so as not to stand out. However, it would  be
    more difficult to change values and attitudes that have been learnt and
    developed whilst away from Afghanistan.  A person would have to monitor
    and self-censor their behaviour on return.  An individual's capacity to
    self-censor would depend upon their maturity, their mental  health  and
    their  ability  to  be  astute  about  the   social   surroundings   in
    Afghanistan, being able to pick up on what it is inappropriate  to  say
    and to do.


92. Dr Schuster also referred to the assumptions  that  people  make  about
    those who have been away from Afghanistan about  their  lifestyle,  and
    question whether they have retained their Islamic faith, drink alcohol,
    or  have  relationships  with  women  for  example.   The  EASO  report
    "Afghanistan - Individuals targeted under  societal  and  legal  norms"
    also refers to perceptions of those on return, including  concern  that
    returnees fear being labelled by insurgents as spies and  a  perception
    by others that an individual would be wealthy having accumulated  funds
    abroad with the consequent fear  of  kidnapping  for  ransom  for  this
    reason.  There is however very limited  evidence  of  kidnapping  other
    than isolated cases.


93. The EASO report "Afghanistan - Individuals targeted under societal  and
    legal norms" does  not  find  any  agreement  from  its  sources  of  a
    collective or consistent attitude  toward  'Westernisation'  in  Afghan
    society.  There are references to broader Western influence  on  Afghan
    society in recent decades due to the  international  military  presence
    and the increasing  popularity,  particularly  amongst  young  Afghans,
    towards Western trends and influences (such as  fashion,  entertainment
    and tattoos).  There are however strong conservative views held amongst
    individuals, family groups and wider communities.


94. Both Dr  Schuster  and  the  EASO  report  "Afghanistan  -  Individuals
    targeted under societal and legal norms" refer to the risk  of  someone
    saying the wrong  thing  at  the  wrong  time,  even  in  Kabul  (which
    generally has a higher tolerance for westernisation than  rural  areas)
    which would not necessarily, but may, cause difficulties and because  a
    person has returned from the West  could  be  used  against  them  with
    accusations made.  Further, the sources both  refer  to  the  need  for
    guidance on Afghan cultural norms to those who have  been  absent  from
    the country and the importance of family,  friends  or  connections  to
    support their understanding of the limits and  boundaries  of  societal
    norms and behavioural expectations.


Other Risks

95. There was some, albeit limited, evidence before us of  wider  risks  to
    individuals in Afghanistan but we do not set out  the  detail  of  such
    potential categories other than to mention, for example by reference to
    the  EASO  Country  of  Origin  Information   Report   "Afghanistan   -
    Individuals targeted by armed actors in the conflict" (December  2017),
    that there  is  some  evidence  of  risk  to  individuals  involved  in
    education, healthcare,  journalism,  the  security  forces,  government
    workers and to Shia Muslims.


96. Ms Winterbotham, consistently with the Samual Hall Report in 2013  "Old
    Practice, New Chains: Modern Slavery in  Afghanistan"  also  refers  to
    risks of sexual exploitation and trafficking, particularly for children
    and youths in large, impoverished families, especially when the  family
    is in debt.  Girls are most vulnerable between the ages of  11  and  19
    years old and younger men, who are most vulnerable between the ages  of
    11 and 15.  In most cases, exploitation is done through the family,  by
    deception or otherwise.


97. In the context of the particular characteristics of  the  Appellant  in
    this appeal and the country guidance issue of  internal  relocation  to
    Kabul, together with only very limited  evidence  before  us  on  these
    wider risk categories, we consider that it is not appropriate for us to
    make any general findings in the present country guidance case  on  any
    of these matters as they are outwith the scope of this appeal.

Evidence relevant to assessing the option of internal relocation

The UNHCR position

98. The  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  assessing  the  international
    protection needs of asylum-seekers from  Afghanistan,  dated  19  April
    2016, provides in relation to the option of internal relocation, so far
    as relevant to the present case, as follows:

       "An  assessment  of  the  availability  of  an  internal  flight   or
       relocation  alternative  (IFA/IRA)  requires  an  assessment  of  the
       relevance as well as the reasonableness of the proposed IFA/IRA.   An
       IFA/IRA is relevant only  if  the  proposed  area  of  relocation  is
       practically, safely and legally accessible,  and  if  the  individual
       concerned would not be exposed to a further risk  of  persecution  or
       serious harm in the area of relocation.  In assessing  the  relevance
       of an IFA/IRA for Afghan  applicants,  the  following  considerations
       must be taken into account:


         i)  The  volatility  and  fluidity  of  the  armed   conflict   in
            Afghanistan in terms of the difficulty of identifying potential
            areas of relocation that are durably safe; and
        ii) The concrete prospects of safely accessing the proposed area of
            relocation, taking into account the risks associated  with  the
            widespread use of IEDs and landmines  throughout  the  country,
            attacks on fighting taking place on roads, and restrictions  on
            civilians' freedom of movement imposed by AGE's.


       ...


       Where the applicant has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  at  the
       hands of a non-State agent, the ability of the agent  to  pursue  the
       applicant to the area of proposed relocation needs to be assessed, as
       well as the ability of the State to provide protection in that  area.
       Where the agent of  persecution  is  an  AGE,  evidence  about  AGEs'
       capacity to carry out attacks outside the area under their  effective
       control needs to be taken into account.


       ...


       Whether an IFA/IRA is reasonable must be determined on a case-by-case
       basis, taking fully into  account  the  security,  human  rights  and
       humanitarian environment in a prospective area of relocation  at  the
       time of the decision.  In particular, the poor living conditions  and
       precarious human  rights  situation  of  Afghans  who  are  currently
       internally displaced in Afghanistan are relevant considerations  that
       need to be taken into account in assessing the  reasonableness  of  a
       proposed internal flight or relocation alternative.  UNHCR  considers
       that a proposed IFA/IRA is reasonable only where the  individual  has
       access to (i) shelter, (ii) essential services  such  as  sanitation,
       healthcare  and  education;  and  (iii)   livelihood   opportunities.
       Moreover, UNHCR considers an IFA/IRA is  reasonable  only  where  the
       individual has access to a traditional support network of members  of
       his or her (extended) family or members of his or her  larger  ethnic
       community in the  area  of  prospective  relocation,  who  have  been
       assessed to be willing and able to provide  genuine  support  to  the
       applicant in practice.


       UNHCR considers  that  the  only  exception  to  the  requirement  of
       external support are single able-bodied men and  married  couples  of
       working  age  without  identified  specific  vulnerabilities.    Such
       persons may in certain  circumstances  be  able  to  subsist  without
       family and community support in urban and semi-urban areas that  have
       the necessary infrastructure and livelihood opportunities to meet the
       basic necessities of life and that  are  under  effective  Government
       control.  Given the breakdown in the  traditional  social  fabric  of
       society caused by decades of war, mass  refugee  flows  and  internal
       displacement,  a  case-by-case  analysis   will,   nevertheless,   be
       necessary."

99. The Human Rights Watch Report "Pakistan Coercion,  UN  Complicity:  The
    Mass Forced Return of Afghan Refugees",  (February  2017)  records  the
    UNHCR, in December 2016, cautioning  against  returning  failed  Afghan
    asylum seekers to Kabul on an internal flight alternative basis for the
    following reasons:

       "Kabul faces serious pressures on housing and services, due to  years
       of primary and secondary population displacements  ...  resulting  in
       large-scale movements to the city,  together  with  a  natural  (non-
       conflict-related) process of urbanization from rural areas.  In 2016,
       the situation was made worse by the fact that more than 25 percent of
       Afghan returnees from Pakistan went to  Kabul.   This  has  immediate
       consequences for the assessment  of  Kabul  as  a  proposed  internal
       flight alternative, in particular with regards to the [criterion]  of
       "reasonableness."  The considerations presenting in  the  April  2016
       [Eligibility] Guidelines remain relevant for assessments of Kabul  as
       an internal  flight  alternative.   In  the  context  of  a  dramatic
       increase  in  competition  for  access  to  scarce   resources,   the
       availability of an IFA will need to be considered on  a  case-by-case
       basis, taking  into  account  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
       individual applicant."

The security situation

100. The Human Rights Unit  of  the  United  Nations  Assistant  Mission  in
    Afghanistan (UNAMA) is mandated by UN Security Council  Resolutions  to
    monitor and report on the situation of civilians in the armed  conflict
    in  Afghanistan,  particularly  on  civilian  casualties.   UNAMA   has
    produced a number of mid-year and annual reports on the  Protection  of
    Civilians in Armed Conflict in Afghanistan since 2009.


101. Before setting out the content  of  the  most  recent  reports,  it  is
    important to bear in mind the methodology used by UNAMA when  compiling
    the data.  The incidents  that  are  included  of  civilian  casualties
    include wherever possible on-site investigations and are compiled  from
    information obtained directly  by  UNAMA.   For  verification  of  each
    incident involving a civilian casualty, UNAMA requires at  least  three
    different and independent types of sources.  If UNAMA are not satisfied
    with the quantity or quality of information concerning an incident,  it
    will not consider it is  verified  and  unverified  incidents  are  not
    included in the report.  For these reasons, UNAMA does not  claim  that
    the statistics  presented  in  their  reports  are  complete  and  they
    acknowledge possible underreporting of civilian  casualties  given  the
    limitations inherent in their operating environment.


102. Dr Schuster reiterated a commonly held view that because of the  strict
    methodology employed by UNAMA, the number of civilian  casualties  were
    likely to be underreported.  This was also likely to be  because  those
    who have been killed will normally be buried within 24 hours and  there
    is no follow-up on those who are seriously injured who  may  die  at  a
    later date and not all deaths are reported.  She  gave  an  example  of
    official data from a recent attack on a mosque which stated that 35  to
    37 people had died, however she spoke to a taxi driver  who  lost  four
    members of his own family and 30 who were killed  in  the  same  attack
    were buried on the same day at the same cemetery he was at,  suggesting
    casualties were much higher.  Dr Schuster's view, based  on  experience
    as well as interviews  with  senior  advisers  to  the  justice  sector
    support programme in the Ministry of Justice, a lieutenant  colonel  in
    the Army and a journalist,  is  that  casualty  numbers  given  by  the
    authorities in Afghanistan are deliberately kept as low as possible  to
    reduce panic amongst the public.


103. The UNAMA mid-year report for 2017 shows armed conflict  continuing  to
    cause severe harm to civilians across Afghanistan, killing and injuring
    civilians at levels similar to the same period in 2016 (1 January to 30
    June).  In the first half of 2017, there were 5,243 documented civilian
    casualties, comprising 1,662 deaths and 3,581 injured.  The key  trends
    observed were that there was an overall decrease in civilian casualties
    from ground  engagement  and  increases  in  civilian  casualties  from
    improvised explosive devices (IEDs), with 40%  of  civilian  casualties
    resulting from the latter in civilian populated areas.  The majority of
    civilian casualties from IEDs occurred in the context  of  suicide  and
    complex attacks.  The  second  leading  cause  of  civilian  casualties
    remained ground engagements but there was a 10%  decrease  in  civilian
    casualties from this compared to the same period in 2016.


104. The majority of civilian casualties,  67%,  were  attributed  to  Anti-
    Government Elements ("AGEs") (made up of 43% Taliban, 19%  unidentified
    AGEs, 5% Daesh/ISKP); followed  by  18%  attributed  to  Pro-Government
    forces; 10% jointly attributed (for example  in  cross-fire  incidents)
    and 5% other (for example from detonation  of  explosive  remnants  and
    cross-border shelling and shooting).


105. In relation to Kabul specifically, "Kabul province continued to  record
    the highest number of civilian casualties, mainly in  Kabul  city.   Of
    the 1,048 civilian casualties (219 deaths and 829  injured)  documented
    in Kabul province, 94  per  cent  resulted  from  suicide  and  complex
    attacks carried out by Anti-Government Elements in Kabul city."    This
    was a 26% rise compared to 2016 and 70% of all civilian casualties from
    suicide and complex attacks  occurred  in  Kabul  city,  most  of  whom
    resulted from a relatively small number of incidents.


106. Although the casualty figures are highest in Kabul (city and  province)
    this is also the area with the highest population and  highest  density
    of population.  Population estimates for Kabul city range  between  3.5
    and 7 million people.  The Respondent, assuming that the total civilian
    casualties for 2017 based on figures from the UNAMA mid-year report are
    2,100, submits that that shows a very low percentage of the  population
    affected.  Even if there were 5000 civilian casualties in a year, based
    on a population of 4.5 million, that still equates to less  than  0.01%
    of the population affected.


107. The number of security  incidents  per  province  varies  considerably,
    with southern regions being historically being the worst affected.  The
    "EASO Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,  Afghanistan:  Security
    Situation" (December 2017) sets out  in  the  two  maps  reproduced  at
    Appendix C, first, the security incidents per province  from  September
    2016 to May 2017  and  in  the  second  map,  the  number  of  security
    incidents compared to population  for  the  same  period.   On  neither
    measure is Kabul  the  worst  affected  province  and  as  measured  by
    incidents per 1000  inhabitants,  it  is  one  of  the  least  affected
    provinces.

108. Following the  mid-year  report  in  2017,  UNAMA  provided  a  shorter
    quarterly report to 30 September 2017 which showed  an  overall  slight
    decrease of 6% in the number of civilian  casualties  compared  to  the
    same period last year,  with  8019  in  total  (2640  deaths  and  5379
    injured).


109. UNAMA's observations in their mid-year report for 2017 are as follows:

       "The armed conflict continued  unabated  in  Afghanistan  during  the
       first six months of 2017.  As  in  2016,  sustained  ground  fighting
       between  Anti-Government  Elements  and  Pro-Government   Forces   in
       numerous provinces  across  the  country  coincided  with  asymmetric
       attacks in villages, towns, and cities by  Anti-Government  elements,
       mainly using indiscriminate tactics.  Reflecting the extent to  which
       the armed conflict invaded the lives of  Afghans  countrywide  during
       the first of the year, violence killed and maimed civilians in nearly
       every conceivable setting of day-to-day life.  Civilians  lost  their
       lives, limbs, sight or suffered harm while inside of their own homes,
       travelling on public roads, attending classes,  praying  in  mosques,
       purchasing food, playing outside, working in  offices,  labouring  in
       agricultural fields, visiting the bank and lying in hospital beds.


       While  this  report  documents  extreme  civilian   harm   throughout
       Afghanistan, the findings within can  never  accurately  portray  the
       extent of human suffering endured by thousands  of  Afghan  civilians
       affected by conflict during the  first  half  of  2017.   Beyond  the
       egregious cases of civilian  death  or  injury  highlighted  in  this
       report, armed conflict  changed  the  lives  of  countless  civilians
       through displacement  and  damage  to  homes,  schools,  and  medical
       clinics - amongst other facilities - all of which  restricted  access
       to  education,  healthcare,  and  economic  opportunities,  including
       gainful employment.  The psychological trauma imposed on  members  of
       the civilian population and local communities by the loss  of  family
       and friends in violent and unpredictable circumstances,  and  by  the
       ever-present risk of becoming civilian  casualties  themselves,  must
       not be understated.


       The changing composition of civilian casualties during the first  six
       months of 2017 raises serious concerns regarding civilian protection.
        Despite a decrease in civilian  casualties  in  ground  engagements,
       including a substantial decrease in the  number  of  civilian  deaths
       caused by ground fighting between Anti-Government Elements  and  Pro-
       Government Forces, civilian  casualty  numbers  remained  at  similar
       levels to the first half of 2016 with increases in child  deaths  and
       women casualties.


       Anti-Government Elements continue to display  contempt  for  civilian
       lives  by  using  indiscriminate  tactics  and  perpetrating  attacks
       deliberately targeting, killing and injuring civilians  in  violation
       of  international  humanitarian  law.   Attacks  targeting   civilian
       Government workers, tribal elders, religious leaders,  and  civilians
       perceived to support the  Government  continued.   Even  where  Anti-
       Government  Elements  appeared  to  direct  attacks  at  non-civilian
       objects, indiscriminate and disproportionate tactics were often  used
       - principally  the  detonation  of  explosive  weapons  in  civilian-
       populated areas.  This meant that Afghan  civilians  often  bore  the
       brunt of such attacks, regardless of the target.  Such  methods  also
       generated   disproportionate   civilian   casualties   on    numerous
       occasions."


110. The UNAMA 'Afghanistan Annual Report  on  Protection  of  Civilians  in
    Armed Conflict: 2016' followed a mandate in the same terms as the  mid-
    year report in 2017 and the same methodology.  In summary, that  report
    concluded:

       "Conflict-related violence exacted a heavy  toll  on  Afghanistan  in
       2016, with an overall deterioration in civilian  protection  and  the
       highest total civilian casualties  recorded  since  2009  when  UNAMA
       began systematic documentation of  civilian  casualties.   Against  a
       backdrop of protracted ground  fighting,  the  battlefield  permeated
       civilian sanctuaries that should be spared from  harm,  with  suicide
       attacks  in  mosques;  targeted  attacks  against  district  centres,
       bazaars and residential homes; and the use of schools  and  hospitals
       for military purposes.


       Between 1 January and 31 December, UNAMA documented  11,418  civilian
       casualties (3,498 deaths and 7,920 injured) ...


       In 2016, UNAMA documented record numbers of civilian casualties  from
       ground  engagements,  suicide  and  complex  attacks  and   explosive
       remnants of war, as well as the highest number of civilian casualties
       caused by aerial operations since 2009.  Increases in civilian deaths
       and injuries from these tactics drove the overall three per cent rise
       in civilian casualties, while  civilian  casualties  from  improvised
       explosive devices and targeted and deliberate killings decreased."

111. We have also been provided with  copies  of  the  annual  reports  from
    UNAMA for 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015  and  the  mid-year  report  for
    2016.  The overall trend shown in these reports is that the  number  of
    civilian casualties are increasing year on year  (since  UNAMA  records
    began in 2009) with significant increases in 2013 and then year on year
    from 2014.  The earlier reports show significant increases in  civilian
    casualties due to ground engagements, albeit this trend appears  to  be
    reversing in the two most recent  reports  set  out  above,  with  IEDs
    becoming the reason for the majority of civilian casualties in the last
    12-18 months.  The earlier reports also show disproportionate increases
    in civilian casualties of women and children which are not  highlighted
    in the same way in the most recent reports.

112. The Appellant has produced  a  schedule  of  major  security  incidents
    causing or risking civilian casualties in Kabul from 1 January 2016  to
    17  November   2017   (compiled   from   various   sources   and   news
    articles/reports, most of which were  in  evidence  before  us).   That
    document provides an overview of 141 incidents,  the  casualty  figures
    and detail of the incidents where known from  news  or  other  sources.
    That schedule refers to many complex attacks, the majority of which are
    targeted attacks on politicians, members of the military,  security  or
    police forces, mosques (in particular Shia mosques),  NGOs  or  involve
    international actors either as part of embassies or individuals.  There
    are in almost every example additional deaths and casualties from those
    in the immediate vicinity in addition to those  specifically  targeted.
    The list also includes a not insignificant number  of  bomb  or  rocket
    attacks without  specific  targeting  and  also  a  smaller  number  of
    incidents which could be described as arising from a criminal situation
    such as armed  robbery.   The  incidents  recorded  involve  casualties
    ranging from several hundred (the largest being the attack  on  31  May
    2017 which killed 92 and injured 491) down to a single  person  or  few
    individuals.


113. The EASO Report "Afghanistan: Security  Situation"  states  that  there
    were 290 security incidents in Kabul City between 1 September 2016  and
    31 May  2017.   These  included  24  incidents  of  violence  targeting
    individuals; 23 of armed confrontations and airstrikes; 63  explosions;
    49 involving security enforcement; 112 non-conflict  related  incidents
    and 19 other incidents.


114. The Appellant has also  produced  various  maps  which  show  that  the
    incidents set  out  in  their  schedule  of  major  security  incidents
    (referred to above and produced from the same  sources  where  location
    was identified) evidenced before us are  geographically  spread  around
    Kabul city rather than being  concentrated  in  a  particular  area  or
    areas.


115. In addition to the security situation set out  above,  there  was  also
    some evidence before us of not insignificant levels of crime in  Kabul,
    but a lack of detail of particular crime rates or risk and nothing that
    suggested there was any greater risk of being a victim of crime for one
    group of people (such as returnees) compared to any other  resident  of
    Kabul.


Overview of conditions in Afghanistan

116. Before setting out the evidence  in  relation  to  specific  indicators
    relevant to the reasonableness of internal relocation and  in  relation
    to Kabul specifically,  we  note  for  context  and  an  overview,  the
    following summary of the  situation  in  Afghanistan  from  the  United
    Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  ("UNOCHA")
    in December 2017, as set out in its report "Humanitarian Needs Overview
    2018":

       "Afghanistan  is  one  of  the  world's  most  complex   humanitarian
       emergencies, characterised by escalating conflict, causing  over  one
       million people to be living in new and prolongued  displacement.   In
       2018,  3.3  million  people   will   need   life-saving   assistance.
       Violations of international humanitarian and  human  rights  law  are
       commonplace,   with   frequent   reports   of   summary   executions,
       kidnappings, and attacks on civilian  infrastructure.   ...  Civilian
       casualties are at the highest levels seen with  8,019  documented  in
       the first nine months of the year.   Two  thirds  of  these  civilian
       casualties were women and children.


       Amidst growing signs that what was once a low intensity conflict  has
       now  escalated  into  a  war,  the  UN  strategic  review   of   2017
       reclassified Afghanistan from  a  post-conflict  country  to  one  in
       active conflict. ...


       Sustained  levels  of  displacement  -  360,000  people   have   been
       internally displaced so far  during  2017  -  combined  with  ongoing
       returnee influxes of more than  546,000  have  also  had  a  profound
       impact in  parts  of  the  country;  overloading  health  facilities,
       schools, depressing labour wages and increasing rents. ...


       ... Conflict affected and returnee populations are also  more  likely
       to utilise negative  coping  mechanisms  such  as  early  and  forced
       marriage, child labour, and family separation.  They are also  likely
       to be exposed to domestic and sexual violence and, even secondary and
       multiple displacement.   Over  50  percent  of  people  displaced  by
       conflict in Afghanistan  have  now  been  displaced  twice  or  more,
       compared to just seven percent five years ago.


       After  four  decades  of  conflict,  there  are  huge  economic   and
       development challenges in the country, which cannot  be  remedied  by
       humanitarian aid.  Approximately 39 percent of  the  population  live
       below the poverty line, an estimated 10 million people  have  limited
       or no access to essential health services, and as many as 3.5 million
       children are out of school.  ... Some 1.9 million people are severely
       food insecure, predominantly due to lack  of  or  limited  access  to
       sustainable job opportunities, while 40 percent of all children under
       the age of five are stunted.  In total,  the  humanitarian  community
       has identified that 8.7  million  people  have  chronic  needs  which
       require longer-term systemic actions to address"


117. It is to be noted that the approach in the UNOCHA  "Humanitarian  Needs
    Overview" has changed significantly between the 2017  and  2018  report
    due to the reclassification of Afghanistan as one in  active  conflict.
    This has led to the 2018 report focusing on acute  needs  arising  from
    distinct drivers  (including  conflict,  natural  disasters  and  cross
    border influxes) rather  than  chronic  needs  arising  from  years  of
    structural challenges and underdevelopment in Afghanistan.


118. For further context, the summary  in  the  UNOCHA  "Humanitarian  Needs
    Overview 2017" (based on the previous approach) included the following:



       "Afghanistan remains one of the dangerous, and most  violent,  crisis
       ridden  countries  in  the  world.   The  continued   deepening   and
       geographic spread of the conflict has prompted a 13% increase in  the
       number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in 2017, now  9.3
       million.  ...


       The country is facing increasing numbers of people on the  move.   In
       2016 the conflict has led to unprecedented  levels  of  displacement,
       reaching half a million in November - the highest number recorded  to
       date.  56% of the displaced are children and face particular risk  of
       abuse, and exploitation, as well as interrupted school attendance and
       harmful child labour.  Multiple forms of GBV, particularly early  and
       forced  marriage,  domestic,  psychological,  and  sexual  abuse  are
       reported, affecting individuals in hosting and displaced  communities
       alike.  Further,  a  lack,  or  loss  of  civil  documentation,  with
       difficulties in  obtaining  documents  outside  of  the  province  of
       origin,  regularly  results  in  hindered  access  to  services   for
       considerable numbers of affected individuals.


       Recent estimates suggest over 9 million people  have  limited  or  no
       access to essential health services.  ...  Severe food insecurity  is
       on the rise with 1.6 million people  severely  food  insecure.   2016
       nutrition surveys show global acute malnutrition  prevalence  ranging
       from 10.9 to 20.7%.  Severe acute malnutrition has breached emergency
       thresholds in  20  of  34  provinces.   1.8  million  people  require
       treatment for acute malnutrition, of which 1.3 million  children  are
       under five.


       Magnifying  this  crisis  of  forced  displacement,  2016   saw   the
       unprecedented  return  of  some  600,000  registered   refugees   and
       undocumented Afghans from Pakistan.   For  the  majority,  return  is
       triggered by shrinking asylum space and community acceptance, and the
       experience often abrupt and distressing.  After more  than  30  years
       living in Pakistan, many have arrived into an unfamiliar country with
       few possessions, assets or social support networks."


119. As  referred  to  in  part  in  the  extracts  above,  Afghanistan  has
    experienced significant changes and movement in  its  population  since
    the beginning of 2016, which follows a  period  of  over  four  decades
    which has seen significant movement for conflict (and  other)  reasons.
    In 2016, the World Bank estimated that 1 in 5 people in Afghanistan  is
    a returnee following  international  displacement  which  has  occurred
    since 1979.  In 2016, around 1 million people returned  to  Afghanistan
    from Pakistan and Iran, which against  a  population  estimated  to  be
    between 28 and 32 million is significant and placed a particular strain
    on the government and aid organisations who do not have the capacity or
    resources to meet the needs of such a  large  number  of  people.   For
    example, the financial support offered by the UNHCR  halved  from  $400
    per person to $200 per  person  during  this  period  due  to  lack  of
    resources.  In addition, UNOCHA estimated that nearly a million Afghans
    were internally displaced (for conflict and to a lesser extent, natural
    disaster reasons) in an 18-month period prior to its Humanitarian Needs
    Overview 2018 report and that 30 out  of  34  provinces  recorded  some
    level of forced displacement.


Kabul - overview

120. Kabul is the largest city in  Afghanistan  and  has  experienced  rapid
    growth in recent years, including from returnee populations,  IDPs  and
    economic migrants.  Population estimates for the city range between 3.5
    million and 7 million people.  It is an ethnically  diverse  city  with
    communities of almost all ethnicities and no group clearly  dominating.
    People tend to move to areas where they already  have  family  or  into
    particular districts as part of a larger group with the same ethnicity.
     Neighbourhoods within the city have become associated  with  different
    ethnic groups, particularly in the outskirts.


121. The total inflow of people to Kabul recorded  between  1  January  2016
    and 22 June 2017  was  680,260,  which  included  a  total  of  325,518
    returnees to Afghanistan (111,500 undocumented returnees from  Pakistan
    and Iran, 203,164 documented  returnees  from  Pakistan  and  Iran  and
    10,854 from other countries).  The remainder were internally  displaced
    persons and economic migrants.


122. In December 2016 the UNHCR commented (as recorded in the  Human  Rights
    Watch Report "Pakistan Coercion, UN Complicity: The Mass Forced  Return
    of Afghan Refugees") the following about the  impact  of  returnees  on
    Kabul as follows:


       "Kabul has been significantly affected by the surge in  returns  from
       Pakistan, with almost a quarter of  the  55,000  registered  returnee
       families, and  a  similar  percentage  of  the  240,000  undocumented
       returnee  families,  settling   in   Kabul's   overcrowded   informal
       settlements.  In light of the well-documented contraction of  Kabul's
       economy following the withdrawal of international forces in 2014, the
       city's absorption capacity has been extremely limited due to the  low
       availability of livelihoods ... appropriate shelter,  and  access  to
       basic services, particularly health and education."


123. According to the  UNOCHA  "Humanitarian  Needs  Overview  2018",  Kabul
    province is one of four provinces in the highest category for  severity
    of needs (together with Kunduz, Nangarhar and Kandahar, and  a  further
    six provinces are in the second  highest  category)  defined  as  areas
    where multiple needs converge, and an integrated response is required.
124.  Dr  Schuster's  evidence  was  that  conditions  in  Afghanistan  have
    worsened, in  particular  following  the  withdrawal  of  international
    security forces in 2014 which led to an economic crash and  a  lack  of
    optimism  for  the  future  by  ordinary  Afghans.   There  is  greater
    awareness of more security incidents in Kabul, the effects of which can
    be seen around the city with blast walls getting taller and  increasing
    in number and increasing numbers of roads blocked off  or  with  height
    restrictions to prevent large vehicles travelling.  The so-called Green
    zone has become more militarised and  other  areas  of  the  city  feel
    fragile.


125. Ms Winterbotham  also  describes  the  physical  changes  in  Kabul  as
    evidence of the changing  security  situation,  with  more  barricades,
    higher barricades and more areas with restricted access.   In  2002  it
    was possible to  walk  freely  around  the  city,  but  she  would  not
    contemplate doing so now as an  international  person.   From  her  own
    perspective, Ms Winterbotham has cancelled or delayed trips to Kabul in
    2017 based on inadequate security arrangements for her there and is  of
    the view that it is only safe to travel around the city in an  armoured
    vehicle.


126. Since 2014, insecurity  in  Kabul  has  increased  and  has  been  more
    affected by suicide and complex attacks as  evidenced  from  the  UNAMA
    figures and Ms Winterbotham described the  effect  of  that  on  people
    living in the city as increasing fear of  travel,  of  going  to  local
    places and significant detrimental mental impact after 30 to  40  years
    of conflict.


127. There was limited evidence before us about  crime  in  Kabul  city  (as
    opposed to security incidents  detailed  above)  and  the  ability  (or
    inability) of the police and state officials to deal with this, as well
    as evidence as to corruption within the police  and  judiciary.   There
    was however little detail in the evidence about crime  rates  in  Kabul
    city or  whether  any  particular  groups  or  geographical  areas  are
    specifically affected.


128. For ordinary Afghans in Kabul, most use non-motor vehicles as  a  means
    of travel.  Buses and taxis are used as an alternative to  cars  (which
    are used only by those who are better off) but there  is  no  extensive
    public transport system  in  Kabul.   For  those  in  employment,  some
    employers provide bus facilities to transport people to and  from  work
    but there are examples of such buses being targeted  in  attacks  where
    there are links to foreign bodies or the Afghan authorities.  The roads
    in Kabul  are  generally  dusty,  muddy  and  unpaved  with  increasing
    congestion.  There are safety concerns  about  particular  roads  which
    have been targeted due to specific locations along the route or because
    they are main routes through, into, or out of the city (usually due  to
    targeting  of  high  profile  traffic  such  as  military  convoys   or
    diplomatic vehicles).  However, Ms Winterbotham accepted  the  greatest
    danger on the roads in and around Kabul was bad driving.
Housing and associated amenities

129. The Islamic Republic of  Afghanistan's  Report  "The  State  of  Afghan
    Cities" in 2015 found that 86% of urban houses in  Afghanistan  can  be
    classified as slums according to the UN habitat definition.  In  Kabul,
    around 74% of people  live  in  informal  settlements  (houses  without
    formal  planning  permission)  which  have  very  limited   sanitation,
    drainage or access to potable water.  Many of these settlements,  which
    now  spread  over  the  hills  surrounding  Kabul  towards  surrounding
    villages, are now well established  but  have  never  been  subject  to
    building regulations or planning control.


130. In terms  of  available  accommodation  in  Kabul,  the  IOM  "Baseline
    Mobility  Assessment,  Summary  Results,   Afghanistan"   records   the
    following shelter as available:


       "Many just squat in abandoned buildings.  Often, the  latter  do  not
       have any doors, windows and even roofs.  In  Kabul  city,  a  monthly
       rent could reach 10,000 AFN ($147) in central urban  areas/districts.
       The usual cost in the outskirts varies between 2,500  AFN  and  6,000
       AFN ($37-87) depending on the type of accommodation and the amenities
       it might offer.  In Dehsabz and Mirbachakot districts  Returnees  and
       IDPs stay at houses made out of mud bricks, straw and stones that are
       unstable and vulnerable to natural disasters.  However, the rent  for
       better-quality accommodation is 2,000 AFN - 5,000 AFN ($30-74)."


131. Dr Schuster also referred to people  squatting,  living  in  tents  and
    making their own bricks to build accommodation.  Her evidence was  also
    that a single room could be rented in Kabul for $100 a month, but  such
    accommodation is difficult to find  and  would  require  payment  of  6
    months' rent in advance.  There were rare examples of groups  of  young
    men renting such a room together.


132. Dr Schuster gave an example of the type of accommodation that would  be
    likely for a family in Kabul including a taxi driver, which would be  a
    small house comprising of  three  rooms  and  include  a  basic  toilet
    emptying into a mud  gutter  in  the  street,  with  occasional  or  no
    electricity and using gas for light and heating.


133. Throughout Afghanistan, most  households  rely  on  wood,  charcoal  or
    waste for heating.  Access to electricity was relatively high in  urban
    areas - with a report from 2011/12 estimating some access  for  95%  of
    urban households, albeit not with a regular supply.


134. UNOCHA's "Humanitarian Needs Overview 2018" states that 45% of  Afghans
    use unimproved water sources.  Access to improved water sources  (those
    that  adequately  protect  water  from   external   contamination)   is
    relatively high in  Afghan  cities,  with  access  through  public  and
    private pumps, public and private wells  or  piped  water.   Unimproved
    water sources in cities include  unprotected  wells,  water  tanks  and
    surface water.  The situation outside of the cities is much  worse  and
    access to clean water can be source of quarrel  and  conflict  in  some
    areas.


135. In Kabul city, there are a limited number of water sources  from  kariz
    (acquifers), canals and pumps and the piped-water  system  covers  less
    than 20% of the population of the city.  The  majority  of  people  get
    water from wells or pumps,  which  can  be  some  distance  from  their
    accommodation and involve long queues.  The alternative is to  purchase
    water - the evidence on the price of which varied between  20  Afghanis
    for 4.5 litres, to 50 Afghanis for a 20-litre bottle to the same  price
    for a 200-litre barrel.


136. UNOCHA's "Humanitarian Needs Overview 2018" states that 68% of  Afghans
    have no access to improved sanitation.  Access to  improved  sanitation
    (facilities  that  hygienically  separate  human  excreta  from   human
    contact) is lower in  Afghan  cities  than  access  to  improved  water
    sources.


137. Data collected from the United Nations  Population  Fund  ("UNFPA")  in
    2013 stated that  of  the  households  in  Kabul,  95%  had  access  to
    electricity; 87% to a TV set; 97% to a mobile phone; 50%  had  improved
    sanitation facilities; 43% had a fridge; 33% a computer; 26% a car  and
    10% had access to the internet.  However, the percentages are likely to
    be lower now due to the population growth since then.


138. In terms of a person's ability to access available  accommodation,  the
    evidence of Dr  Giustozzi  and  Dr  Schuster  differed  as  to  whether
    references  would  be  needed  for  a  single  man   to   obtain   such
    accommodation.  Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that it is possible to rent
    accommodation without connections or references in Kabul,  particularly
    for dormitory accommodation.  References would only be needed for  more
    formal rented accommodation.  Dr Schuster's evidence was that a  single
    young man would be able to rent a room if a landlord could  be  assured
    of his behaviour (for example that he would not harass  women  and  was
    not taking drugs) and with money could obtain such accommodation  on  a
    temporary basis in advance of a reference.  However,  in  her  opinion,
    references were crucial to obtain stable accommodation.


139. Dr Giustozzi and Dr Schuster  referred  to  people  arriving  in  Kabul
    tending to go to the area where people from their  province  lived  and
    were of the view that a person would be  likely  to  find  people  from
    their village or someone who knew their family (Dr Schuster's view  was
    that this was "inevitable") who would be able to  vouch  for  a  person
    and/or help them find a place to stay as well.  Dr Schuster referred to
    the very strong tradition of hospitality  in  Afghanistan,  albeit  the
    availability of such assistance has been eroded over time  due  to  the
    impact of hostilities over 40 years which increased suspicion of single
    people and reduced resources available.

Healthcare

140. There was  limited  evidence  before  us  as  to  the  availability  of
    healthcare in Afghanistan and we record as an overview a summary of the
    information available from the EASO Report: "Afghanistan -  Key  socio-
    economic indicators, state protection,  and  mobility  in  Kabul  City,
    Mazar-e Sharif and Herat City" (August 2017).


141. In summary, that report recorded evidence  that  Afghanistan  had  made
    progress in providing healthcare, but serious obstacles  persisted.   A
    Basic Package of Healthcare Services system was introduced in 2003 with
    the aim of providing the  minimum  essential  health  services  in  all
    primary health-care facilities.   The  Essential  Package  of  Hospital
    Services followed in 2005.  These have improved the situation but there
    is inequality of access to healthcare for  women  (due  to  a  lack  of
    female health care professionals) and those in rural areas;  there  are
    financial  barriers  to  individuals  and   problems   of   corruption,
    insecurity  and  poor  regulation.   Separately  there  is  a   private
    healthcare system, but it is very expensive.


142. In terms of mental health care, the  same  EASO  Report  recorded  very
    high levels of mental  health  problems  in  Afghanistan  (particularly
    depression, anxiety and PTSD) creating significant needs but that there
    was a lack of trained  professionals  (psychiatrists,  social  workers,
    psychologists) and an inadequate infrastructure.  Although  the  Public
    Health Minister reported that psychological services were available  at
    some 1,500 health centres around the country with 300 dedicated  mental
    health clinics; there was only one dedicated mental health hospital  in
    Kabul and Samual Hall's study in 2016  referred  to  there  being  only
    three trained psychiatrists and  ten  psychologists  in  the  whole  of
    Afghanistan.

143. In Kabul specifically, there is better access  to  healthcare  than  in
    the provinces and the most qualified staff work there  with  specialist
    clinics and hospitals; albeit  there  is  still  significant  room  for
    improvement.  There remains a shortage of equipment  and  demand  which
    outstrips supply.  Nearly  half  of  Kabul  residents  can  not  afford
    medical treatment (as patients need to buy their own medicines and,  in
    any event, pharmacies are poorly equipped).  There are  also  instances
    of health facilities being targeted  by  armed  grounds,  including  in
    Kabul.


Employment/socio-economic conditions

144.  The  Afghan  economy  was  previously  boosted  by  the  presence   of
    international forces and reconstruction, with growth  rates  of  around
    14% in 2012.  However, since 2013, the GDP growth rate  has  fallen  to
    under 2% and if population growth  is  factored  in,  the  growth  rate
    essentially drops to zero with some, such as  the  Afghanistan  Analyst
    Network, of the view that there is actually a  declining  average  per-
    capita income.  The last unemployment figures  were  released  in  2014
    from  the  Afghanistan  Living   Conditions   Survey   which   reported
    unemployment of 24% and a further 15.3%  people  underemployed  and  Dr
    Schuster referred to  official  figures  in  2015  showing  a  national
    unemployment rate of 40% (with figures higher in  the  cities  than  in
    rural areas).  The general view, shared by Dr  Schuster,  is  that  the
    position will be worse now due to  the  declining  economic  situation,
    with continuing decline in foreign and domestic investment and  due  to
    annual population growth.  The latest indicator before us was from  the
    Asia Foundation survey in 2016, which found only 45% of all respondents
    saying that they were involved in activity that generates money.


145. The EASO Country of  Origin  Information  Report:  "Afghanistan  -  Key
    socio-economic indicators, state  protection,  and  mobility  in  Kabul
    City, Mazar-e Sharif and Herat City" sets out the  employment  position
    in cities.  It records approximately 20% of  employment  being  formal,
    including   employment   in   the   government,   NGOs,   international
    organisations and within the formal economy, mainly within  the  public
    sector; and 80% of employment being low skilled informal  labour.   The
    latter would include low skilled jobs in the bazaars, day labourers  in
    the  construction   industry,   seasonal   agricultural   workers   and
    apprentices in family businesses.  Employment is also available in  the
    service sector, albeit many were informal or day labouring  work  only.
    High skilled jobs are available in the public  sector,  in  health  and
    education sectors  and  opportunities  are  available  for  those  with
    monetary and  social  capital  to  start  up  a  business.   Access  to
    employment can be hampered by  lack  of  basic  skills  like  literacy,
    numeracy and vocational skills; often referred to in the evidence as  a
    'rural skill set' not transferable in urban environments.


146. In relation to Kabul specifically, EASO states (in the same report)  as
    follows:


       "Kabul is the financial and political centre and largest city of  the
       country and hosts most of  the  international  agencies.   It  has  a
       higher  level  of  industrialisation  than  other  cities.   However,
       according to the Kabul city Master Plan, the employment structure  of
       Kabul  province  is  79.4%  agriculture,  5.7%  industry,  and  14.9%
       services.  Even if the population of Kabul  province  is  80%  urban,
       most inhabitants depend on agriculture for a living, either  directly
       or indirectly."


147. The  International  Organisation  for  Migration  (IOM)  describes  the
    position in Kabul,  in  their  report  "Baseline  Mobility  Assessment,
    Summary Results, Afghanistan" (June 2017) (which uses the  Displacement
    Tracking Matrix (DTM) system) as follows:


       "Kabul city, as the country's capital,  provides  significantly  more
       employment  opportunities.   However,  only  about  5%  of  IDPs  and
       Returnees  possess  their   own   businesses   (shop-keeping,   stock
       deliveries, trading at the markets, selling small size goods  on  the
       streets, small restaurants).  It is common for  IDPs  to  rent  other
       people's cars in order to use them as taxis to  earn  a  daily  wage.
       The DFPs report that over 50%  of  the  respondents  say  that  their
       families have at least one member that migrated to  Iran,  Turkey  or
       Europe and supports his/her relatives by sending money."

148. The US Department of State Annual Report in 2016 referred to a  minimum
    wage  for  certain  employment  in  Afghanistan  (permanent  government
    workers and non-permanent private  sector  workers,  of  6000  Afghanis
    ($103) and 5,500 Afghanis ($95) a month respectively).  The same report
    showed the poverty line in Afghanistan to  be  1150  Afghanis  ($20)  a
    month and over one third of population earning below  that  level.   In
    contrast, the Asia Foundation Survey  of  the  Afghan  People  in  2016
    showed respondents  reporting  average  monthly  household  incomes  of
    10,949 Afghanis ($165) with urban areas  reporting  higher  incomes  of
    14,284 Afghanis ($215).


149. Dr  Schuster  describes  the  job  market  as  very  competitive,  with
    positions being given to family members rather than being advertised or
    with appointment on the basis of merit.  She gave  examples  of  people
    working in return for food or accommodation and employment in  a  range
    of jobs being done for long periods without a salary in the hope  of  a
    proper job being obtained in the future.  The intense  competition  for
    jobs can be partially explained by the fact that it is normal  for  one
    person to support an extended family of up to 15 people.


150. Dr Schuster explained that day labouring work  is  available,  normally
    as a porter or some other manual work such as within  the  construction
    industry.  Such work is obtained by people standing in the  street  but
    is also often obtained through a contact  or  network.   Day  labouring
    work is extremely precarious, unlikely to be regular and could  be  for
    occasional work for half a day only.   The  pay  is  little  for  short
    periods.  UNOCHA, in the  "Humanitarian  Bulletin,  Afghanistan"  (June
    2017) stated that a person could earn, at most, 300 Afghanis ($4.40)  a
    day as  a  day  labourer.   Dr  Schuster  stated  that  those  who  are
    confident, competent and  strong  would  obtain  employment  first  and
    vulnerabilities such as mental health problems may  affect  a  person's
    ability to gain such employment, but it was difficult to  quantify  the
    effect.


151. Another desired or preferred occupation  in  Kabul  is  to  be  a  taxi
    driver.  Dr Schuster described high demand  for  such  a  position  and
    opportunities were likely to be shared or given to those who were known
    and trusted first.  She had knowledge of a person  who  borrowed  money
    from abroad to buy an unlicensed taxi, but this was  risky  because  it
    could be confiscated and to obtain a licence a  person  would  need  to
    bribe officials in Kabul.


152. Dr Schuster's view was that it was  impossible  for  a  person  to  get
    work, even as a day labourer, without a significant network or contacts
    in Kabul.  She did not have experience of anyone being able  to  obtain
    stable employment or survive without  a  deep  network  (which  may  be
    friendship based  as  well  as  familial)  and/or  resources.   On  the
    contrary, she had witnessed young men visibly destitute on the  streets
    of Kabul, begging, being in bonded labour, being  trafficked  or  being
    addicted to drugs and that such instances had  increased  in  the  last
    year.


153. However, Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that a person does  not  need  any
    references or network to obtain  unskilled  labouring  work.   Although
    they may be asked their name and where they are from, there would be no
    further checks on that  information  or  that  person  for  such  work.
    Similarly, a person who has specialist  skills  who  could  demonstrate
    them (for example a tradesman such as  a  plumber),  an  apprentice  or
    person setting up a businessman would not  need  references  to  do  so
    because they could demonstrate their skills.  However,  highly  skilled
    jobs,  particularly  those  involving  handling  money   (for   example
    accountants) or long-term employment is likely  to  require  references
    for a person to be employed.


154. Ms Winterbotham's evidence was that those who were reliant on  ad  hoc,
    unskilled  employment  were  more  susceptible  to  trafficking  and/or
    recruitment into bonded or hazardous occupations in both the licit  and
    illicit sectors; as well as being more susceptible  to  other  coercive
    practices.  However, there was no specific evidence of  this  in  Kabul
    and she identified boys between the ages of 11  and  15  and  irregular
    migrants as those being most at risk.


Returns procedure and available assistance on return

155. There  are  different  procedures  and  assistance  packages  in  place
    depending on whether a person is voluntarily returning  to  Afghanistan
    or  being  forcibly  returned,  and  the  assistance  received   varies
    depending on where a person is returned from.  There are  also  schemes
    of support for which  we  have  documentary  evidence  but  no  further
    evidence of such assistance actually being provided.


156. IOM has assisted over 15,041  voluntary  returnees  from  Europe  since
    2003  and  in  2016  alone,  6,711  people  voluntarily   returned   to
    Afghanistan from Europe  through  the  Assisted  Voluntary  Return  and
    Reintegration programme (AVRR).   The  AVRR  programme  has  four  main
    components - preparation; return; reception and reintegration.   As  to
    reception, at the airport, a person will see a  representative  of  the
    Ministry of Refugees and Repatriations office, have the opportunity  to
    speak to representatives of other Ministries and be able to speak to  a
    representative of IOM.  Money is made available in  cash  to  returnees
    (forced and voluntary) for transportation to their  onward  destination
    or to accommodation at the Jangalak reception centre (available for  up
    to two weeks).  Medical assistance is also available at the airport.

157. Dr Schuster is only aware of 43 people having taken  up  the  offer  of
    accommodation in the Jangalak reception centre in the last five  years.
    Of  those  returning  in  2016,  only  1092  took  up  the   offer   of
    reintegration assistance after arrival and it is thought that  the  low
    take up is more to do with returnees not applying for help rather  than
    being refused support or inadequate resources to assist.  Reintegration
    assistance includes in-kind assistance for the purchase  of  goods  and
    services, help with training or setting up a business or help to secure
    accommodation.  Of those who received reintegration assistance from the
    IOM, one in six received this additional package of  between  E800  and
    E2500 to assist with their life plan for accommodation,  employment  or
    education.

158. The evidence varied as to  support  in  cash  for  returnees  from  the
    United Kingdom (primarily under the Facilitated Returns  Scheme),  with
    some sources suggesting returnees were given  �100  to  help  them;  Dr
    Schuster referred to voluntary returnees  receiving  between  �200  and
    �500 and others suggesting up to �750 in cash and there  was  reference
    to an assisted voluntary return package primarily focused on  families,
    but which was now available  to  young  single  males.   Dr  Schuster's
    evidence was that forced returnees could receive up to �900 in-kind but
    not in cash.  She stated that if a person was astute, financial support
    of �200 to �500 could last a person a month to six weeks, but a  person
    unfamiliar with the system and prices in Kabul could be ripped off  and
    funds only last them a week to ten days.

159. Dr Schuster's evidence was that IOM packages  changed  in  August  2016
    and the situation thereafter was not yet clear about what  support  was
    available or from  whom.   There  was  no  witness  evidence  from  the
    Respondent as to what was provided  to  whom  in  reality  and  the  UK
    government had not consented to IOM releasing their data on this to  Dr
    Schuster when she requested this for the purposes of her expert report.

160. The IOM is also able to give clothing to individuals  if  necessary  on
    return,  assist  them  with  airport   formalities   and   counselling.
    Counselling includes psychological counselling but also  advice  as  to
    housing and  employment.   In  addition,  mine  awareness  training  is
    offered and advice leaflets are  available  about  medical  facilities,
    transportation and opening a bank account.  Similar information can  be
    obtained from government ministries as well.

161. Outside of IOM,  there  is  evidence  of  other  smaller  organisations
    offering assistance to  returnees.   These  include  the  International
    Psychosocial Organisation (IPSO),  AMASO,  Experts  in  the  Fields  of
    Migration and Development (AGEF)  and  European  Reintegration  Network
    (ERIN).   IPSO  is  funded  by  the  German   government   and   offers
    accommodation and counselling services (for up to 400 or 500  people  a
    day) as well as training and  self-awareness  groups.   AMASO  provides
    information and support to returnees and has a  small  apartment  which
    can accommodate a maximum of 10 men for a  few  nights.   AGEF  assists
    returnees from the UK and Germany, offering the same type of support as
    IOM with packages to open or join a business, training and  helping  to
    find a person a placement or employment.   The  package  compensates  a
    returnee for their enterprise for a period of six months.

162. A leaflet from ERIN detailed  assistance  provided  in  Afghanistan  to
    returnees including  reception  assistance,  onward  travel,  emergency
    temporary  housing  and   immediate   necessities   on   return;   with
    reintegration packages to help a person set up a small business, find a
    work  placement  or  undertake  further  education  and  training.   Dr
    Schuster was aware of ERIN  and  the  provision  of  accommodation  and
    travel, but the reintegration support referred  to  was  still  in  the
    planning phase with possible service providers and not yet provided  to
    returnees.

163. The UNHCR provides assistance to returnees, including  as  cash  grants
    but this was primarily directed towards  returnees  from  Pakistan  who
    received $400 per person (reducing to $200 per person) which  was  used
    to help reintegration needs - the money being spent  on  food,  shelter
    and transport with a small number being able to invest in a business or
    build a house.

Evidence of the experience of returnees to Afghanistan

164. There are a number of specific studies about the position of  returnees
    to  Afghanistan  (including  reports  as  to  procedures  on   arrival)
    including quantitative and qualitative data, in addition  to  which  we
    heard evidence from Dr Schuster as to her knowledge and  experience  of
    those who have returned.


165. In 2017,  the  UNHCR  published  "Tough  choices  for  Afghan  refugees
    returning home after exile" which detailed results of a survey of  4285
    people by face-to-face interview on the  point  of  arrival  (primarily
    returnees from Pakistan) and  a  telephone  interview  with  some  1300
    returnees three months after return.  93% of  respondents  stated  that
    they were warmly received by communities on return to  Afghanistan  and
    75% said that three months after arrival they felt they  had  made  the
    right decision to return.  Dr Schuster was surprised by  these  results
    and considered that the context of  reasons  why  people  were  leaving
    Pakistan may have influenced the outcome as a comparison of conditions.




166. In May 2017,  Amnesty  International  interviewed  18  women,  men  and
    children who had recently been  deported  to  Afghanistan  from  Europe
    which showed that group had significant fear on return and  there  were
    instances where risk had been realised with  people  being  injured  or
    killed after return.  Although this is an in-depth study, it  is  of  a
    very small number of people out of thousands of  returns  from  Europe,
    90% of whom were  single  males  rather  than  families  or  women  and
    children.


167. In 2015-2016, the Refugee Support Network monitored the  experience  of
    25  care  leavers  (those  who  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as
    unaccompanied asylum seeking children, were granted leave to remain  up
    to just before their 18th  birthday  and  who  were  then  returned  to
    Afghanistan having been refused further leave to remain)  after  return
    to Kabul  which  found  that  they  had  all  experienced  a  range  of
    interconnected difficulties on  return,  including  with  families  and
    forming relationships, with insecurity, continuing  education,  finding
    sustainable work and mental health difficulties.  The  sample  size  of
    this group was out of a total  of  2,018  care  leavers  who  had  been
    removed to Afghanistan since 2007.  Those monitored had  been  referred
    to the Refugee Support Network's Youth on the Move programme in the  UK
    and then referred to their Monitoring Officer on return to Kabul.


168. UNOCHA's Humanitarian Needs  Overview  2018  included  household  level
    emergency assessments of newly  displaced  populations  in  2016  which
    showed that 70% of such households had no food stocks and only  25%  of
    households had one weeks' worth of supplies.  In terms of housing,  40%
    were able to find refuge with families  or  friends  and  33%  were  in
    rented accommodation but vulnerable to eviction as a result.  The  same
    report found that returnees were in a similar position to those who had
    been internally displaced, with access to shelter, secure tenure,  food
    and economic security all remaining critical for some time  after  they
    have settled.  Returnees were found to be almost entirely dependent  on
    improvised family arrangements and international  humanitarian  support
    to survive.

169. Dr Schuster referred to different experiences depending  on  whether  a
    person voluntarily returned to Afghanistan or  was  forcibly  returned;
    albeit  caution  should  be  applied  to  those  recorded   as   having
    voluntarily returned as many are required to sign papers  and  as  such
    are  effectively  forced  to  return.   Dr  Schuster  described   those
    returning  voluntarily  as  having  time  to  prepare  in  advance  and
    reactivate networks in Afghanistan whereas those forcibly returned  are
    often in denial of what is about to happen, not accepting the situation
    and therefore do not prepare in advance.  They also suffer feelings  of
    stigma and shame, generally or within their  family  unit  due  to  the
    perceived cost to others of failed migration.  There are also different
    experiences for those returning from Pakistan (who  are  mainly  family
    groups, many of whom had been out of Afghanistan for decades), to those
    returning from Iran (who are more likely to  be  single  men,  but  the
    group also includes  a  significant  number  of  unaccompanied  minors,
    single women and emergency medical cases), to those returning from  the
    West (a much smaller number and almost entirely made up of single men).


170. Of those that Dr Schuster has had direct or indirect contact with  (for
    example through studies or through Abdul Ghafoor/AMASO), most of  those
    who have been forcibly returned to Afghanistan have left  again.   Only
    one remained after two years, but of relatively  recent  returnees,  20
    remained in Kabul.  Of those 20, some were supported by  IOM  and  some
    with funds from abroad.  Five of them were  working  as  labourers  but
    only one was being sustained by this employment, the  other  four  were
    homeless.  Three of the other 15 were living in the AMASO accommodation
    and the  situation  of  the  others  was  unknown.   In  Dr  Schuster's
    experience, the only people who successfully reintegrated with  a  home
    and job were those with family networks or resources.  Dr  Schuster  is
    aware of groups of returnees from Iran forming their  own  networks  in
    Kabul and a single man could be  received  into  a  network  through  a
    single contact or through work.


171. A range of  factors  contribute  to  an  individual's  decision  as  to
    whether to re-migrate.  Dr Schuster and Nassim  Majidi  set  out  three
    main reasons for re-migration, first,  debt  (for  example  from  money
    borrowed  to  pay  for  the  initial   migration);   secondly,   family
    commitments and  thirdly,  the  shame  of  failure  or  'contamination'
    leading to stigmatisation.  The failure, or perception of failure  (for
    example, some in Afghanistan see those deported as people who are lazy,
    stupid or criminal  -  there  being  some  culpable  reason  for  their
    return), can lead to a loss of status and  therefore  prospects  for  a
    person.  In addition, people leave Afghanistan again due to fear of the
    security situation and for wider socio-economic reasons, including that
    they were unhappy to have been returned and preferred their  experience
    of life elsewhere.

Findings and reasons

172. We follow the same structure as above for our findings,  dealing  first
    with general findings and then those specific to  this  Appellant.   We
    deal  firstly  with  whether  a  person  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Kabul (if so,  then  there  is  no  option  of  internal
    relocation to Kabul), and if not, our assessment of whether it would be
    reasonable or not  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  person  to  internally
    relocate to Kabul.   As  above,  the  Appellant  does  not  claim  that
    conditions in Kabul  are  in  breach  of  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, nor does he claim that the situation  there
    meets the threshold in Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive.
    As such, save where necessary in  the  context  of  responding  to  the
    Appellant's invitations  to  us  to  make  findings  or  statements  on
    previous country guidance cases, we make  no  specific  findings  about
    Article 3 or Article 15(c).

General Findings - risk

173. We consider first the risk of persecution by the Taliban in Kabul to  a
    person who is accepted to be at risk on return from them in their  home
    area.  The two main ways in which it is said that  this  may  arise  is
    first, through specific  targeting  of  an  individual  in  Kabul,  and
    secondly, through a chance encounter with a person, for  example  at  a
    temporary checkpoint in or around the city.  We deal with each in turn.


174. The risk of a specific individual being successfully  targeted  depends
    upon their identification as a target (for  example,  due  to  past  or
    present actions/circumstances) and the ability of the Taliban to locate
    and then carry out an attack on that person, as well as their  will  or
    priorities in doing so.  The evidence was broadly in  agreement  as  to
    the order of importance of targets for the Taliban in Afghanistan being
    (i) senior serving government officials and the security services, (ii)
    spies, and at the lower level, (iii) other collaborators (including the
    wider security forces, government authorities, foreign  embassies,  the
    UN, NGOs and anyone passing information to  the  government  about  the
    Taliban) and deserters.  Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that  the  Taliban
    keep a blacklist of all those who are wanted by the  Taliban/identified
    as legitimate targets, some of whom are included just because of  their
    high-profile position  and  others  at  a  lower-level  are  identified
    because they have been through a system of sentencing and only then are
    they a legitimate target.


175. Dr Giustozzi's evidence as to the existence of a blacklist setting  out
    the names of people sought by the Taliban as legitimate  targets  comes
    only from limited Taliban sources, has not  been  corroborated  by  any
    other external sources and is not supported by other  commentators  and
    acknowledged experts in the field (see the EASO Report  "Afghanistan  -
    Individuals targeted by armed actors in the conflict").   Dr  Giustozzi
    has never seen such a list, nor is he able to  give  clear  information
    about its content or use from his sources,  with  much  of  the  detail
    filled in with conclusions he has drawn as  such  matters.   There  are
    aspects of the evidence about the blacklist, for  example,  as  to  its
    size and comprehensiveness, which itself undermines a  conclusion  that
    such a thing exists.


176. We do not find that there is sufficient evidence before us to find  the
    existence of a single blacklist operated by  the  Taliban  to  identify
    targets.  However, even if we are wrong  about  that,  there  is  scant
    evidence of who is on such a list and it would in  any  event  take  an
    extraordinary series of events for a person who is on such a list to be
    found and targeted.


177. Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that the blacklist contained  14,500  names
    covering people not only in Afghanistan but also in Pakistan and  other
    countries, including those who have been sentenced (following a process
    by which a person has to receive two written warnings from the  Taliban
    left at that person's address, which were not complied with and then  a
    sentence would be passed that would communicated in writing or verbally
    to the person  or  someone  close  to  them)  and  those  automatically
    included because of their profile as someone posing a serious danger to
    the Taliban.  The number of people included worldwide raises  immediate
    questions as to the  comprehensiveness  of  the  list  given  that  the
    security forces alone in Afghanistan number many times the total 14,500
    said to be on the list.  There was a  lack  of  any  evidence  or  even
    opinion as to why only a relatively small proportion of those who  were
    described as legitimate targets for the Taliban were on the list.  That
    casts doubt as to its existence at all and  shows  that  in  any  event
    there is no reliable evidence about a person's inclusion on it  or  the
    reasons for such inclusion.


178. Dr Giustozzi's evidence did not  include  any  information  as  to  the
    process by which names were added to the blacklist and could only infer
    that the information included would be a person's name,  father's  name
    and place of birth given that that is the usual way to identify  people
    in Afghanistan.  He could also only infer  that  there  was  a  digital
    master copy held somewhere based on his knowledge that the Taliban have
    such technology and infrastructure available to them and that  a  paper
    copy would be unwieldy and impractical to  use.   The  lack  of  detail
    about such a list, particularly given the importance placed on it by Dr
    Giustozzi as a means of identifying those at  risk  from  the  Taliban,
    does not support a conclusion that such a blacklist exists.


179. Further, in any event, even  if  a  blacklist  did  exist  in  the  way
    described by Dr Giustozzi, his evidence as to who has access to it  and
    how it is used  places  a  lower  level  person  of  interest  at  very
    negligible risk (so low as to not amount to a real risk) even  if  they
    are named on it because  it  would  require  an  increasingly  unlikely
    series of events to unfold.  There was no suggestion that the  complete
    blacklist was shared with anyone other than a handful of Shuras at  the
    very top of the organisation; nor that it was disseminated in  complete
    form to any lower level within the Taliban (even to provincial Military
    Commanders); nor that it was in  anyway  searchable  or  accessible  by
    others within the Taliban either quickly (for example, for  individuals
    to be checked against it during a random encounter) or at all.  To  the
    contrary, local Taliban members, fighters  or  dedicated  units  tasked
    with  hunting  down  wanted  individuals,  would,  on  Dr   Giustozzi's
    evidence, only be given details of a few names  of  wanted  individuals
    believed to be within their area of operations.  No information  as  to
    the people on the blacklist would be given to informers.


180. The further step required for a person to be  identified  and  targeted
    is therefore  some  information  about  his  whereabouts.   That  would
    require a person to come to the attention of an informer, but  even  if
    they did (for example by providing their details directly to  them  for
    the purposes of obtaining a reference for employment or  accommodation,
    which for the reasons set out below would  not  be  required  in  every
    case), an informer would not have any access to the list to know that a
    person was on it or wanted.  At its highest, that informer may tell the
    Taliban of a person's details, for example as general information given
    about a person new to an area,  but  it  is  unclear  as  to  how  such
    information would realistically be  relayed  to  a  person  within  the
    Taliban who happened to know, from  the  small  number  of  names  that
    anyone other than a very senior figure within the Taliban is likely  to
    be given, that the person they received information about  was  on  the
    blacklist.


181. If, in the alternative, for some reason a person  came  to  the  direct
    attention of an ordinary Taliban member (not via an  informer),  again,
    the possibility that the person's name was one of  a  small  number  of
    wanted people thought to  be  within  that  Taliban  member's  area  of
    operations, or  would  reach  a  sufficiently  high  level  within  the
    organisation to have a much larger list of  names,  is  beyond  remote.
    There is no particular reason why such information would be checked  or
    passed on higher up the chain of command about someone about  whom  was
    no immediate reason to suspect, or potentially only a  person  of  low-
    level interest.  There was no suggestion in the evidence before us that
    the Taliban had the required sophistication, widespread  technology  or
    resources to conduct checks on every name of those who  come  to  their
    attention,  via  an  informer  or  ordinary  member.   Given  the  vast
    population movement both internally in Afghanistan and inflow of people
    from abroad, the task of running  basic  identity  checks  against  the
    blacklist system described by Dr Giustozzi would be enormous -  if  all
    were monitored, well over a million people in 2016 alone.   We  do  not
    find that therefore that there is anything other than a  fanciful  risk
    of identification as a target for all of these reasons.


182. Further, even if (which for the reasons above  is  highly  unlikely)  a
    person was identified either in their home area or in Kabul as being on
    a blacklist (even if that also exists) and that information was  passed
    on to the relevant Taliban member,  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence  is  that
    there is a single dedicated unit of around 20 people operating in Kabul
    province tasked with hunting down  and  executing  targets  (albeit  we
    accept that his evidence was of at least one per province  and  he  had
    not sought information as to whether there were any more  than  one  in
    Kabul or any other province).  Although his evidence was that low-level
    people  of  interest  were  pursued  because  they   were   easier   to
    successfully kill and the number of opponents  killed  (as  opposed  to
    named  or  high-profile  targets)  is  important  within  the   general
    objectives  of  asserting  authority  as  the   legitimate   power   in
    Afghanistan and undermining the current government; there  would  still
    need to be a decision on the priority of targets amongst  a  population
    of 3.5 to 7 million people, with such limited resources.


183. The evidence of Mr Siddique  recorded  in  the  EASO  report  (set  out
    above) shows that the list of people for whom the Taliban  will  invest
    resources and planning to track and target in major cities  is  limited
    to between a few dozen to up to a hundred persons.  Further, there is a
    lack of supporting evidence of targeting of  low-level  individuals  in
    Kabul, cities/urban areas or areas outside of Taliban control (as  also
    found by the European Court of Human Rights in H and B v UK�  70073/10,
    44539/11, Chamber Judgment [2013] ECHR 298  (9/4/13)).   Overall,  this
    adds an additional level of remoteness such that in totality, there  is
    insufficient evidence to support a real risk of  a  low-profile  person
    being identified, located and targeted even if there is a blacklist  on
    which their name appeared.  In the absence of a blacklist at all,  that
    risk is fanciful at most.


184. As to the prospect of a chance encounter placing a person  at  risk  on
    return to Kabul from the Taliban, we find little  evidence  to  support
    any real risk arising from such a situation.  There is evidence  (which
    is uncontroversial and has not been  specifically  challenged)  of  the
    Taliban setting up temporary checkpoints in and around Kabul city based
    on specific intelligence, although no quantification or estimate of the
    number or range of locations (other than including main routes  in  and
    out of the city) used was submitted by  either  party.   That  specific
    intelligence is said to include the expected  movement  of  a  targeted
    person (or persons - such as employees of the state, other countries or
    NGOs), including the day and time of travel, means of travel (up to and
    including identification of a specific vehicle) and destination, or  at
    least  expected  route.   We  find  that  such  specific   intelligence
    indicates  targeting  of  the  most  high-profile  people,  given  that
    significant or at least very well-placed resources would be required to
    identify  such  specific  information.    The   specific   intelligence
    identified also suggests higher-profile targets as  opposed  to  lower-
    level individuals are far, as a matter of practicality, far less likely
    to  be  travelling  in  specific  vehicles  or  have  such  predictable
    movements.


185. There is of course the possibility that a checkpoint set up  to  target
    a specific person or group may also involve others being stopped either
    randomly or because of a suspicion based on a particular feature.   The
    features suggested in evidence could be that  a  person  is  wearing  a
    shirt and tie (which may indicate that they are  a  state  employee  of
    some sort) or has English contacts on a mobile phone.  There is however
    no specific evidence of such incidents regularly occurring or  at  all.
    The only example that appears in the evidence is of an  Australian  man
    taken off a bus by the Taliban, but the evidence is inconsistent as  to
    whether he was specifically targeted by name or coincidentally  by  his
    appearance or other feature.  Although  we  accept  that  a  person  is
    likely to need to travel in and around Kabul for work and  other  daily
    necessities, the chances  of  encountering  such  a  checkpoint,  being
    stopped at it, being questioned by the Taliban, being identified  as  a
    target and suffering harm as a result are, cumulatively, too remote  to
    give rise to a real risk of harm.  For the reasons set out above, there
    is no real risk that even if a blacklist exists and a person's name  is
    on it, that that information could or would be obtained at a  temporary
    checkpoint because of the lack of availability of access to a  complete
    or searchable list; or that the person's  name  would,  coincidentally,
    happen to be one of a very  small  number  given  to  a  local  Taliban
    member.

186. We do not find that there is any real  risk  of  an  adult  male  being
    forcibly recruited (for example through  threats  or  coercion)  to  an
    armed group in Kabul.  There is scant evidence of  any  such  instances
    occurring  in  Kabul  and  goes  against  the  traditional  methods  of
    recruitment of the Taliban in particular.  We do however  consider  the
    risk of a person feeling compelled to join an armed  group  for  socio-
    economic reasons, as opposed to forced recruitment,  further  below  in
    the context of reasonableness of internal relocation.


187. We do not find  a  person  on  return  to  Kabul,  or  more  widely  to
    Afghanistan, to be at risk on the basis of 'Westernisation'.  There  is
    simply a lack of any cogent or consistent evidence of incidents of such
    harm on which it could be concluded that there was a  real  risk  to  a
    person who has spent time in the west being targeted for  that  reason,
    either because of appearance, perceived or actual attitudes of  such  a
    person.  At most, there is some evidence of a possible  adverse  social
    impact or suspicion  affecting  social  and  family  interactions,  and
    evidence from a very small number of fear  based  on  'Westernisation',
    but we find that the evidence before us falls far short of establishing
    and objective fear of persecution on this basis for the purposes of the
    Refugee Convention.

188. As above, there was only limited evidence before us of  other  possible
    risk factors to individuals in Afghanistan (which were not relevant  to
    the Appellant in this appeal) which  are  outwith  the  ambit  of  this
    appeal and we make no specific findings on them.


General Findings - reasonableness

189. It is not necessary to rehearse here the numerous authorities in  which
    evidence and opinions from the UNHCR have been positively  endorsed  by
    the domestic and international  Courts.   It  is  uncontroversial  that
    significant weight can and should be attached to such evidence from the
    UNHCR  as  the  Guidelines  on   International   Protection   and   the
    "Eligibility Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International  Protection
    Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan" (2016) and we do so  in  this
    appeal.


190. In terms of safety, the  UNCHR  suggests  two  initial  considerations,
    first, the volatility and fluidity of the armed conflict in Afghanistan
    in terms of the difficulty of identifying potential areas of relocation
    that are durably safe; and secondly, the prospects of safely  accessing
    the proposed area of relocation.  In relation  to  Kabul,  it  is  well
    defended as the capital city in terms  of  retaining  control  for  the
    current government and in fact, in recent years the authorities have  a
    good record of maintaining (or in one instance, re-taking)  control  of
    larger cities.  Although taking Kabul is likely to be seen by  AGEs  as
    the ultimate prize and one which would inevitably lead to the  downfall
    of the current government, there is little evidence before us  of  that
    being attempted let alone achieved in the foreseeable future.  In  that
    sense, the volatility and fluidity of armed conflict in Afghanistan  is
    likely to be less in Kabul compared to smaller urban centres and  rural
    areas where control does change between the state authorities and  AGEs
    (or with no clear overall control).


191. As can  be  seen  from  the  UNAMA  reports,  the  nature  of  security
    incidents in Kabul also follows a relatively consistent  pattern,  with
    the focus on suicide and complex incidents rather than air strikes  and
    ground engagement which are more common in other parts of  Afghanistan.
    That type  of  attack  includes  wider  civilian  casualties  than  the
    specific target of the attack and also potential significant collateral
    damage to lives and property.


192. The numbers of civilian casualties in  Kabul  are  increasing  year  on
    year and from the information available to date from 2017 are at record
    levels since UNAMA started  gathering  such  data  in  2009.   To  that
    extent, the intensity of conflict in Kabul city (as well as more widely
    in Afghanistan shown by the overall  rise  year  on  year  in  civilian
    casualties) is increasing.  As the panel commented in AK,  there  is  a
    fluid situation which should be monitored and kept under review, but at
    the present time, we find for  the  reasons  set  out  below  that  the
    security situation in Kabul does  not  exclude  it  as  an  option  for
    internal relocation for a single male as in this appeal.


193. In the first half of 2017, UNAMA  recorded  1,048  civilian  casualties
    (219 deaths and 829 injured) in Kabul province, the  vast  majority  of
    which (94%) were caused by suicide and complex attacks carried  out  by
    AGEs (the Taliban, ISKP and others).  A relatively small number of  the
    security incidents in Kabul city caused the majority of the casualties,
    with the attack on 31 May 2017 alone accounting for more than  half  of
    the casualties in the period.  The security incidents in Kabul city are
    spread around rather than being concentrated in a  particular  area  or
    areas and include as targets individuals, government and  international
    buildings as well as civilian areas including roads, shops and mosques,
    thus affecting many areas of everyday life.


194.  The  expert  witnesses  before  us  were  in  agreement  as   to   the
    deterioration in the security situation in  Kabul,  particularly  since
    the  withdrawal  of  international  security  forces  in   2014,   with
    experience of this being evident  on  the  streets  of  the  city  with
    increasing protection measures  being  used  (for  example,  a  greater
    number of and higher blast walls, more height restrictions on roads and
    more roads closed off).


195. We do not underestimate the negative effect of the  security  incidents
    felt generally on the residents of Kabul who have  increasing  fear  of
    incidents  within  the  city  affecting  themselves  and  their   wider
    family/community and specifically on those who are directly affected as
    a casualty  or  family  member,  particularly  if  that  person  was  a
    breadwinner in the family and unable to  continue  in  work.   This  is
    particularly so in the context of a country  which  has  suffered  four
    decades of conflict and whose resilience has decreased as a result.


196. However, despite the number and impact of  security  incidents  in  and
    around Kabul city, we find that these are not at such a high  level  so
    as to  make  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  unsafe.   In  particular,
    although not necessary to reach the threshold in Article 15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, we note that the evidence before us shows that
    the level of indiscriminate violence falls very far short of that  sort
    of threshold and directly affects (by way of death or  injury)  only  a
    tiny proportion of the population of Kabul city - less than 0.01%  even
    if there were 5000 incidents in a year (more than  double  the  numbers
    recorded by UNAMA in the  first  half  of  2017  plus  the  same  again
    assuming the same numbers in the second half of 2017) with a population
    of 4.5 million.  The calculations  vary  depending  on  the  population
    estimates but even on  conservative  calculations  with  high  casualty
    figures  and  low  population  estimates,  the  percentages  of  people
    affected are  incredibly  small.   This  remains  the  case  even  with
    significant underreporting of casualty figures by UNAMA based on  their
    strict methodology for casualties to be included.


197. Further, we  find  that  the  security  situation  affects  the  entire
    population of Kabul city, as shown by the varied locations and  targets
    of attacks throughout the city and not just a  particular  geographical
    area or particular group of residents.  In particular, we do  not  find
    that there is any increased risk to returnees over and above that faced
    by the population of Kabul city as a whole.  The Appellant's contention
    that returnees are more exposed to random and  indiscriminate  violence
    because of their need to seek day-to-day employment and move about  the
    city to do so does not have any  evidential  basis.   It  is  not  just
    returnees who need to  move  around  the  city,  the  majority  of  its
    residents need  to  do  so  for  work  and  normal  daily  necessities,
    travelling in from the outskirts of the  city  where  accommodation  is
    more affordable for day-to-day as well as regular employment.   In  any
    event, we do not find that regular movement of itself  materially  adds
    to the risk of exposure to indiscriminate violence - contrary  to,  for
    example,  a  situation  where  security  incidents  are  focused  on  a
    particular area where a person would need  to  go  to  for  employment.
    Although it may be that the richest residents  of  Kabul  have  greater
    resources to protect themselves and their property  from  the  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence, they are the significant minority and are  not
    in any event insulated from the broader security situation particularly
    as they also live in higher risk more central areas of the city.


198. Although we have considered the specific situation in  Kabul,  we  also
    find that it is not significantly worse, if at all, than  the  security
    situation prevalent throughout the majority  of  Afghanistan.   The  UN
    strategic review in 2017 has  reclassified  Afghanistan  from  a  post-
    conflict country to one in active conflict, assessing the situation for
    the country as a whole.


199. Conflict is present in the vast majority of  provinces  in  Afghanistan
    resulting in civilian  casualties  and  internal  displacement  of  the
    population.  The number of incidents and number of resulting casualties
    varies significantly between provinces but so do the population as well
    as population density and geography of the province  which  impacts  on
    the latter.  Although the highest  number  of  civilian  casualties  is
    recorded in Kabul in the UNAMA figures, it is also  the  province  with
    the highest population and population density.  The maps in Appendix  B
    show the worst affected provinces by number of security  incidents  and
    number of  security  incidents  compared  to  population.   On  neither
    measure is Kabul the worst or even one of the worst affected areas.  We
    find that the security situation is one which affects the  majority  of
    the population of Afghanistan and extends throughout  the  majority  of
    the territory.


200. On the  second  point  raised  by  the  UNHCR  for  consideration,  the
    Respondent has proposed Kabul as a place of  internal  relocation  (and
    that is the only area within the ambit of this appeal that we are  able
    to consider) and that is also where a person would be directly returned
    to by the Respondent.  There is therefore no identifiable issue with  a
    person safely accessing the proposed area of location.  They  would  be
    returned directly to it.


201. The further consideration highlighted by the UNHCR for those  who  have
    a well-founded fear of persecution from an AGE is the  ability  of  the
    AGE to pursue the person to the area of proposed relocation as well  as
    the ability of the state to provide protection in that area.   Evidence
    of the AGEs capacity to carry out attacks outside the area under  their
    effective control needs to be taken into account.  We  have  considered
    these points already above as to risk on return for a person  to  Kabul
    from the Taliban or other AGE.  There is no real risk that a  low-level
    individual would be successfully targeted by the Taliban in Kabul.


202. We return here as a starting  point  to  the  views  of  the  UNHCR  in
    determining the reasonableness of a place of internal relocation taking
    into account the security, human rights and humanitarian environment in
    Kabul, which provides an appropriate structure for the relevant factors
    to be considered about the proposed place of relocation.   As  set  out
    above, the UNCHR considers that internal relocation is reasonable  only
    where an individual has access to (i) shelter, (ii) essential  services
    such as sanitation, healthcare  and  education;  and  (iii)  livelihood
    opportunities.  Further, the UNHCR consider that it is only  reasonable
    where a person also has access to  a  traditional  support  network  of
    members of his or her (extended) family or members of his or her larger
    ethnic community in the area  of  proposed  relocation  who  have  been
    assessed as willing and able to provide genuine support  to  a  person.
    However, there is a possible exception to  this  last  requirement  for
    single able-bodied men and  married  couples  of  working  age  without
    identified specific vulnerabilities who may, in certain  circumstances,
    be able to subsist without family and community support  in  urban  and
    semi-urban areas that have the necessary infrastructure and  livelihood
    opportunities to meet the basic necessities of life and that are  under
    effective   Government   control.    A   case-by-case   analysis   will
    nevertheless be necessary.


203. We take into account that the  last  UNHCR  guidelines  on  Afghanistan
    were issued in April 2016 and are usually only issued every few  years,
    such that the evidence of a continuing deterioration of  conditions  in
    Afghanistan since that date has not expressly been taken into  account.
    However, we also take into account that in December 2016, although  the
    UNHCR cautioned against returns to  Kabul  on  an  internal  relocation
    basis because of the sudden  and  significant  increase  in  population
    (caused by rapid urbanization  as  well  as  the  influx  of  IDPs  and
    returnees),  it  maintained  the  April  2016  statement  as  remaining
    relevant for assessments of internal relocation to Kabul.  We note that
    2016 was characterised not only by the sudden and significant  increase
    in population but also by a  deteriorating  security  situation,  which
    would have been taken into account by the UNHCR in December  2016.   We
    are not aware of any more recent assessment of  the  situation  by  the
    UNHCR, although we bear in mind that while the security  situation  has
    since worsened further in 2017 and the influx of population  relocating
    to Kabul (internally from within Afghanistan and externally from  other
    countries) has continued, it has not been at such a high level as  seen
    in 2016.  We do not consider therefore  that  there  has  been  such  a
    significant shift in conditions in Kabul since December 2016 so  as  to
    affect the weight we attach to the UNHCR  position  confirmed  at  that
    time.


204. We consider first the issue of whether a support network  is  necessary
    for a person to internally relocate to Kabul without  undue  harshness,
    given that this issue runs through the evidence  on  accommodation  and
    employment as well as the grain of social life in Afghanistan.


205. The social norms in Afghanistan  are  for  people  to  live  in  family
    groups (immediate and more  commonly  extended  family  groups)  within
    communities of the same ethnic/tribal group.  This provides,  dependent
    on  the  availability  of  resources  and  general  situation  of  such
    groups/communities,  a  level  of  support  for  an  individual  within
    Afghanistan.   Such  networks  have  importance   both   socially   and
    economically, in terms  of  employment  and  accommodation.   A  single
    person living alone is outside of the social norms in  Afghanistan  and
    relatively uncommon.


206. Much  of  the  evidence  before  us,  particularly  from  Dr  Schuster,
    emphasised the importance of support networks to an individual for most
    aspects of basic life and survival with her key conclusions being  that
    a person would be highly unlikely to find accommodation  or  employment
    without a person to vouch for them (other than perhaps with significant
    financial resources, for example  to  put  down  six  months'  rent  in
    advance  for  accommodation).   However,  Dr  Giustozzi,  whilst   also
    acknowledging the importance of support  networks  in  society,  stated
    that  these  were  not  essential  for  a  person   to   obtain   basic
    accommodation and employment in Kabul and  although  a  person  may  be
    asked who they are, their father's name and where they come from, it is
    not necessarily the case that that information would be checked or that
    it  would  be  followed  up  by  contact  for  a  reference  from  such
    information, i.e. from a person's family or home area.


207. Whilst we accept the evidence that for  more  formal  and/or  expensive
    accommodation or to obtain more skilled  employment  (particularly  for
    those jobs requiring, for example, trustworthiness, i.e. accountants or
    those handling large sums of money) is  likely  to  require  references
    form someone within a support network, we prefer  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi that  this  is  not  essential  to  obtain  accommodation  or
    employment in every case.  He was able to  give  specific  examples  of
    situations where such a reference or support network would or would not
    be essential with justification for why that was so  depending  on  the
    context, particularly of the type of employment sought.


208. There are a number of variables which are  also  relevant  to  consider
    about the nature of a support network which means  that  it  is  not  a
    simple or straightforward question as to whether a person  has  one  to
    determine whether they would be in a better position if one  exists  at
    the point of return.  We do not however doubt  that  a  person  with  a
    strong family or other support network  in  Kabul  (or  potentially  in
    Afghanistan) would be in  a  stronger  position  on  return  to  Kabul,
    particularly if that support network included  wealthy  or  influential
    individuals with good connections themselves.


209. We take into account that there was little  evidence  before  us  about
    the  differing  quality  of  support  networks  for  an  individual  or
    recognition that the material usefulness  of  a  support  network  must
    depend on the resources and position of those in it.   The  Appellant's
    position was put more simply as a binary question as to  whether  there
    was a support network leading to a better or worse outcome without  any
    recognition that its relevance to a person on return was likely  to  be
    somewhere on a spectrum depending on variable factors.


210. It was accepted by Dr Schuster that the impact of decades  of  conflict
    in Afghanistan has reduced the ability  of  ordinary  Afghans  to  help
    extended family members or members of their community given  their  own
    reduced resources, such that some who are willing to help  may  not  be
    able to do so.  It is also  reasonable  to  infer  that  many  families
    and/or communities may not have the required connections or  status  to
    provide any material support, for example in  helping  them  to  secure
    employment.  It is not therefore a simple  question  as  to  whether  a
    person has a support network in Kabul, but more of  an  assessment,  if
    needed, of the nature and quality of such a support network.


211. We also do not consider that the issue is limited to whether  a  person
    has a support network only in  Kabul,  as  the  system  of  checks  and
    references in which a person can be vouched for could  also  reasonably
    be used across other parts of Afghanistan (although we appreciate  that
    this would preclude direct practical support in Kabul city).


212. Further, we do not consider that the issue of  support  networks  is  a
    question which answered in the negative for a particular  person  would
    necessarily remain the same after return.  Networks can be  reactivated
    and established.  Dr Schuster gave evidence of single men and returnees
    from Iran forming their own  support  network  and  also  that  it  was
    possible for a single man to be included within  a  network  through  a
    single member of it, which may happen, for example, through employment.
     We also find it reasonable to assume that  it  may  happen  through  a
    member of a person's wider  community  or  tribe  given  Dr  Schuster's
    evidence that, it is inevitable that a person would make  contact  with
    someone from such a group on return to Kabul.


213. We do not find that it is an essential  requirement  for  a  person  to
    have an existing support network in Kabul for them to be able to access
    housing or  employment  there  and  that  conclusion  is  supported  Dr
    Giustozzi's evidence  and  by  the  UNHCR's  position  that  there  are
    possible exceptions to the need for a support network for single  able-
    bodied men and  married  couples  of  working  age  without  identified
    specific  vulnerabilities  in  urban  and  semi-urban  areas  with  the
    necessary infrastructure and livelihood opportunities to meet the basic
    necessities of life and are under effective  Government  control.   For
    the reasons set out below, we find that Kabul is such a place  where  a
    support network is not  essential,  and  that  internal  relocation  is
    generally reasonable without one for a single male in good health.


214. In relation to shelter/available accommodation, there are a variety  of
    types of shelter in use in Kabul city, together with an  unknown  level
    of homelessness (albeit there was no evidence before us  of  widespread
    homelessness or destitution).  The  types  of  accommodation  available
    range from  tents,  squatting  in  abandoned  buildings  and  makeshift
    accommodation in camps, to dormitory accommodation, renting a room, and
    small dwellings through to apartments and houses.  These range from the
    lowest to highest cost.  There is no  evidence  before  us  as  to  the
    breakdown of the proportion of people who live in  different  types  of
    accommodation or whether different types of accommodation are inhabited
    by particular groups.


215. The evidence shows that around 74% of people in  Kabul  currently  live
    in informal settlements which have very limited sanitation,  (only  50%
    of the population had access to improved sanitation facilities in 2013,
    which is likely to be lower now), drainage or access to  potable  water
    (only 20% of the total population had access to  piped  water  in  2013
    which is likely to be lower now but water can be purchased), but  those
    in informal settlements  are  likely  to  have  access  to  electricity
    (albeit with irregular supply, 95% of  the  population  had  access  to
    electricity in 2013, although that is also likely to be lower  now  due
    to  population  growth  in  the  city).   Those  informal   settlements
    inevitably cover a range of types of accommodation  but  share  similar
    standards  in  terms  of  associated  amenities   and   the   lack   of
    regulation/building control.


216. We find that apart from the minority who have  the  greatest  financial
    means to afford the  highest  priced  accommodation  in  central  urban
    areas/districts in Kabul, which offer the best available  accommodation
    and amenities,  the  vast  majority  of  residents  in  Kabul  live  in
    relatively poor accommodation with  less  access  to  basic  associated
    services.  It is reasonable to infer that  the  majority  of  returnees
    would settle in these informal settlements given that  they  cover  the
    majority of the accommodation in the city.  The  population  living  in
    informal settlements in Kabul far exceeds the number of  returnees  and
    IDPs in the city and also contains the urban poor.


217. For social and practical  reasons,  a  single  male  may  have  a  more
    limited choice of accommodation in Kabul than  families  because  there
    may be suspicion as to a single  male  living  near  family  groups  or
    women; although there is  some  evidence  of  single  rooms  and  other
    accommodation being available, as well  as  of  groups  of  single  men
    sharing  accommodation.   As  a  single  man,  a  person's   need   for
    accommodation would however be less than  for  a  larger  family  group
    which may to some extent mean that he is no worse off as a  single  man
    for this reason, even if some accommodation is  unavailable  for  those
    social reasons.


218. The further practical considerations for access to accommodation are  a
    person's financial resources (which  we  cover  below)  and  whether  a
    support network is needed.  For the reasons  set  out  above,  we  have
    concluded that a  support  network  is  not  essential  for  access  to
    accommodation of a comparable standard to that of the majority  of  the
    population in Kabul.


219. In conclusion, we do not find that a single  male  returning  to  Kabul
    would be unable to find some sort of accommodation which is  comparable
    to that available for the majority of the  population  in  Kabul,  even
    without support from a network in the city,


220. The accommodation situation is not dissimilar throughout  the  rest  of
    Afghanistan where the standard of accommodation  and  access  to  basic
    amenities like improved water sources and improved sanitation is  poor.
    In 2015, it was found that 85% of  urban  houses  in  Afghanistan  were
    classified as slums and only 45% had access to improved  water  sources
    in 2018.  We do not find that a single male returning  to  Kabul  would
    face accommodation conditions which  are  materially  worse  than  that
    available in other parts of Afghanistan.


221. In terms of access to other essential services, we  have  set  out  the
    evidence as to access to healthcare above and  there  was  no  specific
    evidence before us on  access  to  education,  which  is  not  directly
    relevant to an adult male returnee.  Although there is a basic  package
    of healthcare in Afghanistan, around a third of  the  total  population
    have inadequate access to it with significant barriers  and  inequality
    of access.  The position is better in Kabul  in  particular  and  urban
    areas generally rather than rural areas and is better for men than  for
    women, albeit around half of  all  residents  in  Kabul  cannot  afford
    medical treatment.  There is little to suggest that a returnee in  good
    health is any worse off or has any less access to healthcare  than  the
    majority of the population in Kabul, and the position is  better  there
    than in other parts of Afghanistan.


222. In terms of employment and economic conditions, we  take  into  account
    at the outset the  high  rates  of  unemployment  (as  well  as  under-
    employment) and the fact  that  over  a  third  of  the  population  in
    Afghanistan earn below the poverty line of 1150 Afghanis ($20) a month.
     Stable, higher quality/better paid employment is difficult  to  obtain
    in Kabul (or elsewhere) without appropriately placed connections that a
    person can rely on - the evidence  before  us  is  consistent  in  that
    regard, that jobs are not advertised, and employment not offered on the
    basis of merit or open competition  but  are  given  to  members  of  a
    family/those with connections.


223. However, Dr Schuster and Dr Giustozzi gave evidence of availability  of
    lower skilled jobs which did not require specific skills, experience or
    connections, including  day  labouring  or  portering  work  and  other
    occupations such as being a taxi driver.  This evidence  was  supported
    in the wider  documentary  evidence  before  us,  which  also  included
    reference to other low or unskilled labour such as jobs in the bazaars,
    in the construction industry and agricultural workers.  Work as  a  day
    labourer would be precarious, without guarantee of regular work and may
    only earn a person up to $4.40 a day.  However, in  the  context  of  a
    city where Dr Schuster's evidence was that one breadwinner would  often
    support up to fifteen members of his  extended  family,  a  single  man
    could survive much better on low or unskilled jobs, or  irregular  work
    as his needs would be far less.


224. There were limited examples before us of individuals who, for  economic
    reasons, may have been more susceptible to poor  employment  conditions
    or coercion (including working in return for accommodation or even with
    no salary, bonded labour, employment in hazardous  occupations  and  so
    on).  Ms Winterbotham accepted that there was no specific  evidence  of
    the latter in Kabul and in any event, younger boys rather  than  adults
    were more at risk.  Of the former, we are unable to conclude  from  the
    isolated examples that this is a widespread problem.


225. As a minor point, we do attach some  weight  to  the  fact  that  Kabul
    remains a destination of choice for returnees (for example, with almost
    a quarter of returnees from Pakistan in 2016 settling in  Kabul),  IDPs
    and economic migrants given that it has greater economic prospects than
    other areas.


226. In light of  our  findings  above  and  due  to  what  Ms  Winterbotham
    described as the complex non-linear reasons  why  people  joined  armed
    gangs, we do not find that it has been established that  there  is  any
    real risk that a single man will feel compelled to join an  armed  gang
    for economic survival in Kabul.


227. Finally, we take into account the evidence  about  possible  assistance
    on return to Kabul for those returned, voluntarily or forcibly.   There
    was before us a variety of evidence of different forms of support  from
    different organisations, much of which suffered from a lack of  take-up
    from individuals more than a  lack  of  available  resources.   We  are
    mindful that there was little firm evidence  of  what  support  was  in
    reality being provided to returnees (and how that differed, if at  all,
    between voluntary and forced returnees) and that  the  position  as  at
    August 2017 was specifically unclear as to IOMs continuing  involvement
    or not in the provision of the  main  packages  of  support.   However,
    overall, we find  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  before  us  to
    establish that there is a basic level of support, referred to  by  some
    as  a  'parachute  package'  which  includes  the  offer  of  temporary
    accommodation, travel expenses and either cash on return or support in-
    kind for those with a plan to establish themselves in Kabul.  Even  if,
    on Dr Schuster's evidence, this may only last  a  person  four  to  six
    weeks (or less if not astute or lack knowledge of local  prices),  that
    places a returnee from the United Kingdom in  a  better  position  than
    many other returnees (for example those from Iran  in  particular)  and
    IDPs.  This additional, albeit limited support, makes a material,  even
    if only marginal, difference to the reasonableness of return  to  Kabul
    for a single healthy male.


228. Overall, although the economic conditions in Kabul are  poor,  we  find
    that those conditions affect the urban poor as much  as  returnees  and
    IDPs and that together, these groups likely account for the majority of
    the population  in  Kabul  (in  particular  taking  into  account  what
    information there is as to unemployment  and  under-employment  in  the
    context of the economy as a whole).  We find that there are  livelihood
    opportunities available for single men in  good  health  on  return  to
    Kabul such that there is no real likelihood that they would  be  forced
    to turn to crime, be subject to exploitative work or join an armed AGE.


229. We find that  if  anything,  the  economic  conditions  in  Kabul,  the
    capital city in which there are greater employment  opportunities  than
    other, particularly  rural  areas,  are  better  than  other  parts  of
    Afghanistan.

230.  Our  findings  above  show  that  it  is  not  generally   unsafe   or
    unreasonable for a single healthy man to internally relocate to  Kabul.
    However, we emphasise that  a  case-by-case  consideration  of  whether
    internal relocation is reasonable for a particular person  is  required
    by Article 8 of the Qualification Directive  and  domestic  authorities
    including Januzi and AH (Sudan).  When doing so, we consider that there
    are a number of specific factors which may be relevant to bear in mind.
      These  include,  individually  as  well  as  cumulatively  (including
    consideration that the  strength  of  one  factor  may  counteract  and
    balance the weakness of another factor):


          i) Age, including the age at which a person left Afghanistan.


         ii) Nature and quality of connections to Kabul and/or  Afghanistan.


        iii) Physical and mental health.


         iv) Language, education and vocational and skills.


231. We consider age as a relevant factor given that we have  not  seen  any
    reason or evidential basis to depart from the specific  guidance  given
    in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016, which was
    supported in evidence before us as to greater risk to or  vulnerability
    of minors.  There is no bright line rule at the age of 18 when a person
    in the United Kingdom is considered to be an adult (there are different
    views as to becoming an adult and in particular as to achieving manhood
    in Afghan society which is not specifically linked to age but  more  to
    marital status) where such issues fall  away  overnight  but  are  more
    likely to gradually diminish.


232. We also consider the age at which  a  person  left  Afghanistan  to  be
    relevant as to whether this included  their  formative  years.   It  is
    reasonable to infer that the older a person is  when  they  leave,  the
    more likely they are to  be  familiar  with,  for  example,  employment
    opportunities and living independently.


233. Although we find that it is reasonable for a person without  a  support
    network or specific connections in Kabul or elsewhere in Afghanistan to
    internally relocate to Kabul, a person will be in a  more  advantageous
    position if they do have such connections depending on where they  are,
    the financial resources of such people  and  their  status/connections.
    We have in mind that the availability of a support network may  counter
    a particular vulnerability of an individual on return.


234. In our conclusions, we refer  throughout  to  a  single  male  in  good
    health as this is the primary group of people  under  consideration  in
    this appeal and reflects the position of this particular Appellant.  It
    is uncontroversial that a person who is in good health or fit and  able
    is likely to have better employment prospects, particularly  given  the
    availability of low or unskilled jobs involving manual labour in Kabul.
     We were not provided with any specific evidence of the  likely  impact
    of poor physical or mental health on the safety  or  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation to Kabul but consider it reasonable to  infer  that
    this could be relevant to the issue and the specific situation  of  the
    individual would need to be carefully considered.


235. Finally, it is also reasonable to infer that  a  person  who  speaks  a
    local language in Kabul would be in a stronger position than  a  person
    who does not, and that educational and  vocational  skills  would  also
    strengthen a person's ability to support himself in Kabul  with  better
    employment prospects.



Previous Country Guidance

236. Given the very specific question posed  for  country  guidance  in  the
    present case, whether the current situation in Kabul is such  that  the
    guidance given in AK needs revision in the context of consideration  of
    internal relocation, it is necessary for us to specify what effects, if
    any, our decision has on AK and on other country guidance pertaining to
    Afghanistan.


237. Ms Naik invited us to find that the guidance  on  whether  the  Article
    15(c) threshold is met in Kabul contained in AK is  no  longer  binding
    and until further country guidance is given on  the  matter,  Tribunals
    should decide this point on a case-by-case basis on the evidence before
    them.  The submission relied upon (i) paragraphs 12.2 and 12.4  of  the
    Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-
    Tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal (issued by Lord Justice  Carnwath,
    Senior President of the Tribunals in February 2010 and amended  by  Sir
    Jeremy Sullivan in the  same  capacity  in  November  2014);  (ii)  the
    significant passage of time since AK; and (iii) the limitation  of  the
    issues in this appeal to internal relocation  only  which  is  distinct
    from the separate legal  question  as  to  eligibility  for  subsidiary
    protection under the Qualification Directive.


238. We do not accept Ms Naik's submission.  The mere fact of a  passage  of
    time does not of itself render country guidance  no  longer  applicable
    and the fact that in the case before us, the  Appellant  chose  not  to
    rely on Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive as a reason why he
    could not return to Kabul (despite this being the main  thrust  of  his
    application for permission to appeal and  the  error  of  law  decision
    which followed) means that we have not been expressly addressed on  the
    point by the Appellant to support any change to the guidance  given  in
    AK on this point.  To the contrary, the evidence  that  was  before  us
    which may be relevant to the separate legal question of the eligibility
    of subsidiary protection, was consistent with the findings and  country
    guidance given in AK that the level of indiscriminate violence in Kabul
    is not at such a high level as to mean  that,  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive,  a  civilian,  solely  by
    being present in the country, faces a real  risk  which  threatens  his
    life or  person.   In  any  event,  in  accordance  with  the  Practice
    Directions referred to  above,  a  Tribunal  may  depart  from  country
    guidance if there is  sufficient  credible  fresh  evidence  before  it
    relevant to the issue to be determined that was not considered.


239. The qualification in AK in relation  to  certain  categories  of  women
    when considering the question of internal relocation also  remains,  as
    the evidence before us focused on single males and not the position  of
    women.  In any event, this continues to be the Respondent's position as
    set out in her "Country Policy  and  Information  Note  -  Afghanistan:
    Security and Humanitarian Situation" (August 2017), which itself refers
    to the Respondent's "Impact on  women  and  children  and  the  country
    policy and information  note  on  Afghanistan:  Women  fearing  gender-
    based/violence)" to the same effect.


240. Similarly, we have not seen any reason or evidential  basis  to  depart
    from  the  specific  guidance  given  in   AA   (unattended   children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016.


Summary of general conclusions

241. We set out below in summary, the  country  guidance  from  the  general
    conclusions set out above.


    Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban


     i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a
        senior government or security services official, or a spy)  is  not
        at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.


    Internal relocation to Kabul


    ii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul
        as well as the difficulties faced by the  population  living  there
        (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other returnees,  which
        are not dissimilar to the conditions  faced  throughout  may  other
        parts of Afghanistan); it will not, in general be  unreasonable  or
        unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health to relocate  to
        Kabul even if he does not have any specific connections or  support
        network in Kabul.


   iii) However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual  applicant
        must be taken into account in the  context  of  conditions  in  the
        place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
        of  support  network/connections  with   Kabul/Afghanistan,   their
        physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,  education  and
        vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
        the general position set out above.


    iv) A person with a support network or specific connections in Kabul is
        likely to be in a more advantageous position on return,  which  may
        counter a particular vulnerability of an individual on return.


     v) Although Kabul suffered the highest number of  civilian  casualties
        (in the latest UNAMA figures from 2017) and the number of  security
        incidents is increasing, the proportion of the population  directly
        affected by the security situation is tiny.  The  current  security
        situation in Kabul is not at such a level  as  to  render  internal
        relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.


    Previous Country Guidance


    vi) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive remains unaffected by this decision.


   vii) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the  (un)reasonableness  of  internal
        relocation  to  Kabul  (and  other  potential  places  of  internal
        relocation) for certain categories of women remains  unaffected  by
        this decision.


  viii) The country guidance in AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
        [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also remains unaffected by this decision.


Findings and reasons on the Appellant's claim

242. The Appellant was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal to be at risk  in
    his home area from the Taliban following events in  2006/2007  and  his
    primary case  on  risk  of  return  now  (as  opposed  to  on  internal
    relocation which does not arise if he is at risk in Kabul) is  fear  of
    the Taliban in Kabul.

243. In terms of this Appellant,  Dr  Giustozzi  concluded  in  his  written
    report that if it is accepted that he was wanted by the  Taliban,  that
    risk would be in his home area and in Kabul and that the  risk  of  him
    being targeted would depend on how exposed he would be (for example  by
    giving  information  about  himself  for  the  purposes  of   obtaining
    references for employment and accommodation).  As the Taliban  are  not
    authorised by their own rules to kill  relatives  of  people  they  had
    previously targeted, Dr Giustozzi considered that  the  only  basis  on
    which the Appellant could have been included on the blacklist is  as  a
    deserter.  It was assumed that there would be a concern by the  Taliban
    that the Appellant would be hostile to them because they had killed his
    father and brother (to seek revenge in accordance with  the  traditions
    of blood feuds) and had sought to conscript him into the Taliban  as  a
    ruse to lay the conditions for him to flee and become a deserter.


244. However, in oral evidence, Dr Giustozzi  stated  both  that  the  local
    Taliban would no longer have any interest in the Appellant in his  home
    area (although there may be some continuing  interest  in  him  on  the
    blacklist as a deserter) and  that  the  Appellant  would  only  be  of
    negligible importance to the  Taliban  outside  of  his  home  village.
    Neither conclusion provides any support for the Appellant's claim  that
    he would be at risk on return now and are wholly inconsistent with  the
    written conclusions  in  Dr  Giustozzi's  report.   We  find  his  oral
    evidence, following much more detailed examination of his position  and
    reasons for it, to be the true opinion which we attach weight to.


245. In any event, as to the  possibility  that  the  Appellant  may  be  of
    interest as a deserter, Dr Giustozzi did not know whether the Appellant
    was on the blacklist (assuming the blacklist does exist)  and  did  not
    know whether he had been  sentenced  or  was  or  considered  to  be  a
    deserter.  There is nothing in the Appellant's claim or  evidence  from
    his screening interview, asylum interview, written statements  or  oral
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which lends any  weight  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's theory that he was essentially set up as a  deserter  as  a
    reason to make him a legitimate target.


246. The Appellant's claim  is  that  after  his  father  and  brother  were
    killed, he was kidnapped by the Taliban and was held by them as part of
    a group of about 20 people.  After an attack on the  Taliban  where  he
    was being held, he managed, with others, to escape and then  ultimately
    to flee Afghanistan with the assistance of his uncle (whom the  Taliban
    visited twice  looking  for  the  Appellant,  but  it  has  never  been
    suggested that this was anything more than a search for him).   It  has
    never been claimed that the Taliban sought to conscript the  Appellant,
    sent him any warnings, letters or any sentence for  failure  to  comply
    with the same or in fact any  sentence  on  any  other  basis,  despite
    knowing the addresses where the Appellant and his uncle lived.  On  his
    own account  and  in  accordance  with  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence,  the
    Appellant would not obviously be a target for the Taliban  at  all  and
    would not fit the criteria for inclusion on the blacklist (even  if  it
    existed).


247. In the alternative, even if the Appellant  has  been  identified  as  a
    target (whether or not by inclusion on the blacklist if it  exists)  by
    the Taliban, at most he is a low-level target at the bottom end of  the
    list of priorities for the Taliban whose only motive for  pursuing  him
    as such would be as one of a number of kills rather than because of his
    identity or risk posed to the Taliban per se.  For the reasons set  out
    above in the general findings, that does not give rise to any real risk
    to the Appellant from the Taliban in Kabul.


248. The Appellant also claims in the alternative that he would be  at  risk
    on return to Kabul as a member of a particular social group,  a  person
    who has been 'Westernised', however for the reasons set  out  above  in
    the general findings, there is no real risk to the Appellant  as  such.
    Nor is there any other reason why the Appellant would be at  risk  from
    anyone else in Kabul, either the state authorities (as found by  First-
    tier Tribunal Bradshaw whose findings  on  this  point  have  not  been
    challenged and stand) or AGEs (either directly or through any  kind  of
    forced recruitment by them).


249. The next issue is then whether it is reasonable for  the  Appellant  to
    internally relocate to Kabul.  The Appellant is a  healthy  adult  male
    who has spent the majority of his life in Afghanistan, going to  school
    there and arriving in the United Kingdom at the age of 22.   He  speaks
    Pashto and has no specific or identified vulnerabilities.  He has  been
    out of Afghanistan now for nine and a half years but left when  he  was
    an adult.  The Appellant states that he has no contact with his  family
    in Afghanistan (mother, brother or uncle)  and  it  is  unknown  as  to
    whether he would be able to re-establish contact with them on return if
    he chose to do so.   In  these  circumstances,  based  on  our  general
    conclusions set out above, we do not find that it would be unreasonable
    or unduly harsh for the Appellant to internally relocate to Kabul.   He
    would be returning to living and humanitarian conditions in Kabul which
    affect the majority of  the  population  and  where  he  could  live  a
    relatively normal life without undue hardship.  Whilst we  accept  that
    conditions and prospects in Kabul, and also in  Afghanistan  generally,
    are very poor, there is no reason that this Appellant would be any less
    able than any other to bear those conditions, even taking into  account
    past treatment in his home area.  The  current  security  situation  in
    Kabul is not such as to render internal relocation  there  unreasonably
    or unduly harsh.


250.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is  therefore  dismissed   on   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds and also on human rights grounds  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Article 8


251. Immediately prior to the final day  of  hearing  in  this  appeal,  the
    Appellant sought to submit that his removal to Kabul would be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, being a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for  private  life  contrary  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Further, he specifically  relied  on  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules, that there would be "very  significant
    obstacles to his integration" in Kabul.  However, although Article 8 of
    the ECHR was raised in the Appellant's original grounds  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal  on  this  basis  dismissed,  no
    permission to appeal was sought on these grounds either to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, nor to the Upper Tribunal and permission to  appeal  was
    not granted on such grounds.  In fact, the Appellant expressly did  not
    rely on private life under the Immigration Rules or under Article 8  of
    the ECHR at any point before the Upper Tribunal.  Only when prompted at
    the oral hearing did Counsel for the Appellant  accept  this  and  then
    indicated that the Appellant would need  to  make  an  application  for
    permission to amend grounds of appeal to enable this to be argued.


252. We refused to grant permission to allow  the  Appellant  to  amend  his
    grounds of appeal on a new human rights ground at this very late  stage
    of proceedings, where no proper basis was made  out  for  such  a  late
    request and where the Respondent had had no opportunity to consider  or
    respond.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law for the reasons set out  in  the  decision
of UTJ O'Connor following the hearing on 27 April  2017  (Appendix  C).   As
such it was necessary for him to set aside the decision.

The decision is re-made.  The Appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum,
humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                 Date         19th March 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

    APPENDIX A - SCHEDULE OF BACKGROUND AND EXPERT EVIDENCE


                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal
|Source             |Document (including hyperlink where |Date              |
|                   |available)                          |                  |
|European Asylum    |Country of Origin Information       |22 December 2017  |
|Support Office     |Report, Afghanistan - Security      |                  |
|(EASO)             |Situation                           |                  |
|European Asylum    |Country of Origin Information       |12 December 2017  |
|Support Office     |Report, Afghanistan - Individuals   |                  |
|(EASO)             |targeted by armed actors in the     |                  |
|                   |conflict                            |                  |
|European Asylum    |Country of Origin Information       |12 December 2017  |
|Support Office     |Report, Afghanistan - Individuals   |                  |
|(EASO)             |targeted under societal and legal   |                  |
|                   |norms                               |                  |
|United Nations     |Humanitarian Needs Overview 2018,   |December 2017     |
|Office for the     |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|Coordination of    |                                    |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|TOLO News          |Five Civilians Wounded in Kabul     |17 November 2017  |
|                   |Suicide Attack                      |                  |
|TOLO News          |Three killed in IED Blast in Kabul  |17 November 2017  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Suicide attack in Kabul city leaves |16 November 2017  |
|News Agency        |several dead, wounded               |                  |
|UNAMA              |UNAMA condemns killing of civilians |16 November 2017  |
|                   |in Kabul suicide attack             |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Attack on TV shows Taliban, ISIS    |8 November 2017   |
|News Agency        |opposition to freedom of speech:    |                  |
|                   |Dostum                              |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Coordinated suicide attack on TV    |7 November 2017   |
|News Agency        |Station in Kabul, causalities feared|                  |
|                   |                                    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Ghani orders probe as deadly suicide|1 November 2017   |
|News Agency        |attack hits diplomatic part of Kabul|                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Several feared dead, wounded as     |31 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |suicide attack rocks Kabul          |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|15 Army cadets killed in Kabul      |21 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |suicide attack                      |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Dostum slams security officials for |21 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |failures after deadly mosque        |                  |
|                   |bombings                            |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|No casualties reported in Kabul     |21 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |rocket attack                       |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Blast near University in Kabul      |21 October 2017   |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Kabul mosque bombing: Death toll    |21 October 2017   |
|                   |shoots to 85                        |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Statement of the Secretary-General's|21 October 2017   |
|Mission in         |Special Representative for          |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|Afghanistan on Fridays mosque       |                  |
|                   |attacks                             |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan| Over 30 killed as suicide bomber   |20 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |attacks mosque in Kabul city        |                  |
|IRIN               |Six charts that show Afghanistan's  |18 October 2017   |
|                   |deepening insecurity                |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|1 Killed, 3 wounded in grenade      |18 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |attacks in Kabul city               |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion leaves driver a vehicle   |17 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |dead in Kabul city                  |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|ACJC police officer shot dead by    |16 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |gunmen in Kabul City                |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion target police vehicle in  |14 October 2017   |
|News Agency        |Kabul City, causalities feared      |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan|12 October 2017   |
|Mission in         |(UNAMA), Quarterly report on the    |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|protection of civilians in armed    |                  |
|                   |conflict                            |                  |
|Amnesty            |Forced back to danger:              |5 October 2017    |
|International      |Asylum-seekers returned from Europe |                  |
|                   |to Afghanistan                      |                  |
|Afghan News        |5 Killed, 20 injured in Kabul mosque|29 September 2017 |
|                   |attack                              |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion leaves 19  dead, wounded  |28 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |in Kabul City                       |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Malfunctioning US missile caused    |28 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |causalities in the airstrike during |                  |
|                   |Kabul Attack                        |                  |
|Afghanistan USA    |4 killed, 11 injured in Kabul       |27 September 2017 |
|                   |Airport attack during Mattis        |                  |
|                   |official visit                      |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Several rockets land near Kabul     |27 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |international airport               |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|3 Taliban men firing rockets at     |27 September 2017 |
|                   |Kabul airport killed                |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Suicide attack in Kabul city leaves |24 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |civilians wounded                   |                  |
|GOV.UK             |Get help to return home if you're a |21 September 2017 |
|                   |migrant in the UK                   |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Taliban rejects groups involvement  |14 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |in explosion near Kabul Stadium     |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion near cricket board in     |13 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |Kabul                               |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|2 held as deadly clash leaves 7     |10 September 2017 |
|News Agency        |dead, wounded in Kabul city         |                  |
|Asylos             |Afghanistan: Situation of young male|8 September 2017  |
|                   |'Westernised' returnees to Kabul    |                  |
|United Nations     |Afghanistan - Conflict Induced      |3 September 2017  |
|Office for the     |Displacements in 2017, as of 03     |                  |
|Coordination of    |September 2017                      |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Khaama press Afghan News Agency MoI |1 September 2017  |
|News Agency        |confirms involvement of Ulema       |                  |
|                   |Council chiefs son in deadly Kabul  |                  |
|                   |wedding clash                       |                  |
|National Returns   | Voluntary Returns Service          |September 2017    |
|Command            |(internal)                          |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Suicide attack inflicts casualties  |29 August 2017    |
|News Agency        |in Kabul City                       |                  |
|The Independent    |Kabul explosion Suicide bombing     |29 August 2017    |
|                   |kills at least five in blast near US|                  |
|                   |Embassy in Afghanistan's capital    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Kabul mosque attack death toll rises|26 August 2017    |
|News Agency        |to over 30, more than 40 wounded    |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns killing of civilians |26 August 2017    |
|Mission in         |in Kabul mosque attack              |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Pajhwok Afghan News Five people hurt|25 August 2017    |
|                   |in Kabul magnetic bomb blast        |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul City leaves one  |24 August 2017    |
|News Agency        |wounded                             |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Grenade attack in Kabul City leaves |23 August 2017    |
|News Agency        |at least 7 wounded                  |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Blast leaves 3 injured in Kabul     |13 August 2017    |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Suicide attack leaves one dead in   |9 August 2017     |
|News Agency        |Kabul city                          |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News| 3 police injured in Kabul blast    |9 August 2017     |
|Khaama Press Afghan| Explosion targets security vehicle |7 August 2017     |
|News Agency        |in Kabul city                       |                  |
|United Nations     |Afghanistan - Conflict Induced      |6 August 2017     |
|Office for the     |Displacements in 2017, as of 6      |                  |
|Coordination of    |August 2017                         |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion targets civilian vehicle  |4 August 2017     |
|News Agency        |in Kabul City                       |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion inflicts causalities to   |3 August 2017     |
|News Agency        |civilians in Kabul city             |                  |
|European Asylum    |Country of Origin Information Report|August 2017       |
|Support Office     |Afghanistan Key socio-economic, and |                  |
|(EASO)             |mobility in Kabul City, Mazar-e     |                  |
|                   |Sharif, and Herat City              |                  |
|Home Office        |Country Policy and Information Note |August 2017       |
|                   |- Afghanistan: Security and         |                  |
|                   |humanitarian situation              |                  |
|Emily Winterbotham |Expert Report                       |31 July 2017      |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Khaama Press Afghan News Agency     |31 July 2017      |
|News Agency        |clash among police forces and armed |                  |
|                   |robbers in Kabul city               |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns attack on Iraqi      |31 July 2017      |
|Mission in         |embassy in Kabul                    |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Dr Schuster        |Expert Report                       |26 July 2017      |
|CNN                |31 dead in Kabul car bomb attack    |25 July 2017      |
|                   |claimed by Taliban                  |                  |
|BBC                |Kabul suicide car bomb: 30 killed in|24 July 2017      |
|                   |Afghan capital                      |                  |
|Guardian,          |Afghanistan: dozens dead in Kabul   |24 July 2017      |
|                   |bombing targeting government workers|                  |
|Refworld           |UN condemns attack on civilians in  |24 July 2017      |
|Afghanistan:       |Kabul                               |                  |
|Dr Giustozzi       |Expert Report                       |20 July 2017      |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Khaama Press Afghan News Agency Six |20 July 2017      |
|News Agency        |rockets land near Sayyaf's residence|                  |
|                   |in Kabul                            |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Khaama Press Afghan News Agency     |17 July 2017      |
|News Agency        |Bride killed, 4 others wounded in   |                  |
|                   |Kabul firing involving Mohaqiq's    |                  |
|                   |guards                              |                  |
|International      |Displacement Tracking Matrix        |7 July 2017       |
|Organization for   |Baseline Mobility Assessment,       |                  |
|Migration (IOM)    |Summary Results Afghanistan June    |                  |
|                   |2017                                |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Pajhwok, 2 civilians killed, 1      |5 July 2017       |
|                   |injured as rockets hit              |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Khaama Press Afghan News Agency     |4 July 2017       |
|News Agency        |Senior police officer killed in     |                  |
|                   |Kabul explosion                     |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |July 2017         |
|Mission in         |conflict - Midyear report 2017      |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|United Nations     |Humanitarian Bulletin Afghanistan   |30 June 2017      |
|Office for the     |Issue 65                            |                  |
|Coordination of    |                                    |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|The Guardian       |'Before my brother died, I had      |26 June 2017      |
|                   |dreams': the Kabul attack that      |                  |
|                   |unravelled a family                 |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul city leaves one  |21 June 2017      |
|News Agency        |wounded                             |                  |
|BBC                |Kabul blast: Protester killed near  |20 June 2017      |
|                   |bomb site                           |                  |
|New York Times     |7 US Soldiers Wounded in Insider    |17 June 2017      |
|                   |Attack in Afghanistan               |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|American national kidnapped in Kabul|16 June 2017      |
|News Agency        |city                                |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |Four Killed In Attack On Shi'ite    |15 June 2017      |
|                   |Mosque In Kabul Claimed By Islamic  |                  |
|                   |State                               |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Clash in Kabul city leaves armed    |14 June 2017      |
|News Agency        |robber dead                         |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion targets vehicle in Kabul, |14 June 2017      |
|News Agency        |no casualties reported: officials   |                  |
|CNN                |Kabul bombing: Death toll jumps to  |6 June 2017       |
|                   |150, one week after attack          |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|No causalities or damage as rocket  |6 June 2017       |
|News Agency        |lands in Kabul city                 |                  |
|Afghanistan        |A Black Week in Kabul: Terror and   |4 June 2017       |
|Analysts Network   |protests                            |                  |
|BBC                |Kabul blast: Deadly explosions at   |3 June 2017       |
|                   |protest victim's funeral            |                  |
|BBC                |Kabul bomb: Protesters shot dead at |2 June 2017       |
|                   |march in Afghan capital             |                  |
|US Department of   |Trafficking in Persons Report 2017  |June 2017         |
|State              |(excerpt)                           |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns indiscriminate       |31 May 2017       |
|Mission in         |killing in Afghan capital           |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Ex-Afghan MP wounded in an attack in|24 May 2017       |
|News Agency        |Kabul City                          |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Situation in Afghanistan may        |24 May 2017       |
|                   |deteriorate in 2018: Coats          |                  |
|BBC                |German woman killed and Afghan guard|21 May 2017       |
|                   |beheaded in Kabul                   |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Militants launch coordinated attack |20 May 2017       |
|News Agency        |on Kabul Bank in Gardez             |                  |
|Bjelica and Rutting|Voluntary and Forced Returns to     |19 May 2017       |
|/ Afghanistan      |Afghanistan in 2016/17- Trends,     |                  |
|Analysts Network   |statistics and experiences          |                  |
|TOLO News          |Residents Protest Against 'Rise' In |17 May 2017       |
|                   |Crime In Kabul City                 |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|No Causalities reported in Kabul    |15 May 2017       |
|News Agency        |explosion: Danish                   |                  |
|BBC                |Kabul bomb attack targeting NATO    |3 May 2017        |
|                   |convoy kills eight                  |                  |
|NewsMax            |Report: Hundreds of Millions being  |21 April 2017     |
|                   |wasted in Afghanistan Fraud         |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|No casualties reported in Kabul City|20 April 2017     |
|News Agency        |explosion: MoI                      |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|2 people wounded in an explosion in |17 April 2017     |
|News Agency        |Kabul city                          |                  |
|Al Jazeera         |Suicide bomb attack in heart of     |12 April 2017     |
|                   |Kabul kills five                    |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |IS Claims Suicide Bombing In Kabul, |12 April 2017     |
|                   |Five Dead                           |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Afghan army soldier shot dead in    |11 April 2017     |
|News Agency        |Kabul city                          |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Sticky bomb on traffic police van   |11 April 2017     |
|                   |goes off in Kabul                   |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|2 anti-corruption judicial centre   |10 April 2017     |
|News Agency        |employees shot dead in Kabul        |                  |
|Afghanistan Times  |262 police personal arrested on     |6 April 2017      |
|                   |different charges including         |                  |
|                   |corruption                          |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Treatment of Conflict-Related       |April 2017        |
|Mission in         |Detainees: Implementation of        |                  |
|Afghanistan        |Afghanistan's National Plan on the  |                  |
|(UNAMA)/ OHCHR     |Elimination of Torture              |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|1 killed, 2 wounded in gunmen firing|18 March 2017     |
|News Agency        |in Kabul City                       |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|2 policemen shot dead by unknown    |14 March 2017     |
|News Agency        |gunmen in Kabul city                |                  |
|Euronews           |Afghanistan blast: one dead and     |13 March 2017     |
|                   |nearly 20 injured in deadly minibus |                  |
|                   |explosion                           |                  |
|VOA News           |Afghan Corruption Watchdog Warns of |11 March 2017     |
|                   |Graft's Consequences                |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |Death Toll In Kabul Military        |9 March 2017      |
|                   |Hospital Attack Rises To 49         |                  |
|The Guardian       |Isis militants disguised as doctors |8 March 2017      |
|                   |kill 38 in Kabul hospital attack    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul leave one person |7 March 2017      |
|News Agency        |dead                                |                  |
|Al Jazeera         |Taliban claims deadly Kabul attacks |2 March 2017      |
|AP News            |Taliban suicide attacks, shootout   |2 March 2017      |
|                   |kill 16 in Afghan                   |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Kabul attacks causalities toll rise |2 March 2017      |
|News Agency        |to 22 dead, 120 wounded             |                  |
|International      |Life After Return: Undocumented     |March 2017        |
|Organization for   |Returnees (from UNOCHA, Humanitarian|                  |
|Migration (IOM)    |Bulletin - Afghanistan,  Issue 61,  |                  |
|                   |01-28 February 17)                  |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Policeman guns down one civilian,   |20 February 2017  |
|                   |wounds another                      |                  |
|Human Rights Watch |Pakistan coercion, UN complicity:   |13 February 2017  |
|                   |The Mass Forced Return of Afghan    |                  |
|                   |Refugees                            |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in defence ministry in    |11 February 2017  |
|News Agency        |Kabul, no causalities reported      |                  |
|Foreign and        |Human Rights Priority Country status|8 February 2017   |
|Commonwealth Office|report: July to December 2016       |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns attack outside       |8 February 2017   |
|Mission in         |Supreme Court in Kabul              |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|United Nations High|Tough choices for Afghan refugees   |3 February 2017   |
|Commissioner for   |returning home after years in exile |                  |
|Refugees (UNHCR)   |                                    |                  |
|Washington Post    |Afghan government controls just 57  |2 February 2017   |
|                   |percent of its territory, US        |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |February 2017     |
|Mission in         |conflict - Annual report 2016       |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|International      |Return of Afghan Refugees to        |26 January 2017   |
|Monetary Fund      |Afghanistan Surges as Country Copes |                  |
|                   |to Rebuild                          |                  |
|United Nations in  |Population Movement Bulletin - issue|26 January 2017   |
|Afghanistan        |8                                   |                  |
|DW News            |Afghan migrant returns as a stranger|25 January 2017   |
|                   |to a deteriorating                  |                  |
|Transparency       |Corruption Perceptions Index 2016   |25 January 2017   |
|International      |                                    |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|In harsh winter, Kabul's tent       |24 January 2017   |
|                   |dwellers struggle to survive        |                  |
|TOLO News          |US  Stops Salaries Of 30,000 Ghost  |20 January 2017   |
|                   |Soldiers                            |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Sticky bomb injures 2 police        |18 January 2017   |
|                   |officers in Kabul                   |                  |
|IRIN               |Afghanistan now a 'continual        |10 January 2017   |
|                   |emergency', as war drives record    |                  |
|                   |numbers from their homes            |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Gunmen open fire on cricketer       |8 January 2017    |
|News Agency        |Shapoor Zadran in Kabul             |                  |
|Amnesty            |Afghanistan 2016/17                 |2017              |
|International      |                                    |                  |
|Human Rights Watch |Afghanistan, Events of 2016         |2017              |
|US Department of   |Afghanistan 2016 Human Rights Report|2017              |
|State              |                                    |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Wounded bride: All my dreams        |31 December 2016  |
|                   |shattered                           |                  |
|Winterbotham and   |Making the Case for Afghanistan: Why|29 December 2016  |
|Quentin            |Now Is Not the Time to Abandon the  |                  |
|                   |Country                             |                  |
|Bjelica /          |Over Half a Million Afghans Flee    |28 December 2016  |
|Afghanistan        |Conflict in 2016: A look at the IDP |                  |
|Analysts Network   |statistics                          |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |Afghan Lawmaker Injured In Kabul    |28 December 2016  |
|                   |Bomb Attack                         |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |Gunmen Attack Ex-Taliban Official's |24 December 2016  |
|                   |Home In Kabul                       |                  |
|BBC                |Afghanistan Taliban: Eight dead in  |22 December 2016  |
|                   |attack on MP's house                |                  |
|Reuters            |Taliban claim attack on house of    |21 December 2016  |
|                   |Afghan member of parliament         |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Shooting in Kabul airport leave a   |14 December 2016  |
|News Agency        |foreigner dead                      |                  |
|Asia Foundation    |A Survey of the Afghan People -     |7 December 2016   |
|                   |Afghanistan in 2016 (excerpts)      |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Magnetic bomb explosion leaves 3    |2 December 2016   |
|News Agency        |wounded in Kabul City               |                  |
|Home Office        |Country Policy and Information Note |December 2016     |
|                   |- Afghanistan: Fear of              |                  |
|                   |anti-government elements (AGEs)     |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Bomb attached to Lexus vehicle goes |23 November 2016  |
|                   |off in Kabul                        |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Social activist Omarkhel attacked,  |20 November 2016  |
|                   |hospitalised                        |                  |
|The Seattle Times  |Afghan officials: Suicide bomber    |16 November 2016  |
|                   |kills 6 in Kabul                    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul leaves 1 dead    |15 November 2016  |
|News Agency        |                                    |                  |
|In These Times     |Inside Afghanistan's Internally     |15 November 2016  |
|                   |Displaced Person Camps              |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Man killed another wounded in blast |7 November 2016   |
|                   |outside Kabul mosque                |                  |
|New York Times     |Afghanistan Itself Is Now Taking In |4 November 2016   |
|                   |the Most Afghan Migrants            |                  |
|European Asylum    |Country of Origin Information       |November 2016     |
|Support Office     |Report: Afghanistan Security        |                  |
|(EASO)             |Situation (excerpts)                |                  |
|United Nations     |Afghanistan: 2017 Humanitarian Needs|November 2016     |
|Office for the     |Overview                            |                  |
|Coordination of    |                                    |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|Bjelica /          |Afghan Exodus: Can the Afghan       |31 October 2016   |
|Afghanistan        |government deal with more returnees |                  |
|Analysts Network   |from Europe?                        |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul leaves 2         |29 October 2016   |
|News Agency        |soldiers, 3 civilians wounded       |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Driver wounded in bomb attack on ANA|23 October 2016   |
|                   |pick up                             |                  |
|World Justice      |Rule of Law Index 2016              |20 October 2016   |
|Project            |                                    |                  |
|BBC                |Two Americans killed at military    |19 October 2016   |
|                   |base in Afghanistan                 |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Taimani area of Kabul  |18 October 2016   |
|News Agency        |city                                |                  |
|Human Rights Watch |Afghanistan's Shia Hazara Suffer    |13 October 2016   |
|                   |Latest Atrocity - Insurgents'       |                  |
|                   |Increasing Threat to Embattled      |                  |
|                   |Minority                            |                  |
|The Guardian       |Gunmen kill 14 people in attack on  |11 October 2016   |
|                   |Shia Muslim shrine in Kabul         |                  |
|Reuters            |US watchdog questions money spent on|7 October 2016    |
|                   |Afghan 'ghost' soldiers             |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Suicide attack in Kabul leaves at   |5 October 2016    |
|News Agency        |least 4 civilians wounded           |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|20 injured as suicide bomber hits   |5 October 2016    |
|                   |mini bus in Kabul                   |                  |
|The Guardian       |Afghan exodus from Pakistan could be|4 October 2016    |
|                   |'catastrophic' without urgent aid   |                  |
|International      |The Economic Disaster Behind        |3 October 2016    |
|Crisis Group       |Afghanistan's Mounting Human Crisis |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|1 killed, 2 wounded in Kabul        |3 October 2016    |
|                   |explosion                           |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Suicide attack foiled in Kabul;     |26 September 2016 |
|                   |bomber shot dead                    |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul leaves one dead  |14 September 2016 |
|News Agency        |and another one wounded             |                  |
|RahaPress          |US embassy, NATO base in Kabul      |12 September 2016 |
|                   |placed on brief lockdown            |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Magnetic Bomb hits ANA vehicle: no  |9 September 2016  |
|                   |causalities                         |                  |
|Daily Mail         |Global charity attacked in deadly   |6 September 2016  |
|                   |wave of Kabul violence              |                  |
|Washington Post    |Kabul shaken by attacks on          |6 September 2016  |
|                   |international charity and Defence   |                  |
|                   |Ministry                            |                  |
|CNN                |Third bomb strikes Kabul,           |5 September 2016  |
|                   |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|New York Times     |Coordinated Bombs in Kabul Kill     |5 September 2016  |
|                   |Senior Afghan Officials at Defence  |                  |
|                   |Ministry                            |                  |
|European Asylum    |Afghanistan Recruitment by armed    |September 2016    |
|Support Office     |groups                              |                  |
|(EASO)             |                                    |                  |
|1TVNews            |Afghan officials' collaboration with|31 August 2016    |
|                   |Taliban fuelling war in Helmand     |                  |
|Mubarak, Wagner et |'Hygienic practices and diarrheal   |31 August 2016    |
|al.                |illness among persons living in     |                  |
|                   |at-risk settings in Kabul,          |                  |
|                   |Afghanistan: a cross-sectional      |                  |
|                   |study', BMC Infectious Diseases     |                  |
|                   |(2016)                              |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul leaves one       |27 August 2016    |
|News Agency        |wounded                             |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|1 soldier killed, another wounded in|20 August 2016    |
|                   |Kabul blast                         |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|ANA officer, civilian wounded in    |15 August 2016    |
|                   |Kabul bomb attack                   |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Kabul leaves 1 dead, 3 |8 August 2016     |
|News Agency        |others wounded                      |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|1 ANA soldier killed, 3 wounded in  |8 August 2016     |
|                   |Kabul bomb attack                   |                  |
|Daily Mail         |Taliban truck bomb blasts hotel for |1 August 2016     |
|                   |foreigners                          |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Ex-Afghan MP shot dead by unknown   |31 July 2016      |
|News Agency        |gunmen in Kabul city                |                  |
|Ariana News        |Two people killed, 2 injured in     |30 July 2016      |
|                   |Kabul blast                         |                  |
|VOA News           |Afghan IDPs Suffering Due to        |29 July 2016      |
|                   |Government Inaction, Donor Fatigue  |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|One wounded in Kabul magnetic bomb  |28 July 2016      |
|News Agency        |explosion                           |                  |
|Daily Outlook      |Kabul Facing Severe Water Crisis    |10 July 2016      |
|Home Office        |Country Information and Guidance -  |July 2016         |
|                   |Afghanistan: Security and           |                  |
|                   |humanitarian situation              |                  |
|Integrity Watch    |Combating Corruption in Afghan      |July 2016         |
|                   |Defence and Security Sector         |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |July 2016         |
|Mission in         |conflict - Midyear report 2016      |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Statement by Tadamichi Yamamoto     |30 June 2016      |
|Mission in         |condemning the attack targeting     |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|Afghan National Police in Kabul     |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Rashidan district court judge gunned|28 June 2016      |
|                   |down in Kabul                       |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|Explosion in Wazir Akbar Khan Area  |23 June 2016      |
|News Agency        |in Kabul, no causalities reported   |                  |
|Reuters            |Bomb attacks kill at least 22 in    |20 June 2016      |
|                   |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns attacks in Kabul and |20 June 2016      |
|Mission in         |Badakhshan                          |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|BBC                |Afghanistan: MP Sher Wali Wardak    |5 June 2016       |
|                   |killed in Kabul bomb blast          |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Kabul lawmaker killed, 11 hurt in   |5 June 2016       |
|                   |landmine explosion                  |                  |
|TOLO News          |Sharp Increase In Kidnappings Since |3 June 2016       |
|                   |Taliban Leadership Change           |                  |
|Samuel Hall        |Urban displaced youth in Kabul -    |June 2016         |
|                   |Part 1. Mental Health Also Matters  |                  |
|United Nations High|Afghanistan Factsheet               |June 2016         |
|Commissioner for   |                                    |                  |
|Refugees (UNHCR)   |                                    |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|11 killed in Taliban suicide attack |25 May 2016       |
|                   |on court workers                    |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |Afghan Guard At UN Compound Kills   |20 May 2016       |
|                   |Nepalese Colleague                  |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA Statement on shooting incident|20 May 2016       |
|Mission in         |                                    |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|The Guardian       |Afghanistan's 'ghost soldiers':     |17 May 2016       |
|                   |thousands enlisted to fight Taliban |                  |
|                   |don't exist                         |                  |
|GOV.UK             |Against Corruption: a collection of |12 May 2016       |
|                   |essays                              |                  |
|The Guardian       |Afghan civilian death toll 'much    |8 May 2016        |
|                   |higher than the official estimate'  |                  |
|Amnesty            |My children will die this winter -  |May 2016          |
|International      |Afghanistan's Broken Promise to the |                  |
|                   |Displaced                           |                  |
|New York Times     |15 Ambulances and Hundreds of       |20 April 2016     |
|                   |Victims: Kabul Attack Gives Service |                  |
|                   |Grim Test                           |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Another blast heard in Kabul after  |19 April 2016     |
|                   |deadly suicide attack               |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|64 dead, hundreds wounded in Kabul  |19 April 2016     |
|                   |suicide attack                      |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns Taliban attack in    |19 April 2016     |
|Mission in         |Kabul                               |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|United Nations High|Eligibility Guidelines for assessing|19 April 2016     |
|Commissioner for   |the International Protection needs  |                  |
|Refugees (UNHCR)   |of asylum-seekers from Afghanistan  |                  |
|Al Jazeera         |Rockets hit Afghan capital after    |9 April 2016      |
|                   |Kerry visit (9 April 2016)          |                  |
|Refugee Support    |After Return: documenting the       |1 April 2016      |
|Network            |experiences of young people forcibly|                  |
|                   |removed to Afghanistan              |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|4 killed, 15 wounded in bomb attack |29 March 2016     |
|                   |on ex-senator                       |                  |
|Radio Free Europe  |Rockets Fired At Afghan Parliament  |28 March 2016     |
|                   |Building, No Casualties Reported    |                  |
|Global Terrorism   |Incident Summary                    |25 March 2016     |
|Database           |                                    |                  |
|Bloomberg          |If Afghanistan survives 2016, UN    |17 March 2016     |
|                   |will consider it a success          |                  |
|Khaama Press Afghan|No causalities as suicide blast     |9 March 2016      |
|News Agency        |rocks Kabul City                    |                  |
|Al Jazeera         |Suicide attacks kill dozens in      |27 February 2016  |
|                   |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|Reuters            |Dozens killed, wounded in           |27 February 2016  |
|                   |Afghanistan suicide attacks         |                  |
|TOLO News          |16 Ministries Fire Experts To 'Hire |22 February 2016  |
|                   |Relatives'                          |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|Explosion rocks Kabul; no info on   |9 February 2016   |
|                   |casualties                          |                  |
|BBC                |Afghanistan attack: Kabul suicide   |1 February 2016   |
|                   |bomber kills 20                     |                  |
|The Guardian       |Taliban suicide bomber in deadly    |1 February 2016   |
|                   |attack on Kabul police base         |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |February 2016     |
|Mission in         |conflict - Annual report 2015       |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns suicide attack       |21 January 2016   |
|Mission in         |targeting media in Kabul            |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|TOLO News          |Gunmen Kill Security Guard, Torch   |20 January 2016   |
|                   |Girls School In Kabul               |                  |
|Reuters            |Rocket lands near Italian embassy in|17 January 2016   |
|                   |Afghan capital Kabul                |                  |
|United States      |The Forced Return of Afghan Refugees|13 January 2016   |
|Institute of Peace |and Implications for Stability      |                  |
|O'Donnell          |Afghan forces struggle as ranks     |10 January 2016   |
|                   |thinned by 'ghost' soldiers         |                  |
|Reuters            |Bomb blast hits Afghan capital Kabul|6 January 2016    |
|UN Assistance      |UNAMA condemns Taliban attacks in   |6 January 2016    |
|Mission in         |Kabul City that kill five and injure|                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|56                                  |                  |
|Pajhwok Afghan News|At least 30 injured in second Kabul |4 January 2016    |
|                   |suicide                             |                  |
|BBC                |Kabul French restaurant rocked by   |1 January 2016    |
|                   |'car bomb attack'                   |                  |
|Afghanistan Justice|Deradicalization, Disengagement and |January 2016      |
|Organization       |Reintegration of former Taliban     |                  |
|European Asylum    |Country of Origin Information       |January 2016      |
|Support Office     |Report: Afghanistan Security        |                  |
|(EASO)             |Situation (excerpts)                |                  |
|Integrity Watch    |National Integrity System           |2016              |
|Afghanistan /      |Assessment: Afghanistan 2015        |                  |
|Transparency       |                                    |                  |
|International      |                                    |                  |
|Centre for Security|The Afghan National Police: A study |3 November 2015   |
|Governance         |on corruption and clientelism       |                  |
|United Nations     |Afghanistan: 2016 Humanitarian Needs|November 2015     |
|Office for the     |Overview                            |                  |
|Coordination of    |                                    |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|Zaman and Khalid   |Trends of radicalisation among the  |November 2015     |
|                   |ranks of the Afghan police          |                  |
|Royal United       |Drivers of Violent Extremism:       |16 October 2015   |
|Service Institute  |Hypotheses and Literature Review    |                  |
|Long War Journal   |Taliban overruns district in        |9 October 2015    |
|                   |southern Afghanistan                |                  |
|Fazli et al        |Understanding and Countering Violent|September 2015    |
|                   |Extremism in Afghanistan            |                  |
|United Nations High|Afghanistan Factsheet               |August 2015       |
|Commissioner for   |                                    |                  |
|Refugees (UNHCR)   |                                    |                  |
|BBC                |The young people sent back to       |17 July 2015      |
|                   |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|Bureau of          |From Kent to Kabul: the former      |17 July 2015      |
|Investigative      |asylum seeking children sent back to|                  |
|Journalism         |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|Bureau of          | Schooled in Britain, deported to   |16 July 2015      |
|Investigative      |danger: UK sends 600 former child   |                  |
|Journalism         |asylum seekers back to Afghanistan  |                  |
|Oeppen and Majidi  |PRIO Policy Brief: Can Afghans      |July 2015         |
|                   |Reintegrate after Assisted Return   |                  |
|                   |from Europe?                        |                  |
|Reuters            |UN investigation finds corruption in|19 April 2015     |
|                   |Afghan police oversight division    |                  |
|Human Rights Watch |"Today We Shall All Die"            |3 March 2015      |
|                   |Afghanistan's Strongmen and the     |                  |
|                   |Legacy of Impunity                  |                  |
|UN Assistance      |The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and |March 2015        |
|Mission in         |its People 2 of 3                   |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Council on Foreign |Police Corruption: A Threat to      |12 February 2015  |
|Relations          |Afghan Stability, a Threat to Afghan|                  |
|                   |Women                               |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |February 2015     |
|Mission in         |conflict - Annual report 2014       |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Al Jazeera         |Afghanistan's $3.6 billion police   |12 January 2015   |
|                   |problem: Broken systems and         |                  |
|                   |corruption                          |                  |
|The Guardian       |Killing, not curing- deadly boom in |7 January 2015    |
|                   |counterfeit medicine in Afghanistan |                  |
|The Guardian       |Kabul - the fifth fastest growing   |11 December 2014  |
|                   |city in the world - is bursting at  |                  |
|                   |the seams                           |                  |
|Al Jazeera         |Kabul police chief resigns after    |30 November 2014  |
|                   |attacks                             |                  |
|United Nations     |Afghanistan: 2015 Humanitarian Needs|November 2014     |
|Office for the     |Overview                            |                  |
|Coordination of    |                                    |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|Foreign Policy     |US Watchdog: UN Misspent Hundreds of|6 October 2014    |
|                   |Millions of Dollars in Afghanistan  |                  |
|The Saturday Paper |Taliban tortures Abbott government  |4 October 2014    |
|                   |deportee                            |                  |
|The Guardian       |Sayed Habib Musawi 'tortured, killed|30 September 2014 |
|                   |by Taliban because he was           |                  |
|                   |Australian'                         |                  |
|Refugee Support    |3 things you need to know about life|27 September 2014 |
|Network            |for young returnees in Afghanistan  |                  |
|UN Assistance      |The Stolen Lands of Afghanistan and |August 2014       |
|Mission in         |its People 1 of 3                   |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Afghan People's    |Building the Foundations for an     |10 June 2014      |
|Dialogue on Peace  |Inclusive Peace Process             |                  |
|San Diego Union    |Corruption enemy No. 1 for Afghan   |31 May 2014       |
|Tribune            |police                              |                  |
|Medicins Sans      |Between rhetoric and reality: The   |February 2014     |
|Frontieres         |ongoing struggle to access          |                  |
|                   |healthcare in Afghanistan           |                  |
|Norwegian Refugee  |Still at risk: Security of tenure   |February 2014     |
|Council and the    |and the forced eviction of IDPs and |                  |
|Internal           |refugee returnees in urban          |                  |
|Displacement       |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|Monitoring Centre  |                                    |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |February 2014     |
|Mission in         |conflict - Annual report 2013       |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Human Rights Watch |Afghanistan Universal Periodic      |7 January 2014    |
|                   |Review 2013                         |                  |
|Daily Outlook      |Rise in Criminal Activities in Kabul|29 December 2013  |
|United Nations     |Afghanistan: 2014 Humanitarian Needs|November 2013     |
|Office for the     |Overview                            |                  |
|Coordination of    |                                    |                  |
|Humanitarian       |                                    |                  |
|Affairs (UNOCHA)   |                                    |                  |
|Gladwell           |No longer a child: from the UK to   |September 2013    |
|                   |Afghanistan                         |                  |
|Washington Post    |Brother of Afghan security adviser  |17 July 2013      |
|                   |killed in Taliban attack            |                  |
|Schuster and Majidi|What happens post-deportation? The  |8 May 2013        |
|                   |experience of deported Afghans      |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |February 2013     |
|Mission in         |conflict - Annual report 2012       |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|Samuel Hall        |Old Practice, New Chains: Modern    |2013              |
|Consulting/        |slavery in Afghanistan              |                  |
|International      |                                    |                  |
|Organization for   |                                    |                  |
|Migration (IOM)    |                                    |                  |
|The Independent    |Taliban preys on Afghanistan's      |23 December 2012  |
|                   |corrupt police force                |                  |
|European Asylum    |Insurgent strategies - intimidation |December 2012     |
|Support Office     |and targeted violence against       |                  |
|(EASO)             |Afghans                             |                  |
|Institute for the  |Afghanistan - Green-on-Blue Attacks |31 October 2012   |
|Study of War       |in Context                          |                  |
|BBC                |Afghanistan's 'green on blue'       |7 October 2012    |
|                   |collapse of trust                   |                  |
|Rangelov and Theros|Abuse of power and conflict         |1 August 2012     |
|                   |persistence in Afghanistan          |                  |
|                   |(abstract)                          |                  |
|UN Assistance      |Protection of civilians in armed    |February 2012     |
|Mission in         |conflict - Annual report 2011       |                  |
|Afghanistan (UNAMA)|                                    |                  |
|LandInfo           |Afghanistan: Human Rights and       |September 2011    |
|                   |Security Situation                  |                  |
|New York Times     |Taliban Blamed in Death of Afghan   |24 July 2011      |
|                   |Officer's 8-Year-Old Son            |                  |
|Los Angeles Times  |Afghan Taliban intelligence network |13 April 2011     |
|                   |embraces the new                    |                  |
|Harper and Strote  |Afghanistan pharmaceutical sector   |April 2011        |
|                   |development- problems and prospects |                  |
|United Nations High|Eligibility Guidelines for assessing|17 December 2010  |
|Commissioner for   |the international protection needs  |                  |
|Refugees (UNHCR)   |of asylum-seekers from Afghanistan  |                  |
|Daily Mail         |Taliban have spies everywhere, warns|27 August 2010    |
|                   |army expert after Cameron was almost|                  |
|                   |shot down by insurgent rocket       |                  |
|The Telegraph      |Afghanistan police corruption is    |3 June 2010       |
|                   |fuelling insurgency                 |                  |
|Cleveland.com      |US trains reluctant Afghan police to|18 June 2009      |
|                   |fight Taliban                       |                  |
|Ladbury in         |Testing hypotheses on radicalisation|14 August 2009    |
|collaboration with |in Afghanistan: Why do men join the |                  |
|Cooperation for    |Taliban and Hizb-i Islami? How much |                  |
|Peace and Unity,   |do local communities support them?  |                  |
|Kabul (report for  |                                    |                  |
|the Department for |                                    |                  |
|International      |                                    |                  |
|Development)       |                                    |                  |
|Foreign Policy     |Ineffective, Unprofessional, and    |3 June 2009       |
|Research Institute |Corrupt: The Afghan National Police |                  |
|                   |Challenge                           |                  |
|The Globe and Mail |Afghan police unaware of basic      |30 April 2009     |
|                   |rights laws                         |                  |
|New York Times     |Taliban Kills Afghan Interpreters   |4 July 2006       |
|                   |Working for US and Its Allies       |                  |
|ecoi.net           |Featured topic- General Security    |Undated           |
|                   |Situation in Afghanistan and Events |                  |
|                   |in Kabul                            |                  |
|ERIN               |A joint approach to sustainable     |Undated           |
|                   |return                              |                  |
|Prints             |'Kabul Security Now' facebook page  |Undated           |
|Unknown            |Reintegration Assistance in         |Undated           |
|                   |Afghanistan                         |                  |

APPENDIX B - EASO Country of Origin Information Report, Afghanistan:
Security Situation" (August 2017).

Map 1 - Security incidents per province from September 2016 to May 2017.

[pic]

Map 2  -  Security  incidents  compared  to  population  per  province  from
    September 2016 to May 2017.

[pic]
APPENDIX C - Error of law decision


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03491/ 2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House, London                 |                             |
|on 27 April 2017                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |....                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity Direction

I make an anonymity order, pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper   Tribunal   or   other
appropriate  Court  or  Tribunal  orders  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the Appellant. This prohibition applies  to,  amongst  others,  the
parties and their representatives.

                          DECISION AND REASONS FOR
              SETTING ASIDE THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL'S DECISION

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born  in  Kardai  village,
      Laghman Province, in 1986. For the purposes of this  decision  I  need
      not set out the circumstances of the appellant's time in  Afghanistan,
      save to say that they are accurately reflected in paragraphs 2 to 7 of
      the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


   2. The appellant arrived  in  United  Kingdom  on  an  unidentified  date
      accepted to  be  "towards  the  end  of  2008".  He  was  detained  by
      immigration officers on 24 January 2014 and claimed asylum  five  days
      later. In a decision of 12 February 2015 the respondent  refused  such
      application concluding, in the same decision  letter,  that:  (i)  the
      appellant had not shown there to be substantial grounds for  believing
      that he faces a real risk of suffering serious  harm  upon  return  to
      Afghanistan such as to qualify for humanitarian protection; and,  (ii)
      the appellant's removal would not breach article 3 or article 8  ECHR.
      On the 13 February 2015 the respondent made a decision to  remove  the
      appellant.


   3. The appellant's subsequent  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      dismissed in a decision promulgated on 31 July 2015. The appellant now
      appeals to the Upper Tribunal with the permission  of  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Taylor, granted on 2 October 2015.


Decision and Reasons


   4. At the outset of the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Jarvis
      accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error  of
      law such that it should be set aside. Given this concession, I  do  no
      more herein than summarise why I concur that it is appropriate to  set
      aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted, inter alia, that there exists a real
      risk that the appellant would suffer persecutory  treatment  from  the
      Taliban if he were to return to his home area in Afghanistan [27].  It
      thereafter considered the issue of internal relocation, in the context
      of the Refugee Convention, at [33] of its decision.


   6. In both written and oral submissions made on behalf of  the  appellant
      to the First-tier Tribunal, albeit made within the context of internal
      relocation viewed through the  lens  of  Article  15(c)  and  not  the
      Refugee Convention, it was  submitted  to  be  of  significance,  when
      assessment was being given to the question whether relocation  of  the
      appellant  would  be  unduly   harsh,   that   the   "assistance   and
      reintegration" packages ("assistance packages") previously provided to
      refused asylum seekers upon return to Kabul  had  been  withdrawn  and
      would not be available to the instant appellant.  Paragraph 224 of the
      country guidance decision of AK (Afghanistan) [2012]  UKUT  00163  was
      prayed in aid of such submission.


   7. This feature of the appellant's case is not  explicitly  addressed  by
      the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  it  cannot  be  ascertained  from  its
      decision whether its conclusion at [33] was correctly premised on  the
      fact of the appellant not having have access  to  such  an  assistance
      package.


   8. Furthermore, in my conclusion it cannot be inferred from the fact that
      FtT found, in [36], that "there is nothing cogent or compelling before
      [it] to suggest that AK (sic) no  longer  valid  and  (sic)  regarding
      removal to  Kabul",  that  it  was  therein  seeking  to  address  the
      relevance of the withdrawal of assistance packages to the  application
      of the guidance given in AK.  In any  event,  such  consideration  was
      itself flawed by legal error  in  that  (i)  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      failed to direct itself to, or lawfully apply the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
      Practice Direction (paragraphs 12.2 and 12.4) and the  Upper  Tribunal
      (IAC) Guidance Note 2011 No. 2 (paragraphs 11 and 12); and, (ii) there
      is no  indication  in  [36]  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  lawfully
      addressed  itself  to  the   correct   threshold   applicable   to   a
      consideration of  internal  relocation  under  Article  15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive.


Decision


   9. For these  reasons,  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  10. The Decision on this appeal will be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. The
      findings of primary fact made by the First-tier Tribunal have not been
      the subject of challenge and are preserved, as is  the  conclusion  at
      [27] that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  suffering  persecutory
      treatment in his home area.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor










    APPENDIX D - Senior President's Practice Direction No 10 (2010)
Lord Justice Carnwath 10 February 2010, updated by Sir  Jeremy  Sullivan  13
November 2014

10   Expert evidence

10.1 A party  who  instructs  an  expert  must  provide  clear  and  precise
    instructions to the expert,  together  with  all  relevant  information
    concerning  the  nature  of  the  appellant's   case,   including   the
    appellant's immigration history, the reasons why the appellant's  claim
    or application has been refused by the respondent  and  copies  of  any
    relevant previous reports prepared in respect of the appellant.

10.2 It is the duty of an expert to help the Tribunal on matters within  the
    expert's own expertise.  This  duty  is  paramount  and  overrides  any
    obligation to the person from whom the expert has received instructions
    or by whom the expert is paid.

10.3 Expert evidence  should  be  the  independent  product  of  the  expert
    uninfluenced by the pressures of litigation.

10.4     An  expert  should  asses  the  Tribunal  by  providing  objective,
    unbiased opinion on matters within his or her expertise, and should not
    assume the role of an advocate.

10.5 An expert should consider all material  facts,  including  those  which
    might detract from his or her opinion.

10.6 An expert should make it clear:
     (a) when a question or issue falls outside his or her expertise; and
    (b)  when the expert is not able  to  reach  a  definite  opinion,  for
         example because of insufficient information.

10.7 If, after producing a report, an expert changes his or her view on  any
    material matter, that change of view  should  be  communicated  to  the
    parties without delay, and when appropriate to the Tribunal.

10.8 An expert's report should be addressed to the Tribunal and not  to  the
    party from whom the expert has received instructions.


10.9 An expert's report must:
    (a)  give details of the expert's qualifications;
    (b)  give details of any literature or other material which the  expert
         has relied on in making the report;
    (c)  contain a statement setting out the substance  of  all  facts  and
         instructions given to the expert which are material to the opinions
         expressed in the report or upon which those opinions  expressed  in
         the report or upon which those opinions are based;
    (d)  make clear which of the facts stated in the report are within  the
         expert's own knowledge;
    (e)   say  who  carried  out  any  examination,  measurement  or  other
         procedure which the expert  has  used  for  the  report,  give  the
         qualifications of that person, and say whether or not the procedure
         has been carried out under the expert's supervision;
     (f) where there is a range of opinion on  matters  dealt  with  in  the
    report:
          (i)   summarise  the  range  of  opinion,  so  far  as  reasonably
    practicable, and
         (ii) give reasons for the expert's own opinion;
     (g) contain a summary of the conclusions reached;
    (h)   if  the  expert  is  not  able  to  give   an   opinion   without
         qualification, state the qualification; and
    (j)  contain a statement that the expert understands his or her duty to
         the Tribunal and has complied and will continue to comply with that
         duty.

10.10    An expert's report must be verified by  a  Statement  of  Truth  as
    well as containing the statements required  in  paragraph  10.9(h)  and
    (j).

10.11    The form of the Statement of Truth is as follows:
     "I confirm that insofar as the facts stated in my report are within  my
    own knowledge I have made clear which they are and I believe them to be
    true, and that the opinions I have  expressed  represent  my  true  and
    complete professional opinion."

10.12     The  instructions  referred  to  in  paragraph  10.9(c)  are   not
    protected by privilege but  cross-examination  of  the  expert  on  the
    contents of the instructions will not be allowed  unless  the  Tribunal
    permits it (or unless the party who gave the instructions  consents  to
    it).  Before it gives permission the Tribunal must  be  satisfied  that
    there are reasonable grounds to consider  that  the  statement  in  the
    report  or  the  substance  of  the  instructions  is   inaccurate   or
    incomplete.  If the Tribunal is so satisfied, it will allow the  cross-
    examination where it appears to be in the interests of  justice  to  do
    so.

10.13    In this Practice Direction:
     "appellant" means the party who is or  was  the  appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal; and
     "respondent" means the party who is or was the  respondent  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


