
CW (Deportation - Huang - proportionality) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT 00110
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                         Date:  9 March 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  07/06/2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Vice President)

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bovey QC instructed by Wilson Terris & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J P Waite, instructed by Treasury Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal from the determination of an  Adjudicator,  Dr  J  J
     Morrow, sitting in Scotland, promulgated  on  12  November  2003.   He
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
     of State on 2 May 2003 to make a Deportation Order.  The appeal relied
     on Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

  2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1972, who was given  six
     months leave to enter the United Kingdom in 1994, and indefinite leave
     to remain in June 1995 on the basis  of  his  marriage  to  a  British
     citizen.  He has two children from that marriage,  born  in  1994  and
     1997.  His mother and siblings remain in Jamaica.

  3. In June 1997, the Appellant was convicted of rape,  and  sentenced  to
     four years imprisonment, during which time his  marriage  broke  down.
     He subsequently formed a new  relationship  in  October  2001  with  a
     medical student with whom he now lives.  He has formed a  relationship
     with his girlfriend's family, especially her mother and sister, whilst
     maintaining contact with his children and visiting them  on  alternate
     weekends.  He also pays monthly maintenance for them.  His divorce  is
     under way.

  4. In March 2003, he was convicted of being concerned in  the  supply  of
     Class A drugs and was sentenced  to  four  months  imprisonment.   The
     Sheriff recommended his deportation.

  5. The Adjudicator rejected the Article 3 claim and there is no challenge
     to that.  He rejected the Article 8 claim in these terms:

           "I acknowledge the Appellant has established family life in this
           country, both with regard to his children whom  he  has  regular
           contact with and his new relationship with ["S"].  I  have  also
           reached the conclusion that there would be  an  interference  to
           the Appellant's family  life  if  he  were  to  be  returned  to
           Jamaica.  However, bearing in mind all the information before me
           and in particular the Appellant's convictions and sentences  for
           two serious matters, one involving sexual violence and the other
           involving a Class A drug, I have reached the conclusion that  it
           is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aims  of  the  effective
           Immigration Control to return the Appellant to  Jamaica.   While
           recognising that there are family ties between the Appellant and
           his children and the  Appellant  and  ["S"],  weighing  up  this
           matter against the Appellant's  criminal  activity,  bearing  in
           mind the length of his sentences and the recommendation  of  the
           Sheriff in his drug offence  case,  the  interference  with  the
           above relationships by the Appellant's return to  Jamaica  would
           be proportionate to the legitimate aims of Immigration  Control.
           I have therefore reached the conclusion, based on the  facts  in
           this case as found above; the Appellant's rights under Article 8
           are not breached.   In  the  weighing  up  exercise  that  I  am
           required to make, the Appellant's offences are simply too  great
           with regard to that exercise when  put  alongside  the  evidence
           before me."

  6. The grounds of appeal pointed out that the Appellant had been found to
     enjoy family life here which his deportation would interfere with.  It
     was  said  that  the  Adjudicator  had  ignored  significant  relevant
     evidence from a Social Enquiry Report writer to the  effect  that  the
     Appellant represented a low risk of re-offending.   The  Adjudicator's
     conclusion about the gravity of the offence was unreasonable.

  7. Permission to appeal was refused by the Tribunal but that decision was
     reversed by Lord Kingarth who said that it was arguable:

           "(a)  that  it  is  for  the  Tribunal  as  an  appellate  body,
                 empowered under the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
                 2002 to consider appeals on a point of law,  to  reach  its
                 own view as  to  whether  -  on  the  facts  found  by  the
                 adjudicator - the removal of  the  petitioner  would  as  a
                 matter of law be incompatible with his  Convention  rights,
                 in particular under Article 8, and


           (b)   that in any event  the  decision  of  the  adjudicator  in
                 relation   to   the   question   of   proportionality   was
                 unreasonable,  having   regard   in   particular   to   the
                 petitioner's relationship with his children.  I am  further
                 satisfied that it cannot be said these  arguments  have  no
                 real prospect of success on appeal."

  8. The Tribunal originally intended to hear the appeal in mid 2004 but it
     was adjourned until after the Court of Appeal had decided  the  appeal
     in N (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT  00009,  which  we  had  been  told  was  to
     consider the appropriate approach  to  proportionality  following  the
     decision of the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] 2 AC 368.  In the  end
     that issue was not decided in N (Kenya) and this  appeal  was  further
     adjourned so that it could be considered in the light of the Court  of
     Appeal's judgments in Huang and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 105.

  9. We recognise that that decision is not binding on us, as  this  is  an
     appeal from an Adjudicator sitting in Scotland;  it is  of  persuasive
     weight only.  But as a Tribunal with a UK-wide jurisdiction, there  is
     an obvious undesirability in the law governing its  decisions  varying
     with the location in the United Kingdom in which  an  Adjudicator  had
     sat.

 10. Mr Bovey QC for the Appellant made two principal submissions.   First,
     the Adjudicator had erred in his identification of the legitimate  aim
     in relation to which removal was said to be proportionate.   That  was
     not immigration control but  the  prevention  of  crime.   Immigration
     control was an economic reason within Article 8(2);  see Baroness Hale
     at paragraphs 44 to 54 of R (Razgar) v  SSHD,  [2004]  2AC  368.   The
     Secretary of State had reached his decision based on the prevention of
     crime and could not now seek to support a decision of the  Adjudicator
     which was based on a different case;  Slivenko v Latvia paragraph  103
     ECtHR 9.10.2003 48321/99.

 11. Not  merely  did  that  make  the  assessment  of  proportionality  in
     principle unsound, it had led to the Adjudicator failing  to  consider
     the true gravity of the offences and the importance of the risk of re-
     offending, including the specific evidence in this  case.   One  could
     not just be substituted for  the  other  as  the  Secretary  of  State
     suggested.  Mr. Bovey pointed to the relatively  modest  sentence  for
     the rape, the social enquiry report, and to the minor  nature  of  the
     drugs offence which led to the  recommendation  for  deportation.   No
     significance should be attached to the  Sheriff's  recommendation  for
     deportation because it did not have to be followed.

 12. The later letter from the author of the social enquiry report afforded
     a basis for saying that there was  evidence  of  a  low  risk  of  re-
     offending which needed to be addressed.  The period of  exclusion  was
     also relevant.   The  Secretary  of  State's  letter  of  2  May  2003
     containing  the  reasons  for  the  decision  to  deport  referred  to
     disruption  to  family  life   being    justified   because   of   the
     "convictions" (plural) but later said that the  seriousness  "of  your
     criminal offence" (singular) made removal necessary.  The Secretary of
     State's argument to the Adjudicator had concentrated on the rape;  the
     Adjudicator relied on both offences.  The minor drugs  offence  seemed
     to be part of the thinking.

 13. Second, the Adjudicator and the Tribunal had  to  decide  whether  the
     proposed deportation struck the  right  balance,  ie  a  fair  balance
     between the individual and the public interests.   In so far as  Huang
     at paragraph 61 endorsed the approach in Samaroo v SSHD [2002] INLR 55
     in that respect it was correct;  in so far as  it  adopted  any  other
     approach it was wrong and not binding in this appeal.

 14. Mr Bovey later submitted that the correct approach  to  the  balancing
     exercise for the decision-maker  was  however  not  that  set  out  in
     Samaroo, but that in Boultif v Switzerland [2001] 33 EHRR  1179  which
     had superseded it.  The Court of Appeal had not  reconsidered  Samaroo
     in the light of Boultif.  Mr Bovey referred to paragraph 48 of Boultif
      which is as follows:

           "48.  The Court has only to a limited extent decided cases where
                 the main obstacle to expulsion is the difficulties for  the
                 spouses to stay together and in  particular  for  a  spouse
                 and/or children to live in the other's country  of  origin.
                 It is therefore called upon to establish guiding principles
                 in order to examine whether the measure was necessary in  a
                 democratic society.


                 In assessing the relevant criteria  in  such  a  case,  the
                 Court will consider  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the
                 offence committed by  the  applicant;  the  length  of  the
                 applicant's stay in the country from which he is  going  to
                 be  expelled;  the  time  elapsed  since  the  offence  was
                 committed as  well  as  the  applicant's  conduct  in  that
                 period; the nationalities of the various persons concerned;
                 the applicant's family situation, such as the length of the
                 marriage; and other factors expressing the effectiveness of
                 a couple's family life; whether the spouse knew  about  the
                 offence at the time when he or she entered  into  a  family
                 relationship;  and  whether  there  are  children  in   the
                 marriage, and if so, their age.  Not least, the Court  will
                 also consider the seriousness of the difficulties which the
                 spouse is likely to encounter in  the  country  of  origin,
                 though the mere fact  that  a  person  might  face  certain
                 difficulties in accompanying her or his  spouse  cannot  in
                 itself exclude an expulsion."

 15. Mr Bovey submitted that the destruction  of  established  family  live
     would rarely be proportionate in the  case  of  someone  who  posed  a
     limited future risk of detriment to the public good.  Post Boultif, if
     it was unreasonable for the spouse to go with the deportee, he  should
     not  be  deported.   The  Adjudicator  had  not   dealt   with   these
     considerations.  Relationships which fall short of marriage could also
     be  similarly  respected  and  could  make  a   criminal   deportation
     disproportionate;  Mokrani v France  15.10.2003,  522066/99.   Mokrani
     had been born in France and had entered into a civil partnership.  The
     Secretary of State had  thought  that  the  soon  to  be  ex-wife  and
     children could go to Jamaica;   but  the  Adjudicator  had  apparently
     supposed otherwise or had made no findings on  this  issue  nor  about
     whether the Appellant's girlfriend could go with him.  He appeared  to
     have assumed however that it would end that relationship.

 16. Mr Bovey  also  made  submissions  at  our  request  about  the  first
     paragraph of Lord Kingarth's reasons for  overturning  the  Tribunal's
     refusal of permission to appeal.  The Tribunal could not intervene  in
     an Adjudicator's decision, if there were no error of law, in order  to
     allow an appeal against  a  finding  that  removal  would  lead  to  a
     violation of the ECHR.  But the effect  of  section  6  of  the  Human
     Rights Act 1998 meant that if the Tribunal took the view that  removal
     would violate  a  Convention  right,  it  had  a  duty  to  intervene.
     Proportionality was a test of legality, a question of law, just as was
     an issue of rationality.

 17. There was a difference between  the  approach  under  the  Immigration
     Rules and Article 8; here the Appellant  sought  to  stay  within  the
     Rules (unlike  in  Samaroo)  and  to  use  Article  8  to  colour  his
     application.  The Rules, unlike Article 8, were not concerned with the
     striking of a fair balance with another person's rights.

 18. Mr Waite for the Secretary of State submitted that, applying Huang,  a
     discretionary area of judgment should be extended to the Secretary  of
     State because there was a strong element of  policy  behind  what  was
     necessary for the prevention of crime, which the  Secretary  of  State
     was best placed to judge.  Huang [2005] EWCA Civ  105  paragraphs  59,
     60, 61 and 62 said:

           "59.  ... The true position in our judgment is that the HRA  and
                 s.65(1)  require  the    adjudicator  to  allow  an  appeal
                 against removal or deportation brought on Article 8 grounds
                 if,  but  only  if,  he  concludes  that  the  case  is  so
                 exceptional on its particular facts that the imperative  of
                 proportionality  demands  an  outcome  in  the  appellant's
                 favour notwithstanding that he  cannot  succeed  under  the
                 Rules.

           60.   In  such  a  case  the  adjudicator  is  not  ignoring  or
                 overriding the Rules.  On  the  contrary  it  is  a  signal
                 feature of his task that he is bound to respect the balance
                 between public interest and private  right  struck  by  the
                 Rules with Parliament's approval.  That is why he  is  only
                 entitled on  Article  8  grounds  to  favour  an  appellant
                 outside the Rules where  the  case  is  truly  exceptional.
                 This,  not  Wednesbury  or  any  revision  of   Wednesbury,
                 represents the real restriction which the  law  imposes  on
                 the scope of judgment allowed to the  adjudicator.   It  is
                 not a question of his deferring to the Secretary of State's
                 judgment of proportionality in the  individual  case.   The
                 adjudicator's decision of the question whether the case  is
                 truly exceptional is entirely his own.  He  does  defer  to
                 the Rules; for this approach recognises  that  the  balance
                 struck   by   the   Rules   will   generally   dispose   of
                 proportionality issues arising under Article  8;  but  they
                 are not exhaustive of all cases.  There will be  a  residue
                 of truly exceptional instances.   In  our  respectful  view
                 such an approach is also reflected in Lord Bingham's  words
                 in Razgar??, which we have already cited:

                       'Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation  of
                       immigration control will be proportionate in all save
                       a small minority for exceptional cases,  identifiable
                       on a case by case basis.'

           61.   We have considered whether in view we have  taken  of  the
                 adjudicator's task in these cases is in conflict  with  the
                 reasoning of Dyson LJ in Samaroo v  Secretary  of  State??.
                 In that case there were two appellants whom  the  Secretary
                 of State had decided to deport on  the  ground  that  their
                 continued presence in the United Kingdom was not "conducive
                 to the public good"?6.  The first appellant, Samaroo sought
                 on Article 8 grounds to challenge the Secretary of  State's
                 refusal to grant exceptional leave to remain, a deportation
                 order having earlier been made against the appellant.   His
                 application for judicial review as dismissed,  as  was  his
                 appeal.  In the course of giving judgment Dyson LJ said??:

                       'The Secretary of State must show that he has  struck
                       a fair balance  between  the  individual's  right  to
                       respect for family life and the prevention  of  crime
                       and disorder.  How  much  weight  he  gives  to  each
                       factor will be the subject of careful scrutiny by the
                       court.  The court  will  interfere  with  the  weight
                       accorded  by  the  decision  maker  if,  despite   an
                       allowance for the appropriate margin  of  discretion,
                       it concludes that the weight accorded was unfair  and
                       unreasonable.  In this respect, the level of scrutiny
                       is  undoubtedly  more  intense  than  it  is  when  a
                       decision  is  subject  to   review   on   traditional
                       Wednesbury grounds ....'

                 Samaroo did not involve the statutory jurisdiction  of  the
                 adjudicator or the IAT.  As we have  said  the  proceedings
                 were by way of judicial review to challenge the refusal  of
                 exceptional leave to remain.  An application  for  judicial
                 review is categorically inapt as an arena for a  full-blown
                 merits appeal.  But Samaroo was in any  event  in  truth  a
                 policy case.  There were no applicable  Immigration  Rules.
                 The Secretary of State's position was that the  gravity  of
                 the  appellant's   crime   outweighed   the   compassionate
                 circumstances.  The case was therefore one in  which  there
                 was an open question as to  the  respective  weight  to  be
                 given to private right and public interest.  The court  was
                 in particular asked to make an assessment, in  the  context
                 of the case's facts, of  the  importance  attached  by  the
                 Secretary of State to the desirability of  the  appellant's
                 deportation in  light  of  his  criminal  past.   In  those
                 circumstances the principle of respect for  the  democratic
                 powers was  plainly  engaged.   Our  conclusions  in  these
                 present appeals march with the reasoning in Samaroo.

           62.   In summary, where in a human rights challenge the court is
                 called upon in any respect  to  judge  the  weight  or  the
                 merits of  government  policy,  it  will  in  deciding  the
                 outcome allow a margin of discretion to the  policy  maker.
                 So much  is  required  by  the  democratic  principle:  the
                 principle of respect  for  the  democratic  powers  of  the
                 State.  In such a case, consistently with  its  obligations
                 under the HRA, the court's decision is more intrusive  than
                 Wednesbury, being subject to the disciplines  described  by
                 Lord Steyn in Daly.  But there are  cases,  exemplified  by
                 these appeals, in which the court or adjudicator is not  at
                 all called upon to judge policy.  In that case no  question
                 of respect for the democratic powers of the  State  arises:
                 save  in  the  sense,  again  exemplified   here   by   the
                 Immigration Rules, that prior decisions of the executive or
                 legislature may have fixed,  and  narrowed,  the  territory
                 across which  the  adjudicator's  autonomous  judgment  may
                 operate."

 19. Mr Waite submitted that Huang drew a  distinction  between  Article  8
     claims, together with claims for international protection  and  claims
     under the Immigration Rules on the one hand, in which  an  Adjudicator
     should reach his  own  decision  on  whether  the  circumstances  were
     sufficiently exceptional as to render removal disproportionate, and  a
     deportation appeal, on the other hand, on  grounds  that  removal  was
     conducive to the public good.  Paragraph 61 of Huang  reconciled  that
     approach with Samaroo on the basis  that  Samaroo  concerned  judicial
     review not a merits appeal, in which the assessment of  the  Secretary
     of State's views on the importance  of  the  deportation  engaged  the
     principle of respect for democratic powers.  It was  a  case,  outside
     the Rules, in which an extra-statutory  discretion  had  been  invoked
     unsuccessfully, which decision was challenged on human rights grounds.
      There were no applicable Rules and an "open question" arose as to the
     relative weight to be given to the public  interest  and  the  private
     right.

 20. Although the  Adjudicator  formed  his  own  view  on  proportionality
     without giving any margin or discretion to the Secretary of State,  as
     he should have done, had he done so, he would clearly have reached the
     same  decision.   The  Adjudicator's   decision   that   removal   was
     proportionate was a question of fact and degree.  Mr  Waite  submitted
     that the Adjudicator was not just entitled but bound to conclude  that
     removal was proportionate.  The Tribunal's jurisdiction in respect  of
     such an issue was determined by A(C) v  SSHD  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1165,
     paragraphs 23-26 e.g. it could only interfere if the conclusion as  to
     proportionality was perverse.  Lord  Kingarth's  possible  alternative
     approach should not be applied; it was inconsistent  with  A(C).   The
     same approach had been applied in N v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 [2004]
     INLR 10. The IAT could only interfere if there were an error of law.

 21. Mr Bovey said that it was  not  necessary  for  him  to  contest  that
     approach, but submitted that there was no rationale for that approach,
     and nothing which showed why it should be applied here.  A(C) was  not
     binding in this case.  But a Court should still intervene, as a matter
     of legal duty under section 6 HRA 1998, to prevent a breach  of  human
     rights if it concluded that the State's action would  involve  such  a
     breach.

 22. On the specific points, Mr Waite submitted that there had been no real
     change in the social enquiry writer's  report,  contrary  to  what  Mr
     Bovey asserted.  It had been considered by  the  Adjudicator.   Family
     life in the United Kingdom had been referred to  by  the  Adjudicator.
     The Adjudicator had applied his  mind  to  the  right  proportionality
     test, even if he had used the wrong label for the interest  relied  on
     for justifying the interference with family life, as paragraph  24  of
     his  determination  cited  above  showed.   He  had  carried  out  the
     necessary balancing act, reflecting the Secretary of  State's  refusal
     letter, and his submissions to the Adjudicator.

 23. Mr Waite was unable to help as to why the Secretary of State  had  not
     acted  on  the  rape  offence,  but  there  was   no   allegation   of
     irrationality.  The Adjudicator had taken both into account  and  both
     had been argued as relevant before him.

 24. Boultif was distinguishable:  risk was a relevant factor, but  Boultif
     presented only a comparatively limited danger;  there  had  been  only
     one offence leading to a two year sentence,  whereas  here,  the  rape
     sentence had been followed shortly after by a further offence. Boultif
     was also married to a Swiss citizen,  in  a  continuing  relationship.
     There was no real basis here for  the  Adjudicator  assuming  that  TS
     would not go with the Appellant to  Jamaica,  although  he  made  that
     assumption favourably to the Appellant's claim.

Conclusion

 25. We deal first with  considerations  specific  to  this  determination,
     starting with the contention that the Adjudicator  has  addressed  the
     wrong interest in his proportionality assessment.

 26. We accept Mr Bovey's submission that the  Adjudicator  had  identified
     the wrong objective  in  relation  to  which  the  proportionality  of
     deportation was to be judged;  this was  not  an  immigration  control
     case but one concerned with the prevention of  crime.   We  accept  Mr
     Waite's point that the Adjudicator in his determination analysed  some
     of the issues which were relevant to the prevention of  crime  ie  the
     nature and gravity of the offending, but his conclusions on  the  risk
     of re-offending are less easy to discern.   This  may  be  because  he
     focussed on the wrong aim.  It is difficult to be satisfied  that  the
     proportionality balance was weighed appropriately, according  to  law,
     if the wrong public interest was put into the scales.  Although it may
     be possible to be satisfied that  the  difference  is  inconsequential
     where it is one of mere labelling, it is less  easy  to  be  satisfied
     where one relevant topic, risk of re-offending, is omitted.

 27. Again in many deportation cases, the risk of re-offending may  be  far
     less significant than the nature and gravity  of  the  offence.   Rape
     would readily come into  that  category.   But  there  is  an  unusual
     feature in this case, which is the way in which  the  very  much  more
     grave offence did  not  attract  deportation  proceedings  even  after
     release from prison by  which  time  the  marriage  had  broken  down,
     whereas the comparatively minor drugs offence, albeit a second offence
     committed soon after release, did lead to that consequence.  This  may
     be a proper response from the Secretary of State, though his  decision
     letter is not free from dubiety in that respect.  But it is an  aspect
     which requires some consideration and justification and if any  margin
     of respect for Government policy is to be accorded,  it  is  a  margin
     which the cogency of the decision must earn, through  its  explanation
     of the rational and proportionate relationship between the decision to
     deport and the circumstances of the case.

 28. We also emphasise, as we have done in other cases,  that  there  is  a
     tendency on the part of Home Office Presenting Officers,  and  we  say
     this without criticism of them and more out of recognition  that  they
     have not been properly briefed, to assert that  the  deportee  may  be
     able to seek entry clearance after a comparatively short minimum three
     year period of absence.  Yet for rape, the minimum exclusion  normally
     imposed may be seven or ten years.

 29. The probable period of exclusion may be of considerable importance  in
     assessing  the  degree  of  disruption  to   family   life   and   the
     corresponding degree of public interest in  the  deportation  for  the
     prevention of crime which has to be shown.  Yet we  have  come  across
     many cases, indeed the  majority  of  deportation  cases,  where  that
     period is identified neither by the Home Office Presenting Officer nor
     by the Adjudicator.  The same is true here.  Yet it  is  difficult  to
     see how any sound assessment of proportionality of removal can be made
     without some view being reached on that issue.

 30. The February 2003 social enquiry  report  assessed  the  Appellant  as
     being "in the high risk category of re-offending and of potential harm
     to others" due mainly to the rape conviction.  It appears that he  had
     a third conviction as well because of the reference to  100  hours  of
     community service imposed in November 2002.  But the  significance  of
     that is unclear.  The later report of  October  2003,  from  the  same
     author produced for the appeal to the Adjudicator is  distinctly  more
     upbeat: although the rape was "horrendous", "I would say that [C]  has
     moved on since then".  There  has  been  no  "suggestion  of  any  re-
     offending" since release and he has been "extremely reliable"  in  his
     appointments.  The later report has a distinct advocacy flavour to it.

 31. An Adjudicator properly considering the  risk  of  re-offending  could
     have found reason to discount the later report or to treat it  as  not
     justifying any change in view, and if there were no change in view the
     risk remained high.

 32. The Adjudicator made no separate error in respect of family life.   He
     made no false assumption about the prospects of the  girlfriend  going
     to Jamaica nor about the fact of loss of direct personal contact  with
     his children.  It was understandable that his soon to be ex-wife would
     wish him to stay and his contact with her, and perhaps his maintenance
     payments would be affected.  Those factors were taken into account but
     the potential period of exclusion is relevant here too.

 33. However, there are a number of other issues which we consider that  we
     ought to deal with.

 34. It is necessary to point out in considering this appeal that  although
     the Secretary of State referred in his various  letters  to  paragraph
     364 of HC 395, the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  the  paragraph  of
     specific relevance in deportation appeals, the grounds  of  appeal  to
     the Adjudicator ignored  the  application  and  significance  of  that
     paragraph.  They focussed entirely on Article 8  ECHR.   The  argument
     before  us  did  not  really  engage  with  that  paragraph   or   the
     significance of its existence for the  proportionality  argument.   It
     was simply said that Article 8 coloured the application of the  Rules.
     It was not conceded on appeal that a claim under the Rules had failed.

 35. This is an unsatisfactory way of proceeding.  There is  an  applicable
     Immigration Rule.  Article 8, because of Article 8(2), cannot  operate
     as a right which stands free of Rules or government policies as to the
     gravity of particular offences.  The reference in Huang  paragraph  61
     to there being  no  applicable  Rule  in  a  deportation  case  simply
     reflects that there the claim was brought outside the Rules.

 36. On a deportation appeal, the first step should be to consider  whether
     the Immigration Rules meant that the appeal should be allowed.  If so,
     there would be no particular value in considering Article 8.   If  the
     appeal would be dismissed under the Rules, it would  be  necessary  to
     consider Article 8.  We consider how that should be done later but the
     reasons for considering  the  Rules  first  are  twofold.   There  are
     differences between the Rules and Article 8 in deportation cases which
     in general mean that the former is wider in scope.  And the conclusion
     under the Rules is of great  significance  in  reaching  a  conclusion
     under Article 8 because it is a very significant input to  that  later
     decision, as we explain.  The converse is not the case.

 37. We have addressed the differences  in  the  scope  of  the  Rules  and
     Article 8 in CM (Jamaica)  (Deportation  -  Article  8)  [2005]  UKIAT
     00103.  We said:

           "34.  Although in any particular case it is  unlikely  that  the
                 result will be very different applying  the  provisions  of
                 paragraph 364 HC 395  and  Article  8  ECHR,  it  is  worth
                 pointing out that there are differences.  First,  the  task
                 of the decision-maker on appeal from the Secretary of State
                 under paragraph 364 is to decide whether the balance struck
                 by the Secretary of State is correct in the  circumstances.
                 This is the balance between the public interest  and  other
                 relevant circumstances.

           35.   Second, compassionate circumstances may form part  of  the
                 considerations which arise under Article 8, but they do not
                 do so as such but only where they are part of the arguments
                 about family or private  life.   They  are  by  contrast  a
                 necessary part of the consideration of paragraph 364.

           36.   Third, it  is  noteworthy  that  paragraph  364  with  its
                 reference   to   compassionate   circumstances,    domestic
                 circumstances and all relevant factors brings in the effect
                 of deportation on other family members who  are  not  being
                 deported with the Appellant; thus under the  paragraph  the
                 effect on the son is relevant.  Under Article 8, the effect
                 on the son would be limited to its consequential effect  on
                 the father as the son is not being removed with the father.
                  This means that the appeal available under  the  Rules  is
                 wider than the appeal available to the Appellant under  the
                 applicable Act which confines consideration  of  the  human
                 rights to those of the Appellant.

           37.   The decision-maker  comes  to  his  own  decision  on  the
                 merits, giving weight to any Secretary of State policies on
                 who should be deported or the gravity with which  any  sort
                 of offence is perceived and to his decision, but the appeal
                 decision is for the appellate body.  This  contrasted  with
                 the pre Razgar [2-4] UKHL 27, pre  Huang  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
                 105, review approach to proportionality  under  Article  8.
                 The Huang decision applies to the consideration of  Article
                 8 issues.

           38.   Fourth, in applying Huang to deportation cases,  as  there
                 are Immigration  Rules  which  apply  to  deportation,  the
                 position under the Rules should be  considered  first.   If
                 the case under the Rules fails, it is very difficult to see
                 what factors under Article 8 are not  subsumed  already  in
                 paragraph 364.  Article 8 should then  be  considered  with
                 Huang in mind, but it is difficult to see how a case  which
                 fails under the Rules here could be disproportionate  under
                 Article 8.  However, the  Article  focuses  on  family  and
                 private life and respect for those  interests  is  a  right
                 which  requires  to  be  outweighed  by  other   legitimate
                 interests:  immigration  control  and  the  prevention   of
                 crime."


 38. If it is concluded that under the Immigration Rules an  appeal  should
     be dismissed, the question of how Article 8 ECHR should be  approached
     arises. Razgar is not confined to pure immigration control  cases.  It
     is intended to address the relationship between the Rules and  Article
     8, as the Court of Appeal confirmed in Huang.  So  the  conclusion  of
     Lord Bingham in Razgar as repeated in paragraph 60  of  Huang,  whilst
     cast in terms of decisions pursuant to  the  legitimate  interests  of
     immigration control, would  be  just  as  applicable  to  those  taken
     pursuant to the legitimate interest of the prevention of crime. Indeed
     many deportation cases will involve both. There is no  logical  reason
     for a distinction between the various interests within  Article  8(2).
     We do not see the comment in  paragraph  61  of  Huang,  dealing  with
     Samaroo, as intending to draw such a distinction either.  It  reflects
     the fact that Samaroo concerned  a  case  outside  the  Rules  because
     application of the Rules had already led to a negative answer.

 39. We appreciate that neither Huang nor A(C) are binding on us, as we are
     sitting on an appeal from an Adjudicator who sat in Scotland.  But  as
     we have said, it would be  highly  undesirable  for  the  Tribunal  to
     decide that its jurisdiction  or  jurisprudence  varied  according  to
     where in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Adjudicator  had  sat.  For  that
     pragmatic reason, we do not intend to embark upon a  consideration  of
     whether Huang is persuasive or not. We point out that its  conclusions
     were foreshadowed in relation to entry clearance in cases such  as  SS
     (Malaysia) [2004]  UKIAT  00091,  paragraphs  30-32,  subject  to  the
     qualification that paragraph 31 of that case  has  been  overruled  by
     Huang in so far as it includes the reasonableness approach.

 40. Whatever reservations we have about the decision in A(C), we adopt the
     same approach. The Tribunal had taken a  different  view  in  MA  (Sri
     Lanka) [2004] UKIAT 00161, as to the admissibility of  evidence  about
     post Adjudicator determination events, but it is not  to  that  aspect
     that the remarks of Lord Kingarth are addressed. He suggests,  and  Mr
     Bovey submits, that the question of whether or not there is  an  error
     of law in the assessment of what is proportionate is a matter for  the
     Tribunal. This is on the basis that that question is one of law and  a
     disagreement as to the Adjudicator's answer involves a conclusion that
     there has been an error of law. This is  not  the  approach  taken  in
     A(C).

 41. We do not think that Huang should then be read as saying that the fact
     that the Adjudicator has a jurisdiction to say that the  Secretary  of
     State's decision is disproportionate and hence  unlawful,  necessarily
     means that a conclusion that a  decision  was  disproportionate  gives
     rise to an issue of law on appeal. This point would have been the same
     under the pre Razgar  concept  of  deference;   a  conclusion  that  a
     decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  disproportionate   would
     necessarily have entailed a conclusion on a point of law and an appeal
     from it an assertion of an error of law, if the reasoning that it does
     as a result of Huang were correct.  Yet it is  clear  from  A(C)  that
     that was not what the test was.

 42. The answer is that an Adjudicator has to reach his own  assessment  as
     to whether or not a case is one of those exceptional cases in which  a
     decision which conforms to  the  Rules  is  disproportionate  for  the
     purposes of Article 8, as Razgar and Huang say. On appeal it then  has
     to be shown that that assessment by the Adjudicator, which may involve
     issues of fact and degree, is itself  unlawful  by  reference  to  the
     tests which are used for  that  purpose  by  appellate  Tribunals  and
     Courts.  Here they are the Wednesbury tests, modified as described  in
     Daly for the purposes of the application of  ECHR.  And  it  needs  to
     remembered that the very strict boundaries, laid down  in  Razgar  and
     reflected in Huang, mean that the range of circumstances within  which
     an Adjudicator, without error of law, can find that  an  Secretary  of
     State removal decision is within the Rules, but  unlawful  because  of
     Article 8, is narrow indeed. We add  some  comments  later  about  the
     significance of the extra-statutory discretions and policies for  that
     decision.

 43. In this respect Article 8 gives rise to  problems  no  different  from
     those which are to be found in relation to  Article  3.   There  is  a
     range of circumstances in which removal will breach Article 3.  It  is
     a narrow range because of the severity of the tests which have  to  be
     satisfied.  But there are  issues  of  fact  and  degree  and  if  the
     Adjudicator's decision is within the permissible range, it  cannot  be
     overturned in law.  If it  falls  outside  the  range  of  permissible
     decisions when it should have fallen within it, likewise it gives rise
     to an error of law judged by the same tests.

 44. We do not accept the argument that section 6 HRA requires intervention
     by way of the  error  of  law  jurisdiction  on  appeal  wherever  the
     Tribunal would have reached a different view as a matter of  fact  and
     degree and itself would have concluded that a removal would breach the
     ECHR.  We do not deny that the argument has force and  that  it  would
     chime with the argument that issues of proportionality are  issues  of
     law just as issues of rationality;  if the  appellate  body  concluded
     that a decision was irrational it would conclude that it was erroneous
     in law.  There is force in the argument that the same approach applies
     to proportionality  and  that  that  is  what  Huang  contemplates  or
     necessarily involves when it treats the Adjudicator as the arbiter  of
     proportionality and not merely the  judge  of  the  reasonableness  of
     another's decision.

 45. First, however, it does not follow that the  Adjudicator's  conclusion
     that a decision was proportionate and therefore  lawful  is  itself  a
     decision on a point of law.  It is a decision  on  the  facts  and  an
     assessment of degree.  If it itself is to held unlawful it has  to  be
     shown that that involves an error of law.  If it does not  involve  an
     error of law, adjudged by modified Wednesbury standards, there will be
     no breach of the HRA upon which the Tribunal can  fasten  and  remedy.
     The fact that a reasonable body could take a  different  view  of  the
     facts or of the assessment of issues of degree does  not  convert  the
     decision into an error of law or a breach of HRA.

 46. Second, we would not accept that the concept of an error  of  law  was
     different depending upon who  was  the  appellant,  with  a  different
     standard to be adopted where the appellant  was  the  individual  from
     that adopted where the appellant was the Secretary of  State.  However
     that was inherent in the approach suggested in  this  context  as  the
     basis for the Tribunal's intervention on behalf of the individual.

 47. Third, we see nothing in Huang which suggests  that  the  approach  to
     error of law which was set out in A(C), to which Laws LJ  himself  was
     party, was intended to be revisited let alone overruled.   We  see  no
     good reason not to apply that approach wherever the Adjudicator sat in
     the United Kingdom.

 48. We therefore set out  how  the  issue  of  proportionality  should  be
     approached now in the light of Huang when this case  is  remitted.  We
     repeat  what  we  said  in  MB  (Croatia)   (Huang-   proportionality-
     Bulletins) [2005] UKIAT 00092:


           "29.   What we draw from Huang about the approach of Adjudicators
                 to proportionality is as follows.   The  Immigration  Rules
                 are  the  starting  point  for  the  assessment.    If   an
                 individual has no substantive claim within  the  Rules,  it
                 will be a truly exceptional case on its  particular  facts,
                 in  which  an  Adjudicator  could  lawfully  conclude  that
                 removal  was  disproportionate.   If  an  individual  falls
                 outside the Rules only for  procedural  reasons,  the  same
                 applies save that as in Shala,  it  is  more  difficult  to
                 insist  on  procedural  requirements  where  the  need  for
                 compliance has arisen because of procedural failings by the
                 Secretary   of   State.    An   example   of    exceptional
                 circumstances may  be  where  the  procedural  requirements
                 could not be complied with for want of accessible  relevant
                 diplomatic facilities in the country of return.

           30.    In holding that the Immigration Rules are to  be  regarded
                 as the proportionate response of the executive, approved by
                 Parliament, to the  many  and  varied  circumstances  which
                 individual immigration cases present, the Court  of  Appeal
                 must also have had regard to the way in which  those  Rules
                 are  also  supplemented  by  policies  or   extra-statutory
                 concessions.  Where an  individual  may  fall  within  such
                 policies but they have not been considered by the Secretary
                 of State, the decision may be unlawful, because a  relevant
                 consideration has been ignored, though it is  not  for  the
                 Adjudicator directly to apply the policy.   Such  a  policy
                 offers a further guide as  to  what  is  the  proportionate
                 response of the executive:   if  provision  has  been  made
                 through policy or concession for a further class of  cases,
                 it will be yet the more difficult  for  an  Adjudicator  to
                 hold a decision disproportionate which  falls  outside  the
                 scope of the Rules and any policy concession.

           32.    Where a Rule or extra-statutory provision covers the  sort
                 of circumstance upon which an individual  relies  eg  entry
                 for marriage, study, medical treatment or delayed decision-
                 making, but  the  individual  falls  outside  the  specific
                 requirements or limits of the otherwise applicable Rules or
                 policy, that is a very clear  indication  that  removal  is
                 proportionate.  It is not for the judicial  decision-maker,
                 except in the clear and truly exceptional case to set aside
                 the  limitations  set  by  the  executive,  accountable  to
                 Parliament, and, in the  case  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
                 approved by Parliament.

           33.   Where Rules  or  extra-statutory  provisions  do  not  make
                 provision at all for circumstances which an individual  may
                 rely on for the purposes of overcoming to the qualification
                 to an ECHR  right  which  is  provided  by  the  legitimate
                 interests  of  immigration   control,   his   case   cannot
                 rationally be considered more  favourably  than  one  whose
                 circumstances are covered in principle by some provision of
                 the  Rules  or  of  an  extra-statutory  policy  but  whose
                 circumstances do not meet the detailed requirements of  the
                 Rules or policy.

           34.      The   starting   point   for   the   consideration    of
                 proportionality is the Rules and then the effect of  extra-
                 statutory policies.  It will  be  necessary  in  each  case
                 where an exception is made in respect of an individual  who
                 has no basis to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  to
                 state clearly why those approved and  qualified  provisions
                 in the Rules or policies should  not  be  regarded  as  the
                 conclusive negative answer to that claim.

           35.    Compassionate circumstances are often invoked in Article 8
                 cases, though they may involve in  reality  no  significant
                 aspect of family or private life.  A removal  decision  may
                 be harsh.  There are Rules and policies which deal  with  a
                 variety  of  compassionate  circumstances  for   entry   or
                 remaining in the United Kingdom.  If a particular case does
                 not  fall  within  them,  the  normal  conclusion   of   an
                 assessment  of  proportionality  should   be   that   those
                 circumstances  mean  that  the  legitimate   interests   of
                 immigration control favour removal.   A  truly  exceptional
                 case would have to be made out.  Article 8 is not a general
                 provision justifying the overriding of immigration  control
                 on general compassionate grounds  or  where  there  may  be
                 harshness and misfortune from removal.  It is  a  provision
                 which creates rights on specific grounds and  only  applies
                 where  those  rights   exist;   it   only   precludes   the
                 effectiveness of immigration control, as  embodied  in  the
                 Rules and extra-statutory policies  or  concessions,  where
                 the  individual   circumstances   are   so   powerful   and
                 exceptional that those considered provisions should not  be
                 allowed the effect which  would  normally  be  accorded  to
                 them.

           36.    Shala and Edore [2003] INLR 361 continue on their facts to
                 exemplify what can constitute a truly exceptional case.  By
                 contrast, the actual facts of Huang and  Kashmin  exemplify
                 what cannot be such a  case,  and  Abu-Qulbain  illustrates
                 what possibly might be such a case.  Huang and Kashmin also
                 illustrate Adjudicator decisions  in  which  seemingly  the
                 Adjudicators simply thought that the proportionality  issue
                 involved a question of harshness or unfairness, which is  a
                 misguided view of Article 8.  Those factors  may  assist  a
                 claim but cannot be its sole content.

           37.    Although Huang has held  that,  following  Razgar  in  the
                 House of Lords, the M* (Croatia) reasonableness approach is
                 wrong in law, it would be a complete  misinterpretation  of
                 Huang to read it as containing  an  approach  significantly
                 different in its likely effect on the result in  individual
                 cases.  Read with Razgar in the House of Lords, it  clearly
                 envisages successful disproportionality cases under Article
                 8, for those who fall outside the  Rules  or  policies,  as
                 rare or truly exceptional.  We do not see the difference in
                 legal approach as likely to lead to a different  answer  in
                 practice, and it is far  from  clear  that  any  difference
                 which might exist would favour the claimant."

 49. We recognise that much of that refers to the interests of  immigration
     control but the principles are just as applicable to all the interests
     represented  in  Article  8(2)  and  in  particular  to  that  of  the
     prevention of crime.

 50. Nonetheless for the reasons which we have given this appeal is allowed
     to the extent that it is remitted for hearing  other  than  before  Dr
     Morrow.   It  is  reported  for  what   we   say   about   Huang   and
     proportionality.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT




