
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Osefiso and another (PTA decision: effect;  'Cart'  JR)  [2021]  UKUT  00116
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February and 24 March 2021     |16 April 2021                        |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                 ABOLAJI TEMITOPE OSEFISO - FIRST APPELLANT
                            OJ - SECOND APPELLANT

          (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE IN RESPECT OF THE SECOND APPELLANT)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr F Magennis (10 February) and Mr R Sharma, (24
                    March) instructed by David Benson Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(1) A decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal  against
a decision of the First-tier Tribunal disposes of proceedings in  the  Upper
Tribunal. Except for its power to set aside under rule 43  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  for  procedural  irregularity,  the
Upper Tribunal  cannot  revisit  its  decision.  As  a  result,  it  has  no
jurisdiction to entertain subsequently-formulated grounds  of  challenge  to
the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


(2) In order to satisfy the part of CPR 54.7A(7)(a) which requires the  High
Court to find  an  arguable  case  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of
permission to appeal was wrong in law,  the  court  needs  to  be  satisfied
either that:

          (a) the Upper Tribunal's reaction to the grounds of  challenge  in
         the application for permission to appeal was arguably wrong in law;
         or

          (b) where the judicial review grounds have not found expression in
         the grounds considered by the Upper Tribunal, the  judicial  review
         grounds are of such an a nature  as  to  have  required  the  Upper
         Tribunal to  have  raised  them  of  its  own  volition,  and  then
         considered them; and that its failure to do so is arguably wrong in
         law.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. INTRODUCTION

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria, a  mother  and  her  son,  born
    respectively in 1987 and 2015.  On 24 January  2018,  they  made  human
    rights claims to the respondent.  On 6 June 2018, the applications were
    refused.  It was noted by the respondent that the first  appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2002,  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.  She was granted leave to remain  in  February  2013,  on  the
    basis of her private life, until 15 August 2015.  On  11  August  2015,
    she was granted further leave to remain, again  on  the  basis  of  her
    private life, until 19 February 2018.  The  first  appellant  told  the
    respondent that her  husband,  the  father  of  the  second  appellant,
    resided in Nigeria; and that  she  had  family  life  with  the  second
    appellant, who resides with her in the United Kingdom.

 2. Given that the first appellant did not fall within  the  provisions  of
    the relevant immigration rules for leave to remain as  a  partner,  her
    application was  considered  by  reference  to  the  first  appellant's
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the second appellant.
     The second appellant, however, was not a British citizen or settled in
    the United Kingdom; nor had he lived in the United Kingdom continuously
    for seven years or more.  Thus, although the parental relationship  was
    acknowledged,  the  respondent  considered  that  application  made  by
    reference to the child fell for refusal under the rules.


 3. The  first  appellant's  case  was  then  considered  by  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of those rules.  Paragraph 276ADE reads as follows:-

         "276ADE (1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.1 to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-LTR.4.5.  in
             Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
             lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than   20   years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."


 4.  The  respondent  found  that  the  first  appellant  had   not   lived
    continuously in the UK for at least the last  twenty  years.   She  was
    also over the age of 18.  She was not between 18 and  25  years.   This
    meant that the only way in which  the  first  appellant  could  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE  was  by  reference  to  sub-paragraph  (1)(vi).   The
    respondent accordingly addressed the issue of whether  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to the first  appellant's  integration  into
    Nigeria.   The  respondent  considered  there  would  not.   The  first
    appellant had spent her formative years living in Nigeria and would  be
    familiar with the language and culture there.  The first appellant  had
    a husband living in Nigeria, who had business interests in the country.
     All of that would, according  to  the  respondent,  enable  the  first
    appellant to integrate into Nigeria.  She had  been  to  Nigeria  since
    entering  the  United  Kingdom.   For  these  reasons,  the  respondent
    concluded that the first appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


 5. As for the second appellant, the respondent's attention also focused on
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The respondent considered  that  there  would
    not be very significant obstacles in the case of the  second  appellant
    because he would be relocating to Nigeria with his mother and would  be
    supported by her there whilst he integrated.  Furthermore,  the  second
    appellant's father resided in Nigeria and would also be able to  supply
    support.


 6.  The  letter  of   refusal   concluded   by   considering   exceptional
    circumstances.  It was noted that the second appellant was born in  the
    United Kingdom and that the first appellant was  in  employment  there.
    Although the second appellant might be currently enrolled in  education
    in the United Kingdom, it was clear to the  respondent  from  objective
    information that Nigeria had a functioning education system, which  the
    second appellant would be able to enter.   Although  it  was  generally
    accepted that the best interests of a child  whose  parent  was  facing
    removal from the United Kingdom were best served by the child remaining
    with the parent, given that the first appellant would be  removed  with
    the second appellant, and that the first  appellant  was  "clearly  the
    most important person in [the second appellant's] life  ...  this  will
    help him to readapt to life in Nigeria".  Although the first  appellant
    had family and friends in the  United  Kingdom,  these  ties  were  not
    considered to be strong enough to engage article 8.


 7. The respondent noted that the first appellant was a nurse in the United
    Kingdom and that she supported newly qualified nurses.  The  respondent
    also noted that the first appellant said there was a shortage of nurses
    in the United Kingdom.  That was carefully considered:


         "however this is not an exceptional reason to grant  leave  outside
         the rules.  It is open for you to return to Nigeria and  apply  for
         the correct entry clearance.  You can use your skills gained in the
         UK in Nigeria where you could find a similar job".


    Nor was it an exceptional circumstance that  the  first  appellant  had
    purchased a house in the United Kingdom.  The house could be  sold  and
    the money used to buy a similar property in Nigeria.






B.  APPEALS TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


 8.  The  appellants  appealed  against  the  refusals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Following an appeal heard at Taylor House on 26  June  2019,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  S  J  Clarke  dismissed  the  appeals  in  a
    decision promulgated on 8 August 2019.  The judge heard  evidence  from
    the first appellant, and from the first appellant's mother and sisters.
     The first appellant told the judge that her marriage to her husband in
    Nigeria had ended in June 2017.  Amongst the findings made by the judge
    were those at paragraph 17 of her decision, where it was recorded  that
    the mother of the first appellant had  recently  spent  six  months  in
    Nigeria, looking after her own  mother.   The  judge  found  that  this
    demonstrated there was a base from which the first  appellant  and  the
    second appellant could begin their life in  Nigeria.   At  the  end  of
    paragraph 17, the judge found that "the appellant's mother is currently
    remitting money for some of their children by bank transfer and I  find
    she is able to assist the appellant should the need arise".


 9. At paragraph 18,  the  judge  found  that,  in  any  event,  the  first
    appellant could maintain the second appellant  by  herself  or  through
    some assistance from the father of the second  appellant.   The  decree
    absolute produced by the first appellant specifically referred  to  the
    father  paying  for  the  school  fees  of  the  second  appellant  and
    specifically stated that "it is not limited to this".


10. At paragraph 20, the  judge  found  that  the  first  appellant  was  a
    successful independent woman, who had set up her own home and  educated
    herself  and  was  earning  a  good   salary   for   an   international
    pharmaceutical company.  At paragraph 20, he found the first  appellant
    could speak Yoruba fluently:-


         "... and whilst I was informed of a local dialect called Remo, I do
         not find this sufficient to create an insurmountable obstacle,  and
         in any event, the first Appellant was brought up in a Remo speaking
         area until she came to the UK aged 15 years, and if she is a little
         rusty, I find she can relearn it being as educated as she is having
         attained a first-class degree."


11. Also at paragraph 20, the judge found that the second appellant did not
    face any insurmountable obstacles and that there were schools he  could
    access.  He was young enough and of an age when he could  learn  Yoruba
    or Remo, as well as English.


12. Having concluded that the appellants did not meet the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules, the judge looked at ECHR Article 8  outside  the
    rules, finding, in effect, that there were no reasons such as to compel
    a grant of leave by reference to that Article, outside those rules.  At
    paragraph 23, the judge noted that the second appellant would return to
    a network of family living in the same  state  as  the  father  of  the
    second appellant "who may or may not assist with  his  upbringing,  but
    even if he does not, there remain some financial  assistance  from  the
    grandmother and the first Appellant owns an asset  in  the  form  of  a
    house ...".  The first appellant also had "transferrable skills and  is
    able to provide for her son in Nigeria in some care related or  nursing
    related activity".






C.  APPLICATIONS FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL


13. The appellants applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  of
    application to the First-tier Tribunal contended that the judge  should
    have realised there was  a  reasonable  contemplation  that  the  first
    appellant's private life "would not remain stagnant".  This was said to
    be an error of law.  It was also submitted that the judge had failed to
    recognise that the  first  appellant's  qualification  as  a  qualified
    registered adult nurse constituted an important public interest,  given
    the shortage of nurses in the  United  Kingdom.   The  grounds  further
    contended that there were factual errors in the judge's  decision.   At
    paragraph 17, the judge was said to  have  wrongly  recorded  that  the
    first appellant's mother was able  to  support  her  financially.   The
    first appellant said that, in fact, it  was  the  first  appellant  who
    provided financial support to her mother.  It was also  untrue  to  say
    that the first appellant had grown up in a  Remo  speaking  area.   The
    judge had misunderstood what was said at  the  hearing.   The  language
    spoken in her grandmother's village was Remo, which the first appellant
    did not speak or understand.

14. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to  appeal  on  11  November
    2019.  The appellants then made a renewed application for permission to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The renewed  application  emphasised  the  alleged
    factual errors made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  the  decision.
    It was said that these impacted upon the judge's consideration  of  the
    case for the appellants.

15. On 6 January 2020, the Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal.  At
    paragraph 2 of the refusing judge's  decision,  he  noted  the  alleged
    factual  errors  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   At
    paragraph 3, the refusal categorised the grounds as "unarguable".   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to find that the first appellant
    was unable to satisfy the requirements of the  immigration  rules.   As
    regards  paragraph  276ADE,  the  refusal  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  judge  had  found  that   the   appellants   did   not   face
    "insurmountable  obstacles  to  their  integration  in  Nigeria".    In
    reaching that finding, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had had regard  to
    the history  of  the  first  appellant's  mother  and  found  that  the
    appellants  had  a  base  to  start  from  in  Nigeria.   The   refusal
    specifically addressed the  issue  of  whether  the  first  appellant's
    mother was able to remit money to her other children in  Nigeria,  only
    because she was financially supported in  the  United  Kingdom  by  the
    first appellant.  The refusal noted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    not found that the appellants  would  necessarily  have  to  call  upon
    assistance from the first appellant's mother.   On  the  contrary,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had found that  the  first  appellant  was  a
    successful independent woman who had set up home and educated  herself,
    and who was earning a good salary from an international  pharmaceutical
    company.  She could speak  Yoruba  and,  although  there  was  a  local
    dialect called Remo, that would not create an insurmountable  obstacle.
    The Upper Tribunal Judge considered that the assessment of an Article 8
    claim  "is  always  a  highly  fact  sensitive  task".    Reading   the
    determination as a whole the refusal of  permission  ended  by  stating
    that "it is quite clear that the conclusions of the  judge  as  to  the
    Article 8 appeal were supported by reasons open to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her, and the findings made".




D. 'CART' JUDICIAL REVIEW

16. The appellants sought judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    to refuse permission to appeal.  The grounds  of  the  judicial  review
    application were settled by Mr Sharma.  He had not been involved in the
    proceedings up to that point.  Mr Sharma mounted  a  criticism  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which had not found any expression
    in the grounds accompanying the applications for permission  to  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.  At paragraph  22  of
    the judicial review grounds, Mr Sharma submitted that, at paragraph  17
    of her decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had misdirected  herself
    as regards the test to be satisfied in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules.  The judge had described the test in  terms  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the integration of the  appellants  in  Nigeria,  whereas
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) requires consideration  of  whether  there  are
    "very significant obstacles to" integration.

17. The  judicial  review  grounds  went  on  to  critique  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision on the basis that there needed to be  a  change  in
    circumstances, in order to justify the respondent's  refusal  to  grant
    leave to remain to the first appellant, given that the latter had  been
    given such leave on private life grounds on  previous  occasions.   The
    grounds submitted that the first appellant's visit to Nigeria  in  2013
    could not constitute such a change.  Nor could the fact that the  first
    appellant had moved from her mother's home.  The fact  that  the  first
    appellant's mother's had contacts in  Nigeria  were,  according  to  Mr
    Sharma's grounds, irrelevant to the two initial  grants  of  leave  and
    therefore not of  sufficient  basis  on  which  to  depart  from  those
    previous decisions.

18. At paragraph 41 of the judicial  review  grounds,  Mr  Sharma  candidly
    recognised "that many of the submissions above did not explicitly  form
    a part of the original grounds before the Tribunals".  Indeed, they did
    not.  We do not consider they formed any part of those grounds.

19. Following a hearing conducted by telephone on 1 April  2020,  at  which
    the appellants and the Secretary of State were represented by  Counsel,
    the High Court  granted  permission  to  bring  judicial  review.   The
    court's reasons were that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    "appears to be poorly reasoned, appears to apply the wrong  test  under
    the relevant Rule (very significant obstacles) and  arguably  does  not
    adequately weigh the factors which  may  render  the  claimant's  (sic)
    expulsion disproportionate".

20. The court identified the important points of principle or practice  for
    the purpose of CPR 54.7A to be  (i)  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should take the successive grants of leave  to  remain  in  a  category
    leading to settlement as the  starting  point  in  determining  whether
    there had been a change in circumstances since the last grant of leave;
    (ii) what approach should be taken in considering proportionality under
    Article 8 or "very significant obstacles" under the Rules, where  there
    has been a previous grant; and (iii) when  should  a  person,  who  had
    previously been found to have lost all ties to the country of  proposed
    return,  be regarded as having established ties  to  that  country,  to
    such an extent that their route to settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom
    should be interrupted.  The  High  Court  noted  that  Counsel,  having
    carried legal research, told the court there was "no case law  directly
    on these points".

21. The High Court's order, which  resulted  from  the  telephone  hearing,
    stated that these "important points of principle or  practice  for  the
    consideration  of  the  Upper  Tribunal"  would  be  "subject  to   the
    claimants' application to amend their grounds of appeal".



E. DISCUSSION

22. As the Upper Tribunal explained in MA (Cart JR: effect on UT processes)
    Pakistan [2019] UKUT 353 (IAC), the "Cart" judicial review jurisdiction
    for which provision is made by CPR  54.7A  should  not  be  treated  by
    parties as merely an untrammelled third opportunity to raise grounds of
    challenge to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which have found no
    expression in the grounds put to the First-tier Tribunal and, then, the
    Upper Tribunal.  In enacting section 11 of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, Parliament has provided for there to be a renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal, following a refusal  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. That renewed application is not constrained by  whatever
    grounds have been put to the First-tier Tribunal.  The "Cart"  judicial
    review is, however, of a fundamentally different character. In order to
    satisfy the part of CPR 54.7A(7)(a) which requires the  High  Court  to
    find an arguable case that the Upper Tribunal's refusal  of  permission
    to appeal was wrong in law, the court  needs  to  be  satisfied  either
    that:

          (a) the Upper Tribunal's reaction to the grounds of  challenge  in
         the application for permission to appeal was arguably wrong in law;
         or

          (b) where the judicial review grounds have not found expression in
         the grounds considered by the Upper Tribunal, the  judicial  review
         grounds are of such an a nature  as  to  have  required  the  Upper
         Tribunal to  have  raised  them  of  its  own  volition,  and  then
         considered them; and that its failure to do so is arguably wrong in
         law.

23. In the present case, we were  concerned  whether  the  High  Court,  in
    granting  permission  to  bring  judicial  review,   regarded   it   as
    significant that the appellants had supposedly  applied  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to amend their grounds of appeal.  Accordingly, at the hearing
    on 10 February 2021, directions were given to the appellants to explain
    (i) what information was given to the High Court about the  grounds  to
    which the Upper Tribunal's impugned refusal of permission had  in  fact
    responded; and (ii) the basis (if any) on which it was  suggested  that
    any other grounds should be considered in a judicial review.

24. In response to these directions, Mr Sharma filed a  skeleton  argument,
    together with a supplementary bundle.  From the latter, we see that  on
    30 January 2020, over three weeks  after  the  Upper  Tribunal  refused
    permission to appeal, a document purporting to be  an  application  for
    permission to appeal (on Form IAUT-1) was sent to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    together with grounds.  The form indicated  that  the  application  was
    being made outside the relevant time limit.  The reasons given were  as
    follows:-

         "This is an application for  amending  the  grounds  that  we  have
         lodged on 28 November 2019 for permission seeking to Upper Tribunal
         (sic).  This grounds was given (sic) by a different Counsel and  it
         is necessary for us to amend this grounds (sic) for us to  rely  on
         these grounds before High Court in a Cart judicial review.

         We hereby seek permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  amend  the
         grounds seeking permission and  extend  the  time  of  making  this
         applicaiton (sic) in the interests of justice."

25. The grounds which accompanied the application  were,  in  fact,  headed
    "PARTICULARS OF CLAIM JUDICIAL REVIEW".  A comparison of this  document
    and the judicial  review  grounds  shows  that  the  substance  of  the
    challenge now being made was the same in each case; namely, the alleged
    application  of  an  incorrect  test  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules; and the alleged failure of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to take as her starting point  the  previous  grants  of
    leave to the first appellant on private life grounds.  The  grounds  of
    30 January 2020 concluded as follows:-

         "27. In making this application, A recognises the  difficulty  that
             may arise if she succeeds before the Administrative  Court  on
             grounds not previously pleaded before the Upper  Tribunal  and
             invites a pragmatic approach to granting permission  to  amend
             grounds.

         28.  This application has been brought as timeously as  allowed  in
             the circumstances, in good faith and  on  grounds  that  would
             materially alter the outcome  of  the  appeal.   There  is  no
             prejudice to the Respondent, in granting permission  to  amend
             grounds in circumstances where the Administrative Court  would
             have identified the grounds as arguable.

         29.  The errors pleaded are, in relation to ground 1, material  and
             obvious.  It is unclear why it was not  expressly  pleaded  in
             the preceding applications.  Ground 2 is an extension  of  the
             factual errors relied upon in the grounds below and is  simply
             an attempt to perfect the grounds."

26. In view of the history we have set out, we would strongly disagree with
    what is stated in paragraph 29 of this document. It is perfectly  clear
    that the grounds accompanying the application made on 30  January  were
    fundamentally different from those put to, and refused  by,  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

27. The important point, however, is that those acting for  the  appellants
    at this stage of the proceedings did in fact recognise  the  difficulty
    the appellants faced  in  bringing  a  "Cart"  judicial  review,  whose
    grounds of challenge had not previously been put to the Upper Tribunal.
    A decision was, therefore, taken to attempt to put the newly formulated
    grounds before the Upper Tribunal in the form  of  an  application  for
    permission to appeal.  But the fundamental problem with this course  of
    action was that such an  application  had  already  been  made  by  the
    appellants'  previous  representatives.   That  application  had   been
    decided by the Upper Tribunal  on  6  January  2020,  when  it  refused
    permission to appeal.  That refusal was, unarguably,  a  decision  that
    disposed of the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.  Subject to what  we
    say in paragraph 29 below, upon the making of the refusal decision, the
    Upper Tribunal became functus officio.

28. In Patel & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA
    Civ 1175; [2016] Imm AR 444, the Court of  Appeal  held  that,  once  a
    decision on permission to appeal has been taken by the Upper  Tribunal,
    that tribunal has no power to review a decision under section 11 of the
    2007 Act.  The court held:-

         "48. It is clear from the wording of section  13(8)(c)  taken  with
              section 11(4)(b) of the 2007 Act that when the UT  grants  or
              refuses an application for permission to appeal,  it  is,  in
              principle, making a "decision" within the  meaning  of  those
              sections.  Therefore,  given  the  terms  of  section  13(1),
              13(8)(c) and 11(4)(b) of the 2007 Act, it is also clear  that
              a  "decision"  of  the  UT  to  grant  permission  to  appeal
              constitutes  an  "excluded  decision".   Once  an   "excluded
              decision" is made by the UT, then the  UT  has  no  power  to
              "review" it, by virtue of the terms of section 10(1)  of  the
              2007 Act.

29. Patel presents a serious difficulty  for  the  present  appellants.  It
    would clearly make a mockery of section 10(1) of  the  2007  Act  if  a
    party could evade the restriction on review of a refusal of  permission
    merely by making another application for permission. The  only  way  in
    which a decision that disposes of proceedings can be revisited  by  the
    Upper Tribunal is under  rule  43  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008: Jan (Upper  Tribunal:  set-aside  powers)  [2016]
    UKUT 336 (IAC); [2016] Imm AR 1437. Rule 43 enables the Upper  Tribunal
    to set aside such a decision if it is in the interests of justice to do
    so and there has been some procedural irregularity in the  proceedings.
    There is no question of there being such an irregularity in the present
    case.

30. Furthermore if, as Mr Sharma submitted, the  Upper  Tribunal  did  have
    jurisdiction to consider the so-called application made on  30  January
    2020, the consequences would be profound.  Section 104 (Pending appeal)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  provides  that  an
    appeal is pending during the period beginning when it is instituted and
    ending when it is finally determined (or  in  other  circumstances  not
    here relevant).  Section 104(2) provides that an appeal is not  finally
    determined while (inter alia) "an application for permission to  appeal
    under section 11 ... of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    could be made or is awaiting determination".  If Mr  Sharma  is  right,
    there would be nothing to prevent an appellant from filing an unlimited
    number of applications for permission to appeal, within  the  requisite
    time limit, all of which would have  to  be  determined  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

31. Although decided in a different  statutory  context,  the  judgment  of
    Richards LJ in  JH  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ  78;  [2009]  Imm  AR  499  illuminates  the
    concern we have with the appellants' submissions. Construing section 3C
    of the Immigration Act 1971 with regard to a decision of the  Secretary
    of State on an application for leave, Richards LJ  held  that  "once  a
    decision has been made, no variation to  the  application  is  possible
    since there is nothing left to vary" (paragraph 35). By the same token,
    in the present case the grounds of application for permission to appeal
    cannot be varied, once a decision has been  taken  on  the  application
    that disposes of proceedings.

32. Mr Sharma sought to avoid the consequences of  Patel  by  pointing  out
    that in the present case there was  "the  intervening  judicial  review
    claim.  Indeed, there is also the additional quashing of  the  impugned
    decision ..." (skeleton argument, paragraph 14).  His skeleton argument
    continues by submitting that, if the Upper Tribunal had considered  the
    30 January "application" (here described as an "application to  amend")
    before the High Court's decision to quash the  refusal  of  permission,
    that would have constituted an excluded decision and  could  have  been
    challenged by the Administrative Court.

33. We do not consider this submission takes the appellants  anywhere.  The
    mere fact that the purported application was made to the Upper Tribunal
    in the context of what was then an  undecided  "Cart"  judicial  review
    cannot invest the Upper Tribunal with  a  jurisdiction  that  it  would
    otherwise lack. If the Upper Tribunal had formally responded to the  30
    January "application" by stating that it could  take  no  action,  that
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  be  judicially  reviewed  or
    appealed, since any decision of the Upper Tribunal is subject to one or
    the other form of challenge. But that does not affect  the  inescapable
    reality that the "application" of  30  January  simply  could  have  no
    material bearing on the High Court's function of  deciding  the  "Cart"
    judicial review.  The fact that the Upper Tribunal had  been  belatedly
    approached with arguments in favour of the grant of  permission,  which
    had not hitherto found expression, could not relieve the appellants  of
    the burden of persuading the High Court that the grounds  now  advanced
    were such that - even though  they  had  not  been  put  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal - they nevertheless should have occurred to it, when examining
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

34. In other words, because the basis of challenge in the  judicial  review
    was not the basis of  challenge  put  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    appellate  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   decision,   the
    appellants were inexorably faced with having  to  make  their  judicial
    review case on the basis set out in paragraph 22(b) above; namely, that
    the Upper Tribunal should have taken the points of  its  own  volition.
    That is a more challenging task than under paragraph 22(a),  since  the
    basis of challenge needs to be a "Robinson" obvious one (R v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  ex  parte  Robinson  [1998]  QB  929;
    [1997] Imm AR 568; R (Begum) v  Social  Security  Commissioners  [2002]
    EWHC 401 (Admin); Bulale v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 806; [2009] Imm AR 102).

35. Mr Sharma sought to rely upon paragraph 40 of MA (paragraph 22 above):-

         "40. It is necessary to make one final procedural point.  If, as  a
             result of "Cart" judicial review proceedings, the grounds  for
             contending that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law
             have changed, compared with those that were before  the  Upper
             Tribunal  when  it  made  its  (now  quashed)  decision,   the
             appellant will  need  to  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
             permission to amend his or her grounds of permission, in order
             to be able to rely upon the grounds  advanced  in  the  "Cart"
             judicial review.  The fact that such grounds have found favour
             in the High Court does not mean  those  grounds  automatically
             become the grounds of challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's
             decision."


36. What the Upper Tribunal said at paragraph 40  of MA cannot be  used  to
    justify what the appellants did in the present case.   As  is  evident,
    the Upper Tribunal was there addressing the  requirement  to  apply  to
    amend the grounds of application for permission, following the quashing
    by the High Court of the earlier refusal of permission to  appeal.   In
    the present case, the approach to the Upper Tribunal on 30 January not
    only took place before the High Court had made  a  quashing  order  but
    also was apparently motivated by the view that the High Court might  be
    persuaded to grant the judicial review,  precisely  because  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been so approached.  For the reasons we  have  given,  any
    such motivation was misconceived.

37. Having said this, we are persuaded that those acting for the appellants
    took the steps they did in entirely good faith.  We do, however, expect
    that, in the light of our decision in the present case, no  one  should
    repeat those steps in future.

38. Whether or not the High Court was  influenced  by  the  fact  that  the
    appellants had made the "application" of 30 January,  the  outcome  was
    that the court quashed the refusal of permission  to  appeal.   In  the
    light of that quashing, and of the substantive reasons  given  for  the
    grant of permission, the Upper Tribunal has given permission to  appeal
    against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  new  grounds
    advanced by Mr Sharma  were,  we  respectfully  consider,  compellingly
    synthesised by the High Court in explaining  why  important  points  of
    principle or practice arose.  In particular, the ground  alleging  that
    the First-tier Tribunal applied  the  wrong  test  in  connection  with
    paragraph 276ADE(1(vi) is  of  the  kind  which  we  accept  the  Upper
    Tribunal should have considered of its own volition,  when  considering
    the  application  for  permission.  In  the  circumstances,   we   gave
    permission to amend the grounds accordingly.

39. Despite Mr Lindsay's valiant efforts to persuade us otherwise,  we  are
    satisfied that the errors  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  are
    material.  The result is that we set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  Having regard to the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    required, we remit the appeals to be heard entirely afresh by the First-
    tier Tribunal.




Decision

Appeal allowed. The cases are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction  applies  both  to  the
appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Mr Justice Lane

12 April 2021




The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
President of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber


