

                                    [pic]
Ahmed and Others (deprivation of citizenship) [2017] UKUT 00118 (IAC)

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London           |          Date Promulgated:  10       |
|                                       |February 2017                         |
|On 09 January 2017                     |                                      |
|Further written submissions completed  |                                      |
|on 25 January 2017                     |                                      |

                                   Before


                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes



Between


                                Shabir Ahmed
                                  Adil Khan
                               Qari Abdul Rauf
                                 Abdul Aziz
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellants:    Shabir Ahmed: Mr R Sharma, of counsel, instructed by
             Platt Halpern
                                       Solicitors (by written submission
             only)
               Adil Khan, Qari Abdul Rauf and Abdul Aziz: Mr Z Jafferji, of


                                       Counsel Instructed by Burton &
             Burton Solicitors



For the Respondent:    Ms C McGahey QC and Mr V Mandalia, of counsel,
             instructed by
                                       The Government Legal Department


 i) While the two fold duties enshrined  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 are imposed on  the  Secretary  of
    State, the  onus  of  making  representations  and  providing  relevant
    evidence relating to a child's best interests rests on the  appropriate
    parental figure.


ii) A failure to discharge this onus may  well  defeat  any  argument  that
    there was a proactive duty of enquiry on the Secretary of  State  in  a
    given context.


iii) In deprivation of citizenship cases, section 55  issues  arise  at  two
    stages: at the deprivation of citizen stage and at the later  stage  of
    proposed removal or deportation.


iv) As the subject of national  citizenship  lies  exclusively  within  the
    competence of Member States, EU law has no role to play in  deprivation
    cases: G1 v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 867 applied.


 v) The Secretary of State's deprivation of citizenship  policy  confers  a
    wide margin of appreciation on the decision maker.


vi) Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  does  not
    apply to deprivation of citizenship decisions as such decisions are not
    made under the Immigration Acts.


vii) There would be a considerable saving of human and  financial  resources
    with consequential reduced delay  if  deprivation  of  citizenship  and
    deportation or removal decisions were to be made jointly.



                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. This  is  the  decision  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.


 2. All of the Appellants are of Pakistani nationality  and  have  acquired
    British citizenship by naturalisation.  Their  conjoined  appeals  have
    their origins in a series of decisions made by the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State") proposing to deprive
    the Appellants of their British citizenship under section 40(2) of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
    dismissed the Appellants' ensuing appeals.  The  Appellants  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal pursuant to my order granting permission  to  do  so
    dated 05 August 2016.

 3. As recorded in the  permission  order,  these  are  four  inter-related
    appeals in a case of some  notoriety  arising  out  of  certain  highly
    publicised prosecutions and ensuing convictions.  The  Appellants  were
    convicted  of  various  inter-related  offences:  the  trafficking   of
    children for sexual exploitation, rape, conspiracy to engage in  sexual
    activity with children and sexual  coercion.   Their  sentences  ranged
    from 6 to 19 years imprisonment.  The sentencing judge highlighted  the
    scale and gravity of the  offending,  the  protracted  period  involved
    (2008 - 2010), the ages of the victims - they were  young  teenagers  -
    and the factors of callous, vicious and violent rape,  humiliation  and
    financial gain.



    The Appellants' Criminality


 4. On 9 May 2012 HHJ Clifton sentenced the four Appellants, together  with
    five others, following their conviction by a jury of very grave  sexual
    offences, undertaken in the context of a  conspiracy  to  commit  them,
    between the spring of 2008 and  the  spring  of  2010.   That  criminal
    behaviour  can  be  summarised  briefly  as  the  grooming  and  sexual
    exploitation of a number of girls in their early teens, in the area  of
    Rochdale and Oldham.  As the sentencing Judge  observed,  this  summary
    risks  hiding  the  appalling  character  of  their   behaviour.    The
    Appellants were all many years  older  than  their  victims.   In  some
    cases, girls were raped callously and viciously and in others they were
    forced to have sex with paying customers.  The sentencing  Judge  noted
    that some of the Appellants acted to satiate their lust, others did  so
    for financial gain and some had both motivations.  All  were  condemned
    as having treated their victims as worthless and undeserving  of  basic
    respect  and  dignity.  Their  offences  were  shocking,   brutal   and
    repulsive.

 5. Individually the Appellants were punished as follows:

      i) Shabir Ahmed was convicted of the rape of a girl of 15  on  several
         occasions and of giving her to a young man that he referred  to  as
         his nephew who also raped her.  There was a second rape conviction.
         He was described as the leader of the  conspiracy.   For  the  rape
         convictions he was sentenced  to  19  and  22  years'  imprisonment
         respectively.  For the convictions for trafficking, conspiracy  and
         sexual assault he was sentenced to two further terms of eight years
         and one of six months.  All sentences were  ordered  to  be  served
         concurrently. He remains incarcerated.


     ii) Adil Khan was convicted of conspiracy to engage in sexual  activity
         with a child by penetrative sex,  and  of  trafficking  for  sexual
         exploitation two 15 year old girls.  He had sex with them both, and
         used violence towards one whom he coerced.  For the conviction  for
         trafficking he was sentenced to eight years'  imprisonment  with  a
         further term of eight years  to  be  served  concurrently  for  the
         conspiracy conviction.  He has been released on licence.


    iii) Qari Abdul Rauf was convicted of conspiracy  to  engage  in  sexual
         activity with a child by penetrative sex  and  of  trafficking  for
         sexual exploitation a 15 year old girl.  He had sex with that  girl
         in his taxi, and he and others also had sex with her at a  flat  in
         Rochdale.  For the convictions for trafficking he was sentenced  to
         six years' imprisonment with a further term  of  six  years  to  be
         served concurrently for the conspiracy  conviction.   He  has  been
         released on licence.


     iv) Abdul Aziz was convicted of conspiracy to engage in sexual activity
         with a child by penetrative  sex  and  of  trafficking  for  sexual
         exploitation a 15 year old girl.  He had taken over the running  of
         the conspiracy from Shabir Ahmed and whilst he was not convicted of
         having  sexual  intercourse  with  a  child  himself,  his  further
         convictions were coercing girls into having sex with men  who  paid
         him, including the coercion of one girl into having anal  sex  when
         she was menstruating.   For  the  trafficking  convictions  he  was
         sentenced to nine years' imprisonment with a further term  of  nine
         years to be served concurrently for the conspiracy conviction.   He
         has been released on licence.


    There were other convicted offenders who are not involved in these
    appeals.




Statutory Framework


 6. Section 40 of the British Nationality Act (the "1981 Act"),  under  the
    rubric of "Deprivation of Citizenship", provides:




         "(1) In this section a reference to a person's "citizenship status"
             is a reference to his status as-


             (a)  a British citizen,


             (b)  a British   overseas territories citizen,


             (c)  a British Overseas citizen,


             (d)  a British National (Overseas),


             (e)  a British protected person, or


             (f)  a British subject.

         (2)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
             deprivation is conducive to the public good.


         ...


         (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under  subsection
             (2) if he is satisfied that the  order  would  make  a  person
             stateless.


         ...


         (4A) But that does not prevent the Secretary of State  from  making
             an order under  subsection  (2)  to  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status if-


             (a)   the  citizenship  status  results  from   the   person's
                  naturalisation,


             (b)  the Secretary of State is satisfied that the  deprivation
                  is conducive to the public good because the person,  while
                  having that  citizenship  status,  has  conducted  him  or
                  herself in a manner which is seriously prejudicial to  the
                  vital interests of the United Kingdom, any of the Islands,
                  or any British overseas territory, and


             (c)   the  Secretary  of  State  has  reasonable  grounds  for
                  believing that the person is able,  under  the  law  of  a
                  country or territory outside the United Kingdom, to become
                  a national of such a country or territory.

         (5)  Before making an order under this section in respect of a
             person the Secretary of State must give the person written
             notice specifying -


   a) that the Secretary of State has decided to make an order,
   b) the reasons for the order, and
   c) the person's right of appeal under section 40A (1) or under section 2B
      of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997.


         (6)  Where a person acquired a citizenship status by the  operation
             of a law which applied to him because of his  registration  or
             naturalisation  under  an  enactment  having   effect   before
             commencement, the Secretary of State may by order deprive  the
             person of the citizenship status if the Secretary of State  is
             satisfied that the registration or naturalisation was obtained
             by means of-


             (a)  fraud,


             (b    false representation, or


             (c)  concealment of a material fact."


     The Secretary of State's decisions were all made  under  section  40(2)
and (5).




    The Secretary of State's Decisions


 7. The Appellants' convictions were the sole impetus for the Secretary  of
    State's decisions made under section 40.  Decisions to  that  end  were
    initially made on 31 July 2015.  The Appellants exercised  their  right
    of appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act.  Unusually, in the  events
    which occurred, the Secretary of State's decision- making  process  and
    the process of the FtT then merged to a certain extent.  As this sounds
    on at least one of the grounds of appeal, it is  necessary  to  outline
    what transpired between 31 July 2015 and the ultimate disposal  of  the
    appeals by the FtT.  In short:


      i) The appeals having been registered, a hearing date of 22  September
         2015 was arranged initially.   This  was  then  re-arranged  to  28
         October 2015  and,  in  the  course  of  a  phase  of  active  case
         management, this arrangement was revised.


     ii)  By  letter  dated  28  October  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State's
         representative withdrew the decisions of 31 July 2015 in the  cases
         of Messrs Khan, Rauf and Aziz.


    iii) In each of the aforementioned three cases fresh decisions, dated 02
         December 2015, followed.


     iv) Messrs Khan, Rauf and Aziz then lodged appeals with the FtT against
         the fresh decisions. Those appeals were linked to the appeal of  Mr
         Ahmed and all four appeals were then heard together.


    The FtT promulgated its decisions on 07 April 2016. In each case the
    FtT upheld the decisions of the Secretary of State.




 8. At this juncture it is convenient to  record  that  the  aforementioned
    three Appellants - Messrs Khan, Rauf and Aziz - are each the fathers of
    children aged under 18 years.  This realisation was the impetus for the
    substitution of the original decisions by replacement decisions.   This
    does not apply to the first Appellant, Mr Ahmed,  whose  children  were
    adults at all material times.  We shall elaborate on  this  distinction
    infra.


 9. The format of the Secretary of State's decisions in all four  cases  is
    identical, with the exception that in the case of the  first  Appellant
    there is (as explained above) no mention of children.  The  content  of
    the decisions varies only minimally, reflecting the different names and
    dates of birth of the Appellants, their differing family  circumstances
    and the different dates upon which they had received their certificates
    of nationalisation as British citizens.


10. The Secretary  of  State's  decisions  in  all  four  cases  noted  the
    Appellants' British citizenship status, their convictions and  some  of
    the observations of  the  sentencing  judge.   Each  of  the  decisions
    describes  the  Appellants'  criminality  as  involving  "serious   and
    organised offences".  In the cases of Messrs  Ahmed  and  Aziz,  it  is
    stated that these Appellants had "a leading role" in  the  criminality.
    In the cases of Messrs Khan and  Rauf,  the  different  terminology  of
    "collusion with others"  is  employed.   In  the  cases  of  the  three
    Appellants who have children, there is a separate  paragraph  dedicated
    to this issue which we shall address at a later stage of this judgment.




11. In all four cases, the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions  contain  the
    following passages:


         "In accordance with section 40(5) of the  British  Nationality  Act
         1981, the Secretary of State gives notice of her decision  to  make
         an order to deprive you [name] of British citizenship under section
         40(2) ....


         This is because the Secretary of State is satisfied that  it  would
         be conducive to the public good to do so....


         Having considered all  relevant  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
         State considers deprivation  of  your  British  citizenship  to  be
         reasonable and proportionate ....


         In accord [sic] with section 40(4) ....  the Secretary of State  is
         satisfied that such an order will  not  make  you  stateless.   You
         still hold Pakistani nationality as Pakistan Nationality law allows
         for a person to hold dual nationality."


    In all four cases, under the rubric "right of appeal", the Secretary of
    State's decisions also stated:


         "You may appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal against  the
         decision to deprive you of your citizenship, under section 40A  (1)
         ....


         In  the  eventuality  that  you  are  deprived  of   your   British
         citizenship, the Secretary of State will also give consideration to
         pursuing your removal or deportation from the United Kingdom.   You
         will be receiving a separate notification if  such  a  decision  is
         made ....


         Should any appeal in respect of the notice to deprive you  of  your
         British citizenship  be  dismissed,  the  deprivation  order  under
         section 40(2) ...  depriving you of your British  citizenship  will
         be served on you."


The Secretary of State's Decisions Analysed

12. The correct analysis of the Secretary of State's decisions,  considered
    in their statutory context, is in our judgment the following:

      a) By the impugned decisions the Secretary of State  conveyed  to  the
         Appellants  that  an  order  depriving  them   of   their   British
         citizenship under section 40(2) of the 1981 Act was forthcoming:  a
         classic "minded to decide" notification or notice of intention. The
         language of section 40(5) is "notice".


      b) Simultaneously, the Secretary of State  notified  an  intention  to
         defer making such an order in the event of an appeal being pursued:
         this was a voluntary act, not mandated by the statute.


      c) The pursuit of an unsuccessful appeal would give rise to the making
         of a deprivation of citizenship order (and a  further  notification
         to this effect): this is portrayed as a virtual inevitability.


      d) In the event of an order being made, the Secretary of  State  would
         give consideration to removing or deporting the Appellants from the
         United Kingdom.


13. The course adopted by the Secretary of State's decision-making  process
    in these cases therefore contemplates two further  stages.  First,  the
    making of a formal deprivation of British  Citizenship  order  in  each
    case, in the event of an unsuccessful appeal. Second,  further  to  the
    latter order, a removal decision or deportation order.  We observe that
    if the second further stage is reached in any of the Appellants' cases,
    it  will  involve  all  of  the  formalities,  procedures,  rights  and
    protections which decisions of this kind entail.  We shall revisit  the
    significance of this infra.

14. Given the factual and legal context outlined above, it  is  unnecessary
    to consider the hypothetical  question  of  whether  a  deprivation  of
    citizenship order may lawfully be made in circumstances where an appeal
    to the tribunal against a "notice of intention" decision is pending.



Permission to Appeal


15. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted to each  of
    the Appellants on the following five grounds:



      i) The Respondent's decision was vitiated by a  failure  to  discharge
         her duty under s. 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009;






     ii) The First-tier Tribunal ["FtT"] failed to acknowledge the factor of
         EU law  rights,  failed  to  carry  out  a  proper  proportionality
         balancing exercise and failed to evaluate the factors specified  in
         Articles 27 and 28 of the Charter;






    iii) The FtT erred in its construction of  the  statutory  criterion  of
         "serious organised crime" and  failed  to  take  into  account  the
         Respondent's policy on the issue;






     iv)  The  FtT  erred  in  its  application  of  Article  8  ECHR   and,
         specifically, failed to appreciate that the Article 8 claim focused
         on the deprivation of citizenship, not proposed deportation;






      v) The FtT erred in law  in  applying  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.






    We shall address each of the permitted grounds of appeal seriatim.










GROUND 1: THE SECTION 55 ISSUE


16. As noted above, this ground of appeal does not arise in the case of the
    first Appellant, Mr Ahmed. Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 (the "2009 Act") provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
             that-


             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom; and


             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State  and
                  relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.


         (2)  The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-


             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;
             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer;
             (c)   any general customs function of the Secretary of State;
             (d)   any customs function conferred on a  designated  customs
                  official.


         (3)  A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising
             the function, have regard to any guidance given to the  person
             by the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1)."


         [Our emphasis]

    It is common case that section 55  applied  to  the  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State under challenge.


17. At this stage we revisit the chronology of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision-making: see especially [6] - [8] above.   It  is  common  case
    that the Secretary of State's decisions concerning the three Appellants
    (second, third and fourth) who have children aged under 18  years  were
    withdrawn and substituted to address the lacuna  that  the  section  55
    duty  had  not  been  considered  in  the  original   decisions.    The
    substituted decisions sought to rectify this omission.  Of the  second,
    third and fourth Appellants the substituted (operative)  decisions  all
    contain a passage beginning with an acknowledgement of the Secretary of
    State's awareness that  the  Appellant  concerned  either  has  British
    citizen children whose ages are  noted  (in  two  cases)  or  that  the
    relevant Appellant has "dependents under 18 who are  British  citizens"
    (the Khan case). In all three cases, this passage continues:


         "Deprivation of your citizenship  (as  distinct  from  deportation)
         will not,  in  itself,  have  a  significant  effect  on  the  best
         interests of your children.  It will neither  impact  on  their  or
         your wife's status in the United Kingdom, nor is there any evidence
         that it will impact on their education, housing, financial  support
         or contact with you.  The  Secretary  of  State  acknowledges  that
         deprivation may have an emotional impact on your children. However,
         having taken into account the best interests of your children as  a
         primary consideration in discharge of  her  section  55  duty,  the
         Secretary of State considers that the public interest in  depriving
         you of citizenship clearly outweighs  any  interest  your  children
         might  have  in  your  remaining  a   British   citizen.    British
         citizenship is a privilege that confers particular entitlements and
         benefits, including the right to a British passport and  the  right
         to vote in general elections.  It is not  in  the  public  interest
         that individuals who engage  in  serious  and/or  organised  crime,
         which constitutes a flagrant abuse of British values,  enjoy  those
         entitlements and benefits ...


         Having considered all  relevant  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
         State considers deprivation  of  your  British  citizenship  to  be
         reasonable and proportionate."


    The essential question which arises in these appeals is whether, within
    the compass of the grant of permission to appeal, these passages in the
    decisions disclose any material  error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision maker.



18. During the FtT phase the initial case  management  directions  notified
    the parties of a forthcoming case management review hearing ("CMR") and
    included the following:



         "At least three days before the CMR  all  parties  shall  file  and
         serve a skeleton argument addressing the relevance of section 55 of
         the 2009 Act to each case ..."


     This prompted a letter from the  Secretary  of  State's  representative
stating:

         "....  The Secretary of State, following  submission  made  by  the
         legal representatives for the above  named  [the  three  Appellants
         concerned], has decided to reconsider the decisions  in  accordance
         with the Secretary of State's obligations under section 55 ....

         Therefore the Secretary of  State  has  decided  to  withdraw  the
decisions ...."

    It is common case that the  withdrawal  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    initial  decisions  and  their  substitution  by  new  decisions   were
    precipitated by the grounds of appeal and written representations  made
    on behalf of the three Appellants concerned in response  to  the  FtT's
    directions.  These representations addressed the issue of the impact of
    the impugned decisions on the welfare of the children concerned.



19. We turn to examine the case made to the FtT  on  this  issue  by  these
    three Appellants.  In summary:



      a) In the case of the first Appellant, Mr Khan, who was unrepresented,
         there  is  no  indication  that  any  witness  statement  or  other
         documentary  evidence  was  presented.   The  Tribunal's   decision
         records that this Appellant gave evidence and notes  the  following
         (referring to one of the members of the panel of three Judges):


             "Judge Baird asked the Appellant some questions  to  ascertain
             the circumstances  of  him  and  his  family.   The  Appellant
             confirmed that he is still on  licence,  the  terms  of  which
             prohibit him from going to Rochdale.   He  lives  in  Swinton,
             Manchester.  He is working part time in a  carpet  shop.   His
             wife is still living in Rochdale.  He has one son aged  7  who
             is living with his mother in a council property.  He does  not
             see his child.  He explained that this was because the  social
             worker will not allow it.  He has no telephone contact either.
             He has cousins, nephews and his wife's family in the UK and he
             is in contact with them.  His wife is a British citizen as  is
             his son ...


             He did see his son when  he  was  in  prison.   He  was  asked
             whether his wife had said how his absence is affecting his son
             and he responded that the  child  is  very  upset  and  it  is
             affecting his education.  His wife lives on state benefits and
             is struggling financially so their son does not get the things
             that he needs."




      b) The third Appellant, Mr Rauf, who was legally represented,  made  a
         relatively detailed witness statement which was  submitted  to  the
         FtT.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  had  noted  that  this
         Appellant has five British citizen children, aged between 8 and  15
         years.   In  his  statement,   this   Appellant   makes   a   bare,
         unparticularised  reference  to  "my  wife  and   children".    The
         remainder of his statement consists of  much  advocacy  and  little
         concrete evidence.  The decision of the FtT contains the  following
         passage:


             "He told us that he has five children between the  ages  of  9
             and 16.  They went to Pakistan to see relations in April 2015.
              He said that none of them have any medical problems  but  are
             upset.  When asked how he  thought  that  deprivation  of  his
             British citizenship would affect them, he said that  it  would
             be a very hard life for them without him.  They would be  very
             upset. He said that this  was  because  he  looks  after  them
             financially and takes them  to  and  from  school.   His  wife
             cannot drive and she is not educated and there  are  no  other
             relatives in the UK who can look after the  children  ...   he
             told us that all his children were in education and doing well
             at school."




         As appears from the following passage, this Appellant evidently did
         not proactively alert the FtT to the full picture:


             "In subsequent re-examination it came out  that  in  fact  the
             Appellant is not living with his wife and children  currently.
             He said it was a condition of his licence that he cannot go to
             Rochdale which is where they live.  He sees them on  Saturdays
             during the  day.   He  confirmed  therefore  that  he  is  not
             currently taking or collecting them from school nor is  he  in
             employment and providing for them financially ... he  has  not
             worked since he was released from  prison  in  November  2014.
             His licence will expire in November 2017 and he is on the  Sex
             Offenders Register for an indefinite period."




      c) In the case of the fourth Appellant,  Mr  Aziz,  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision noted that he had three British  citizen  children
         aged 5, 14 and 17 years.  This Appellant was represented before the
         FtT.  The presentation of his case included  a  written  statement.
         This recounted that prior to his incarceration he was the  family's
         sole bread winner, working as a taxi driver.  His children were  in
         full time education.  The family  was  now  wholly  dependent  upon
         state benefits.  His wife and children had visited him  during  his
         imprisonment.  Following his release from prison in  December  2015
         any contact with his children had  been  supervised,  involving  an
         appointed Social  Services  supervisor.   His  childrens'  maternal
         grandparents lived in the United Kingdom. He had a strong bond with
         his wife and children.   In  his  evidence  to  the  Tribunal  this
         Appellant elaborated on his written statements and  explained  that
         (by reason of the licence conditions) he was living apart from  his
         family,  in  Manchester.  In  evidence  to   the   Tribunal,   this
         Appellant's spouse testified that all three children  were  "bright
         in their education".  She  described  the  adverse  impact  on  the
         family arising out of her husband's imprisonment and the continuing
         separation.  Similar evidence, both written and oral, was given  by
         the oldest child of the family, a son aged 17.   He  confirmed  the
         role of his maternal grandparents in their lives.


    This Appellant's assertion in examination in chief that he looked after
    his children financially and  accompanied  them  to  and  from  school,
    without illumination or elaboration, was plainly misleading.




    The FtT's Approach



20. We now turn to consider how the FtT dealt with the  best  interests  of
    the children issue in its separate decisions.  In the case of Mr  Khan,
    the FtT noted the submission  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    relating to section 55 of the 2009  Act  and  reproduced  in  full  the
    relevant passage in the Secretary of State's decision: [17] supra.  The
    approach espoused by the FtT was that since the removal or  deportation
    of the Appellant was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of  depriving
    him of his British citizenship, Article 8 ECHR must be considered.  The
    word "deportation" features repeatedly in the  passages  which  follow.
    The FtT reasoned:



         "He is currently not having contact with his child.  His  wife  has
         looked after the child all the time he has been in prison. She  has
         also been deprived of her husband and his income for that period of
         time ....


         There was no evidence of the effect his separation from  the  child
         may have had on the child ...


         Given the seriousness of the crimes  committed  by  the  Appellant,
         very considerable weight must be given to the  public  interest  in
         his removal.  The family circumstances of this Appellant, even  put
         at their highest, which would include  him  being  able  to  resume
         living with his wife and child, do not render his removal,  in  all
         the circumstances, disproportionate."



21. In the case of  the  third  Appellant,  Mr  Rauf,  the  FtT  noted  the
    representative's  argument  that  the  Secretary  of  State   had   not
    adequately assessed the best interests of the children.   The  approach
    adopted by the Tribunal was essentially the same as in Mr Khan's  case,
    viz to ask  whether  removal  or  deportation  would  be  a  reasonably
    foreseeable consequence of depriving  this  Appellant  of  his  British
    citizenship, supplying an affirmative answer.  The FtT then stated:



         "The second alleged impropriety is that the Secretary of State  did
         not make adequate or any enquiries as to where the  best  interests
         of the children lie and the Appellant  is  thus  unable  to  answer
         that.  However, the Secretary of State has clearly taken  the  best
         interests of the children at their highest and said at paragraph  7
         of  the  Notice  that  the  public  interest  outweighed  the  best
         interests of the children.   In  other  words,  even  if  the  best
         interests of the  children  required  the  Appellant  to  remain  a
         British citizen and thereafter  in  the  UK,  those  interests  are
         outweighed by the public interest because of  the  gravity  of  his
         offending behaviour ....


         We find that being the case the Secretary of State  has  adequately
         dealt with the best interests of the  children  and  fulfilled  her
         obligations under section 55 ....


         Conversely, the Appellant has adduced no evidence whatsoever  about
         the children's best interests.   We  have  been  provided  with  no
         evidence from their GP, school or even their mother that they  will
         suffer by either the Appellant losing his  British  citizenship  or
         being removed from the UK."


    Next the FtT reasoned that to deprive this Appellant of his citizenship
    would not breach any person's Article 8 rights:


         "It would not prevent the Appellant from being with and caring  for
         his children if permitted to do so. It would be open to him to seek
         leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  his  family  life.
         Furthermore, given the grave nature of the offending and  the  fact
         that it was an organized  crime  perpetrated  with  others  over  a
         sustained period, we find the decision to deprive the Appellant  of
         his British citizenship entirely appropriate. The  consequences  of
         him no longer being a British citizen  on  either  himself  or  his
         family members is not such as to outweigh the  public  interest  in
         the deprivation."


     In a later passage, the FtT stated:

         "The Appellant claims that his wife cannot look after the  children
         without him.  However, the fact is she has done so  for  the  three
         years since his arrest and since his release.  Again apart from the
         Appellant's bare assertion, there was not a shred  of  evidence  to
         support this and most strikingly nothing from his wife ...


         The Appellant claims that his children have been badly affected  by
         their separation from the Appellant, again not a shred of  evidence
         to that effect ....


         We have been provided with no evidence that the Appellant even  has
         a genuine and subsisting relationship with either his wife  or  his
         children."


    The FtT's ultimate  conclusion  was  that  Article  8  rights  did  not
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.



22. In the case of the  fourth  Appellant,  Mr  Aziz,  the  FtT  noted  the
    reliance of the Secretary of State's  representative  on  the  relevant
    passage  in  the  substituted  decision  and  reproduced  this  in  its
    entirety: see [17] supra.  Having done so,  the  approach  adopted  was
    essentially the same as in the other two cases: see [18] and 19] above.
     Thus, the Article 8 issues canvassed were viewed from the  perspective
    that the removal or deportation  of  this  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of  depriving  him  of
    his British citizenship.  As in the other two appeals, the FtT reasoned
    that the deportation of this Appellant  would  clearly  interfere  with
    family life and continued:



         "We accept that he has a family life with  his  wife  and  children
         although this is  at  the  moment  severely  restricted  with  only
         supervised contact with his children being allowed ....


         We take into account that under  the  terms  of  his  licence,  the
         Appellant cannot go to Rochdale.  His wife and children had to live
         without him when he was in prison though we do accept and take into
         account that they did have some contact with him by  visiting  him.
         We have considered the best interests of his  children  as  we  are
         required  to  do.  Clearly  the   children   have   suffered   some
         unpleasantness at the hands of  other  people  due  to  the  crimes
         committed by their father ...  Despite that, they do not want their
         father to have to go to Pakistan. His absence has created financial
         difficulties for the whole family ...


         We do not accept the evidence of the  Appellant's  wife  about  the
         problems her youngest child had when his father went to prison.  He
         was just a baby and at one   year  old  would  be  unlikely  to  be
         affected as she claims.  We would also say that we find  it  highly
         unlikely that it is the case that the Appellant's wife is the  only
         person who can look after her parents.  She has siblings in the  UK
         and there is in  any  event  no  evidence  of  the  level  of  care
         required."


     The FtT then expressed the following omnibus conclusion:

         "Having considered all the evidence in  the  round,  we  find  that
         there  are  no  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules  that
         would outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation.   Indeed,  we
         would go so far as to say that the crime  being  an  organised  and
         sustained series of sexual assaults on children is so serious  that
         the family circumstances of this Appellant come  nowhere  close  to
         outweighing the public interest in deportation."
          [Emphasis supplied.]


    Adding:


         "We accept that the best interests of children in  general  lie  in
         being with both parents but in all the circumstances of  this  case
         .....   those interests are outweighed by the public  interest  and
         would  not  render   any   decision   to   remove   the   Appellant
         disproportionate.  We  make  this  finding  having  considered  the
         family circumstances at their  highest,  which  would  include  the
         Appellant being able to resume living with his wife  and  children.
         We  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the   deprivation   of
         citizenship itself does not  breach  his  right  to  a  family  and
         private life as protected by Article 8."



23. We summarize the rival contentions of the parties'  representatives  on
    this issue  thus.  Mr  Jafferji,  representing  the  second  to  fourth
    Appellants, submitted that the Secretary of  State  had  committed  the
    "primary  and  basic  flaw"  in  confining  her  consideration  to  the
    immediate consequences of depriving his clients of British  citizenship
    and  disregarding  the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of  this
    measure.  His second submission was that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed in her duty to make enquiries concerning  the  children  and  to
    obtain relevant information, such as social  services  input,  relating
    to, the affected children.  In written  form,  Mr  Jafferji  formulated
    this submission thus:



         "No enquiries  were  made  in  these  appeals.   In  light  of  the
         publicity, notoriety and nature of  the  crimes  committed  by  the
         Appellants, there would plainly have been a grave impact  upon  the
         children  ...   despite  the  obvious  need  for  full  and  proper
         information with respect to  the  impact  upon  the  children,  the
         Respondent did not make any enquiries ...."


    It was argued that the FtT, in failing to identify these legal  defects
    in the Secretary of State's decisions, had erred in law.



24. The main submission of Ms McGahey QC and Mr Mandalia on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State was that having regard to the  context,  upon  which
    some emphasis was placed, the Secretary of State's duty was limited  to
    considering the extent to which the impugned  decisions  impacted  upon
    the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the affected children.
      Second,  the  Tribunal  was  reminded  of  the  terms  in  which  the
    children's interests were  considered  in  the  substituted  decisions.
    Third, we were reminded of  the  manner  in  which  these  issues  were
    explored by the FtT  in  its  successive  decisions.   Fourth,  it  was
    submitted, in terms, that the Appellants' cases under the aegis of this
    ground of appeal were really advanced in a vacuum:  they  neither  laid
    before the Secretary of State  or  the  FtT  evidence  bearing  on  the
    childrens' best interests nor made  relevant  representations.  Nor  do
    they point to the existence of any such evidence at this stage





25. We consider that the content of the duty owed by the Secretary of State
    under section 55(1) of the 2009 Act in  the  cases  of  the  second  to
    fourth Appellants must be measured by reference  to  the  context.   In
    this respect, the context  to  which  the  decisions  underlying  these
    conjoined appeals belongs had two basic ingredients, the first factual,
    and the  second  legal.   The  factual  dimension  of  the  context  is
    rehearsed above. There follows the legal context.



The Legal Context


26. The first  ingredient  in  the  legal  context  is  that  each  of  the
    Appellants, by virtue of naturalisation, enjoys the status  of  British
    citizens.  A comprehensive code for the acquisition and loss of British
    nationality (now British citizenship) has been  devised  by  Parliament
    since the first statutory intervention  of  note,  namely  the  British
    Nationality  and  Status  of  Aliens  Act  1914,  which  repealed   the
    Naturalisation Act 1870.  Following the Commonwealth  Legal  Conference
    held in London in 1947, the British Nationality Act 1948 sought to give
    effect to the principles of  the  Canadian  Citizenship  Act  1946  for
    general application throughout  the  Commonwealth.   It  reflected  the
    principle that people of each of the self-governing  countries  of  the
    Commonwealth had a particular status as citizens of their  own  country
    and a common status as members of the Commonwealth family.   A  limited
    power to control the immigration  of  Commonwealth  citizens  into  the
    United Kingdom was introduced via the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962.
     In due  course  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  the  1981  Act  were
    introduced.





27. Throughout history, British subjects were free at common law and/or  by
    statute to enter the United Kingdom and  reside  there.   This  is  the
    fundamental right conferred by the status of British citizenship. Under
    the 1981 Act, British citizenship is the only status  which  confers  a
    legal right to live in the United Kingdom and to come and go  at  will.
    The possibility of acquiring this status  by  naturalisation  has  long
    been recognised by statue (see in particular the 1948 Act) and  is  now
    governed by section 6 of and Schedule 1 to the British Nationality  Act
    1981.  The effect of modern British nationality laws is  that  loss  of
    the right of abode in the United Kingdom is  the  main  consequence  of
    depriving a person of British citizenship.  The affected  subject  also
    suffers the loss of associated and  consequential  rights,  duties  and
    opportunities - in  particular  voting,  standing  for  election,  jury
    service, military service, eligibility for  appointment  to  the  Civil
    Service and access to state benefits,  state  financed  healthcare  and
    state sponsored education.  Fundamentally, the relationship between the
    individual and the State, which lies at the heart  of  citizenship  and
    nationality, is extinguished.





28.  Interestingly, as a perusal of the 1948 and 1981  statutes  indicates,
    successive Governments have  declined  to  define  comprehensively  the
    rights  attaching  to  British  citizenship  through  the  vehicle   of
    legislation.  The Government perspective on the essential  elements  of
    citizenship was  expressed  in  the  Green  Paper  "The  Governance  of
    Britain" (CM7170) published in July 2007, which focuses (inter alia) on
    the concepts of membership of the community, national identity,  common
    British values and the constitution.  Another report of  note  in  this
    context is "The Path to Citizenship: Our Common Bond", which forms part
    of the background to the 2009 Act.





29. The second main ingredient in the legal context is the  decision-making
    structure devised by the 1981 Act.  We have analysed  this  in  [11]  -
    [12] above.  In short, decisions of the kind under challenge  in  these
    appeals have the status of a notice of intention, under  section  40(5)
    of the 1981 Act, to make a deprivation of citizenship  order.   If  the
    decision under section 40 (the same structure applies to  both  section
    40(2) and section 40(3)) is not challenged by appeal to  the  tribunal,
    the next stage contemplated is a  formal  order  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The unexpressed (though perhaps implied)  premise  is  that  no
    deprivation order will be made while an appeal to the tribunal  remains
    undetermined.





30. Loss of British citizenship occurs  at  the  second,  rather  than  the
    first, of the aforementioned  stages.   A  deprivation  of  citizenship
    order - emphatically - does not equate to either removal or deportation
    of the affected subject from the  United  Kingdom.   Both  removal  and
    deportation are governed by other statutory regimes entailing specified
    procedures, requirements and rights.  Removal and deportation decisions
    may in certain circumstances be challenged by appeal or judicial review
    proceedings.  British citizens are immune from removal and  deportation
    action.  Thus they must be deprived of their British citizenship status
    before either of these courses can be pursued.





31. Accordingly, neither a decision (or notice  of  intention)  to  make  a
    deprivation order (these cases) nor a deprivation order itself has  the
    immediate or direct consequence of the affected  subject's  removal  or
    deportation from the United Kingdom.  It is, of course,  reasonable  to
    assume that a notice of intention to make a deprivation of  citizenship
    order will normally be given as a prelude to a deprivation order and  a
    later decision to remove or deport the affected person from the  United
    Kingdom.  But the initial decision is correctly to be viewed as a first
    step.  Future steps and stages will require the subject to be  actively
    involved and, in particular, will generate  the  Secretary  of  State's
    duty under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998  to  avoid  conduct
    incompatible with protected Convention rights, will engage  the  common
    law principles of a fair decision making process, and will also trigger
    the constraints imposed by any applicable statutory code  (for  example
    the UK Borders Act 2007) and established principles of public law.


  31. There is no shortage of judicial learning  and  guidance  relating  to
      section 55 of the 2009 Act, which forms  the  next  component  of  the
      legal context.  The leading decisions, which emanate from the  Supreme
      Court and the Court of Appeal, were reviewed by this  Tribunal  in  JO
      and Others (Section 55 Duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC),  MK
      (Section 55 - Tribunal Options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT  00223  (IAC)
      and Kaur (Section 55/Public Interest Interface) [2017] UKUT 14  (IAC).
      In MK, this Tribunal held that where a  breach  of  section  55(1)  is
      canvassed, the onus rests on the Appellant to establish  this  on  the
      balance of probabilities and there is no  onus  on  the  Secretary  of
      State. This is not contested by these Appellants.


  32. In JO Nigeria, this Tribunal, having drawn attention  to  the  twofold
      duties enshrined in section 55, stated at [13]:


         "The question of whether the duties imposed by Section 55 have been
         duly performed in any given case will inevitably  be  an  intensely
         fact  sensitive  and  contextual  one.   In  the  real   world   of
         litigation,  the  tools  available  to  the   court   or   tribunal
         considering this question will frequently, as in the present  case,
         be confined to the application or submission made to the  Secretary
         of State and the ultimate letter of decision ...."




    Reflecting this Tribunal's assessment in MK Sierra Leone of where the
    onus rests, in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 Mann J added, at
    [62]:


         "In this appeal  Counsel  for  the  appellant  placed  considerable
         emphasis on the need for the Tribunal to satisfy itself as  to  the
         interests of the child in such a way as suggested an  inquisitorial
         procedure.  I agree with Laws LJ that the  circumstances  in  which
         the Tribunal will require further enquiries to be made, or evidence
         to be obtained, are likely to  be  extremely  rare.   In  the  vast
         majority of cases, the Tribunal will expect the relevant  interests
         of the child to be drawn to the attention of the decision maker  by
         the individual concerned.  The decision maker would then make  such
         additional  enquiries  as  might  appear  to  him  or  her  to   be
         appropriate.  The scope for the  Tribunal  to  require,  much  less
         indulge in, further  enquiries  of  its  own  seems  to  me  to  be
         extremely limited, almost to the extent that  I  find  it  hard  to
         imagine when, or how, it could do so."


  33. This Tribunal examined this issue in a little  detail  in  JO  Nigeria
      (supra), at [10] - [13].  It seems to us  that  given  the  particular
      course and contours  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  making
      processes in these appeals, considered in tandem with the full factual
      and legal context, the observation of Mann J applies a fortiori in the
      instant context.  While the possibility of a duty of proactive enquiry
      on the part of the Secretary of State in  a  given  context  was  also
      canvassed in JO Nigeria, at [14], this Tribunal declined to  determine
      this discrete issue on a hypothetical basis, through  recognizing  its
      potential to arise in a specific, concrete fact sensitive context.  We
      shall explain below why we consider that no such duty arose in any  of
      these cases.




  34. The context in which the decisions of the Supreme Court and the  Court
      of Appeal noted in Kaur were made, is  of  some  significance.   These
      were all cases involving decisions having  final,  permanent  or  long
      term consequences, by which the individual was compelled to leave  the
      United Kingdom with  no  further  decision  to  follow.   The  context
      enveloping the Secretary of State's decisions underlying these appeals
      is to be contrasted, as demonstrated above.   Furthermore,  issues  of
      the kind canvassed under the banner of this ground of appeal are to be
      evaluated realistically  and,  where  appropriate,  robustly,  as  the
      following passage in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550 demonstrates, at [58]:


         "I would not wish for a moment to sideline the importance  of  s.55
         of the 2009 Act or  the  guidance  issued  under  it  ...   or  the
         statements of high authority to the effect that  the  child's  best
         interests must be properly gone into. But in the  circumstances  of
         this case it is in my judgment wholly unrealistic to  suppose  that
         any further evidence, let alone enquiries  (whether  of  the  child
         himself or anyone else) ....  might offer the least possibility  of
         establishing a case under Article 8 sufficiently strong to  prevail
         over the extremely pressing  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
         deportation."


          [Our emphasis]




    Notably, this was stated in the context  of  a  decision  having  final
    character and long term consequences, namely deportation.  This passage
    also reflects this Tribunal's assessment  of  the  interaction  between
    section 55 and Article 8 ECHR in JO (Nigeria), at [7].


  35. The question of whether in any given context the Secretary of  State's
      duty under  section  55(1)  has  been  discharged  will  also  require
      consideration  of  the  decision-  making  process  adopted   in   the
      individual case.  As regards these appeals, this is  outlined  in  [6]
      and [15] - [16] above.  The effect of the decision-making  process  in
      the present cases was that the second to fourth Appellants  had  ample
      opportunity to make to the Secretary of State such representations and
      to provide such evidence bearing upon the children's best interests as
      they wished.


  36. We consider that in this decision-making  context,  the  Secretary  of
      State was entitled to expect the second to fourth Appellants and their
      representatives proactively to equip her with the representations  and
      information  necessary  to   enable   an   adequate   best   interests
      assessment to be carried out or to suggest other appropriate paths  of
      enquiry.  While this analysis  will  not  invariably  apply  to  every
      context, we consider it applicable in these cases.  Secondly, we  find
      no evidential foundation to support the  contention  that  in  any  of
      these cases the Secretary  of  State  was  under  a  duty  of  further
      proactive enquiry.  We accept the submission of Ms McGahey QC that the
      Appellants' argument to the contrary is made in  a  vacuum.   Thirdly,
      bearing in mind the features of the context highlighted above, we  are
      satisfied that the substituted  decisions  contain  an  adequate  best
      interests assessment.  This  is  our  primary  conclusion  and  it  is
      sufficient to defeat the first ground of appeal.


  37. While we have found merit in  the  Respondent's  submission  that  the
      Appellants did not place any best interests material before  the  FtT,
      other than the witness  statements  provided  and  the  oral  evidence
      elicited in questioning, it is not disputed that the second to  fourth
      Appellants will be at liberty to make such representations and provide
      such evidence bearing on their children's best interests as  they  are
      desirous of providing at the future stages likely to be  reached.   We
      consider that this will arise as a matter  of  right.   By  virtue  of
      section 55(1), overlaid by the public law principles highlighted in JO
      Nigeria, the Secretary of State would be under a duty to consider  all
      material of this  kind  prior  to  making  a  removal  or  deportation
      decision consequential thereon.  The separate duty under section 55(3)
      would also bite.


  38. Thus, insofar as section 55 and  Article  8  issues  have  not  arisen
      forcefully at this stage of the broader landscape, any omission or gap
      in representations or evidence - for which the Appellants must be held
      responsible - can be remedied in the  future,  when  further  decision
      making contexts will have two particular features, one legal  and  the
      other factual.

  39. The legal factor is that any future decision requiring  an  individual
      to leave the United Kingdom will  have  consequences  quite  different
      from the (mere) notice of intention decisions currently  in  existence
      and the Appellants will have a right to be heard. At that final  stage
      such consequences will raise the spectre of  long  term  or  permanent
      exclusion of the second to fourth Appellants from the day to day lives
      of their families and prolonged separation.  The 'playing field'  will
      be  quite  different.    Furthermore,   one   would   expect   further
      representations and evidence to address the  distinction  between  the
      impact on the affected children flowing from the harrowing  events  in
      their lives during recent years and any predicted further or different
      impact arising out of the deportation or removal of  their  respective
      fathers. This is an issue which the  Appellants  did  not  address  in
      their representations to the Secretary of State:   this is a  paradigm
      illustration of a context where all the tools and cards  are  held  by
      the Appellants and their families.  There may  also,  foreseeably,  be
      other evidence - for example from schools, clubs, churches et  alia  -
      and any expert evidence they may see fit to commission.


  40. The stand out factual feature of future decision making  processes  is
      that further decisions  will  have  to  be  based  upon  such  updated
      representations  and  information  as  are  assembled  and   advanced.
      Drawing attention  to  the  broader  canvas  in  this  way  serves  to
      highlight that whilst section 55 and Article 8 issues  arise  at  this
      stage, in these cases they have done so less forcefully than is likely
      in the predictable future.

  41. Next, the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Deliallisi  (British
      Citizen: Deprivation of Appeal: Scope) [2013] UKUT 00439  (IAC)  falls
      to be considered.  Here it was held that in appeals under section  40A
      of the 1981 Act it is  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the
      reasonably foreseeable  consequences  of  deprivation  of  citizenship
      which may, depending on the facts, include  removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom.  The relevant passages are found in [54] - [56].   While  the
      verb "determine" features in [2] of  the  headnote  and  the  relevant
      cross-heading in the text, we consider that [54] - [56], considered as
      a  whole,  reflect  the  Tribunal's  decision  that   the   reasonably
      foreseeable consequences of a decision under section 40(5) of the 1981
      Act are a factor to be considered by the FtT.  This  clearly  embraces
      section 55 and Article 8 issues.


  42. While the analysis and route culminating in the same conclusion  which
      we have charted above may be more elaborate than, and  do  not  mirror
      precisely, the approach in Deliallisi, we have no reason to doubt  the
      correctness  of  the  decision.   To  this  we  add  that  while   the
      correctness of the Delliallisi decision  was  challenged  in  argument
      before the FtT, based on an earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
      Arusha and Demushi (Deprivation of Citizenship - Delay) [2012 UKUT  80
      (IAC), the Secretary of State did not maintain  this  argument  before
      us: see [52] - [54] of counsel's skeleton argument.

  43. We make the following further discrete conclusions.  First, there  was
      no error of law on the part of the Secretary of State in this respect.
       In particular, it was not erroneous in law to focus on the nature  of
      the decisions being made.  Second, the Secretary of State plainly  did
      have regard to the possible consequences of those  decisions.   Third,
      it cannot sensibly be said that the Secretary of State did not have in
      contemplation the  real  possibility  that  the  notice  of  intention
      decisions  would  operate  as  a  first  step  in  a  broader  process
      culminating in removal or deportation decisions.  Having regard to how
      the section 40 framework operates to the contrary,  realistically,  is
      unarguable.


  44. Furthermore there is no demonstrable error of law in the  approach  of
      the FtT.  As its decisions demonstrate  beyond  peradventure,  it  had
      deportation of  the  Appellants  to  the  forefront  of  its  mind  in
      considering the various grounds of appeal,  as  is  evidenced  by  the
      consideration which  it  gave  to  the  statutory  deportation  regime
      considered in [71 - 76] infra.

  45. Finally,  we  would  mention  section  55(3)  of  the  2009  Act.   As
      emphasised in JO (Nigeria), this contains a  discrete,  free  standing
      duty: see [12].  No breach of  section  55(3)  was  canvassed  in  the
      Appellants' grounds of appeal, and this issue is not identified in the
      grant  of  permission  to  appeal:  on  the  contrary,  the  grant  of
      permission is specifically confined to the primary,  substantive  duty
      imposed by section 55(1).  As a result, the section  55(3)  issue  did
      not feature in the skeleton arguments of any of the  parties  and,  at
      the hearing, arose only in the context of a brief observation  on  the
      part of the bench. It  is  not,  therefore,  a  live  issue  in  these
      appeals.

  46. We nonetheless take the opportunity to observe that the  duty  imposed
      by section 55(3) is inextricably linked to that enshrined  in  section
      55(1).  The former duty is designed  to  facilitate  and  enhance  the
      discharge of the latter.  Context, as ever, will be all important.  In
      MK (Sierra Leone), this Tribunal held that it is not necessary for the
      Secretary of State's decision maker to make specific reference to  the
      statutory guidance: see [19].  This Tribunal has  observed  more  than
      once that, based  on  its  experience,  the  discrete  statutory  duty
      enshrined in section 55(3) appears to be honoured by the Secretary  of
      State more in the  breach  than  the  observance.   It  is  timely  to
      reiterate this  message.   Our  further,  and  final,  observation  on
      section 55(3) is that its impact in notice of intention decisions made
      under section 40(5) of the 1981  Act  will  invariably  be  calibrated
      according to the individual context and, further, will be assessed  in
      the light of our evaluation of the reach and  impact  of  the  section
      55(1) duty above.  Beyond this  we  do  not  venture  in  the  present
      appeals, as this issue lies outwith the grant of permission to  appeal
      and was not the subject of argument.

  47. For the reasons elaborated above, we conclude that the first ground of
      appeal has no merit.





    GROUND 2: THE EU LAW ISSUE



  48. This ground is summarised in [15] (ii) above.  The starting  point  is
      that the  impugned  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
      identify, or address, any EU law issue.  Mr Jafferji  recognised  that
      these appeals have no "cross-border element".  He submitted,  however,
      that while the Court of Appeal in G1 v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 867 considered this  an  essential  factor,
      the Supreme Court in Pham v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2015] UKSC 19 left the issue undecided and canvassed the  possibility
      of a referral to the CJEU in some appropriate case.


49. Mr Jafferji contended that the specific  dimension  of  EU  Law  to  be
    considered is the proportionality principle which,  in  turn,  requires
    consideration of whether the Appellants pose  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious  threat  to  an  identified  public  interest;  an
    exclusive focus on the personal conduct of the Appellants; disregard of
    the issue of general prevention; and consideration of the impact of the
    Secretary of State's  decisions  upon  the  Appellants'  rehabilitation
    prospects.  This submission was advanced by reference  to  Articles  27
    and 28 of Directive 2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive") and its final
    element entailed the contention that the Appellants benefit from, as  a
    minimum, the highest tier of protection which  the  Directive  affords,
    namely imperative grounds of public security.


  50. Responding, Ms McGahey QC and Mr Mandalia highlighted the inconclusive
      nature of the Supreme Court's consideration of this issue in Pham  and
      submitted that this ground of  appeal  must  fail  by  reason  of  the
      decision in G1 to which effect was given recently by this Tribunal  in
      AB (Nigeria v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  UKUT
      00451 (IAC).  The final element of  the  Respondent's  submission  was
      that the "Zambrano" principle is not engaged.  It could not be engaged
      in Mr Ahmed's  appeal  since  there  was  no  child  affected  by  the
      decision.  As to Messrs Khan,  Rauf  and  Aziz  all  of  the  affected
      children have a British citizen mother upon whom they  can  rely,  and
      those children are not dependent upon their fathers for  the  exercise
      of their rights of residence within the  European  Union  (Zambrano  v
      Office National de L'Emploi [2011] EUECJ C-34/09).


  51. The FtT dealt with this discrete issue as follows.  In its decision in
      Mr Rauf's appeal, the Tribunal stated, at [53]:


         "Depriving the Appellant  of  his  British  citizenship  will  also
         deprive him of citizenship of the European Union.  However the case
         of Pham relied upon does not find that the Government does not have
         the power to do this.  The  UK  Government  is  sovereign  in  this
         respect, with the proviso that the decision must  accord  with  the
         principles  of  proportionality  and  must  not  render  a   person
         stateless.  As we have found the Appellant will  not  be  stateless
         and the decision is proportionate.  In any event this Appellant has
         never exercised any rights conferred by his EU citizenship."




    In Mr Khan's decision there is a similar passage at [27].  In Mr Aziz's
    decision there is a passage to like effect at [40].   We  observe  that
    none of these passages expressly distinguishes between  a  decision  to
    make a deprivation order and the order itself.  All of them are  to  be
    considered in  conjunction  with  the  FtT's  clear  awareness  of  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequence of future decision making  processes
    relating to deportation or removal of the Appellants  from  the  United
    Kingdom.


  52. In R (G1), which concerned a judicial review challenge to  the  making
      of an order to deprive  an  individual  of  citizenship,  the  EU  law
      argument was  formulated  in  very  specific  terms.   The  contention
      advanced was that the Secretary of State had  been  obliged  (and  had
      failed) to observe procedural principles  of  EU  law  in  making  the
      impugned  order:  specifically  that  EU  law  procedural   principles
      entitled him to attend in person his appeal  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      The critical passages in the leading judgment (of Laws LJ) are in [38]
      - [39].  The central theme of the decision of the Court of  Appeal  is
      that the subject of national citizenship lies exclusively  within  the
      competence of individual EU Member States in which EU law has no  role
      to play. We presume to observe that this is well established doctrine.
       G1 was considered by the Upper Tribunal in AB  which,  in  substance,
      acknowledged that this general principle may require modification in a
      deprivation of citizenship case involving a cross-border element:  see
      [85] and [87].


  53. Most recently, these issues were considered, but not decided,  by  the
      Supreme Court in Pham v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2015] UKSC 19.  There the EU  law  dimension  canvassed  was  the  EU
      principle of proportionality.  The appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's "notice of intention" decision had been allowed by SIAC on the
      ground that the  effect  of  the  decision  would  be  to  render  the
      appellant stateless.  The Court of Appeal reversed this  decision  and
      remitted the case to SIAC to determine the other  grounds  of  appeal.
      The Supreme Court affirmed  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal.
      Interesting though the judgments of the Supreme  Court  Justices  are,
      for our purposes the most important consideration is that the decision
      in G1 was not overruled.  Being a decision of the Court of Appeal,  it
      is binding on this Tribunal  by  the  operation  of  the  doctrine  of
      precedent.  This provides a complete answer to this ground of appeal.


  54. We add two observations. The first is that,  albeit  in  Article  8(2)
      proportionality - rather than EU law proportionality - terms, the  FtT
      examined this issue  exhaustively  and  concluded  that  the  impugned
      decisions of the Secretary of State  were  a  proportionate  means  of
      furthering  the  legitimate  aims  pursued.   Our  second  observation
      relates to the context in which proportionality  has  been  raised  on
      behalf of the second to fourth Appellants.  We have analysed  this  at
      some length above.  Based on this analysis, it seems to  us  that  the
      proportionality  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions
      savours more of a preliminary skirmish  than  a  major  battle  having
      final  and  decisive  consequences.    The   real   battleground   for
      representations, evidence, assessment and  determination  relating  to
      proportionality, which will include any legal duty of enquiry  on  the
      part of the Secretary of State which may arise and will have  a  clear
      section 55 dimension, will materialize in the future,  in  the  likely
      event that the Secretary of State will proceed to make deprivation  of
      citizenship orders and, subsequent  thereto,  deportation  or  removal
      orders.


  55. We conclude therefore that this ground of appeal has no merit.





    GROUND 3: THE POLICY ISSUE



  56. The policy issue which arises in these appeals is a reflection of  the
      lean, economic model for  which  the  legislature  opted  in  devising
      section 40 of the 1981 Act.  A deprivation of citizenship  measure  is
      lawful only where the  Secretary  of  State  is  "...  satisfied  that
      deprivation is conducive to the public good", per section 40(2).  This
      criterion is not defined.  Nor is there any provision  in  section  40
      requiring the Secretary of  State  to  have  regard  to  a  series  of
      obligatory considerations.


  57. The Secretary of State has chosen to adopt a policy  relating  to  the
      exercise of the power conferred by section 40(2).  The  Appellants  do
      not make the case that the Secretary of  State  failed  to  take  this
      policy into account. Indeed it  is  apparent  from  the  text  of  the
      impugned decisions that the decision makers were alert to it.  Rather,
      this ground of appeal is to the effect that (a)  the  policy  requires
      the subjects of this type of  decision  to  have  engaged  in  serious
      organised crime, and, (b) the Appellants' criminality is not  of  this
      character.  The Secretary  of  State,  it  is  argued,  erred  in  law
      accordingly.  The consequential error  of  law  of  the  FtT  was  its
      failure to diagnose the Secretary of State's legal  misdirection  and,
      in this context, Mr Jafferji  further  submitted  that  there  was  an
      insufficiency of material before the FtT.


  58. The material point of reference is chapter 55 of  the  "UK  Visas  and
      Immigration Nationality  Instructions:  Volume  1"  which  deals  with
      deprivation (section 40) and nullity.  This is a  publication  of  the
      Secretary of State, available in the public domain.  It takes the form
      of policy guidance and instructions directed  to  case  workers.   The
      subject matter of chapter 55 is "Deprivation and  Nullity  of  British
      Citizenship".  This  contains,  at  paragraph  55.4.4,  the  following
      statement:


         "'Conduciveness to the public good' means depriving in  the  public
         interest on the grounds of  involvement  in  terrorism,  espionage,
         serious organised crime, war crimes or unacceptable behaviours."




    This passage first appeared in the version of this publication
    introduced in 2014.




  59. This ground of appeal invokes a further Government publication.   This
      is a Command Paper entitled "Serious  and  Organized  Crime  Strategy"
      (CM8715) published in October 2013.  The Foreword to this publication,
      signed by the  Home  Secretary,  employs  the  language  "serious  and
      organized crime".  The expressed purpose  of  the  publication  is  to
      broadcast to the public a new cross - Government  strategy  which  has
      been adopted in conjunction with the creation of  the  National  Crime
      Agency and certain  policing  reforms.   The  use  of  the  descriptor
      "serious and  organized"  is  not  uniform.   In  some  parts  of  the
      Foreword, the adjective employed is "organized".  The same applies  to
      the "Executive Summary" and other parts of the publication.


  60. CM8715 is a relatively bulky and dense publication.  It consists of 75
      pages.   The  submissions  of  Mr  Jafferji  escorted  us  to  various
      passages, all of which we have considered.  In the course of  argument
      we suggested that its structure  is  broad  and  open  ended  and  its
      language open textured.  For the purpose of disposing of  this  ground
      of appeal, we propose to make brief references only to the text:


    Paragraph 2.5:


    "There is no legal definition of organized crime in England and  Wales.
    For the purposes of this strategy, organized  crime  is  serious  crime
    planned, co - ordinated and conducted by people working together  on  a
    continuing basis.  Their motivation is often, but not always, financial
    gain."


    Paragraph 2.6:


    "Organized crime is characterized by violence or the threat of violence
    and by the use of bribery  and  corruption:  organized  criminals  very
    often depend on the  assistance  of  corrupt,  complicit  or  negligent
    professionals, notably lawyers,  accountants  and  bankers.   Organized
    crime  also  uses  sophisticated  technology  to  conduct   operations,
    maintain security and evade justice."


    Paragraph 2.7:


    "We make a distinction between organized crime groups and urban  street
    gangs ....


    The  differences  are  primarily  about  the  level   of   criminality,
    organization, planning and control.  But there are connections  between
    gangs and organized crime: urban gang members may engage in street drug
    dealing on behalf of organized criminals and some gangs aspire  to  and
    may become organized crime groups in their own right."


    Paragraphs 2.20 - 2.21:


    "This section of our strategy provides a short introductory overview of
    the main organised criminal activities in the UK ....


    Over half of the organized crime groups operating against  the  UK  are
    involved in drug-related  crime;  a  significant  proportion  are  also
    involved in violent crime ...."


    [Our emphasis]


    Paragraph 2.43:


    "Child sexual abuse and exploitation remains a largely  solitary  crime
    and, where group offending occurs, it shares few of the characteristics
    traditionally associated  with  organised  crime.   The  offending  is,
    however, often extremely serious and complex.  The  majority  of  child
    sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  offenders  are  motivated  by  sexual
    gratification with a much smaller  number  motivated  by  financial  or
    other gain."


    Finally, Annex B highlights  the  cross  -  Government  nature  of  the
    strategy, listing  some  30  public  authorities,  including  the  Home
    Office, with rules  and  responsibilities  for  "tackling  serious  and
    organized crime".


  61. Applying an orthodox public law analysis, chapter 55 of the "UK  Visas
      and Immigration Nationality Instructions:  Volume  1"  was  plainly  a
      material consideration to be weighed by the decision maker in  all  of
      these cases.  As already noted, there is no suggestion that it was not
      considered in the decision making process.   Our  evaluation  of  this
      dimension of the Appellants' challenge is as follows:


      i) Section 40(2) of the 1981 Act confers on the Secretary of  State  a
         discretionary power to deprive a person of British citizenship.


     ii) The statutory pre-condition to the exercise of this power  is  that
         the Secretary of State must be  "satisfied"  that  "deprivation  is
         conducive to the public good".   This  is  a  paradigm  public  law
         empowering provision.  Thus in every case the Secretary of  State's
         decision, inter alia, must not lapse into  irrationality,  must  be
         informed by taking into account all material considerations  (which
         include chapter 55) and must not be contaminated by  the  intrusion
         of immaterial considerations.  This is not an exhaustive checklist.


    iii) While Chapter 55 purports to supply a definition of  "conducive  to
         the public good" this cannot have the effect of  supplementing  the
         statute.  It belongs purely to the realm of a  legislation  related
         policy.


     iv) Paragraph 55.4.4 does no more than indicate the kind  of  cases  in
         which the statutory power might be exercised and it does so without
         prescription.   It  does  not   purport   to   be   exhaustive   or
         comprehensive.   This  is  particularly  clear   from   the   words
         "unacceptable behaviours".   It  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  a
         looser, more open - ended linguistic  formula.   Fundamentally,  we
         consider that paragraph 55.4.4 simply provides  case  workers  with
         some basic  guidance  as  to  how  the  statutory  power  might  be
         exercised


       v)  The exercise of  the  statutory  power  in  every  case  must  be
          harmonious with the statutory language, accord with the underlying
          legislative intention and further the policy and  objects  of  the
          statute, duly infused with the avoidance of fetter  of  discretion
          in accordance with the hallowed British Oxygen principle  (British
          Oxygen v Board of Trade [1971] AC 610).


  62. The main evidence considered by both the Secretary of  State  and  the
      FtT relating to the nature and gravity of  the  Appellants'  offending
      was the transcript  of  the  sentencing  hearing.   Part  of  this  is
      digested in the Secretary of State's decisions, while other parts  are
      summarized or reproduced in the decisions of the FtT.   Giving  effect
      to the analysis in the foregoing paragraph, we consider  that  it  was
      rationally open to the decision maker to conclude that the Appellants'
      offending was embraced by the inexhaustive, elastic terms of paragraph
      55.4.4 under the rubric of "unacceptable behaviours".


  63. We give separate consideration to CM8715.  The first question  in  our
      view is whether this publication  had  the  status  of  an  obligatory
      material consideration.  Chapter 55 of the "UK Visas  and  Immigration
      Nationality Instructions: Volume 1" makes no reference to it.  This is
      unsurprising, given that chapter 55 pre-dates CM8715.  Thus  there  is
      no  express  nexus  between  the  two  policies.   The  only  link  is
      constituted by the phrase  "serious  organized  crime".   For  present
      purposes, we are prepared to assume, without deciding,  that  the  two
      policies are sufficiently  inter-related  to  fall  to  be  considered
      together.


  64. Mr Jafferji, very sensibly, did not seek to argue  that  the  criminal
      behaviour of any of the Appellants was not serious.   His  contention,
      rather,  was  that  it  was  not  of  the  character  to  attract  the
      appellation of serious organized crime.  In exchanges with the  bench,
      Mr Jafferji was disposed to accept that criminality of this kind could
      in principle amount to serious organized  crime.   He  further  agreed
      that the question of what constitutes serious organized crime involves
      a wide margin of appreciation on  the  part  of  the  decision  maker.
      Finally, he did not demur from our proposition that CM8715  is  framed
      in terms which are not precise, exhaustive or comprehensive.


  65. Our analysis of chapter 55 above applies also to CM8715.  In addition,
      we consider it instructive to  reflect  on  the  legal  character  and
      effect of the latter kind of publication.  CM8715 is, in our judgment,
      a  classic  illustration  of  a   non-prescriptive,   open-ended   and
      inexhaustive Government policy publication.   It  contains  no  bright
      line or hard edged rules or definitions.  Indeed, by its terms  it  is
      at pains to avoid these.  Furthermore,  it  does  not  purport  to  be
      comprehensive.  Its elasticity is one of its dominant  attributes.  In
      short, it is a classic policy


  66. Furthermore, CM8715 is a paradigm illustration of a policy which falls
      to be viewed through the  analysis  of  Lord  Clyde  in  R  (Alconbury
      Developments) v Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport  and
      the Regions [2003] 2 AC 295, at [143]:


         "The formulation of policies is a perfectly proper course  for  the
         provision  of  guidance  in  the  exercise  of  an   administrative
         discretion. Indeed policies are an essential  element  in  securing
         the  coherent  and   consistent   performance   of   administrative
         functions.  There  are  advantages  both  to  the  public  and  the
         administrators in having such policies. Of course there are  limits
         to be observed in the way policies are applied.  Blanket  decisions
         which  leave  no  room  for   particular   circumstances   may   be
         unreasonable.  What is crucial is that the policy must  not  fetter
         the exercise  of  the  discretion.   The  particular  circumstances
         always require to be considered.  Provided that the policy  is  not
         regarded as binding and the authority still retains a free exercise
         of discretion the policy may serve the useful purpose of  giving  a
         reasonable guidance both to applicants and decision-makers."


         [Emphasis added]


    We would add that it is long established that this type of  publication
    is not to be  construed  by  adopting  the  approach  applicable  to  a
    statute, deed or contract.   See, for example R v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department, ex parte Ozminnos [1994] Imm AR  287  at  292.
    The construction of every document is, of course,  a  question  of  law
    and, therefore, ultimately a matter for  the  court:  In  Re  McFarland
    [2004] UKHL 17 at [24].


  67. The heavy emphasis on policies which this ground  of  appeal  involves
      raises the risk of  distracting  from  the  ultimate  question.   That
      question, giving precedence to the primary legislation, is whether the
      Secretary of State's conclusion that  to  deprive  the  Appellants  of
      their British citizenship status is conducive to the public  good  was
      one that was reasonably open to her.  This is not a question of  fact.
      Rather,  as  the  word  "satisfied"  indicates,  it  is  a  matter  of
      evaluative  judgment  on  the  part  of  the   Secretary   of   State.
      Furthermore, neither of the policies can have the effect of  diluting,
      restricting or modifying the statutory  language.   The  criterion  of
      "conducive to the public good" constitutes  the  ultimate  touchstone.
      There is no challenge based on the  disregard  of  material  facts  or
      factors or the  intrusion  of  something  alien.   Nor  is  there  any
      irrationality challenge - and any such challenge would in our judgment
      be doomed to fail in any event.  Viewed through this prism, and taking
      all of the foregoing into account, we consider that the  Secretary  of
      State's decisions withstand this ground of challenge.


  68.  We  further  consider  that  the  Secretary  of  State's   evaluative
      assessment that the Appellants' offending fell within the  embrace  of
      this policy is uncontaminated  by  any  error  of  law.   Accordingly,
      neither the Secretary of State's decision nor the decisions of the FtT
      can be impugned on this ground.



    GROUND 4: THE ARTICLE 8 ECHR ISSUE.



  69. All representatives were in agreement  with  our  analysis  that  this
      ground is inextricably immersed within the first  ground,  as  [14]  -
      [44] above demonstrate.  Accordingly, in common with the first ground,
      this ground too must fail.










    GROUND 5:  THE PART 5A NIAA 2002 ISSUE



  70. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  (the  "2002
      Act"), which has been in force since 28 July 2014,  is  introduced  by
      section 117A (1) in these terms:


         "This Part applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -


           a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and  family
              life under Article 8,    and


           b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
              Rights Act 1998."


    The Secretary of State's decisions were not made "under the Immigration
    Acts", as these enactments  do  not  include  the  1981  Act:  see  the
    definition of "the Immigration Acts" in section 61 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.  Historically, statutes dealing with British nationality have
    never been embraced by the recurring statutory phrase "the  Immigration
    Acts".  As a   result Part 5A was inapplicable. This is common case.


  71. The question for this Tribunal is whether the consideration which  the
      FtT gave to Part 5A gave rise to any material  error  of  law  in  its
      decisions.  This ground  of  appeal  is  formulated  in  the  skeleton
      argument on behalf of the Appellants thus:


         "This error is not immaterial.  It shows that the FtT's approach to
         the appeals was confused.  This confusion  led  it  into  error  in
         assessing whether the deprivation decisions were inconsistent  with
         Article 8 rights; and in  exercising  discretion  generally  as  to
         whether the deprivation decisions should have been made."

     The riposte on behalf of the Secretary of State is the following:

         "...  The FtT made clear that it was considering  the  hypothetical
         situation in which there  was  an  appeal  against  a  decision  to
         deport.   The  FtT  may  well  have  found  such   a   hypothetical
         consideration a useful check on its decision under Article 8  about
         the decision to deprive of citizenship ....


         The Respondent accepts that the provisions did  not  apply  to  the
         decision to deprive of citizenship.  The FtT did not  suggest  that
         they did.  The Respondent  did  not  apply  them  when  making  her
         decisions.  The Respondent submits that hypothetical  consideration
         of the deportation issue by the FtT has no effect on  its  properly
         reached conclusions in respect of the deprivation of citizenship."




    As these passages make clear,  the  final  ground  of  appeal  did  not
    generate elaborate argument on behalf of the Appellants  and  this  was
    reflected at the hearing, by which stage this ground had receded  to  a
    point where it was quite subsidiary  to  the  three  principal  grounds
    addressed above.


  72. As already acknowledged, it was not necessary for the  FtT  to  review
      the legality of the Secretary of State's decisions by reference to the
      regime constituted by Part 5A of  the  2002  Act,  as  it  was  of  no
      application.  The FtT, however, did so by reference to the probability
      of deportation. We are unable to detect any resulting  material  error
      of law in any event.  Our first conclusion on this ground of appeal is
      that the decisions of the FtT are not vitiated by reason of conducting
      this exercise.  While the FtT was in error to do so, we consider  that
      such error was immaterial.


  73. It may further be said that  the  FtT's  excursus  into  Part  5A,  if
      anything, benefited the Appellants, since its effect  was  to  subject
      the legality of the Secretary of State's  decisions  to  a  series  of
      checks,  standards  and  requirements  which  did  not  have   to   be
      considered.  Furthermore,  the  FtT,  in  consequence,   conducted   a
      considerably more elaborate proportionality  balancing  exercise  than
      the circumstances required.  The Part 5A exercise which it carried out
      conferred no discernible advantage on the Secretary of State and  none
      was identified in argument.

  74. The discrete argument,  set  forth  above,  that  the  FtT's  Part  5A
      exercise "... led it into error in assessing whether  the  deprivation
      decisions were  inconsistent  with  Article  8  rights"  was  advanced
      faintly and  without  elaboration.   No  specific,  concrete  material
      "error" was particularised in  argument  and  we  can  identify  none.
      Furthermore, the Article 8 issues were inextricably bound  up  in  the
      section 55 ground of appeal which we have considered  in  extenso  and
      rejected in [14] - [46] above.  We further find merit in Ms  McGahey's
      submission that the exercise conducted by the FtT was in  substance  a
      hypothetical one, in which  we  discern  traces  of  an  abundance  of
      caution.


  75. For these reasons we reject this final ground of appeal.


    A Footnote

  76. At the eleventh hour, the first of the four Appellants, Mr Ahmed,  was
      left unrepresented.  The Tribunal during the morning  of  the  hearing
      received a belated letter from  his  instructed  solicitors  asserting
      that Mr Ahmed had "withdrawn his instructions", in circumstances where
      (it was said) the solicitors had been providing their  services  on  a
      pro-bono basis and this Appellant had been "paying for Counsel's  fees
      on a private basis" but had no further resources to do so.  There  was
      no application to adjourn the hearing.  As  appears  from  the  formal
      sections at the beginning of this judgment, we had the  benefit  of  a
      skeleton argument from counsel previously instructed on behalf of this
      Appellant.  This contained the following statements:


         "Having had sight of the skeleton argument prepared for  the  other
         Appellants, the first  Appellant  wishes  to  adopt  that  skeleton
         without repetition herein ...


         Any submissions made in this skeleton are in addition to the points
         therein."


    What followed did not differ  in  substance  from  the  more  extensive
    skeleton argument provided by  counsel  representing  the  other  three
    Appellants.  Insofar as there were any different emphases  or  nuances,
    these were duly taken into account  by  our  careful  reading  of  this
    written submission.  We concluded that fairness  did  not  require  the
    adjournment of Mr Ahmed's appeal of our own motion.


77.  On a separate issue, we would recommend that  the  Secretary  of  State
    give careful consideration to the viability and desirability of  making
    section 40 and deportation decisions jointly. If this is  feasible,  it
    will have the supreme merits of combined appeals to the tribunal  (FtT)
    and a single hearing addressing all issues, together with reduced  cost
    and delay.


OMNIBUS CONCLUSION

78. None of the Appellants' grounds of appeal  having  been  made  out,  we
    dismiss all appeals and affirm the decisions of the FtT.


                                                                       [pic]
THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER                                    Dated: 31
January 2017
