
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

MM (Section 8:  commencement) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00115

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing: 25 May 2005


                                             Date Promulgated: 5th July 2005

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Miss E Arfon-Jones (Deputy President)
                   Mr A Jordan (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr S Chelvan instructed by Switalski's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer

Section 8 of the 2004 Act came into force on 1 January 2005 and  applies  to
decisions made after that date even if the claim was  made  previously.   It
has no objectionably retrospective effect.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.  It is  not  in  dispute  that  he
     entered the United Kingdom illegally.  His account of that is that  he
     went from Iran to Turkey about  9  October  2004  and  travelled  from
     Turkey to the United Kingdom by road in  the  back  of  a  lorry.   He
     claimed asylum on 26 October 2004, which he says is the day he arrived
     here.  After examination of his claim, the Secretary of State  refused
     it on 9 December 2004 and made a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
     United Kingdom.  Against that decision the Appellant appealed, and his
     appeal was heard  by  an  Adjudicator,  Dr  A  Thorndike,  who,  in  a
     determination sent out on 1 March 2005, dismissed it.   The  Appellant
     applied for and was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal.  Following the commencement of the appeals provisions
     of  the  2004  Act,  that  grant  takes  effect  as   an   Order   for
     reconsideration of the Appellant's appeal by this Tribunal.

  2. The basis of the  Appellant's  claim  was  that  he  was  at  risk  of
     persecution in Iran because of  his  association  with  Iran  Paad,  a
     banned pro-royalist group.  His claim is that he and a  friend  had  a
     women's clothes-making and boutique business in partnership.  One day,
     when the friend was out, the Appellant noticed that he had  left  some
     Iran Paad publicity material in the office.  When his friend returned,
     the Appellant expressed his interest and was shown a  secret  part  of
     the building where there was a photocopier and a paper cupboard.  That
     was in February 2004.  One day when he came to work in September 2004,
     he saw the police arresting his partner and friend, so, with the  help
     of his father, he immediately made arrangements to go to London.

  3. The Appellant expanded on this account in his oral evidence.   He  was
     cross-examined,  and  a  number  of  apparent   implausibilities   and
     inconsistencies were put to him.

  4. During the course of his evidence, the Appellant confirmed that he had
     not in fact himself had any dealings with Iran Paad  when  he  was  in
     Iran.   He  said,  however,  that  he  had  been  involved  with   the
     organisation  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  participated  in   a
     demonstration outside the Iranian Embassy in  London  on  11  February
     2005.  In the course of submissions, the Adjudicator  was  invited  by
     the Appellant's representative to treat him as credible  and  to  find
     that, in any event, the Appellant was now a refugee sur  place  as  he
     would be at risk as a result of his known Iran Paad activities  whilst
     in the United Kingdom.

  5. The Adjudicator does not  appear  to  have  been  shown  any  evidence
     tending to suggest a current risk to Iran Paad supporters in Iran.  He
     was asked to take the view that, as the United States State Department
     and Human Rights Watch both spoke of a  repressive  state,  he  should
     assume that those associated  with  Iran  Paad  would  be  subject  to
     persecution.  In particular, he was asked not to take account  of  the
     fact that the most recent CIPU Report made  no  reference  to  current
     persecution of Iran Paad members.

  6. The Adjudicator's findings and conclusions are set out  in  the  seven
     paragraphs numbered 34 to 39 (sic) of his determination, which are  as
     follows:

           "34.  In reaching my conclusions I have taken account of all the
                 evidence before me, including the  background  information,
                 particularly in so far as the Iran Paad is concerned.


           35.   I regret to say that I do not find  the  appellant  to  be
                 credible, because of the number of  discrepancies  and  the
                 distinct lack of evidence regarding the activities of  Iran
                 Paad in Iran and the persecution of its  activists  by  the
                 Iranian state authorities.  I do however accept that he was
                 in partnership in a business  making  and  selling  women's
                 clothing.  It may well be that  his  business  partner  was
                 arrested, but for what reason I do not know.


           36.   It is my belief that he has taken advantage of this arrest
                 to fabricate a story in order to  justify  asylum  in  this
                 country.  If he had been truthful as to why he had come  to
                 United Kingdom, he would have  clearly  stated  on  arrival
                 that it was for political reasons.  If he had been truthful
                 about the organisation of which he said he was a member who
                 distributed leaflets on a  regular  basis,  he  would  have
                 known full well what the name of the  organisation  was  at
                 the outset.  He would have also known that  it  would  have
                 been noted on the literature.  If Nazari had gone  to  such
                 precautions to hide from the appellant the fact that  there
                 was a secret sub-basement in the building - a  secret  kept
                 for some three years - I do not find it plausible  that  he
                 would have left Iran  Paad  (or  any  opposition)  leaflets
                 around in a place where staff could easily see them.


           37.   The  appellant  made  serious  allegations  regarding  the
                 conduct of the  interpreter  at  the  screening  interview.
                 This is not noted by the Home Office interviewer and  until
                 the hearing nothing had been said  about  this  before.   I
                 believe he has made this up to cover up shortcomings in his
                 evidence.


           38.   Credibility is as noted in paragraph 4 above an  issue  in
                 the respondent's decision.  I also take account of  section
                 8 of the 2004 Act ("credibility") which obliges me to  take
                 note of challenges to  credibility.   As  recorded  in  the
                 immediate preceding  paragraphs,  there  are  a  number  of
                 discrepancies which I regard as significant as going to his
                 credibility.


           39.   Despite Mr Andre's submission,  although  I  am  conscious
                 that no country report can  be  fully  inclusive  there  is
                 absolutely  no  evidence  to  show  Iran   Paad   has   any
                 significant presence in Iran, let alone that  is  adherents
                 of whatever level  were  persecuted.   In  any  event,  the
                 appellant by  his  own  admission  was  a  very  low  level
                 activist.  It was only right at the  end  of  his  evidence
                 under cross-examination that he mentioned his parents  were
                 supporters of the monarchy.  The fact of the matter is that
                 the monarchy was overthrown  over  25  years  ago.   It  is
                 history.  I also note that the demonstration in London  was
                 not organised by Iran  Paad  but  by  another  pro-monarchy
                 organisation exiled in London.  Even if I were to find  the
                 appellant credible, which I do not, his claim to asylum  is
                 not objectively well-founded.


           39.   For these reasons, I do not believe he was persecuted  for
                 political reasons,  and  I  do  not  believe  he  would  be
                 persecuted if  returned  to  Iran,  or  subjected  to  ill-
                 treatment to be threshold demanded by article  3  ECHR.   I
                 therefore  dismiss  both  his  asylum  and   human   rights
                 appeals."

  7. There are three grounds of appeal on  which  permission  was  granted.
     They may be summarised as follows.  First, the Adjudicator should  not
     have applied section 8;   secondly,  he  should  have  placed  minimal
     emphasis on the CIPU Report in the light of criticism of CIPU  Reports
     in general;  thirdly, he should have taken  more  seriously  the  risk
     arising from the Appellant's claimed activities in London.

  8. We deal first with section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment
     of Claimants etc) Act 2004.  The ground of appeal to  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal on section 8, settled, we understand, by counsel (not,
     we emphasise, Mr Chelvan, who appeared before us) is as follows:

           "The application of s.8 2004  Act  (para  38)  breaches  natural
           justice;  ECHR Art 6;  and the (unwritten) constitution, because
           it has been applied in such a manner as:


                 (a)   the executive seeks to bind the judiciary;  and
                 (b)   is applied with  an  imprecise  broad  brush  by  not
                       identifying the weight  placed  on  each  (purported)
                       inconsistency."


  9. Very wisely, Mr Chelvan  did  not  seek  to  rely  on  the  ground  in
     precisely those terms before us.  What he did argue was that, although
     section 8 of the 2005 Act came into  force  on  1  January  2005,  the
     Commencement Order should not be regarded as affecting those  who  had
     made their claim before that date.  The  reasons  argued  were  first,
     retrospectivity, and, secondly, unfairness.

 10. Section 8 of the 2004 Act is complex.  We do not need to set it out in
     full.  Subsection (1) is as follows:

           "(1)  In determining whether to believe a statement made  by  or
                 on behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a  human
                 rights claim, a deciding authority shall take  account,  as
                 damaging the claimant's credibility, of  any  behaviour  to
                 which this section applies."

      Subsections (2) to (6) then set out, by way of definition,  the  types
      of behaviour to which the section applies.  They include, for example,
      failure to claim asylum in a safe country, destruction  or  alteration
      of documents, and other  behaviour  designed  or  likely  to  mislead.
      Subsection (7)  contains  definitions,  including  that  of  "deciding
      authority" which  is  defined  to  include  the  Secretary  of  State,
      immigration officers, and this Tribunal, which  itself  by  subsection
      (13) is extended to include Adjudicators and  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal.

 11. As Mr Chelvan recognised, section 8 was  brought  into  force,  by  SI
     2004/3398, on 1 January 2005.   There  were  no  express  transitional
     provisions.

 12. Mr Chelvan's argument was that, despite the  absence  of  transitional
     provisions, section 8 could not have been intended to have  effect  in
     the assessment of claims already in progress on the commencement date.
      That would be to give it a retrospective  effect,  because  it  would
     apply to behaviour by an Appellant that had already taken  place.   He
     referred us to Bennion's  "Statutory  Interpretation:   A  Code",  4th
     Edition, 2002,  section  97,  which  is  headed  "Presumption  against
     retrospective operation" and reads:

           "Unless the contrary intention appears, an enactment is presumed
           not to be intended to have a retrospective operation."

 13.  Unfortunately  for  Mr  Chelvan,  his   argument   faces   formidable
     difficulties.  As Bennion's comment on section  97  makes  clear,  the
     concept of retrospectivity is often misunderstood:

           "It is important to  grasp  the  true  nature  of  objectionable
           retrospectivity, which is that the past legal effect of  an  act
           or omission is retroactively altered by a later  change  in  the
           law.  However, the mere fact that a  change  is  operative  with
           regard to past events does not mean  that  it  is  objectionably
           retrospective.  Changes relating to the past  are  objectionable
           only if they alter the legal nature of an  act  or  omission  in
           itself.  A change in the law is not objectionable merely because
           it takes note that a past event  has  happened,  and  bases  new
           legal consequences upon it."

 14. Antonelli v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1998] QB 948 is
     cited as an example.  In that case, an  act  of  1979  enabled  estate
     agents to be inhibited from practice if they had been convicted of  an
     offence involving fraud or dishonesty or violence.  It was  held  that
     there was no objectionable retrospectivity in applying the  Act  to  a
     person who had been convicted of such an  offence  before  the  coming
     into force of the Act.  The parallel with the present  case  is  quite
     close:  indeed, it is closer  still  when  we  take  into  account  Mr
     Chelvan's second principal submission, which was that the Appellant is
     prejudiced  by  the  application  of  section  8  to  him.   For  that
     submission to have any force, it must be assumed  that  the  Appellant
     had a choice whether or not to engage (without reasonable explanation)
     in behaviour which is now behaviour to which section 8 applies.  If he
     did have such a choice, it does not seem to us that he can claim  that
     he is prejudiced by a decision maker taking his behaviour into account
     as damaging his credibility, whether under  section  8  or  otherwise.
     The estate agent in Antonelli may have wished, in retrospect, that  he
     had taken better care not to be convicted of an offence:  but  he  had
     to take the consequences of his acts, and this Appellant  must  do  so
     too.

 15. We have dealt with Mr Chelvan's arguments under section 97 of  Bennion
     because that is the way in which he put them to us.  It does, however,
     appear clearly to us that the provisions in  question  are  procedural
     rather than substantive.  The general rule for  procedural  provisions
     is that they have effect in pending as well as future proceedings,  so
     the application of section 8 to claims already in progress  would  not
     be particularly surprising.  (We recognise that  an  argument  against
     objectionable retrospectivity can be applied to procedural  provisions
     too.)

 16. For the foregoing  reasons,  we  reject  the  Appellant's  claim  that
     section 8 of the 2004 Act should not have been  applied  to  him.   We
     have to say, however, that we are surprised that the argument was put.
      The  Adjudicator's  treatment  of  section  8,  in  one  sentence  of
     paragraph 38 of his determination, is clearly  hopelessly  inadequate.
     In fact, it is surprising that the sentence "I also  take  account  of
     section 8 of the 2004 Act ('credibility') which  obliges  me  to  take
     note of challenges to credibility" could have been written by a person
     who had even glanced at the provisions in question.  Not only  is  the
     title of the section abbreviated, but its effect  is  wholly  omitted.
     As we have indicated above, section 8 is about the effect  of  certain
     types of specified behaviour in  assessing  credibility:   it  applies
     regardless of any specific challenges.  There were no doubt  a  number
     of matters which the Adjudicator ought to have taken into  account  as
     behaviour to which section 8 applies.  There is no trace of his having
     done so.  All he says in this  context  is  "There  are  a  number  of
     discrepancies which I regard as significant".  That is  not  something
     with which section 8 has anything specifically to do.

 17. Our conclusion on this issue is that section 8 bound the  Adjudicator;
     that he failed to apply it;  that that was an error of law;  but  that
     it was not a material error, because he disbelieved the  Appellant  in
     any event.

 18. We pass on to Mr  Chelvan's  second  major  ground  of  appeal,  which
     related to the Adjudicator's  treatment  of  the  objective  evidence.
     That ground was  originally  formulated  by  reference  to  a  general
     criticism of the CIPU Reports, which itself is of  doubtful  currency.
     So far as the present case is concerned, we must look to see what  was
     before the Adjudicator.  There were  of  course  in  all  the  country
     reports before him general statements about the repressive  nature  of
     the government in Iran.  So far as  Iran  Paad  itself  is  concerned,
     however, the only reference appears to be that at paragraph  6.185  of
     the CIPU Report, as follows:

           "According to a 1998 report from  the  Netherlands  Ministry  of
           Foreign  Affairs  on  the  situation  in  Iran,  activities   of
           opposition groups such as Tudeh, Iran Paad, Komala and  Fedayeen
           had not been evident in Iran in recent  years.   However,  since
           then it has been  reported  that  over  1,000  members  of  such
           dissident groups were executed in 1988/1989, including 38  named
           members of Tudeh and the situation for the Kurds appears to have
           deteriorated recently.   However,  according  to  a  March  2003
           Amnesty  International  Report  a  number  of  Kurds,  including
           members of Komala, have been executed in recent months."

 19. Mr Chelvan confirmed that there was no evidence before the Adjudicator
     that those with royalist views are currently at risk in  Iran.   That,
     as it appears to us,  is  sufficient  to  conclude  the  matter.   The
     evidence before the Adjudicator was wholly insufficient to demonstrate
     that the Appellant would be at risk as  having  been  associated  with
     Iran Paad activities in Iran, even  if  he  were  to  be  regarded  as
     credible.

 20.  The  third  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  claimed  sur  place
     activities.  As Mr Chelvan conceded to us, there was no evidence other
     than that from the Appellant.  The Adjudicator  did  not  believe  the
     Appellant, and, bearing in mind that the Appellant was  not  generally
     regarded as credible in his story, there is no reason why he should be
     regarded as credible in  his  claim  of  having  been  involved  in  a
     demonstration.  The Adjudicator gave  other  reasons  for  his  doubts
     about that.  But even if it were the case that the Appellant had taken
     part in an Iran Paad demonstration in London, there is  absolutely  no
     evidence of a record being taken by the Iranian authorities in such  a
     way as might endanger the Appellant if he were to be returned.

 21. For the foregoing reasons, these latter two grounds disclose no  error
     of law by the Adjudicator.  He  made  his  decision  properly  on  the
     evidence that was before him.  The error of law in relation to section
     8 was not, as we have said, material.

 22. There was no material  error  of  law  and  we  therefore  affirm  the
     Adjudicator's determination.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:


