

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

              MB (admissible evidence; interview records) Iran[2012] UKUT
00019(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 6 February 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     MB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Quinn Martin and Langan
For the Respondent:    Mr M Lindsay QC, instructed by the Solicitor to the
                    Advocate General for Scotland


1.  R (Dirshe) v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  421,  [2005]  1WLR  2685,  is  not
authority for the proposition that where a claimant requests  tape-recording
of an interview, but that is not carried out, the record is inadmissible.

2.  Cadder v Her Majesty's Advocate [2010] UKSC 43  has  no  application  to
the admissibility  of  asylum  interview  records,  immigration  proceedings
being of a distinct nature to criminal proceedings.  Admission of  interview
records does not breach a claimant's right to a fair trial.

3. Tribunals do not have a general discretion to refuse to receive  relevant
evidence on the basis of procedural defects as to how it was obtained.  Rule
51(1) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  is  not
to that effect. Apart from circumstances  where  lateness  of  the  evidence
means it is unfair to receive it, issues of fairness go to the weight to  be
attached to evidence, not admissibility.

      DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is an Iranian national  who  claimed
    asylum on or about 1 September 2008. We direct that in  any  report  of
    this case he shall be identified by the initials MB.   His  substantive
    asylum  interview  took  place  on  12  September  2008.   Before   the
    interview, his solicitors sent a letter indicating that as there was no
    funding for them to attend, they  wanted  the  interview  to  be  tape-
    recorded.

 2. Where no representative is present to keep an independent  record,  the
    practice of tape- recording of interviews has  been  permitted  by  the
    Home Office following the decision in R (Dirshe) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 421; [2005] 1 WLR 2685.  In the
    event, the  appellant  was  interviewed  without  tape-recording.   His
    asylum claim was refused on 22 September 2008.

 3. On 19 November 2008, an appeal to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
    was dismissed by Immigration Judge Hamilton. He observed that there had
    been no tape-recording as requested and this was  unfortunate,  but  he
    received the record of interview into the  proceedings.   He  concluded
    that the appellant was not a credible informant as to the circumstances
    giving rise to his claimed fear of persecution.

 4. Part of the reason why  Judge  Hamilton  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had told the truth concerned the date  of  the  strike  at  a
    factory where the appellant claimed he was employed, which resulted  in
    him coming to adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  in  Iran.   The
    appellant's case was that this happened  in  February  2008.  The  Home
    Office produced documentary evidence of protests during the course of a
    strike at the Alborz Tyre manufacturing company  in  April  2008.   The
    judge said that he was satisfied that the protests took place in April,
    not in February, and therefore found that information provided  by  the
    appellant identifying the February date was not genuine.

 5. However, the Judge went on at paragraph  45  of  his  determination  as
    follows:-

        Even if I had been satisfied the  event  took  place  in  February,
        2008, I would have not have been prepared to accept  the  appellant
        was part of those events.  For the reasons I have detailed above  I
        do not find the appellant credible.  His evidence is  inconsistent.
        He has  at  a  very  late  stage  tried  to  discredit  the  asylum
        interviewer, and I believe he has  done  this  simply  to  try  and
        assist his claim.


 6. Reconsideration of this decision was refused.


 7. In due course the appellant made representations to  the  Secretary  of
    State which, he submitted, amounted to a  fresh  asylum  claim.   Those
    representations were refused, but on 10 June 2010, on  his  application
    for judicial  review,  the  Lord  Ordinary,  by  consent,  reduced  the
    decision of the Secretary of State and remitted the  case  for  further
    consideration. Part of the fresh material on which the appellant relied
    in that judicial review was information indicating there  were  strikes
    at the tyre factory in both February and April 2008.

 8. On 19 February 2011, the Secretary of State took a fresh decision, once
    again rejecting the appellant's account  on  credibility  grounds.   At
    paragraph 23  of  that  decision,  having  regard  to  the  information
    provided by the appellant, she said it was accepted that protests  took
    place in  2008  at  the  Alborz  tyre  factory.   The  decision  letter
    continued, however,  that  it  was  not  accepted  "that  you  had  any
    involvement in these protests or even that you  worked  at  the  Alborz
    tyre factory".  The Secretary of State  noted  the  contradictions  and
    inconsistencies  found  by  Immigration  Judge  Hamilton  in  the  2008
    decision,  and  the  alternative  finding  of  the  Immigration  Judge,
    irrespective of the date of the protests.

 9. There was then an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber.  That appeal first came on for hearing in  April  2011,
    but was put over for certain documents upon which the appellant  relied
    to be checked.  The matter then came before Immigration Judge Forbes on
    13 June.  By that stage, it became apparent that the appellant and  his
    representative  could  not  rely  upon  documents  he  had   submitted,
    suggesting that he was wanted by the authorities for participation in a
    demonstration, because  the  authenticity  of  the  documents  was  not
    supported by his expert.

10. There is in the file a typed up version of  Immigration  Judge  Forbes'
    record of proceedings, in which he records as follows:-


        I put it to [Mr McGowan, solicitor for the appellant] that I  might
        therefore have to accept that the only ground of appeal open to him
        rested on procedural unfairness in relation to the holding  of  the
        substantive interview  when  the  appellant  claimed  he  had  been
        unwell.  He accepted that that  was  the  only  position  he  could
        adopt.  We discussed how he might vary the  grounds  of  appeal  to
        include that aspect.  He wanted some days to do  that.   I  decided
        with him that I would fix a further CMR for the 21 June, 2011.


    Further to that hearing, the appellant did indeed amend his grounds  of
    appeal to include a  further  ground  that  the  asylum  interview  was
    unfair, and its record should not have been received in  the  appellate
    proceedings by Judge Hamilton or Judge Forbes.

11.   The proceedings were adjourned to the  27  June,  when  the  question
    whether the asylum interview should have been received by either  judge
    was considered.  Judge Forbes rejected the  appellant's  case  for  not
    receiving this material.  He went on to dismiss the appeal  on  refugee
    and subsidiary protection grounds.


12. Although at a point in his determination Judge  Forbes  refers  to  the
    issue of whether  the  interview  should  have  been  received  as  one
    question, he does not in fact decide any other questions.  In the light
    of his record of proceedings of 13 June, it appears that he  understood
    that no other issue had been raised.

13. The appellant then sought leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   His
    grounds of appeal essentially summarise his case as follows:-


        a. Following the decision in Dirshe, the appellant had a  right  to
           have an interview tape recorded.
        b. The  appellant  never  waived  his  right  to  a  tape  recorded
           interview.
        c. By analogy with Cadder v Her Majesty's Advocate [2010]  UKSC  43
           there was a breach of the appellant's rights to a fair  hearing,
           by reason of the decision of the judge to receive the  interview
           record in the immigration proceedings.

14. Further, the grounds of appeal stated:


         The Immigration Judge erred in fact in finding that the appeal  ...
         was not insisted upon.   The  appellant's  representative  made  it
         clear to the Immigration Judge during the  course  of  the  hearing
         that if the Immigration Judge was not with him in relation  to  the
         procedural issue he wished to address the Tribunal on the remaining
         substantive grounds of appeal.  The  said  error  of  fact  may  be
         established by uncontentious and objectively unverifiable evidence.

15. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by the  UT  in  August,
    2011.  The judge granting permission made no direction  for  filing  of
    evidence to support the contention that all  grounds  of  the  original
    appeal were intended to be pursued.

16. In support of his appeal, the appellant has  submitted  to  us  a  very
    substantial factual bundle containing an undated skeleton  argument  of
    some four paragraphs, not materially amending the point of law that  is
    central.  We also had a helpful skeleton on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State, supported by authorities, contending that the Immigration  Judge
    did not err in law in receiving this material.

Was There a Material Error of Law by Judge Forbes?

17. When the appeal was called on for hearing before us on 6  February,  Mr
    Caskie did not advance submissions on the lines set out in his  grounds
    of appeal and skeleton argument and the volume of authorities  that  he
    had prepared. We can well understand why.

18. In our view,  those  arguments  were  misconceived  for  the  following
    reasons:


        (i)    The  case  of  Dirshe  did  not  establish  that  an  asylum
        applicant had a right to have interviews tape recorded, merely that
        a blanket policy refusing tape-recording in cases where  a claimant
        did not have his own representative able  to  take  an  independent
        note of the proceedings was unlawful. Further,  the  decision  says
        nothing about the admissibility of  an  unrecorded  interview  into
        immigration proceedings where the appellant had asked  for  such  a
        recording.


        (ii)    The analogy between admissibility of evidence  in  criminal
        proceedings and in immigration proceedings is misconceived.  As far
        as we are aware, there is no general discretion in  the  courts  of
        either England and Wales or  of  Scotland  to  decline  to  receive
        relevant evidence in civil  proceedings,  by  whatever  means  that
        evidence  may  have  been  obtained.   By  contrast,  in   criminal
        proceedings in both jurisdictions there is a well-recognised  power
        to decline to receive evidence that is unfairly obtained.


        (iii) Whilst the duty to  act  compatibly  with  a  person's  human
        rights  might  require  a  public  authority  not  to  use  certain
        information obtained in breach of those rights, the difficulty  for
        the appellant is that there has been a consistent line of authority
        that asylum appeals are not the determination of a civil  right  or
        obligation, so as to engage Article 6 ECHR; and no case has been or
        could be made that the interview was an aspect of private  life  to
        which Article 8 might attach.


        (iv) The Secretary of State points out  in  her  skeleton  argument
        that  very  recently  a  constitution  of   the   Upper   Tribunal,
        Immigration and Asylum Chamber in  Abdul  Kuidiri  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department AA/01658/2011 rejected precisely  the
        same argument as Mr Caskie has identified in his grounds of appeal,
        seeking  to  extend  the  criminal  law  principle  in  Cadder   to
        immigration appeals.  Kuidiri is an unreported  decision.   If  the
        matter had been pursued  any  further  before  us,  we  would  have
        granted the Secretary of State permission to rely upon it,  because
        its reasoning is highly relevant to the present issue, and we agree
        with it.


        (v)  Judge Forbes was bound to take the findings of fact  by  Judge
        Hamilton as a starting point for his consideration of this  appeal.
        No argument had been submitted to Judge Hamilton that he should not
        have received the record of interview in this case.   No  complaint
        was made by the appellant or his solicitors following 12  September
        2008 that he had been deprived of a tape  recorded  interview.   No
        complaint was made generally  of  the  inaccuracy  of  the  written
        record, as opposed to the reasons why the appellant had  given  the
        answers that he did.


        (vi)  The appellant made a witness statement between  the  date  of
        the interview and the date of the  hearing  in  November  2008,  in
        which he makes no complaint about the  absence  of  tape-recording.
        He makes specific observations upon why he did not give information
        in response to  questions.   He  does  not  suggest  that  he  gave
        information that had not been properly recorded.


        (vii) The reason why the interview  was  not  recorded  was  not  a
        refusal by UKBA to do so, but the fact that the appellant indicated
        that he did not mind whether it was recorded or not at the start of
        the formal inquiry into his claim. We observe that he had given the
        UKBA officials quite a lot of information  about  himself  and  his
        family without tape recording earlier in the process.

19. Instead,  Mr  Caskie  developed  a  new  submission  that  he  had  not
    identified previously.  He submitted that rule 51(1) of the Asylum  and
    Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  assisted  him  in  the
    submission that there was a power in the Tribunal to  exclude  evidence
    on the ground of unfairness in how it was obtained.  Rule  51(1)  reads
    as follows:


        The Tribunal may allow oral, documentary or other  evidence  to  be
        given of any fact which appears to be relevant to an appeal  or  an
        application for bail, even if that evidence would  be  inadmissible
        in a court of law.

20. We accept that this rule affords discretion  to  receive  relevant  but
    otherwise inadmissible material in support of an issue.   We  disagree,
    however, with the proposition that that rule gives the Tribunal a novel
    jurisdiction to refuse to accept evidence that is most relevant  to  an
    appeal and would otherwise be admissible in a court of law.  As already
    indicated, our understanding is that both in England and Wales  and  in
    Scotland, civil courts have no such jurisdiction.

21. Mr Caskie cited no authority for the proposition that rule 51 had  this
    ambit. As far as we are aware, there is no decision of the AIT  or  the
    Upper Tribunal to this effect. In our view, he  confused  two  distinct
    issues, namely the exercise of discretion by a Tribunal  to  refuse  to
    accept evidence tendered late, because to do so at that late stage  may
    be unfair, and the ability of a judge to refuse to accept evidence that
    was provided in time, on the basis that the circumstances  under  which
    it was obtained or recorded were unfair.

22. There may be documentary evidence based on third or fourth hand hearsay
    where the original informant may  well  be  unreliable  and  where  any
    testing of such evidence may be impossible, where a judge would  attach
    little or no weight to the evidence.  But that is a far cry indeed from
    excluding the primary evidence in an asylum  appeal,  namely  what  the
    claimant  him  or  herself  says  in  an  interview   contemporaneously
    recorded.  By contrast with the position in criminal proceedings, where
    the purpose of an interview is to explore the state's case of  criminal
    conduct by the suspect, the asylum interview is the opportunity for the
    claimant to advance his or  her  case  for  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

23. Mr Caskie then developed a second submission not previously  intimated,
    namely that in the particular circumstances of this case,  notably  the
    request by his solicitors that the interview be tape recorded, and  the
    fact that the written record showed that the  appellant  had  requested
    frequent breaks as he was not feeling well, no  reasonable  Immigration
    Judge,  properly  directing  himself,  could  have  placed  any  weight
    whatsoever on the content of the interview.

24. We are satisfied, essentially for the reasons developed by  Mr  Lindsay
    QC replying to  this  submission,  that  it  also  has  no  foundation.
    Irrationality is a high test to meet. No  submissions  appear  to  have
    been advanced, either before Judge Hamilton  or  before  Judge  Forbes,
    that no weight could be attached to the record of  proceedings.   Judge
    Hamilton was aware that the absence of tape recording posed a potential
    disadvantage to  this  applicant,  but  nevertheless  reached  his  own
    reasons as to why the interview record was probative of his  assessment
    of the appellant's credibility, for reasons  that  are  reasonable  and
    well open to him to arrive  at.   The  absence  of  any  post-interview
    evidence that the written record failed to record  what  the  appellant
    said, or to give a true picture of his state of health on the  day,  is
    significant.

25. We disagree with Mr Caskie's argument  that  unless  the  Tribunal  was
    prepared  to  exclude  reliance  upon  interview   evidence   in   such
    circumstances, there would be no incentive for the Secretary  of  State
    to permit tape recordings of asylum interviews at all.   A  person  who
    asks for tape recording of his or her interview in  order  to  have  an
    independent reliable record cannot have  such  a  request  unreasonably
    refused. If an application is  unreasonably  refused,  he  or  she  may
    refuse to participate in the interview, can  make  a  prompt  complaint
    about the refusal, and if there is an issue  promptly  taken  with  the
    reliability of the record or  the  absence  of  information  about  the
    appellant's state of health or the quality of interpretation  that  may
    be captured by the tape recording but missed from the  written  record,
    it may well be open to a judge to refuse to assign any weight  to  that
    interview. Further,  an  unlawful  refusal  may  result  in  the  judge
    concluding that the  immigration  decision  itself  was  not  taken  in
    accordance with the law, and allow  the  appeal  on  that  basis:   see
    Naved (student -fairness - notice of points) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC).

26. But there was no such challenge here, and although  the  appellant  did
    indicate at various points that he was not feeling well  and  wanted  a
    break, neither he nor subsequently  his  solicitors  responded  to  the
    interview process as a whole  by  contending  that  the  procedure  was
    unlawful or unfair.  In all the circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the
    Immigration Judge was entitled to give the weight to the  discrepancies
    and inconsistencies he identified for the reasons he did.

27. This then merely leaves  the  question  of  whether  Immigration  Judge
    Forbes was wrong, having  decided  the  issue  whether  the  record  of
    interview should be admitted, to dismiss the appeal without  more.   At
    first sight, that would be a  rather  unusual  course  of  action.   We
    understood that Mr Lindsay was  prepared  to  accept  that  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis of what the
    learned Judge said in his determination.

28. However, once we look at the record of proceedings on 13 June, which we
    raised with Mr Caskie  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  a  different
    perspective is brought to the issue. We have received no statement from
    the appellant's solicitor to contradict the record or to indicate  that
    he expressly maintained other grounds of appeal. We are not prepared to
    assume that the Judge was acting under a  misapprehension  in  what  he
    recorded in the record of proceedings.

29. Moreover, on further analysis  we  agree  with  Judge  Forbes  that  in
    substance there was nothing left in this  appeal,  if  the  Immigration
    Judge was entitled to receive the interview  record  and  to  make  the
    findings as to credibility that he did. That decision was the  starting
    point for any further consideration of this case. If there was no  good
    reason to conclude that  it  was  wrong  in  the  light  of  subsequent
    developments, then the fresh claim and  the  second  appeal  would  not
    succeed.

30. Events following Judge Hamilton's decision show he was not entitled  to
    hold against the appellant the fact that  he  said  that  the  relevant
    strike and demonstration was in February 2008 rather than  April  2008.
    It is clear, however  that the Secretary of State  did  not  hold  that
    against the appellant in the fresh refusal of the asylum claim, and  it
    was therefore no longer an issue before Judge Forbes.   Judge  Hamilton
    had made the clear alternative finding that even if the  appellant  was
    right about dates, he nevertheless remained not  satisfied  that  these
    events related to the  appellant's  claim  in  any  material  way,  for
    reasons he gave. The appellant's attempt to rely upon fresh evidence of
    being wanted by the Iranian Authorities failed.  That being  the  case,
    there was nothing left to justify allowing  the  protection  claim.  No
    independent human rights claim was advanced.

31. We have examined the decisions of both judges with care, in  the  light
    of the history of this claim, but we find that there has been no  error
    of law by Judge Forbes.  This appeal is accordingly dismissed.



         Signed                                    Date

            Mr Justice Blake                                        16
February 2012
            President of the Upper Tribunal
            Immigration and Asylum Chamber




