
Heard at Field House | | | |
|On 25 February 2005        |        |AB and DM (Risk categories  |
|                           |        |reviewed - Tutsis added) DRC|
|                           |        |CG [2005] UKIAT 00118       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21st July 2005                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Vice President)                                    |
|Mr R A McKee                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|Respondent                                                        |
|and between                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                           |and     |                            |


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                    Respondent


Representation:
For the First appellant:          Mr E Fripp of Counsel,
For the Second appellant          Ms Ojutiku of Counsel,
For the respondent:               Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting
Officer

The Tribunal broadly confirms the list of risk categories identified in
M, VL and subsequent CG cases but finds that in view of the increase in
anti-Rwandan feeling, Tutsis or those suspected of being Tutsi  are  at
risk by reason of being associated  with  Rwandans.   Essentially,  the
risk categories are those with an ethnic, political or military profile
in opposition to  the  government.    The  assessment  of  risk  in  an
individual  case  will  depend  upon  a  careful   analysis   of   that
individual's origins, background and profile.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    There are two appeals before the Tribunal.  In the first appeal,  the
      appellant (the first appellant), a citizen of the Democratic Republic
      of  the  Congo  (DRC)  appeals  against  the  determination   of   an
      Adjudicator, Mr  C  B  Buckwell  issued  on  14  February  2004,  who
      dismissed his appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds  against
      the decision made on 6 January  2004  refusing  him  leave  to  enter
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.  In the second appeal,
      the  appellant   (the   second   appellant)   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr Michael D Oakley issued on 9  May
      2003, dismissing his appeal against a decision made  on  31  December
      2002 giving removal directions following the refusal of his claim for
      asylum.   These appeals are being heard together with the consent  of
      both parties as they raise common issues  of  fact  relating  to  the
      situation in the DRC  as  to  the  current  risk  categories  and  in
      particular whether and to what extent those of Tutsi ethnicity are at
      real risk of persecution and more generally what  the  current  risks
      are for failed asylum seekers.  A summary of our conclusions  appears
      at paragraph 51.

The facts relating to the first appellant.

2.    The first appellant was born in  December  1970  in  Kinshasa.    His
      mother was from Kigali in Rwanda and was half  Rwandan.   His  father
      was from the DRC.   His father had worked for a private food  company
      which had been associated with the government of the  late  President
      Mobutu.    The first appellant said that his  father  was  killed  in
      1986.  He believed that it was because his  father  did  not  support
      President Mobutu.  This raised the  appellant's  political  awareness
      and when he was in his early 20's, he decided to join the  Democratic
      and Christian Socialist party (PDSC) which opposed  President  Mobutu
      and his political Party, the Popular  Revolutionary  Movement  (MPR).
      He joined the PDSC in 1992 or 1993 and  had  a  role  in  encouraging
      meetings for younger members.   He was a musician and used his skills
      to educate new members.

3.    The appellant took  part  in  demonstrations  in  1990-1991  and  was
      arrested on a number of occasions.  On  the  first  occasion  he  was
      released the same evening but on the second occasion  he  was  beaten
      when in detention.   A  soldier  hit  him  with  a  butt  of  a  gun.
      President Laurent Kabila came to power in 1997.   Once  in  power  he
      suspended other political parties.  He encouraged foreigners to  come
      from Rwanda,  Burundi  and  Uganda.   Meetings  were  held  by  other
      political parties.   There was a meeting  at  the  first  appellant's
      home when 50 people were present.   The appellant said  that  because
      of this meeting he was arrested in December 1997, beaten and detained
      for  2  days.     From  1998  President  Kabila   started   requiring
      foreigners to return to their own countries.     The  appellant  said
      that he was known as an individual who was half Rwandan and was  also
      considered to be a foreigner.   Those  who  did  not  wish  to  leave
      remained to fight together  with  remnants  of  the  army  of  former
      President  Mobutu.   As  a  result  government  soldiers  sought  out
      foreigners.   On 28 January 2000 the first appellant  was  away  from
      home.   He was told that he should not return because  armed  men  in
      uniform were looking for him.   He sought refuge in  a  church  whose
      members raised money for him as they feared  that  his  life  was  in
      danger.     He was able to cross the river to Congo  Brazzaville  and
      then travel to Brussels before coming to the  United  Kingdom  on  30
      January 2000.   He claimed asylum on arrival.

4.    The Adjudicator found that the appellant was a credible witness.   He
      identified three key elements within the claim.   The first  was  his
      part-Rwandan ethnicity.  The Adjudicator was satisfied that those  of
      Rwandan descent had in the past been the subject of adverse attention
      by the DRC authorities.  He referred to a newspaper article which had
      been  produced  in  evidence  which  he  accepted  as  authentic.  It
      indicated that the appellant had encountered difficulties in the past
      due his ethnicity.

5.    The second element related to the appellant's  political  activities.
      The Adjudicator accepted that as a result of these activities he  had
      on occasions suffered  from  arbitrary  detention  and  arrest.   The
      objective evidence supported his claim that  political  parties  held
      meetings on  a  local  basis  and  these  meetings  were  subject  to
      aggressive visits by those acting on behalf of the authorities.   The
      Adjudicator found that he had in the past been subjected to treatment
      which might  be  seen  as  amounting  to  persecution  and  which  he
      described as certainly treatment contrary to the terms of Article  3.



6.    The third element related to the position  of  this  appellant  as  a
      musician.   The Adjudicator accepted that musicians could have a very
      significant influence in Africa and it was a matter of public  record
      that many African musicians specifically used their music and  lyrics
      to put across  certain  political  messages  often  critical  of  the
      government.   It was part of the appellant's case that  the  band  in
      which he was involved took the opportunity to adopt lyrics with  such
      an approach.  Certain of his songs called for democracy and political
      freedom.   Evidence was produced showing a band including  the  first
      appellant in Kinshasa in June 1999.  The Adjudicator  commented  that
      he did not know how his band would  rank  or  whether  the  appellant
      himself would be specifically well known as a vocalist or as a member
      of the band's chorus.

7.    The Adjudicator said that looking at matters  in  the  round  he  was
      satisfied that the appellant was an  individual  who  had  previously
      come to the attention of the authorities.   He accepted that  he  had
      suffered mistreatment in the past.   However,  on  his  own  evidence
      there appeared to be no assertion that he had suffered in the past as
      a direct result of his activities as a musician or as a result of his
      ethnicity.  He was detained in the  past  because  of  his  political
      involvement.  The Adjudicator accepted that the  appellant  had  said
      that prior to his departure from the DRC he had been advised that  he
      was being sought at the  time  not  only  because  of  his  political
      opinions  but  also  because  of  his  ethnicity.    The  Adjudicator
      considered the Tribunal determinations in VL (risk  -  failed  asylum
      seekers) DRC CG [2004] UKIAT 00007 and S (DRC)  [2004]  UKIAT  00010.
      He referred to the current situation in the DRC  and  the  fact  that
      since June 2003 there had been a transitional government.  A National
      Assembly and Senate were opened in August 2003.    Political  parties
      across the spectrum were represented in  a  political  power  sharing
      government.

8.    The Adjudicator was of the view that when the  appellant  arrived  in
      the United Kingdom, there was a strong likelihood that he would  have
      been entitled to asylum.   He commented that an individual  with  his
      past background which included  mistreatment  at  the  hands  of  the
      authorities might have been able to  claim  international  protection
      until significant political changes were put in place.   However,  it
      was the Adjudicator's view that the new  political  arrangements  had
      significantly transformed the political landscape in the  DRC.    The
      Adjudicator was not satisfied that  the  appellant's  background  and
      profile would now put him at risk.   He went on to consider the claim
      under Article 8 based on the first appellant's family life  with  his
      girlfriend and the fact that they were expecting a  child.    He  was
      not satisfied that removal would be disproportionate to a  legitimate
      aim.

The facts relating to the second appellant

9.    The second appellant was born in February 1980.   It  was  his  claim
      that his father had been a member of  the  Union  for  Democracy  and
      Social Progress (UDPS) who during a demonstration in  1996  had  been
      shot and killed.   The appellant became a  member  in  1997  and  was
      involved in distributing leaflets and arranging rooms  for  meetings.
      Following a demonstration he was detained for about 50 days and  then
      released by an uncle paying a bribe.   The second appellant continued
      his activities and was arrested again in  1998  and  detained  for  6
      months before being released.   In 1998 he became  a  driver  working
      for his uncle.  He continued with his UDPS activities.   In  2002  he
      went to the east of the DRC to recruit young men  from  the  UDPS  to
      join him in starting  an  armed  campaign.    In  September  2002  he
      volunteered to drive rebels to various  areas  in  the  east  of  the
      country and registered his interest at a local branch.   He was given
      $300 and told to wait until he was contacted.   He later learned from
      a member of the UDPS committee that the chairman  had  been  arrested
      and that those who had volunteered to  go  to  the  east  were  being
      sought by the authorities.   In October 2002 the police came  to  the
      home of the second appellant's uncle looking for  him.   His  brother
      contacted him as he had a mobile phone and told  him  to  stay  away.
      He went into hiding on 20 October 2002 leaving the DRC  and  arriving
      in Gabon on 30 October 2002.  Arrangements were then made for him  to
      fly to the United Kingdom.   He arrived on 2  November  2002  by  air
      with a false passport, applying for asylum on 6 November 2002.

10.   The Adjudicator did not find the second appellant to  be  a  credible
      witness  and  regarded  his  account  of  events  in  the  DRC  as  a
      fabrication designed to gain access  to  the  United  Kingdom.    The
      appeal was dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal in the first appeal.

11.   In the grounds of appeal it is  argued  that  in  the  light  of  the
      Adjudicator's findings of fact, the decision in VL and the background
      evidence set out in particular  in  the  UNCHR  position  paper,  the
      Adjudicator was wrong to  find  that  the  first  appellant  was  not
      someone who would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  by  reason  of  his
      political beliefs heightened by the profile accompanying his  musical
      activities.  It is also argued that the first  appellant  would  fall
      into a risk category as someone having Rwandan connections  or  being
      of Rwandan origin.    The  newspaper  article  produced  in  evidence
      confirmed the risk.    The grounds assert that the Adjudicator failed
      to address all relevant issues when considering  proportionality  and
      in particular the fact that removing the first appellant to  the  DRC
      would represent a permanent breach of contact between himself and his
      child.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the
      grounds raised an arguable issue that the Adjudicator may have  erred
      in law in his assessment of the risk on return.

The grounds of appeal in the second appeal

12.   The grounds argue that the Adjudicator has completely disregarded the
      fact that it would be unsafe for the second appellant to be  returned
      to Kinshasa as he did not have a valid passport or any  other  travel
      documentation.    The  Adjudicator  had  found  that  there  was   no
      reasonable degree of likelihood that the second  appellant  would  be
      detained other than possibly for a short time but he  overlooked  the
      fact that prison conditions in  the  DRC  were  harsh  and  in  local
      prisons life  threatening.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in
      relation  to  the  point  that  the  second  appellant  might  be  in
      difficulties because he would have no travel  documents  or  passport
      but permission was refused on all other issues raised in the grounds.



The hearing before the Tribunal:  The evidence of Mr Eric Kennes

13.   At the hearing before the Tribunal, Mr Eric Kennes was called to give
      oral evidence.  He has prepared expert  reports  in  both  cases  and
      permission had been given for him to give oral evidence in the second
      appellant's case.  However, as both appeals are being heard together,
      his oral evidence relates to both appellants.

14.   Mr Kennes has degrees in law, philosophy and political science.    He
      has taught at the Catholic Seminary in Kolwezi in the DRC and at  the
      University of Mbuji-Mayi.   He has stayed  in  the  DRC  for  varying
      periods of time for research or official missions in 1995, 1996, 1999
      and 2001.    His most recent trips have  been  in  May  2003,  August
      2003, March 2004 and August-September 2004.  He works as a  full-time
      researcher at  the  Africa  Institute,  Africa  Museum,  Tervuren  in
      Belgium, a leading documentation centre on the DRC.

15.   In his oral evidence Mr Kennes  confirmed  and  adopted  his  reports
      dated 19 October 2004 and updated to 21 February 2005 in  respect  of
      the second appellant and dated 18 November 2004 and 22 November  2004
      in respect of the first appellant.  In answer to  questions  from  Ms
      Ojutiku, Mr Kennes confirmed that returnees to the DRC would normally
      be given substitution documents issued by a DRC Embassy.   They  were
      not identical to ordinary  travel  documents  and  would  identify  a
      returnee as having claimed asylum.    There was  some  evidence  that
      information was transferred back to  the  DRC  from  embassies  about
      asylum seekers.   The authorities tended  to  scrutinise  files  more
      carefully  to  determine  whether  someone  was  rightly  or  wrongly
      returned.   Mr Kennes confirmed that a general  peace  agreement  was
      concluded in December 2002 and it was agreed that appointments  would
      be  distributed  amongst  the  different  parties  but  security  and
      immigration remained under the control  of  supporters  of  President
      Kabila and attempts were being made  by  his  supporters  to  prevent
      opposition growing to the President.

16.   Returnees with  substitution  documents  would  be  interrogated  and
      investigated.   They would be interrogated at the airport.   The  aim
      would be to  see  firstly  whether  they  were  of  interest  to  the
      authorities and secondly to extort  money.     Both  the  police  and
      immigration services were ruled by arbitrariness.    There was a risk
      that someone might be detained until they could raise money for their
      release.   The going rate used to be about $500 but could  be  up  to
      $1,000 depending on circumstances.   There was a risk that the second
      appellant would be treated as having brought dishonour  to  the  DRC.
      If he could not pay a fine then there was a risk  of  being  detained
      and imprisoned.   Conditions in Makala prison  were  terrible.    The
      authorities were now more on  their  guard  as  there  had  been  two
      attempts to destabilise the government in March and  June  2004  with
      the incursion of Rwandan troops into the northern Kivu region.  There
      was a deep divide in Congolese society between those  from  the  west
      and east.   The north of Kivu was controlled by  Rwandan  troops  but
      the southern area had gone in  the  direction  of  Kinshasa.   Recent
      events had exacerbated anti-UDPS feelings there.  A  suggestion  that
      the elections should be delayed beyond the proposed date in  mid-2005
      led to an explosive reaction in Kinshasa and the police reacted  with
      great brutality.  In January 2005 the  UDPS  declared  an  action  of
      ville morte (dead city) meaning that everyone should  stay  at  home.
      The action was successful.  In consequence the UDPS is regarded as  a
      renewed threat to the government and  the  immigration  services  are
      scrutinising returnees carefully to prevent the  opposition  growing.
      A UDPS activist would be at risk on return.

17.   In answer to questions from Mr Fripp, Mr Kennes said that if  someone
      was returning with substitute documents, he did not see what risk  he
      would be under save to try and take money from him.   There would  be
      an attempt to interrogate to find the real reason why they  had  been
      removed by the returning government and to ask for  further  sums  of
      money.   Everyone faced the same degree of interrogation.   If  there
      were no other factors, a person was likely to get  out  after  paying
      money but this was speculative.   He had not heard of violence  being
      used at the airport during  interrogations.   That  would  happen  in
      prison or at a detention centre.    Mr Kennes was asked how  much  it
      would take for the authorities to conclude that  a  returnee  was  of
      interest to them.   He replied  that  it  depended  on  the  evidence
      available.   If there was information that someone had been  involved
      in political activities, that would be  a  reason  for  some  further
      investigation.  Whether the authorities would trust  what  they  were
      told by returnees would depend on the circumstances.    In  principle
      they distrusted the information they received  but  if  they  had  no
      specific reason to distrust someone they would have to let them go.

  18. There would not be  a  risk  to  someone  from  the  area  where  the
      President or his wife came from.   If a person really was  suspected,
      he would be interrogated and that would continue in prison.  If  held
      in prison, a person would have to resort to other strategies such  as
      asking a friend or relative in an influential position  to  intervene
      on his behalf.    If someone did end up in prison he  might  well  be
      forgotten about and left there for months or years.    If  the  first
      appellant was suspected of being Rwandan  by  association,  he  would
      fall into a risk category.  If there was  no  evidence  of  this,  he
      would  not  be  at  risk.    The  transfer  of  information   between
      authorities in the DRC was not systematic.   It may  happen  in  some
      cases but not in others.   Information was commonly transferred  from
      DRC embassies abroad to the immigration service but  the  system  was
      less efficient for transferring information  internally  between  the
      regions.

19.   In cross-examination by Mr Blundell,  Mr  Kennes  confirmed  that  he
      researched political and economic matters.   He had  three  areas  of
      speciality, the mining industry, political elites including elections
      and the history of Presidents Laurent and  Joseph  Kabila.    He  had
      been on a number of official missions to the DRC.   He was in contact
      with local NGOs and had other contacts.    The  immigration  services
      did have instructions to arrest all those thought to  be  Rwandan  or
      Tutsi.  The first appellant had experienced problems in January 2000.
       If he was considered to be of Rwandan origin, he would  be  at  risk
      from the authorities.

The Submissions

20.   Mr Fripp submitted that the evidence from Mr Kennes showed that there
      was visibly an increased concern with further scrutiny of  those  who
      had faced a review by an Embassy prior to the issue  of  substitution
      documents.   The authorities' increased concern with the  correctness
      of the paperwork indicated an increase in concern with the  substance
      of the reasons why someone was out of the country.   There was now  a
      new Director of Immigration who had engaged with this issue.    There
      was no improvement in the background  human  rights  situation.   The
      political situation in the DRC was in flux with attempted  coups  and
      incursions in the east.   This might differentially affect  different
      groups.   The current Tribunal guidance should be revised to  reflect
      these changes.   The likelihood was that the  local  embassies  would
      know about someone who had been  involved  in  political  activities.
      The first appellant would be  at  risk.    The  Adjudicator  accepted
      there had been past persecution because of his  political  activities
      and ethnicity.  He would have no satisfactory answer to questions  he
      was likely to be asked on return.   If  his  Rwandan  links  came  to
      light, he would be at risk.

21.   Ms Ojutiku submitted that there was a real likelihood that the second
      appellant's  claim  for  asylum  would  have  become  known  to   the
      authorities in the DRC.   He  would  be  returning  without  his  own
      travel  documents  but  would  be  in  possession   of   substitution
      documents.   There was an Article 3 risk for those  who  returned  in
      these circumstances.   He was at risk of detention and ill-treatment.
         The original application had been based on his  UDPS  profile  and
      that of his father.   Mr Kennes confirmed that this was  currently  a
      risk category.  She emphasised the significance of the fact that  the
      second appellant had lived in Kinshasa but his father  had  lived  in
      the east.   He was likely  to  be  a  victim  of  the  ransom  system
      operated at the airport.  The basis of the claim under Article 3  did
      not relate just to this risk but also the fact that he was  a  failed
      asylum seeker. He had no valid travel documents  and  had  previously
      been arrested as a member of the UDPS.

22.   Mr Blundell submitted that there was no further evidence to support a
      contention that failed asylum seekers  as  such  would  be  at  risk.
      There was still no call from the UNCHR for a cessation of returns  to
      the DRC.  There was a considerable vagueness about some of Mr Kennes'
      evidence such as his evidence about a particular flight where  people
      were said to  have  been  detained  and  as  to  the  methodology  of
      obtaining information.    There  was  no  real  risk  to  the  second
      appellant.  So far as the first appellant  was  concerned  his  claim
      relied on  the  fact  that  he  was  partly  Rwandan,  his  political
      interests and the fact that he  was  a  failed  asylum  seeker.   The
      Adjudicator was entitled to find that there had  been  a  significant
      change in circumstances in the DRC.  The evidence as to the risks  to
      Tutsis was sparse.

The background situation

23.   The background to the current situation in the  DRC  can  briefly  be
      summarised as follows.  The 5 year conflict in the DRC that began  in
      August 1998 between the various rebel forces and the  DRC  government
      was effectively  brought  to  an  end  by  the  December  2002  peace
      agreement and the setting up of the Transitional National  Government
      in June 2003.  This comprises the President and four Vice  Presidents
      from different political groups.    The  new  National  Assembly  and
      Senate were opened in August 2003.   The National Assembly is made up
      of 500 members from the numerous  political  parties  to  the  inter-
      Congolese dialogue, the  former  government,  the  unarmed  political
      opposition, civil society and former rebel  groups.   The  Senate  is
      made up of a 120 members from the various  parties  to  the  national
      power sharing accord:   paragraphs 4.24 - 7 of the CIPU report.

24.   Mr Kennes in his reports has dealt more fully with this process.   It
      has to be viewed in the context of the  complexity  of  the  previous
      conflict.   There were three main  groups  involved,  the  government
      army, the rebel group controlled by Rwanda, the Congolese  Rally  for
      Democracy - Goma  (RCD/Goma),  and  the  rebel  group  controlled  by
      Uganda, the  Congo  Liberation  Movement  (MLC)  led  by  J-P  Bemba.
      Further, within the RCD movement there have been dissident  factions.
        The peace  agreement  has  been  made  on  a  political  front  but
      according to Mr Kennes  lasting  peace  will  depend  upon  it  being
      accepted by the various military factions.   In April 2002 there  was
      a  partial  agreement  involving  the  MLC  and  the  government  but
      excluding the RCD.    This  was  not  implemented.    The  UDPS,  the
      Unified  Lumumbist  Party  (PALU)  and  the  Forces  for  Union   and
      Solidarity (FONUS) refused to join the MLC  -  government  agreement.
      The RCD signed an alliance with the UDPS and  others.     There  were
      then further negotiations in South  Africa  which  led  to  a  global
      agreement in December 2002 leading to power sharing between RCD/Goma,
      the MLC and the government with some lesser responsibilities going to
      other parties.

25.   In Mr Kennes' view it remains doubtful whether this will  lead  to  a
      durable political  stabilisation  of  the  country  and  questionable
      whether the parties to the agreement are sincerely committed  to  its
      implementation.   It is also his view that it seems more likely  that
      all parties will try to gain more  power  at  the  expense  of  their
      adversaries.  There is considerable mutual distrust  and  a  lack  of
      will to co-operate but against  this,  Mr  Kennes  accepts  that  the
      agreement has been functioning better than expected.   Even  so,  the
      situation is fragile.  There was an attempted  coup  at  the  end  of
      March 2004 by forces thought to be loyal to former President  Mobutu.
         The insurgents attacked four military camps in  Kinshasa  but  the
      government  remained  united  and  in  control  and  the   coup   was
      unsuccessful: this is also referred to in paragraphs 6.211-2  of  the
      CIPU report.   There was a further attempted coup  on  11  June  2004
      when Kinshasa was again struck by  artillery  and  gun  fire  shortly
      after midnight.   The coup bid was quickly put down.

26.    According  to  Mr  Kennes,  the  installation  of  the  Transitional
      Government has not had any significant impact  on  the  human  rights
      situation  in  the  DRC.   He  described  the  general  situation  as
      government by warlords jockeying for power.   The UDPS at present are
      refusing to participate.   There continues to be a risk  of  a  coup.
      The overall picture is one of generalised  chaos.   The  position  is
      being exacerbated not just by the attempted coups referred  to  above
      but also by  continuing  concerns  that  the  Rwandan  government  is
      interfering in the Kivu region.  In May 2004 two militias  took  over
      Bukavu in what was seen as an attempt to de-stabilise the  transition
      process.   In June 2004 there were mass demonstrations across the DRC
      protesting against the  activities  of  the  Rwandans.     Mr  Kennes
      report records that the human  rights  record  of  all  the  formerly
      warring factions is appalling and that they continue in  practice  to
      control much of the territory  they  have  conquered.    One  current
      tendency is perceptible: a reinforcement of the anti-Rwandan and anti-
      Tutsi sentiment which  creates  some  degree  of  unity  between  the
      warring factions.   We note at this point that Mr Kennes' view of the
      widespread disregard for  human  rights  is  confirmed  by  the  CIPU
      report: see for example paragraphs 5.23 and 5.27 of the October  2004
      report dealing with detention and torture.

27.   Mr Kennes has dealt at length in his evidence with the risk to  those
      of Tutsi or Rwandan ethnicity.   He says that the peace agreement has
      not modified the situation but has  even  intensified  the  risk  for
      ethnic Tutsis.  After the installation of the Transitional Government
      there has been continued insecurity with each of the rebel  movements
      waiting for a chance to take power.   If  the  RDC/Goma  prevent  the
      reunification  of  the  country  under  a  transitional   government,
      aggression will be directed against Tutsis and anyone  considered  to
      be Tutsis. The Rwandans will be seen as the cause of  the  evil  that
      has come over the country.   Acts  by  ethnic  Tutsi  troops  led  by
      Lauren Nkunda and Mutebusi in late May  2004  led  to  a  generalised
      protest.   In camps in and around  Bukavu  26  Banyamulenge  soldiers
      were killed by their fellow soldiers in June 2004  and  about  30,000
      ethnic Tutsi including many Banyamulenge fled to Rwanda and Burundi.

28.   It is Mr Kennes' view that Tutsis are now arguably  the  category  of
      people most at risk on  return  to  the  DRC.     He  says  that  the
      Congolese have suffered so much from the endless war that  resentment
      against anything Rwandan is very high.  He went so far as to say that
      the category Tutsi is not limited to real Tutsis but anybody  who  is
      considered  to  be  Tutsi  including  anyone  who  is  a  member   or
      sympathiser of the RDC/Goma rebel movement or even anybody who  is  a
      member of the UDPS, the party that concluded  an  alliance  with  the
      RDC/Goma.   Mr Kennes also identified the following risk  categories:
      UDPS members, members of PALU, members of  the  Special  Presidential
      division (DSP) or family members,  high  ranking  MPR  officials  and
      their families and those involved in the assassination  of  President
      Kabila.    So  far  as  failed  asylum  seekers  are  concerned,  the
      immigration services did not always have a list unless the  embassies
      had been involved in the procedure and did not always track down  the
      cases of returned asylum seekers but they would check the reasons why
      a person was returned.  If a person had a  political  charge  against
      him, he would be at risk and all failed asylum seekers were  at  risk
      of being required to pay "fines" to the services concerned.

29.   In his report dated 19 October 2004  dealing  specifically  with  the
      fate of returned failed asylum seekers, Mr Kennes accepts that  quite
      evidently a number of stories by asylum seekers are  invented.   This
      is because the closure of European borders for  ordinary  immigration
      leaves only one possibility open  to  a  DRC  citizen  to  leave  the
      country:  seeking  political  asylum.    The  economic   and   social
      situation in the DRC has never  been  as  bad  as  at  present.    He
      commented that the stories  told  by  asylum  seekers  do  display  a
      pattern and in many cases may easily be correct but added that it was
      extraordinarily difficult to judge the credibility of a case  on  the
      basis of the case file.    There was little  standardisation  of  the
      documents used and most could be falsified.

30.   The risk to a failed asylum seeker only occurred when  a  person  did
      not have ordinary travel documents and the  immigration  or  security
      services had a reason for interrogating or arresting the  person  and
      they had some information available.   This person may have  a  known
      case against them or otherwise be of  interest  to  the  authorities.
      Failed asylum seekers might be required to pay a  "ransom"  if  there
      was no case against them.   One of the reasons for this was that they
      were regarded as having brought dishonour  to  the  Congolese  state.
      Mr Kennes accepted that there was no  persecution  of  failed  asylum
      seekers per se but it was his view that there was a serious  risk  of
      inhuman and degrading treatment not necessarily for political but for
      financial reasons.

31.   In relation to the issue of failed asylum  seekers  returned  to  the
      DRC, we also had before us paragraphs 6.221 - 226 of the CIPU  report
      October 2004.   In a letter of November 2002 the  British  Ambassador
      said that he had not seen any evidence  that  failed  asylum  seekers
      were persecuted on arrival, a view shared by the French, Belgian  and
      Dutch governments.  The report refers to the UNCHR position paper  of
      July 2004 that it is not opposed  to  the  return  of  failed  asylum
      seekers provided they have been found in fair procedures not to  have
      international protection needs subject to the caveat that some  areas
      remained unsafe and that states needed  to  ascertain  carefully  the
      nationality of rejected asylum seekers as  well  as  their  areas  of
      origin, profile and political or military affiliation.



Tribunal cases on risk categories

32.   In VL, the Tribunal when dealing with the risk categories in the  DRC
      came to the following conclusions:

           "93.  Our essential focus in this determination has been on  the
              issue of failed asylum seekers.    However,  the  Adjudicator
              in allowing this appeal made reference to  one  further  risk
              factor, namely, being a woman with a very young  child:   see
              paragraph 22.   In view of the analysis  set  out  in  M  and
              preceding paragraphs of this determination, we also  have  to
              consider whether there was  another  possible  risk  category
              into which she would fall, with reference  to  identification
              by the Tribunal in M of two  definitive  risk  categories  as
              follows:
           (a)   Nationality or perceived nationality of a  state  regarded
              as hostile to the DRC (in particular those who  have  or  are
              presumed to  have  Rwandan  connections  or  are  of  Rwandan
              origin);
           (b)   Having or being perceived to have a military or  political
              profile or background.


            94.  As explained earlier, we consider M (0071)  reached  sound
              conclusions and we adopt its conclusions in this  respect  as
              well as  others.     We  note  that  both  the  latest  UNHCR
              evidence and the latest report  of  Mr  Kennes  lent  further
              support to the identification of these two  categories.  They
              also lend support to inclusion  of  a  third  category  being
              without travel documents but this does not arise  in  the  UK
              context for reasons already given.


           95.   We would also observe that the UNCHR and  Mr  Kennes  have
              made reference in the past to other possible risk categories,
              including being from rebel held areas;    being of  a  family
              of mixed ethnicity; being of Tutsi origin or being  perceived
              to be Tutsis.


            However, since in our view the latest evidence is not clear cut
              in respect of these additional categories  and  the  Tribunal
              has  not  found  that  they  are  effective  risk  categories
              currently, we  leave  the  matter  to  be  more  definitively
              decided as and when necessary in future reported cases".

33.   In M(DRC) [2004] UKIAT 0075, the Tribunal considered the  risk  faced
      by the Tutsi community in Kinshasa.   It stated as follows:

              "15.     Firstly, we note that both confirm that as a  result
              of 1998 pogroms against Tutsis the authorities in conjunction
              with the ICRC  took  specific  steps  to  protect  the  Tutsi
              community in Kinshasa.    Secondly, even though  the  Belgian
              source does not describe the level of protection as complete,
              neither source identifies any significant level  of  civilian
              violence against Tutsis since specific steps were taken.


              16.      Secondly, both sources are dated 2002.   They do not
              deal with the  situation  since  August  2002.    As  already
              noted, the CIPU report, which deals with developments  since,
              identifies a significant improvement beginning in 2001.


              17.      Thirdly,  we  do  not  quite  understand  Mr  Khan's
              contention that Tutsis fall into separate  risk  category  by
              virtue of being confused with Rwandans.  It is clear that the
              authorities now protect Tutsis in Kinshasa.  If  there  is  a
              failure to make a distinction sometimes  between  Tutsis  and
              Rwandans,  it  is  made  by  civilian  Kinois  not   by   the
              authorities.    The  latter  to  repeat,  are  described   as
              affording protection to Tutsis against civilian actions.


              18.      We also consider that the argument  advanced  by  Mr
              Khan does not in any event easily fit the particular facts in
              relation to this claimant.    On his own account, his  mother
              was a Congolese, not a  non-Congolese  Tutsi.     It  appears
              from the background  sources  that  suspicion  and  hostility
              against Tutsis  is  primary  directed  against  non-Congolese
              Tutsis.


              19.      Since returns from the UK to the DRC are to Kinshasa
              and there is no evidence to suggest that  Tutsis  originating
              from other areas are prevented from remaining in  that  city,
              it is unnecessary for us to address the evidence relating  to
              treatment of Tutsis in  other  areas  particularly  those  in
              rebel held areas, although we note that the  CIPU  refers  to
              continuing  discrimination   against   them,   not   to   any
              significant levels of violence  or  other  forms  of  serious
              harm."


34.   The Tribunal in TC (mixed ethnicity - Rwandan) DRC [2004] UKIAT  00238
      regarded M as properly addressing the risks faced by citizens  of  the
      DRC of mixed Rwandan/Tutsi ethnicity.

Conclusions on the risk categories

35.   It is clear from the background evidence that since the start  of  the
      war in 1998 ethnic Tutsis have been subjected to serious abuses in the
      DRC but the security situation did improve during 2003  and  according
      to the US State Department report for that year ethnic Tutsis were not
      subjected to serious abuses by government security forces or citizens.
         The camp in Kinshasa which had housed several hundred Tutsis  since
      1998 was closed in the summer of 2003 because the local population had
      become more tolerant  towards  the  Tutsis.    The  ICRC  helped  find
      solutions for  the  former  inhabitants  of  this  camp.    About  100
      obtained exit visas for Canada, others travelled to the  east  of  the
      DRC and others remained in Kinshasa.    However,  recent  events  have
      caused the situation to deteriorate.  In  this  context  the  Tribunal
      refers to the UNCHR report of 2 February 2005 in response to a request
      for its opinion on the risk on return to the DRC for people of Rwandan
      origin or all those perceived as such.

36.         This relevant part of the report reads as follows:

                  "Until recently, the Banyamulenge were viewed as allies of
              RCD-Goma and Rwanda, and were subsequently deemed to be  safe
              in Eastern DRC.  However, following a shift of alliances, the
              Banyamulenge are also reportedly targeted by  Rwandan  troops
              because of  their  perceived  or  actual  opposition  to  the
              Rwandan occupation in Eastern DRC.  Despite  the  efforts  of
              the DRC authorities to protect the Banyamulenge/Tutsi  ethnic
              group, the government may not be able to  protect  them  from
              the generalised hostility of local  communities.   For  these
              reasons,  UNHCR  is  of  the  opinion  that  individuals   of
              Banyamulenge ethnic origin may be at risk of persecutory acts
              on the grounds of nationality  and  membership  of  a  racial
              group."


      The report focuses primarily on the situation in the East of  the  DRC
      but it does provide support for the fact  that  there  is  a  risk  to
      Tutsis from the generalised hostility of local communities at least in
      Eastern DRC.  The Banyamulenge live mainly  in  the  East.   They  are
      ethnically related to the Rwandan Tutsi although they have  their  own
      distinct dialect.  They are descended from those who came from  Rwanda
      before colonial occupation started in1885.  They  have  been  seen  as
      natural allies of the Rwandans even though they have  sided  with  the
      Congolese against the Rwandans.  The incursions by  the  ethnic  Tutsi
      troops of Laurent Nkunda and Mutebesi was justified  as  necessary  to
      protect the Banyamulenge but in all likelihood this was an  excuse  to
      intervene and its effect has been to  harden  attitudes  against  both
      Tutsis and Banyamulenge


37.   We also note from  this  report  that  it  is  confirmed  that  active
      membership in a political party may  lead  to  difficulties  with  the
      authorities.  The government has reportedly been involved in arbitrary
      arrest, detention, torture  of  persons  perceived  to  be  government
      opponents.   The  report  maintains  that  individuals  with  real  or
      perceived  political  associations  are  likely  to  be  at  risk  and
      therefore deserve to receive particular and careful  consideration  of
      their claims.


 38.  In the Human Rights Watch Report  of  4  December  2004  dealing  with
      press reports that Rwandan troops had again crossed into  the  DRC  it
      was said that news of a Rwandan military presence would further  spark
      anger towards Congolese of Rwandan origin, particularly those who were
      Tutsi.  Congolese of other groups believed that Congolese Tutsi, and a
      related people, the Banyamulenge, would support  a  Rwandan  invasion.
      Fear and hatred between ethnic groups had  risen  sharply  in  eastern
      Congo in the previous six months.  These reports  support  Mr  Kennes'
      view that at present there is an increased risk to Tutsis  exacerbated
      by  a  reaction  to  the  events  in  Bukavu  in  May-June  2004   and
      subsequently.    According to Mr  Kennes  it  is  very  dangerous  for
      anyone who is a Tutsi or considered as such to live in Kinshasa.    He
      would have to live in  the  commune  of  Gombe  where  there  is  some
      protection offered by MONUC but only the  well  off  can  live  there.
      High level officials of RCD/Goma might enjoy some sort of  protection.



Tutsi ethnicity

39.   The evidence currently available satisfies us that  the  position  has
      changed since the Tribunal considered the issue of the risk to  Tutsis
      in M and TC. In the current situation in the DRC the  Tribunal  accept
      that,  with  the  exception  of  high  level  officials  of  RCD/Goma,
      returnees of Tutsi ethnicity or believed to be of this ethnicity could
      be at real risk on  return.     The  resentment  against  anything  or
      anybody Rwandan or perceived to be Rwandan is very high and such  that
      there is a real risk of generalised hostility from  local  communities
      against which the authorities are currently unlikely to protect.   The
      situation improved in 2003 but we are satisfied in the  light  of  the
      evidence before us there has been a sharp deterioration in  2004.   We
      accept Mr Kennes' evidence  of  the  current  dangers  for  Tutsis  in
      Kinshasa, the great majority of whom are unable  generally  to  obtain
      the protection of either MONUC or the authorities.

40.     However, we would emphasise that a person cannot expect  to  succeed
      in a refugee or Art 3 claim merely by asserting that he or  she  is  a
      Tutsi or would be perceived as one.  Given  that  there  are  distinct
      physical characteristics typical  of  a  Tutsi  -  see    CIPU  report
      October 2004 para 6.71 - a highly significant  consideration  will  be
      the extent to which a person possesses  those  characteristics.  If  a
      person claims to be of mixed Tutsi ethnicity it will  be  relevant  to
      examine to what extent he or she will be seen to have taken the ethnic
      identity of their father or mother. Furthermore, given the  importance
      in the DRC context of tribal links, geographical location,  linguistic
      identity, customs, traditions and other factors, there  may  be  valid
      reasons for  finding  that  a  person,  albeit  lacking  entirely  the
      physical characteristics of a Tutsi, will be perceived as one.

41.     We would add, however,  that we do not find very helpful Mr  Kennes`
       suggestion (see above para 28) that the category of Tutsi  should  be
      seen as including anyone  who  is  a  member  or  sympathiser  of  the
      RDC/Goma rebel movement or even anybody who is a member of  the  UDPS.
      It may well be that within the DRC people use  "Tutsi"  as  a  general
      pejorative term to denote those who are pro-Rwandan,  but  it  remains
      that  it  is  seen  to  designate  persons  on  ethnic  grounds  quite
      separately from their military or political affiliations. To adopt  Mr
      Kennes` proposed extension of the Tutsi category would  falsely  imply
      that it covers   only those who have a military or political  profile.



Persons from Kivu

42.   Mr Kennes' evidence was also that in Kinshasa there is a  tendency  to
      consider anybody from the Kivu region as Rwandese. However,  we  think
      in this respect his evidence was less specific and difficult to square
      with the fact, which must  be  evident  to  the  DRC  authorities  and
      Kinshasa residents, that many non-Tutsi inhabitants of the Kivu region
      have faced oppression at the hands of rebel armies in league with  the
      Rwandese. If Mr Kennes` evidence on this category were right, we would
      expect there to be evidence of wide-scale round-ups of or attacks upon
      persons entering Kinshasa from the Kivu  region.  So  far  as  we  can
      ascertain, such evidence is lacking.

  43.  This is not to say that an individual from Kivu could not succeed  in
      showing a real risk where there are other factors adding  to  risk  in
      play.    This emphasises the importance of each case being  looked  at
      on its own facts.  The fact that a returnee comes from Kivu would be a
      relevant factor to  be  taken  into  account  but  by  itself  is  not
      determinative. The assessment of risk involves a careful  scrutiny  of
      the evidence as a whole including the evidence of to  what  extent  an
      appellant's origin, background and descent might lead the  authorities
      to consider him as Rwandese.


Military and political profile

 44.  We confirm that there continues to be a real risk for  those  with  a
      political or military profile.   Each case must be judged on its  own
      facts but it is possible now to provide a little more detail at least
      about those who fall within the "political profile" subcategory.

45.     We would emphasise first of all that  use  of  the  word  "profile"
      highlights the fact that this category is intended to mark out  those
      whose  actual  or  perceived  military  or  political  activities  or
      involvements are likely to have brought them or to bring them to  the
      adverse attention  of  the  Kabila  regime.  Mere  membership  of  an
      opposition political party will not demonstrate  that  a  person  has
      such a profile.

46.     Bearing this point in mind, we accept that at the present  time  it
      is very dangerous to be an active member of the UDPS.    The  success
      of the  ville  morte  action  in  bringing  much  of  Kinshasa  to  a
      standstill in January 2005 has threatened the Kabila leadership.   We
      accept Mr Kennes' evidence that UDPS militants abroad  returning  now
      would be at risk of detention.   There is a much lesser risk for PALU
      members although this changes from time to  time.   According  to  Mr
      Kennes they tend to  be  released  more  easily  than  UDPS  members.
      There is a potential risk for DPS members who are  considered  to  be
      potential and actual collaborators or spies for  Bemba  and  his  MLC
      movement.  The danger  for  high  ranking  MPR  officials  and  their
      families has  considerably  diminished  since  the  creation  of  the
      Transitional Government and depends on the position of  persons  held
      under the Mobutu regime.   Those involved or believed to be  involved
      in the assassination of President Kabila continue to be  at  risk  of
      imprisonment and torture.   The immigration and security services are
      still convinced that only  part  of  the  network  that  planned  the
      assassination has been discovered and arrested.

Failed asylum seekers

47.   The evidence presently before us does not satisfy us  that  there  is
      any adequate evidential basis for taking a different view from current
      Tribunal jurisprudence that returned failed asylum seekers are not  at
      real risk of persecution for that reason alone.  We accept that  while
      there  might  be  attempts  to  extract  money  from   returnees   the
      authorities are only interested in those who have or are perceived  to
      have an ethnic, military or  political  profile  identifying  them  as
      opponents to those in power. Mr Kennes confirms in his evidence that a
      person returning with valid, ordinary travel documents will not be  at
      risk unless of interest to the authorities for these reasons.

48.   If someone is identified as a failed asylum seeker but there  are  no
      known political charges against him, there is a risk that they may  be
      required to pay a "fine". Those who do not have charges  against  them
      or are otherwise not of interest to the authorities will  be  released
      upon payment of the fine.  According to Mr Kennes, a  failure  to  pay
      leads to a risk of being detained in  irregular  places  of  detention
      such as an office and being released only upon payment of the fine but
      there are cases where returnees, having been sent abroad by an "asylum
      seeker immigration network" with the  complicity  of  officials,  have
      been able to look to that  network  for  protection  on  return.   The
      director of immigration services does try to defend  the  interest  of
      all returnees by checking whether they have been lawfully returned  or
      whether somebody has received the papers they are entitled to.  On one
      hand this is positive for the DRC citizens  abroad  who  do  not  seek
      political asylum but it has led to a closer scrutiny of the  cases  of
      returned failed asylum seekers.  Research into an individual case  may
      more easily lead to the discovery of the political, military or ethnic
      background of a returnee but may  also  identify  someone  as  a  mere
      returned failed asylum-seeker.

49.   This evidence emphasises that the primary risk to a returnee is where
      they have a political or military or ethnic (Tutsi)  background  which
      makes him of an adverse interest to  the  authorities.   However,  the
      risk arises because  of  his  background  and  not  because  he  is  a
      returnee.   The  relevance  of  the  fact  that  returns  are  closely
      scrutinised goes to the likelihood of that background coming to light.
      If someone is not of interest to the authorities but is identified  as
      a failed asylum seeker then it is clear from  the  evidence  that  the
      only real risk they run is of being  required  to  pay  a  fine.   The
      officials involved are motivated for financial reasons using returnees
      as a potential source of income.   This  behaviour  can  certainly  be
      categorised as harassment but we are not satisfied that the risks  are
      such that there is  a  real  risk  of  imprisonment  or  detention  in
      conditions which amounts to a breach of article  3.   The  aim  is  to
      obtain money and must be viewed in the  context  of  a  society  where
      corruption is endemic and there is a background of generalised  chaos.
      The hard reality is that corruption is endemic in  countries  such  as
      the DRC and officials may take the opportunity of using their position
      to extort money from returnees.

50.   The issue for the Tribunal is whether the position is such that there
      is a real risk of a breach  of  article  3  for  all  returned  asylum
      seekers identified as  such.  We  are  not  satisfied  that  the  high
      threshold is met.  The risk is of having  to  pay  a  fine  and  being
      wrongly detained to encourage payment.  We are not  satisfied  on  the
      evidence before us that this amounts to a breach of article 3. We  are
      confirmed in this view by the fact that the UNHCR in its letter  of  2
      February 2005 maintained its opinion which it has set out in  previous
      letters that generally  speaking  it  was  possible  for  unsuccessful
      asylum seekers to return to the DRC provided that they had been  found
      in fair procedures not to have international protection needs.

Summary of the Risk Categories

51.   Building on previous country guidance cases and in  particular  M  and
      VL, the Tribunal would reformulate  and  summarise  the  current  risk
      categories as follows:

        i) We confirm as continuing to be a  risk  category  those  with  a
           nationality or perceived nationality  of  a  state  regarded  as
           hostile to the DRC and in particular those who have or  presumed
           to have Rwandan connections or are of Rwandan origins.


       ii) We consider that in light of recent developments there is now  a
           risk  category  consisting  of   those   who   are   Tutsi   (or
           Banyamulenge) or are perceived to be  Tutsi  (or  Banyamulenge).
           The only possible exception to it arises in  relation  to  high-
           level officials of RCD/Goma.  We accept that in  practice  there
           is considerable overlap with (i)  since,  as  a  result  of  the
           events of 2004  "Rwandan" and "Tutsi" are more often regarded as
           the same by the DRC authorities and civilian population and as a
           result Tutsis and those perceived as such face higher risks than
           before. However, they are distinct categories, one  nationality-
           based, the other ethnicity-based.

      (iii) We also confirm as an existing risk  category  those  having  or
           being perceived to have  a  military  or  political  profile  in
           opposition to the government.  The risk fluctuates in accordance
           with the political situation.   On the  basis  of  the  evidence
           before us, the current position  is  as  follows.  The  Tribunal
           accept that there is a real risk at present for UDPS  activists.
            In the eyes of the authorities in Kinshasa UDPS supporters  are
           assimilated with supporters of the RDC/Goma movement because  of
           the alliance reached in 2003 even if later officially ended.  At
           present there is a lesser risk for PALU members.    There  is  a
           potential risk for DSP members who are considered  as  potential
           or actual collaborators for JP Bemba and his MLC movement.   The
           risk  for  those  associated  with   the   Mobutu   regime   has
           considerably lessened.  It is clear from the background evidence
           that close relatives of Mobutu have returned  to  the  DRC  from
           exile:  CIPU report paragraph 6.110-2.    It  is  reported  that
           those not suspected of collaboration with the  rebels  would  no
           longer be at risk and affiliation to the MPR would not  normally
           involve the risk of political persecution.   No  repression  has
           been organised against PDSC members since the death  of  Laurent
           Kabila.


       iv) The evidence before us sought to identify a  number  of  further
           potential  risk  categories:  rebel  movement  members  now   in
           opposition to their own movement and those  who  come  from  the
           east (including Kivu) but are returned  to  Kinshasa  without  a
           political or military profile.   However, these  issues  do  not
           arise in the present  appeal  and  we  do  not  have  sufficient
           evidence to make it appropriate to reach conclusions about them.


52.     In the light of our findings this determination is  to  be  read  as
      replacing the existing country guidance cases on the DRC save  for  VL
      for what it says  about  the  approach  to  the  issue  failed  asylum
      seekers. It also replaces   RK (obligation to investigate)  CG  [2004]
      UKIAT 00129, but we would emphasise  that  the  latter  remains  as  a
      legally  important reported case in respect of   what  it  says  about
      the obligation to investigate.

53.   The Tribunal would reiterate some earlier observations on the task of
      assessing whether a person falls within the new second risk  category
      as now extended.  There are two main aspects to this.  Firstly on the
      evidence before us, most but not all Tutsis would  be  at  risk.   As
      noted in paragraphs 39-40, some Tutsis may  be  able  to  obtain  the
      protection of MONUC albeit in practice they may be limited  to  those
      with wealth who are high-level officials within RCD/Goma  and  appear
      able to look to the authorities for protection.

54.   Secondly, as with the military or political category, much depends on
      the perception of the authorities as to  whether  they  view  someone
      adversely.  It is not sufficient for an  appellant  simply  to  state
      that he is Rwandan or Tutsi or would be perceived as  such.  Evidence
      as to ethnicity will need to be scrutinised  carefully.   Given  that
      Tutsis are described as being physically distinct from  other  tribes
      (CIPU report October 2004 para 6.71) a person is more  likely  to  be
      viewed as a  Tutsi  by  the  authorities  if  he  or  she  has  those
      distinctive characteristics.  Similarly those whose  dialect,  tribal
      links and geographical origins link them closely to  Tutsis  such  as
      the Banyamulenge would  also  appear  to  fall  within  the  at  risk
      category.  However, the mere fact of coming from the East or being of
      mixed ethnicity is unlikely without more to give rise to a perception
      of being Tutsi.  The assessment must  be  made  on  the  basis  of  a
      careful analysis of an appellant's ethnicity, background and profile.

The appeal of the first appellant

55.   The Adjudicator accepted that the first  appellant  would  have  been
      entitled to asylum when he arrived in the United Kingdom but in  view
      of the new political arrangements in place since the end of June 2003
      he was satisfied that the political landscape in  the  DRC  had  been
      transformed.  It was his view that the appellant's past detention was
      because of his political activities with the PDSC.     He found  that
      there was now no  risk  arising  to  the  first  appellant  from  his
      political opinions or his activities as a musician. We are  satisfied
      that the Adjudicator was entitled to reach this conclusion and  there
      is no error of law in his findings and conclusions on this aspect  of
      the first appellant's appeal.

56.   The adjudicator went on to deal with the risk arising from  the  fact
      that the first appellant was of part  Rwandan  ethnicity.   He  found
      that there was no doubt as to his nationality.  He had had no history
      of any involvement in fighting with any rebel group  particularly  in
      the east of the DRC.  Despite his ethnicity he had  not  entered  the
      DRC in the past from Rwanda, having been born in  Kinshasa.  However,
      the adjudicator did accept that the first appellant  had  encountered
      difficulties in the past due to his ethnicity and accepted  that  the
      newspaper report was genuine. He  accepted  the  reliability  of  the
      newspaper article which referred to the first appellant  by  name  as
      someone, of a mixed marriage, who was seriously  threatened.  We  are
      satisfied that the Adjudicator  did  err  in  law  by  leaving  these
      factors out of account when assessing in the light  of  the  evidence
      before him and in particularly the UNHCR report whether  there  would
      be a risk arising from his ethnicity.

57.   As we have found a material error of law we are able to consider  the
      further evidence now before  us.   In  the  light  of  this  evidence
      dealing with the heightened risks to those suspected  of  Rwandan  or
      Tutsi background and the fact that the first appellant  has  come  to
      the attention of  the  authorities  in  the  past,  the  Tribunal  is
      satisfied that there is a real risk of persecution  on  return.    We
      bear in mind that the Adjudicator accepted that in January  2000  the
      authorities were looking for him and there was  a  newspaper  article
      indicating that he had encountered some difficulties because  of  his
      ethnicity.  The  first  appellant  does  not  have  the  identifiable
      physical  characteristics  of  a  Tutsi,  but  the  newspaper  report
      indicates  that  his  perceived  ethnicity  of  Tutsi  has   been   a
      significant factor in the  adverse  interest  taken  in  him  by  the
      authorities  previously.  We  consider  that  his   perceived   Tutsi
      ethnicity, together with his past political and musical involvements,
      would mean that he was likely to  continue  facing  a  real  risk  of
      adverse  treatment  either  from  the  authorities  or   from   local
      communities against which he would not receive effective protection.

The facts relating to the second appellant

58.   The second appellant's evidence was rejected by the  Adjudicator  who
      came to the conclusion that his account was a fabrication.    He  did
      not believe that the second appellant had been a member of  the  UDPS
      or had been detained.  The Tribunal is not satisfied that he would be
      at risk because he would have no travel documents or  passport.    If
      he is returned he will be provided with substitute documents  through
      the DRC Embassy.  The Tribunal is not satisfied  that  there  is  any
      adequate basis for a successful argument that he  would  be  at  real
      risk on return.   The authorities will only be  adversely  interested
      in him in so far as he falls into one of the known  risk  categories.
      In the light of the Adjudicator's findings he does not.   We are  not
      satisfied that the risk of having money extorted from him on  arrival
      is such that there is a real risk of a breach of Article  3.     This
      risk arises because of corruption within the security and immigration
      services.  The Adjudicator was entitled to find  that  there  was  no
      reasonable likelihood of detention other than possibly a  very  short
      period when enquiries were made. As the appeal was decided  before  9
      June 2003, the appeal against the Adjudicator's determination is  not
      limited to showing that there is an error of law.  However,  for  the
      reasons we have given, we are not satisfied either that he  erred  in
      law or that there is any basis on  which  we  would  be  entitled  to
      interfere with his findings of fact or  his  assessment  of  risk  on
      return.  We agree with those findings and conclusions.

Decisions

59.   Accordingly, the appeal by the  first  appellant  is  allowed.    The
      appeal by the second appellant is dismissed.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President


Appendix A
Background materials placed before the Tribunal

CIPU reports October 2003, April 2004 and October 2004
Public AI Index AFR 62/28/98 dated 24 July 1998
UNHCR letter "Returns to the DRC" 13 August 2003
Human rights Watch 24 July 2003
US State Dept Report DRC 31 March 2003
BID letters 25 Sept 2003, 16 April 2003, 7 May 2003, 16 May  2003,  30  May
2003
Home Office letters 14 Feb 2003, 17 March 2003, 17 April 2003, 20 May 2003,
11 June 2003, 12 August 2003
Docu- Congo email 20 August 2003
UNHCR letters 23 January 2003, 10 June 2003
Home Office letters 15July 2003, 1August 2003
Amnesty International faxes 9July 2003 (x2)
Docu-Congo 23 June 2003, 16 may 2003
Undated statement by returned asylum seeker
Home Office Bulletin 30 January 2003
BID letter 30 may 2003
Home Office letter 12 June 2003
BID letter 16 July 2003
Country report ACCORD/UNHCR seminar 28-9 June 2003
Kennes Fate of returned asylum seekers 10 Feb 2003
RLC documents on return 21 October 2003
IRRN (UK) 2 Dec 2004 Arun Kundnani
UNHCR letters 15 Sept 2003, 24 February 2004, 3  August  2004,  2  February
2005
HRW report 4 December 2004
UNHCR report 2005
Congoceca July 2002 human rights abuses against UDPS
Statement UDPS Gen Sec 10 Nov 1999
Afrol News 20 march 2003
Utusan online report 10 April2003
All Africa.com report 31 March 2003
BBC news report 3 April 2003
ABC news on line report 9 April 2003 (x2)
BBC news report 8 April 2003
World Refugee survey report 2004

Appendix B
Expert Reports

Reports from Mr Kennes dated 19 October 2004, 18 November 2004, 22 November
2004, 27 March 2005

Appendix C
Cases cited or referred to

Senga CO-573-94
B (DR Congo) [2003] UKIAT 00012
M (DR Congo) [2003] UKIAT 00051
VL (risk - failed asylum seekers) DRC [2004] UKIAT 00007
S (DRC) [2004] UKIAT 00010
M (Croatia) [2004]UKIAT 00024*
M (DRC) UKIAT 00075
TC (mixed ethnicity -Rwandan) DRC [2004] UKIAT 00238
RK (obligation to investigate) [2004] UKIAT 00129

                                     ***

Approved for electronic transmission
