
ar
      SM and Others  (Kurds - Protection - Relocation) Iraq  CG [2005] UKIAT
                                                                       00111






                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 29/30 March 2005
                                                                1 April 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              29th June 2005

                                   Before:


                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)
                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                                Mrs E Morton




                              (               )


                              (               )

                              (               )

                                                                  APPELLANTS


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    These appeals were listed together to enable the Tribunal  to  provide
      Country Guidance on a number of issues relating to Iraqi Kurds.  Ms N.
      Braganza for A.S. Law Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  first
      claimant, Mr (               ).  Ms Braganza instructed by  Douglas  &
      Partners, also appeared on behalf of Mr (               ), the  second
      claimant. Ms Y. Adedeji, instructed by  Livingstone  Brown  solicitors
      appeared on behalf of the third claimant, Mr (               ). Mr  S.
      Kovats, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
      Secretary of State in all three cases.

2.    The following five issues are for consideration  by  the  Tribunal  in
      these appeals.


      (i)   the nature of the authorities in the KAZ
      (ii)  sufficiency of protection by the Kurdish authorities, the  Iraqi
           authorities and the coalition forces generally


      (iii) the reach of the PUK throughout Iraq by means of the police  and
           judicial systems


      (iv)  the availability of internal relocation for a  Kurd  within  the
           KAA.


      (v)    the  availability  of  internal  flight  for  a  Kurd  in  Iraq
           generally.

3.    We propose as far as possible  to  deal  with  each  of  these  issues
      separately, setting out the relevant  evidence  with  regard  to  each
      issue in turn and thereafter  setting  out  our  conclusions  on  that
      evidence.  Our general conclusions are set out at paragraph 279 below.
       First of all we set out the factual background to each appeal.

4.    In the case of Mr (               ) it is  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal. Mr (               ) appealed to the  Adjudicator,  Mr  P.J.G.
      White, against the Secretary of State's decision of 22  February  2002
      to issue directions for his removal from the  United  Kingdom,  asylum
      having been refused.  The essence of his claim is as set out paragraph
      15 of Mr White's determination.  The appellant (as we shall  refer  to
      him) was a member of the KDP  who  worked  in  the  offices  of  Golan
      Newspaper, and in particular in the copy section. This  newspaper  was
      owned by the KDP who used the printing facilities of the newspaper not
      only for producing material intended to be published in the  newspaper
      but also for other printing and copying purposes including   documents
      of a confidential and secret  nature.  The  appellant  had  particular
      responsibility for photocopying and worked with two  colleagues  named
      Razgar and Bakir.
5.    On  21  September  1999  the  three  of  them  were  summoned  to  the
      supervisor's office and questioned about  missing  documents  and  the
      leaking of confidential information to the PUK.   The  nature  of  the
      information said to have been revealed was not specified. Subsequently
      Razgar and Bakir attempted to flee to the PUK area but they were  both
      shot and the appellant was subsequently informed that Bakir had  died,
      but before doing so had falsely implicated the  appellant  in  leaking
      the information. The appellant went into hiding and subsequently  fled
      from Iraq and came to the United  Kingdom  on  19  December  1999  and
      claimed asylum on arrival.

6.     The  Adjudicator  assessed  his  claim,  taking  into  account   also
      objective evidence from Ms Sheri Laizer and other objective  evidence.
      He found the appellant to be  credible.   He  concluded  that  if  the
      appellant were to be returned to Iraq he would still be of interest to
      the KDP authorities.  It seems from paragraph 27 of his  determination
      that he considered that there would not be a sufficiency of protection
      for the appellant upon return to Iraq.   He appears to have restricted
      his consideration to the situation in the KAA.

7.    In his grounds of appeal the Secretary of  State  contended  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to consider internal relocation and  that  this
      would not be unduly harsh. Permission was granted to argue this point.



8.    Mr (               ) appealed  to  the  Adjudicator,  Mr  R.A.  Price,
      against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  of  28  August  2003
      refusing asylum.

9.    Mr (               ) is a member of the Barwary tribe.  He  said  that
      his family farmed their land outside Zakho but had problems  with  the
      powerful Goly tribe who wanted his family land but this  was  refused.
      These problems had began mainly from 1995  but  manifested  themselves
      particularly in April 2003 when his brother Zerevan was working on the
      land and the appellant was elsewhere. He found out later that  Zerevan
      had gone to the  land to work and there were irrigation  problems  and
      he had then gone on the Goly land to  ensure  the  passage  of  water.
      Whilst doing this he was insulted by a son of the Goly tribe and  shot
      and injured this man, who later died. They knew that  there  would  be
      revenge and considered they could not fight the  Goly  tribe  as  they
      were powerful.  His father and  brother  fled  and  he  also  did  so,
      leaving Iraq and going to Turkey where he remained until June and came
      to the United Kingdom on 2 July 2003 and claimed asylum on the 3  July
      2003.

10.   The Adjudicator found the appellant  to  be  credible.   He  concluded
      that  the Goly tribe appeared to be localised and he  did  not  accept
      the appellant's evidence that that tribe, which he  had  described  as
      consisting of possibly 2000/3000 members, was all powerful in the  KAZ
      and elsewhere in  Iraq.    He  considered  that  the  appellant  could
      relocate within the Kurdish Autonomous Region and was  satisfied  that
      there would be a sufficiency of protection there.

11.   He bore in mind however, the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Gardi
      [2002] EWCA Civ 750 in which it was stated that the Kurdish Autonomous
      Region would not meet the criterion of being  a  state  or  state-like
      entity capable of  providing   protection  for  the  purposes  of  the
      Refugee Convention. He felt constrained to follow Gardi.  He  went  on
      however to consider that there was no reason why the appellant  should
      not relocate elsewhere in Iraq and that it was  not  credible  that  a
      relatively small tribe, however powerful, would be able to locate  him
      and enforce the blood feud. Though the security situation in Iraq  was
      unsatisfactory at the time, he considered that there was no reason  to
      find that the Coalition Forces and/or the present temporary government
      in Iraq would not be in a position to provide a degree of  sufficiency
      of protection.

12.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued firstly,  that  the  Adjudicator
      had failed to consider whether there  was a Refugee Convention  reason
      in this case and erred in failing to address the objective material on
       the issue of internal relocation. Secondly, it  is  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator should at least have considered adjourning the  appeal  to
      allow the appellant who was unrepresented at  the  hearing  to  obtain
      evidence on the question  of  relocation  and  also  the  question  of
      sufficiency of protection.  Subsequent to the hearing a report from Mr
      Joffe had been obtained which  it  was  contended  would  support  the
      appellant's claim that he could not relocate within  Iraq.  The  other
      matter raised in the grounds of appeal concerned why  the  appeal  was
      out of time, and the Vice President who granted permission  to  appeal
      saw merit to this and also considered that the Adjudicator  might  not
      have given sufficient consideration to the issues  of  sufficiency  of
      protection and internal relocation.

13.   Mr (               ) appealed to the Adjudicator, Mr  J.G.  Macdonald,
      against the decision of the Secretary of State of 5 November  2001  to
      issue directions for his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,  asylum
      having  been refused.

14.   Mr (               ) had been a member of the PUK until 1995. In  1983
      a PUK organiser, Omer Hamakaki had  murdered  the  appellant's  uncle,
      Mulla Omer.  When the appellant stopped working for the PUK in 1995 he
      opened his own business as a hairdresser. His cousin, Aso, the son  of
      Mulla Omer, came to visit him on 3 June 2000 and on 10 June he was  in
      his hairdressing salon and Aso was with him.  Aso  saw  Omer  Hamakaki
      pass by  the  shop  and  shot  him,  killing  him,  and  fled  to  the
      appellant's sister's  house. The appellant felt that he  also  had  to
      run as he feared that Hamakaki's family would take  immediate  revenge
      upon him.

15.   Both Aso and the appellant's brother were arrested in connection  with
      the murder. The appellant's brother was released. Aso  was  killed  by
      the family of Omer Hamakaki and his relations and the  PUK,  according
      to the appellant's answer to question 24 at  interview.  The  Hamamaki
      family belonged to the  Jaff   tribe  which  the  appellant  said  was
      present throughout the whole of Iraq.   He also claimed that  although
      Aso had been killed by Hamakaki's  family  the  tradition  of  revenge
      killing had not been satisfied, and he was perceived as being involved
      in the murder.

16.   He produced various documents including  a  letter  issued  by  a  PUK
      commander indicating that he was involved with Aso Omer in the killing
      of Mr Hamakaki, and  also  describing  the  appellant  and  containing
      instructions that he be arrested.

17.   The Adjudicator accepted the appellant's evidence, including the  fact
      that he was not involved in any way with the murder. He accepted  that
      the  documentation was genuine and noted that in essence his claim was
      that he feared persecution by Hamakaki's family  and  the  Jaff  tribe
      because the PUK would not be able to protect him and that he would not
      be safe anywhere in Iraq.  He  was  not  claiming  that  he  would  be
      persecuted by the PUK and it appeared that if returned to the PUK area
      he was likely to be questioned, detained and  put  on  trial  for  his
      involvement in the murder. His fear was essentially that he could  not
      escape the family of the deceased who would be determined to carry out
      an honour killing involving him.  The  Adjudicator  proceeded  on  the
      basis that  notwithstanding the lapse of time and the revenge  killing
      of Aso there remained a risk that Hamakaki's family would continue  to
      be interested in the appellant.

18.   The Adjudicator went on to note the objective evidence, and  concluded
      that the PUK  and the KDP were willing to offer protection  to  anyone
      who feared reprisals in the case of an honour killing. The KDP and PUK
      were in de facto control of the KAZ and willing to offer protection to
      those residing within their respective territories  and  there  was  a
      system in place to provide the necessary protection although the reach
      of such protection as they were able to offer was limited.

19.   He also noted from the country report before him  that  people  within
      the former KAZ who had a localised problem could safely and reasonably
      relocate within the former KAZ to an area where the KDP and  PUK  were
      able to provide protection, to the Kurdish dominated areas outside the
      former KAZ, or elsewhere.

20.   The Adjudicator concluded therefore that the appellant could seek  the
      protection of the PUK.  If he were to be targeted  by  the  deceased's
      family then the PUK were willing to protect  him  and  would  offer  a
      sufficiency of protection to the appropriate standard as  set  out  by
      the House of Lords in Horvath.

21.   The Adjudicator also concluded that since the Ba'ath Party regime  was
      no longer in power, the appellant would be safe  throughout  Iraq  and
      given the substantial presence of the  Allied  Forces  it  was  highly
      implausible that Hamakaki's family or the Jaff tribe would be able  to
      target  him outside the KAZ.    There was nothing exceptional  in  his
      case which indicated that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for   him  to
      relocate elsewhere in Iraq.

22.   In the grounds of appeal it is  contended  that  the  finding  by  the
      Adjudicator that the available protection  by  the  PUK  and  KDP  was
      limited indicated that the appellant would be at risk  of  persecution
      if returned to Iraq and that the Jaff tribe would be  able  to  target
      him outside the KAZ because their reach, power  and  tribal  influence
      extended across all of Iraq.

23.   Permission was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
      finding that there was adequate protection from the PUK was not  safe.
      The Vice President adverted to what may  conveniently  be  called  the
      Gardi point (the first issue which falls to be considered by  us)  and
      also to the effectiveness of such protection.  It was  not  considered
      to be arguable that the Adjudicator's conclusion that there was a lack
      of evidence that the Jaff tribe would find the appellant was not  open
      to him.  The Vice President also noted that since there  was  evidence
      that the PUK had handed the appellant's co-accused, his  cousin,  back
      to the family who then killed him, that it was arguable that he  faced
      risk on the same basis.

The nature of the authorities in the KAA
24.   We consider first the issue of the legal status of the authorities  in
      what is now the  Kurdish  Regional  Government  (KRG)  area,  formerly
      referred to variously as the KAA, KAZ and KAR (for sake of convenience
      we shall hereafter refer to it as the KAA) and also the ability  as  a
      matter of international law of those authorities to  provide  security
      to  the  inhabitants  of  that  area.  This  issue  has   arisen   for
      consideration in a number of cases which we now list and to which more
      detailed reference will be made below.

25.   First is the starred determination of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal
      in Dyli (00/TH/02186).  This was cited with approval by the  Court  of
      Appeal in Canaj [2001] EWCA Civ 782 which also heard an appeal against
      the decision of Dyson J as he  then  was  in  Vallaj  (CO/27378/2000).
      Subsequently the matter arose for obiter comment by Keene LJ in  Gardi
      [2002] EWCA Civ 750, which was specifically concerned with the KAA, as
      was a subsequent determination of the Tribunal in Faraj  [2002]  UKIAT
      07376.  The matter also  arose  for  consideration  by  the  Court  of
      Session in Saber [2004] INLR 222 and  most  recently  the  matter  was
      given detailed consideration by the Tribunal in its  country  guidance
      case of GH [2004] UKIAT 00248.

26.   The submissions on this  point  were  made  on  behalf  of  all  three
      appellants by Ms Adedeji.  She referred us to relevant  pages  of  the
      October 2004 Country Report concerning the nature of  and  history  of
      relations between the KDP and the PUK.  It is said in this  report  at
      page 152 of the Secretary of State's bundle that Kurdish nationalists'
      aspirations within Iraq have historically  been  weakened  by  rivalry
      between the KDP and the PUK, though in September 1998 they signed  the
      Washington Agreement to work towards resolving  the  main  outstanding
      issues in the Kurdish regions of Iraq. On 4 October 2002 they  jointly
      reconvened the Kurdish regional parliament for the  first  time  since
      the clashes that had occurred between them in 1994.

27.   After the ousting of Saddam Hussein  both  parties  were  said  to  be
      increasingly combining their political resources and  efforts  to  re-
      establish the joint governments of the Kurdish regions that  had  been
      in place between 1992 and 1994.

28.   Ms Adedeji also referred us to  the  Law  of  Administration  for  the
      state of Iraq (the transitional period) set out  at  Annex  G  to  the
      Country Report and to be found at pages 189 onwards in  the  Secretary
      of State's bundle. In particular, she referred us  to  the  fact  that
      this involved structures   set up for a transitional period  and  that
      it shall cease to have effect on the  formation of elected  government
      pursuant to a permanent constitution.  Its powers  are  to  be  shared
      between  the  federal  government  and   the   regional   governments,
      governorates, municipalities and local  administrations  according  to
      Article 4 of  the  law  of  administration.   The  Iraqi  transitional
      government shall  consist  of  a  National  Assembly,  the  Presidency
      Council, the Council of Ministers, including the  Prime  Minister  and
      the judicial authority. Article 25 sets out  the  areas  of  exclusive
      competence for the Iraqi transitional government which  includes  such
      matters as formulating foreign policy and  diplomatic  representation,
      formulating and executing national security policy and  formulating  a
      fiscal policy.

  29.   Article  53A  states  that  the  Kurdistan  Regional  Government  is
      recognised as the official government of the  territories administered
      by that government on 19 March 2003  in  the  governorates  of  Dohuk,
      Arbil, Suleimania, Kirkuk, Diyala and Neneveh.   The  term  'Kurdistan
      Regional Government' shall refer to the Kurdistan  National  Assembly,
      the Kurdistan Council of Ministers and the Regional Judicial Authority
      in the Kurdistan region.

30.   At Article 54A it is stated that  the  Kurdistan  Regional  Government
      shall  continue  to  perform  its  current   functions   through   the
      transitional period except with regard to those issues falling  within
      the exclusive competence of the federal  government  as  specified  in
      this law.  The Kurdistan Regional  Government  shall  retain  regional
      control over police forces and internal security  and  will  have  the
      right to impose taxes and fees within the Kurdistan region.

31.   Ms Adedeji also drew our attention  to the CIPU  Report  at  page  267
      and onwards in the Secretary of State's  bundle  concerning  the  2005
      elections in Iraq.  The KDP and PUK had formed a  joint  list  of  the
      National and Kurdish Assemblies though  they  had  competed  in  local
      provincial elections, and both parties complained of some threats  and
      manipulation by the other side.  The Kurdistan Democratic List  gained
      the majority of votes in the Kurdistan Legislative Elections with  90%
      of the votes and 104 seats in the Kurdistan  National  Assembly.   The
      Kurdish Alliance obtained 26% of the  votes and seventy-five seats  in
      the National Assembly.

32.   She also referred us to paragraphs 1.1 to 1.13 of  the  Joint  British
      Danish  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Damascus,  Amman  and  Geneva   on
      conditions in Iraq on July 2003.   The UNHCR and Damascus were of  the
      opinion that the parties controlling Northern Iraq behaved as they did
      before the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime.  She also referred  us  to
      page 367 of that bundle which forms part  of  the  Dutch  Ministry  of
      Foreign Affairs General Country Report on Iraq of December 2004, where
      it was noted that the Transitional National Assembly  would  have  the
      task of drawing up a permanent  constitution  in  Iraq  following  the
      elections.  It is  also  noted  at  page  370  that  the  Transitional
      Administrative Law which is in force until a permanent  government  is
      formed by the end of 2005 at the latest, recognises that  the  KRG  is
      the  official  government  for  the  region  that   it   was   already
      administering before the military intention. It is said  at  page  373
      that under the Transitional Administrative Law the Kurdish areas  have
      de facto autonomy during the interim period.

33.   Further on in that report at page 384 it is stated  that  the  Kurdish
      Parliament has stated its intention to bring its legislation  in  line
      with the central legislation of  Baghdad  as  far  as  possible.   The
      Transitional Administrative Law states that the KRG will continue  its
      tasks during the transitional period with the exception of  the  tasks
      referred to above, that come under the exclusive responsibility of the
      interim government in Baghdad.

34.   Ms Adedeji then took us the relevant case law.  In Dyli the point  was
      made at paragraph 13  that  the  protection  with  which  the  Refugee
      Convention  was concerned was  said  to  be  'the  protection  of  the
      country'  and  it  was  irrelevant  how  that  was  achieved,  whether
      directly, by the  authorities  of  the  country  or  by  others.   The
      Tribunal concluded at paragraph  14  that  for  the  purposes  of  the
      Refugee Convention protection provided by or through  UNMIK  and  KFOR
      was capable of amounting to the protection of his own  country  for  a
      resident of Kosovo.

35.   In Vallaj it was  noted  at  paragraph  12  that  the  United  Nations
      security Resolution 1244 (1999) provided  for  the  establishment  and
      deployment in Kosovo of international  and  security  presences  (i.e.
      UNMIK and KFOR).  The Resolution did not alter the status of Kosovo as
      part of the Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia.    The  UNMIK  answered
      through the Secretary General and his Special  Representative  to  the
      Security Council.  Dyson J went on to say  at  paragraph  30  that  in
      those rare cases where as a matter of international law  the  need  to
      protect has been transferred  to  another  entity  then  in  his  view
      Article 1A(2) of the  Refugee  Convention  should  be  interpreted  by
      reference to the ability of that other entity to protect the nationals
      of a country from persecution on any of the Convention grounds.

36.   In Canaj it was conceded on behalf  of  the  claimant  that  if  as  a
      matter of practical reality protection was being provided by UNMIK and
      KFOR then that was capable of constituting protection for the purposes
      of the Convention, but the argument was that they  were  not  in  fact
      providing the necessary protection to the requisite standard.

37.   Ms Adedeji then took us on to Gardi, and in particular  paragraph  37.
      At paragraph 37 it was suggested that the protection required  had  to
      be that of an entity capable of granting nationality to a person in  a
      form recognised internationally, a point which had been  made  by  the
      Federal  Court  of  Australia  in  Tjhe  Qwet  Koe  and  Minister  for
      Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and Others [1997] 912FCA.  It was  said
      that the KAA did not meet that criterion, and Keene LJ referred  to  a
      paper by Professor Hathaway and Ms Foster where it was said  that  the
      protection could only be provided by an entity capable of  being  held
      responsible under international law.  He noted that  the  decision  in
      Vallaj was not inconsistent with  that  proposition  since  the  UNMIK
      region in Kosovo had the authority of  the  United  Nations  plus  the
      consent  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia  although   no-one
      suggested that the KAA or any part of it  was  such  an  entity  under
      international law. Had it been necessary to decide it, he  would  have
      been inclined to find in favour of the appellant on the   'protection'
      aspects, but he did not satisfy the requirements of  the  'fear  test'
      and as a consequence his case did not fall for  protection  under  the
      Refugee Convention.

38.   This in essence was what was argued by Ms Adedeji  on  behalf  of  the
      appellants today. The situation with regard to the KAA  was  unchanged
      and the Transitional Administrative Law did not  affect  this  in  any
      material way but simply reflected what had been the position there for
      some time.  There  was  still  no  international  personality  in  the
      authorities, as was required.  The PUK  and  KDP  were  very  separate
      states, they had merged but had not fully merged. There was no   unity
      as such  between  them  to  the  required  extent.  The  international
      personality aspect considered in Gardi had not been answered.

39.   We referred Ms Adedeji to paragraph 21 in Vallaj where  reference  was
      made to the situation of  federal  states  which  devolve  substantial
      powers of government to regional administrations yet it was said to be
      right to describe the  protection  as  being  the  protection  of  the
      federal state. Ms Adedeji argued that the situation in  Northern  Iraq
      was very different from, for example, the  US  Federal  State  system.
      There was no unified regional government but it was mainly made up  of
      two units, the KDP and the PUK.  They operated  separate  systems.  On
      the facts of the case the KRG would not be able as a matter of law  to
      provide the protection envisaged by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Gardi.
      Also, as regards the suggestion that the protection came from the KRG,
      this was not true as there were two factions and two entities  in  the
      area and  it  was  necessary  to  look  at  the  reality.  Though  the
      Transitional Administrative Law  referred to the KRG it was  necessary
      to look at what that actually was and how it in fact operated.  It was
      contended that the  KDP  and  PUK  could  not   and  did  not  provide
      protection.

40.   In his submissions on this point Mr Kovats argued that  it  was  clear
      beyond argument that as matter of law the authorities in the KAA  were
      capable of  providing  protection.  He  gave  two  reasons  for  this.
      Firstly, the authorities showed that the question was whether, on  the
      facts, protection could be provided, and he referred us in  particular
      to the relevant paragraphs in Dyli, Vallaj and Faraj.  The  appellants
      could not rely on  Gardi  as  the  decision  was  arrived  at  without
      jurisdiction and had no standing. Also the matter had been  considered
      in detail by the Tribunal in GH where it had been  concluded  that  it
      was an issue of fact, as the authorities  indicated.   No  reason  had
      been shown why the Tribunal should depart from that.

41.   Even if Mr Kovats were wrong in  that  regard,  there  were  two  good
      reasons as a matter of law as to why protection could be provided.  He
      referred us firstly to Article 53A of the Transitional  Law  and  also
      Article 54. Even if the PUK and KDP were separate,  there  was  forty-
      three separate police authorities in the United Kingdom but there  was
      still protection even if it were not a unitary police system.

42.   Secondly, he referred us to the elections of 30 January  2005.   There
      had been elections in the Iraqi National Assembly and for the  Kurdish
      Regional Authority and the eighteen governorates.  The KUP and PUK had
      won on a joint ticket in the regional  and  national  elections.  They
      were therefore united both nationally and regionally and  this  was  a
      matter of law which was what the election results were. He referred us
      to paragraphs 97 to 105 in  GH  and  also  his  skeleton  argument  at
      paragraph 14.  By way of reply Ms Adedeji stated that the  authorities
      could not protect  as  a  matter  of  law  as  the  KRG  lacked  legal
      personality and a capability  as  required  by  Gardi  which  remained
      persuasive.

43.   In this regard Ms Braganza also referred us to  paragraph  103  of  GH
      where the point was made that the issue in relation to protection  had
      never been fully argued in respect of the home area of the claimant or
      of a situation where internal relocation was in  point.   GH  was  not
      conclusive on the point.

44.   Our starting point must be the starred determination of  the  Tribunal
      in Dyli.  We attach particular weight to the conclusion  at  paragraph
      13 that it  is  irrelevant  how  the  protection  of  the  country  is
      achieved, whether directly by the authorities of  the  country  or  by
      others.  The Tribunal therefore concluded that for the  purpose of the
       Convention protection provided by  UNMIK  and  KFOR  was  capable  of
      amounting to the protection  of his own  country  for  a  resident  of
      Kosovo.  It is of course  relevant  to  bear  in  mind  the  different
      context that applied there, as also can be see from  the  comments  of
      Dyson J in Vallaj in concluding that as he did that it  would  not  be
      appropriate to adopt an unduly formalistic approach contrary to common
      sense and it was also important to construe the Refugee Convention  as
      a living  instrument  to  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  current
      international circumstances.

45.   Dyli was approved by the Court of Appeal  in  Canaj  and  Vallaj,  and
      indeed it appears that the particular issue was no longer being argued
      before the court in the cases of those appeals.

46.   As regards Gardi, it is of course the case  that  the  decision  there
      was subsequently declared to be a nullity by the Court of  Appeal  for
      want of jurisdiction in Gardi v SSHD (No. 2) (Declaration of  Nullity)
      [2002] EWCA Civ 1560.   In this regard we associate ourselves entirely
      with the views expressed by the Tribunal in Faraj,  in  particular  at
      paragraph 13 of that determination.  There  the  point  is  made  that
      although Keene LJ was asked to verify the views of Professor Hathaway,
      his attention did not appear to have been drawn to the  fact that  the
      paper written by Professor Hathaway and Ms Foster was of recent origin
      and also did not reflect the position that Professor Hathaway together
      with several other refugee law experts took in  the  far  more  widely
      accepted Michigan Guidelines at paragraph 10, where it was stated that
      return on internal protection grounds to a region controlled by a non-
      state entity could  be  contemplated,  albeit  only  where  there  was
      compelling evidence  of  that  entity's  ability  to  deliver  durable
      protection.  Nor did it appear that Keene LJ's attention was drawn  to
      the fact that the UNHCR  position was that de facto entities  were  at
      least in principle capable of affording protection under  the  Refugee
      Convention. The Tribunal there emphasised the pragmatic or  functional
      approach according to which the issue of whether  a  de  facto  entity
      could afford Refugee Convention protection is essentially  a  question
      of fact.

47.   Upon consideration of the decision of the Court of Sessions in  Saber,
      as was pointed out by the Tribunal in GH, there  is  nothing  to  show
      from the short passage at paragraph 32 of that decision that the court
      did anything  more  than  adopt  the  provisional  overview  expressed
      briefly by Keene LJ in Gardi.  In neither case does it appear that the
      comments made stem from a fully reasoned judgment after full argument.
       The point is also made at paragraph 101 in GH that it is arguable  in
      Saber that the appeal which led to a remittal was actually decided  on
      the  narrower  point  that  the  PUK  was  not  capable  of  providing
      appropriate protection in its own sphere of influence in part  of  the
      KAA in what was described as a situation of unrest. We agree  entirely
      with this comment.

48.   As regards the reference to  Tjhe Qwet Koe at paragraph 37  in  Gardi,
      it is clear from what is said by Tamberlin J that  his  interpretation
      of Article 1(A)(2) was confined  to the situation where  the  claimant
      was stateless.  It is also relevant to refer to the judgment of D�cary
      JA in Zalzali [1991] 3CF 605, cited in GH, where  he  stated  at  page
      615:

             'The "country", the  "national  government",  the  "legitimate
             government",  the  "nominal  government"  will  probably  vary
             depending upon the circumstances and the evidence and it would
             be presumptuous to attempt to give  a  general  definition.  I
             will simply note here that I do not rule out  the  possibility
             that there may be several established authorities in the  same
             country which are each able to provide protection in the  part
             of the territory controlled by them, protection which  may  be
             adequate though not necessarily perfect.'

49.   In our view therefore the weight of the authorities very much  favours
      the pragmatic approach to the issue of protection rather than the more
      limited approach which suggests that protection has  to be provided by
      an entity capable of granting  nationality  to  a  person  in  a  form
      recognised internationally, as was suggested by Keene LJ in his obiter
      remarks in the void decision in Gardi.

50.   As Mr Kovats pointed out, however, it is the case in any  event  that,
      as is set out at Article 54 of the  Law  and  Administration  for  the
      State of Iraq, the Kurdistan Regional Government s e also  dd
hall continue to perform its current functions throughout  the  transitional
      period, except with regard to  those  issues  which  fall  within  the
      exclusive competence of the federal government as  specified  in  this
      law.  Among other  things  the  Kurdistan  Regional  Government  shall
      retain regional control over the police force and  internal  security.
      We see force to the point made by Mr Kovats that by analogy  with  the
      situation in the United Kingdom where there  are  43  separate  police
      authorities, it is nevertheless the case that protection  is  provided
      by the state.

51.   Also, as a consequence of the  elections of 30 January 2005,  the  KDP
      and the PUK stood on a joint  ticket  in  the  regional  and  national
      elections and therefore can  properly  be  said  to  be  unified  both
      nationally and regionally as a matter of law.   As  a  consequence  we
      agree entirely with the conclusion of the Tribunal in GH at  paragraph
      106 that the PUK  and the KDP acting through  the  Kurdistan  National
      Assembly are the legitimate delegated government in  the  former  KAA.
      It is clear that the Kurdish Regional Government and  its  organs  are
      the lawfully delegated government in that region.

52.   In summary, therefore  on  the  first  point,  we  conclude  that  the
      authorities in the KRG are able as a matter of  international  law  to
      provide security and protection to the inhabitants of that region.

Evidence on the remaining issues
53.   We turn now to the  remaining  issues.   We  set  below  the  evidence
      before us both generic  and  specific,  and  the  submissions  of  the
      representatives  on that evidence and thereafter our findings  on  the
      generic evidence and our decisions in the particular appeals.

54.   We heard oral evidence from Dr Rebwah Fatah  who  also  provided  four
      reports and one written in conjunction with Ms Sheri Laizer,  who also
      gave oral evidence before us, and who has produced  three  reports  of
      her own together with the joint  report.  The  other  main  pieces  of
      evidence before us consist,  in  no  particular  order,  of  the  CIPU
      Country Report of October 2004, the CIPU Iraq Bulletin of August 2003,
      the Dutch General Report of  April  2000  on  North  Iraq,  the  Joint
      British/Danish Fact Finding Mission on Conditions in Iraq of September
      2004, the US State Department Bulletin  of  26  March  2004,  a  Joint
      British Danish Fact Finding Mission to Damascus, Amman and  Geneva  on
      Conditions in Iraq of July 2003 and a General Country Report  on  Iraq
      of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated  14  December  2004,  a
      UNHCR report of 29 January 2005 on the  possibility  of  applying  the
      internal flight or relocation alternative for Iraqi Kurds within Iraq,
      the UNHCR report on Iraq for 1 August 2004, the Amnesty  International
      2004 report on Iraq, a report of Human Rights Watch, of 3 August 2004,
      and an IWPR report of 18 February 2005 and a further report from   the
      same body of  4 March 2005.  As is becoming the  practice  in  country
      guidance cases, we list as an appendix to this determination the  main
      sources upon which we have relied.

The evidence of Dr Fatah
55.   We turn first to the evidence of Dr Fatah. Dr Fatah is an  Iraqi  Kurd
      by origin, he is now a British citizen. He works  as   a  Middle  East
      specialist in particular as a writer, broadcaster and  journalist.  He
      has worked in  the  media  extensively  for  the  last  twenty  years,
      including being a founder columnist and editor-in-chief of a  cultural
      Kurdish news letter, and has broadcast extensively. He is also the CEO
      of a media group, KurdishMedia.com which is  an  internet-based  daily
      information provider on the Kurdish question. He is  regularly  called
      upon by governmental organisations, NGOs, academics,  and  researchers
      as an expert who has advised a number of British, US and European NGOs
      working and wanting to work in Iraqi Kurdistan including the Save  the
      Children Fund and Christian Aid.  He states that he is in professional
      contact on a daily basis with the  situation  in  Iraq  and  that  his
      reports have been cited in a number of  immigration  appeals.  He  has
      been working as an expert witness since 2000 and has worked  for  over
      seventy firms in the United Kingdom and has provided assistance to the
      Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless Persons of Belgium.

56.   Dr Fatah was instructed to provide reports with regard  to  all  three
      appellants. His reports with regard to Mr (               ) and  Mr  (
                  )  are  general  to  them  both,  although  with  specific
      comments on their individual appeals, and he has provided  a  separate
      report on Mr (               ) although a great  deal  of  information
      contained in there, being generic, is to be found also  in  his  first
      report of 3 January 2005 which otherwise deals with the  specifics  of
      Mr (               ) and Mr  (               )'s cases. In  the  first
      report he deals in detail with tribal life in Kurdish society and  the
      differences between Kurds and Arabs, issues of conflict between  Kurds
      and Arabs stemming from their differences, citing a number of examples
      of atrocities against Kurds,  and  also   providing  comments  on  the
      Tribunal's country guidance case of GH [2004] UKIAT 00248.

57.   Dr Fatah's second report is a report on Mr (               ) which  as
      we say very largely reproduces the contents of the  (                )
      and (               ) report, save with regard to the specifics of  Mr
      (               )'s case which are addressed there.

58.   Dr Fatah's third report, of 10 March 2005, is entitled 'Expert  Report
      - Election Update' and contains comment on the situation  in  Iraq  in
      the  light of the election of  January  30,  2005  and  also  contains
      sections on sufficiency  of protection in Iraq, the reach of the   PUK
      and the KDP throughout Iraq and issues of relocation  for  Kurds  both
      within the KAA and in general in Iraq.
59.   Dr Fatah's fourth report of 24 March 2005 is entitled  'Expert  Report
      - Election Update' and contains comments  on  the  Dutch  Ministry  of
      Foreign Affairs Report of 14 December 2004 to which we  have  referred
      above.

60.   Clearly we shall address in some detail later the specifics  of  those
      reports, insofar as they were not dealt with by Dr Fatah  in  evidence
      in chief and in cross-examination.

61.   Dr Fatah gave evidence before us on 29 Mach 2005.  He  confirmed  that
      his reports were true and he adopted their contents  as  part  of  his
      evidence.

 62.  He had most recently been in Iraq for nine days in March 2005  and  he
      was in Kurdistan, the only safe area for him to be in.

63.    He  addressed  various  issues  concerning  the  appeal   of   Mr   (
        ). He said that the publishing house for which Mr (                )
      worked was part of the KDP and was run by Mr Barzani who is  a  nephew
      of the head of the KDP. It was  a  party  organ.   If  someone  leaked
      intelligence information from it they would be at greater risk. He did
      not believe that Mr  (                )  could  go  to  the  PUK  area
      because now the PUK and the KDP have their own interests in  Kurdistan
      and in Iraq.  He considered that the KDP would be able to  target  him
      in the PUK areas and also that they could ask  the  PUK  to  hand  him
      over.  The reason for saying that was that the PUK  and KDP were  very
      close now after the election. There were now KDP offices  in  the  PUK
      areas, for example in Suleyimaniyah.  They had run  one  list  in  the
      Iraqi elections and had both nominated the PUK leader for the role  of
      the Presidency of Iraq

64.   Nor did he consider that Mr (               ) could  relocate  to  the
      PUK area as they would not damage their relationship with the KDP  for
      one individual.  As the PUK and KDP had won the election in  Kurdistan
      and set up a  united  Kurdistan  Regional  Government  and  Parliament
      together, they shared a great deal of interest which was of more value
      to them than arguing about one individual.

65.   With regard to the  question of the KDP demanding that  the  PUK  hand
      him over, he referred to an example of a Mr Hariri,  a  prominent  KDP
      leader, who had been assassinated in  February  1998  by  a  group  of
      radical Islamists who had moved to an area controlled by the PUK.  The
      assassins had been handed over by the PUK to the KDP. The PUK and  KDP
      had a security coordination office  which  enabled  them  to  exchange
      wanted people.

66.   As regards the KDP's reach outside Kurdistan to central  and  southern
      Iraq, he said that  prior  to  the  Iraqi  election  and  the  interim
      government the KDP had various important positions, for  example,  the
      deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, and the head of the Iraqi armed  forces
      and various ministers. Also, PUK and KDP  peshmergas  had  taken  part
      with the  multinational forces in  Fallujah.  Also  the  PUK  and  KDP
      provided security for the capital. That  had  been  confirmed  by  the
      multinational forces during the Fallujah episode. They had been  found
      to be trustworthy and they were well organised.

67.   After the Iraqi elections it was the case that now  the  PUK  and  the
      KDP had 77 MPs in the Iraqi parliament out of a total  of  273.   They
      were the second political force in Iraq after the  Shia  and  the  new
      Prime Minister was nearly certain to be a Shia and the president would
      be the head of the PUK.   Other important positions such  as  the  Oil
      Ministry were under negotiation.  Therefore they would not just  be  a
      group in Kurdistan but were now an Iraqi political force.

 68.  He did not believe that there was anywhere in Iraq where  the  KDP  if
      interested in Mr (               ) would be unable to reach him.

69.   He believed that Mr (               ) would be dealt with severely  by
      the KDP if they found him.  He did not think that Mr (               )
      could be protected by the civil  judiciary  or  by  anyone.  This  was
      because his problem  was  with  the  party.   It  was  unheard  of  to
      undermine the judgment of the party and a judge would  not   interfere
      and it was not for example a case of theft or a property  matter.  The
      security forces belonged to the party so they would not protect him.

70.   As to whether Mr (               ) could move and live in a PUK  area,
      where he did not face a risk on return, there were  the   problems  of
      checkpoints and coordination between the  KDP  and  the  PUK.   A  KDP
      person moving to the PUK area would need to register with the security
      forces and give reasons for being there and he did not think that this
      would be possible.  If he returned to Baghdad it was the case that  it
      would be unsafe for him to return along the  road via Fallujah. It was
      not possible just to choose and go and live in the PUK area if he were
      moving from the KDP area.

71.   The suggestion was put to Dr Fatah that since the KDP   and  PUK  were
      now close that there was no reason for the KDP   to  worry  about  him
      having leaked to the PUK in the past.  Dr Fatah said  that  they  were
      two different groups and both tried to buy each other's membership, so
      information about the  other  party  would  put  them  in  a  stronger
      position.  This could assist at the next  election.   They  needed  to
      work very hard to weaken the other and gain more territory.

72.   As regards any risk he would face from the families of Mr  Razgar  and
      Mr Bakir, he thought that the families blamed Mr (               ) for
      causing their problems.  This was referred to in his statement.

73.   As regards Mr (               ), Dr Fatah was  asked  about  the  Goli
      tribe and its reach and the extent of this in Kurdistan. He said  that
      Kurdish society was mainly tribal. The tribes were  all  powerful.  It
      could be argued, as had been done by  Mr  McDowell,  that  tribes  and
      political groups could be equated. The tribe had its own  position  in
      Kurdistan. They were armed and could reach out to wherever they wanted
      if they thought it was viable and they  would  take  revenge.  He  was
      asked whether he had knowledge of the relationship  between  the  Goli
      and the KDP and he said that the KDP was an association of tribes, and
      the Goli was one of those tribes. He was asked to  what  extent  among
      tribes there was an  element  of  another  associated  tribe  becoming
      involved if, for example, the Goli targeted Mr (                ).  He
      said they would not as it was a  tribal  feud.  For  example,  he  had
      referred to this in  his report with regard to the KDP and the idea of
      revenge. He was asked whether there was a part of Kurdistan where Mr (
                    ) could be safe from targeting by  the  Goli  tribe.  He
      said that if he tried to live anywhere normally he thought he would be
      discovered, for example, if he was working or going to college, but it
      would be different if he hid away.   There were  many  killings  on  a
      daily basis due to tribal feuds.  They were small communities  and  it
      was very easy to find someone and it happened in many cases.

74.   As to whether he would be outside their reach  outside  Kurdistan,  he
      said  that  they  could  use  their  KDP  connections  and   influence
      potentially to find him wherever he was in Iraq.  As to the likelihood
      of them doing this, he said that the Goli were an influential part  of
      the KDP and he did not think that there would be a problem  for  them.
      Therefore there was nowhere Mr (                )  could  go  in  Iraq
      where he would be outside the reach of the Goli.

75.   He was asked about the size of  the  Goli  and  said  that  they  were
      nothing like the Jaff, concerning whom he  had  also  given  evidence.
      They were rather localised. They were mainly  in  the  KDP  areas  and
      would not be found for example in  Suleimaniya.  He was asked what the
      Goli tribe would do if they found Mr (                )  and  he  said
      that a tribe would normally  kill and take revenge and it was a tribal
      custom.

76.   He was asked what the KDP would do if they found him and he said  that
      he did not want to speculate about this. He referred to a  case  of  a
      Barzani who he thought had fallen out with the KDP  and  was  arrested
      in a private prison and was in a basement and  after  five  years  was
      given amnesty but for five years did not leave  that  room.  That  was
      typical of the methods those parties used.   He believed  that  anyone
      who tried to undermine the KDP, especially their leaders or  important
      tribes, would be dealt with severely. Like Mr  (                ),  he
      would not be protected by the judiciary for similar reasons. The  Goli
      tribe was part of the KDP and there was no  real  distinction  between
      the tribe and the political party.

77.    As  to  whether  his  tribe,  the  Barwari,  would  protect  him,  he
      questioned how long they could protect him for.  If there were no  KDP
      issues it would be an issue between the tribes and they would  go  for
      other members of the tribe, if not him. If they adopted the party line
      they  could  use  the  party  influence.  The  Barwari  had  political
      influence in the KDP also but they were also  localised.  The  Barwari
      were in a KDP area. They had a political influence  but  it  was  very
      difficult for that to protect the appellant. In that case if both  had
      the same influence it was a tribal issue.  It was  a grey area between
      the tribe and the party and it depended upon which would be  the  more
      influential of the two tribes.  He understood that  the  Barwari  were
      more educated and some of their members had left the KDP, but  it  did
      not mean however that they were not affiliated with the KDP.

78.   In the light of the comment that all tribal groups were  powerful,  we
      asked Dr Fatah why Mr (               )'s own tribe would not be  able
      to protect him from the Goli as it would be a question of prestige. He
      said that the tribal view was that they  had their own norms and would
      try to kill him or other males in his family if he was not there.   He
      could hide in a basement but would not be able to live a normal  life.
      With regard to his own tribe  it  was  a  question  of  what  kind  of
      protection they could provide. They would not be able to  provide  him
      with bodyguards.

79.   As regards any other way of resolving  the  issue,  he  said  that  in
      other cases they could give  women  to  the  other  tribe  or  make  a
      settlement in money terms. All these tribal solutions  were  possible,
      though some tribes would not see it this way.

80.   As regard Mr (               ), he knew of the Jaff tribe and he  knew
      of Mr Hamakaki who had been an influential PUK member. There had  been
      news in the local newspaper about him.

81.   The Jaff tribe was probably  the  most  influential  and  the  biggest
      Kurdish tribe.  He had a great  interest  in  them  because  of  their
      social structure.  He thought they used to be nomads between Iraq  and
      Iran in the  southern part of Kurdistan around Sulemaniyah, Kirkuk and
      Khanaqeen.   The  Jaff  were  associated  with  the  PUK.   A  Kurdish
      political group was an amalgamation of several  tribes  and  the  Jaff
      were one of the main tribes behind the PUK.

82.   It was not likely that Mr  (               ) would  be  able  to  live
      safely elsewhere in Kurdistan, for example in the KDP  area.   He  did
      not think that the KDP would provide any protection for such a person.
      They would not undermine their interests, as he had said  before.   If
      he went elsewhere in Iraq the PUK would reach him.   As  to  how  they
      would be able to find him, he said that the PUK  and the KDP both  had
      important and effective intelligence services and an example  of  this
      was that the PUK's intelligence service had located Saddam Hussein and
      told the US of this. That was an  indication  of  how  effective  they
      were.  They were mature organisations.

83.   Within the PUK  various  Jaff  individuals  were  tribal  leaders  who
      influenced the policies at a very high level. As to what the PUK would
      do with Mr (               ), he did not want to  speculate,  but  for
      example, in 1991, there was the case of a communist in  Kurdistan  who
      had accidentally killed a PUK leader and Dr Fatah had learned from PUK
      sources that the had been killed, and this was public knowledge.

84.   Dr Fatah was also asked if he was  aware  of  any  evidence  that  the
      blood feud had continued over the period of four years during which Mr
      (               ) had been away from Iraq given that he had said  that
      others would be targeted if the 'legitimate target' was not available,
      and he said that he was not aware.

85.   Prior to the election, the deputy president (interim) of Iraq,  was  a
      PUK member and also the head of the Iraqi assembly was a PUK  man  and
      they also had people in various ministerial positions.   They  had  an
      office in Baghdad and the peshmergas had taken part in the  attack  on
      Fallujah.  The KDP had also taken part and they both  formed  part  of
      the Iraqi army today.

86.   As regards the checkpoints in the north, prior  to  February  1,  2004
      they existed at the entrance of all villages and  towns  in  Kurdistan
      but after the bombing of the PUK and KDP headquarters in  Arbil  on  1
      February 2004, they had realised that Islamists who  had  carried  out
      the bombing could penetrate the Kurdish region and  commit  atrocities
      and now the border  between  Kurdistan  and  southern  Iran  was  very
      secure.  The  checkpoints  of  both  parties  were  manned  by   their
      peshmergas.

87.   As could  be seen from  his  and  Ms  Laizer's  fact  finding  Mission
      report, it was very difficult to avoid the checkpoints.  In the  areas
      of both the PUK and the KDP people would be  given  temporary  IDs  to
      enable them to move around. When passing  through  checkpoints  people
      were asked what they had with them and had to  produce  identification
      evidence and state where they came from and where they were going  to.
       The matter would be recorded. The KDP were more  organised  than  the
      PUK.  The former had  sophisticated  computers,  the  latter  recorded
      information in a book only.

88.   Outside Kurdistan there was chaos. Any five or six  people  could  get
      together to set up a checkpoint  and  trouble  foreigners  and  target
      minorities and there was a risk of hold-ups. This was confirmed in the
       Dutch report.  It was not  only  political  but  it  was  becoming  a
      business.

89.   As to whether there was reference at the checkpoints  to  the  central
      records, he said that that did not have computers on  the  checkpoints
      but had lists of people and car numbers and  it  was  very  primitive.
      When people moved around they had an ID and would have to produce   it
      at checkpoints. When a person moved into an  area  he  would  have  to
      register with the Mukhtar and he would go  through  all  the  person's
      papers.  This was operated  by  the  political  parties,  despite  the
      chaos.

90.   He was asked to  clarify  the  situation  as  to  whether  there  were
      computers at the checkpoints or not. He said that there were computers
      when a man first entered the country from outside,  for  example  from
      Turkey or Iran or Syria, but not if he were within  the  region.  They
      could check details on computers if a person was taken to  a  security
      place.

91.   On the question of protection within Kurdistan, he and Ms  Laizer  had
      interviewed a number of judges in Kurdistan and also the head  of  PUK
      security in Suleimaniyah and various  civil  organisations.  They  had
      concluded that there was a civil judiciary system in the PUK  and  KDP
      areas, though there was little connection between  them.   The  system
      worked for civil issues such as marriage, death but  the  police  were
      concerned with security.  There was a police force  coming  under  the
      civil judicial system and there were  separate  PUK  and  KDP  forces.
      Security dealt with other issues.  This included matters  particularly
      concerning threats to Kurdish national interests. The PUK and the  KDP
      were again separate in this.

92.   Also there were tribal norms. There was  a  tribal  judiciary  system.
      The civil judiciary system allowed the tribal solution to  resolve the
      problem if the tribe could solve it.  It would not appear in the civil
      judiciary system. It was the same in both the PUK and the KDP areas.

93.   As to the structure of the tribal judiciary system, he said  that  for
      example in the case of an honour killing if a woman had sex before  or
      outside marriage then the tribe would kill her and the civil judiciary
      system would not  interfere. It was the same with blood feuds.  It was
      a matter of the accepted norms  of the society.  In  his  example  the
      woman would not look to the civil system to protect her  or  stop  the
      tribal system because it  was  accepted  and  the  society  would  not
      undermine its own values.  It might change in the future but that  was
      the situation as of now and they had lived like that for  generations.
      For example, they had come across womens' shelters which had now  been
      opened in Suleimaniyah. The head of the shelter had told him that they
      could not contact the security as the head of security had  said  that
      if the head of the shelter organisation sent a woman back to her  area
      she would be killed.

94.   As to how he would describe the level of  independence  of  the  civil
      judiciary system, he said he could only  work  from   examples.   When
      they had interviewed Judge Shiyu he had said that they had sentenced a
      person to death and that person was free a week later and that was how
      the political parties and the tribes could interfere in  the  judicial
      system. As to the frequency of such interference, by way of  reply  he
      referred to a case involving a judge in the 1990s in  the  region  who
      had said he could not do his job because of  party  interference,  and
      there were examples of this in the report.

95.   As regards the effectiveness of the police in the PUK  and  KDP  areas
      to protect  ordinary  citizens,  he  said  it  did  not  work  to  any
      standards.  He  thought  the  police  were  undermined  by  the  party
      security whatever they tried to do. There were a lot of police on  the
      street but they did not really do much and  the  peshmergas,  not  the
      police, protected the  party leaders.

96.   He was asked what protection the security forces afforded and he  said
      that Judge Razgar, whom they had interviewed, had said that the police
      were under-resourced and not trained.  The head of security  was  very
      well protected in comparison to the judge who was not protected.

97.   He was asked about protection elsewhere in Iraq. He  referred  to  the
      Dutch report. It was said that there was chaos.  The Shia area in  the
      south was controlled by militants who  were  mainly  Islamic.  In  the
      Sunni  triangle  there  was  a  huge  number  of  their  organisations
      including radical Islamists and there was a kidnapping  industry.  The
      multinational forces were not operating in the cities now.  They  were
      in camps outside the cities and dealt with disturbances and  protected
      the green zone. The UK Danish report or the Dutch  report  linked  the
      Iraqi  national  army  to  illegal  radical  organisations   providing
      intelligence and resources to radicals. Power in Iraq  was  fragmented
      between different areas. There were also areas  controlled  by  former
      loyalists at times according to a person who told him.  There was  not
      really  an  effective  Iraqi  government  which  could  protect  Iraqi
      citizens. The current level of security was very low and it was  worse
      this year than last year. People stayed at home. The coalition  forces
      themselves made it clear that they could not police  the  streets  and
      there had been big attacks, for example on  Fallujah.   There  was  an
      example of aid workers who had not  been  protected  in  Baghdad  last
      year.

98.   He did not think that any of the three appellants could move and  live
      elsewhere in central or southern Iraq. This would not be feasible  for
      a Kurd especially after the Kurdish Regional Government was set up  in
      1991. There was a lot of difficulty. They could not speak  Arabic  and
      were very localised. If put into Baghdad  such  a  person  would  find
      there was  a different language and different  religion  and  culture.
      There was also all the security there and they  would  have  no  party
      political affiliation and would be suspect in  Baghdad  and  questions
      would be asked as to why they moved there.  They could be reported  to
      one of the  groups. They might be seen as being better off than  Iraqi
      Arabs and at risk of kidnap.

99.    They  might  also  be  perceived  as  being   associated   with   the
      multinational forces. The Kurds had  opened  the  north  after  Turkey
      refused and had been active in the removal of  the  former  government
      and so they were seen as  infidels  by  other  Iraqis  on  account  of
      working with the US forces. There was a report of Israeli intelligence
      officers in Kurdistan and this affected the relationship of the  Kurds
      and the Arabs. There was an example that he had given in his report of
      a Kurdish asylum seeker in France who had been killed.

100.  In cross-examination Dr Fatah was asked about his views on  the  Dutch
      report of 2000.  It was true  that  next  to  no  clashes  took  place
      between the PUK and the KDP and that neither would  put  up  with  any
      acts of aggression by other groups within its own area. If the  tribes
      were taken into account, there was an incident of a fight  during  the
      last month. As regards  the  statement  that  the  KDP  and  PUK  must
      basically be regarded as capable of protecting the population of their
      areas from  attacks by other forces, he emphasised  that  this  report
      was in 2000 and there had been an attack in February 2004 on  the  PUK
      and KDP headquarters in Arbil and there had been many deaths.   It was
      put to him that there was only one incident albeit a serious  one  and
      he said that he gave other examples in his report.

101.  He was asked whether he was saying that neither the KDP  nor  the  PUK
      could provide protection within their own areas, and he said that they
      would find it difficult even for their members.

102.  He  agreed  with  the  statement  that  more  personal,  clan  related
      incidents did commonly occur.  He did not know  whether  it  was  true
      that blood feuds were less common than they used to be. It had  always
      been tribal rule and he did not know what quantitative information had
      been relied on. The tribes were ruled  by  their  norms.  The  parties
      could not intervene.  As regards the statement that the  PUK  and  KDP
      authorities might also intervene to bring  about  settlements  between
      the families, clans and tribes concerned, he said that the  Department
      of Social Affairs of the PUK acted as an advisor.  He  did  not  agree
      that it was true that where tribal chiefs could not agree or,  in  the
      case of a particularly serious criminal offence such  as  murder,  the
      KDP and PUK would  endeavour  to  ensure  that  due  judicial  process
      operated and a court judgment was in fact accepted.   As  regards  the
      statement that fines or reduction of sentences were means available to
      the authorities, he said that there was evidence that  certain  people
      in the PUK and KDP were tribal leaders. On his and Ms  Laizer's  visit
      they had seen examples of the bodies of a lot of young girls found  in
      a river and it was the case that you could  not  question  the  tribal
      leaders about this.

103.  He agreed with the statement that the ability and willingness  of  the
      PUK and the KDP to intervene would depend in part  on  the  power  and
      position of the individual's family's clans and tribes  concerned.  He
      did not  agree  with  the   statement  in  the  report  that  internal
      relocation was feasible for certain PUK supporters and family  members
      within  the  PUK  region  from   KDP   territory   and   vice   versa.



104.  A Kurd could  move  round  Kurdistan  if  they  had  problems  with  a
      political party or group.  If he wanted to go and live in a  different
      area he could not just go and do that.  He was asked  why  not,  other
      than bureaucratic difficulties, and he said that after coming  through
      checkpoints a person would be able to move.  It was  not  accurate  to
      say, as was said in the Dutch report of 2000, that it could be assumed
      that a person could avoid problems with the KDP or the PUK  by  moving
      to an area dominated by the other party.

105.  As regards the article by Mr Karadaghi in the Daily Star, at page  358
      of the Secretary of State's bundle, he considered with regard  to  the
      first paragraph that this was not representative and  the  writer  had
      hardly been there.  He did not know what was meant by the word  'good'
      in the first paragraph.

106.  As regards the statement at paragraph 3 that law  and  order  existed,
      he referred to his joint report with Ms  Laizer.  The  party  law  was
      above every law, so the statement was true. He also  agreed  that  the
      security situation in the Kurdish area was a far cry from that in  the
      rest of Iraq.  It was the case that the politicians wanted to be  part
      of Iraq but the people did not. He agreed that the politicians in  the
      PUK and KDP wanted to present  to  the  outside  world  a  picture  of
      responsible government. He  was asked whether  it  was  not  in  their
      interest to have a stable state with law and order and  he  said  that
      they wanted a stable region but their power was not challenged.

107.  He was asked for his comments on  the  article  at  page  313  of  the
      Secretary of State's bundle written by the Assistant Legal Adviser  at
      the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.  As regards the comment  that  it
      was quite clear that the Iraqi judiciary had been re-established as  a
      separate branch of the government under the supervision of the Council
      of Judges and it was now free from political influence and, hopefully,
      corruption, he said that the system was chaotic, whatever was  written
      on  paper.  Islamists  killed  wherever  they  wanted.  A  Shia   Kurd
      government was coming but they had nothing in common. The Shia  wanted
      a Shia judiciary and this would  put further pressure on the  judicial
      system, and the Kurds and the Sunnis disagreed.  The  Iraqi  judiciary
      system was uncertain and it could lead to a system of Sharia law.  The
      article was speculative and had nothing to do with reality.

108.  He was asked for his comments on the article at  page  282  concerning
      judges in Iraq and their comments on the  improving rule  of  law.  He
      considered that was that this was the official view of  the  political
      parties. Most of the cases would not end up in the  civil  courts  but
      ended up in the security. He gave the example of a case  when  he  was
      there of a PUK activist assassinated by the PKK and he had  been  told
      that the judiciary system could not deal with it.

109.  As regards the comment at paragraph 5.87 of the CIPU Report  that  the
      police force and local government built up by the PUK and KDP remained
      in place and were largely unaffected by the war, he said that it could
      be said that the war helped the PUK and KDP to expand to  other  parts
      of Iraq and gave them more arms. The US had tried to  democratise  the
      region.  The  parties   had   more   access   to   resources.    Their
      administrations were akin to Saddam Hussein's model  and  people  were
      discouraged from challenging the party and  it  was   a  single  party
      system.  It was an unchallenged structure and they had a  better  grip
      and had access to resources.   People became  policemen  because  they
      were better paid.

110.  As regards the comment in  the  British/Danish  Fact  Finding  Mission
      report of September 2004, that there was no evidence to  show  whether
      the PUK or the KDP were persecuting each others' members, he said that
      they did not do so generally and that was the case. He was referred to
      paragraph 4.3 of that report where it was  said  that  the  system  of
      getting the tribal leaders to solve problems in  respect  of  criminal
      cases and problems between members of different tribes  seemed  to  be
      surprisingly effective. He said that it was very effective. He gave an
      example of a tribe member who had been drunk and was told by  a  guard
      not to enter an area and did so and was shot in the back and he was  a
      member of an influential tribe. The PUK had identified the man and the
      killer  who had been shot.

111.  As regards the comment at paragraph 4.4 of the  report concerning  the
      tribal system working well as a conflict solving institution, he  said
      that the tribe throughout Iraq's history had solved the problems.  The
      tribe operated as a system. It worked very differently  from  European
      standards.  Revenge was an aspect. It  was  an  effective  system  for
      people outside the norm. He did not query  the  effectiveness  of  the
      tribe system but its methodology and killing and abuses.

112.  He was asked whether  the  tribe's  only  method  was  violence  being
      responded to by even greater violence and he said  no,  that  was  too
      general.  Somebody who stole would  be  fined.  With  regard  to  more
      substantial matters there was a lot of violence.

113.  With regard to the comment in the Dutch report  of  December  2004  at
      pages 377 and 378 of the Secretary of State's  bundle,  in  particular
      the latter where it was said that it could  not  be  established  with
      certainty to what extent it was  possible  to  escape  the  threat  of
      vendettas and  honour killings by settling elsewhere in Iraq, he  said
      that this was inaccurate. He and Ms Laizer  had  obtained  information
      from the women's shelter in Suleimaniyah, and reference to this was to
      be found in his report and they had included pictures  of  victims  of
      honour crimes.

114.  He was asked about paragraph 6.73 of the October 2004  Country  Report
      concerning tourists visiting the north. He said that  people  visiting
      for a day was not a problem and they could  go  through  the  security
      checks.  He accepted that it was the case that once  within  Kurdistan
      there was freedom of movement if you had your ID and could answer  all
      the questions.

115.  He was referred to paragraphs 214 and 215  of  his  first  report,  at
      page 39 of the appellant's bundle.  This related his concern that  the
      Parliament would be mostly Shia, and Shia concepts were not compatible
      with democracy and voting, and fatwas  would  be  issued  which  would
      become decrees and one of the fatwas could be the genocide of  infidel
      Kurds. He said that it was right that the Parliament was mostly  Shia.
      It was put to him that the Shia had 140 seats out of 275 and  he  said
      that was the most in Iraq.  It was put to him that there had  been  no
      fatwas yet and he said that there  was  a  fatwa  that  the   internal
      constitution would be incorporated and the Kurds had been deprived  of
      their rights by Sistani and the Kurdish issue was to  be  internal  to
      Iraq, and internally Kurds had problems within  Iraq.   The  Shia  and
      Ayatollah Sistani did not want the Kurds to have the autonomy that had
      been agreed in the interim constitution. The Shia now recognised  that
      they could exercise their power in Iraq.   There was  still  no  Iraqi
      government  as the Shia and Kurds could not get together.

116.  As regards paragraph 215 that an Arab solution to  the  Kurdish  issue
      might be sought and that from  history that meant  genocide,  he  said
      that that was his view.

117.  He was referred to his statement at paragraph 39 of his  third  report
      at page 71D of the bundle that the US was wrong in imposing Allawi and
      Al-Yawar for the post of Prime Minister and President of Iraq. He said
      that  partly  this  was  right.  The  election  had  achieved  several
      objectives.  No Iraqi national party had evolved  to  represent  Iraq.
      Rival groups had got together to fight their corner.

118.  It was not the case that he saw the Iraqi election as negative  rather
      than positive, but he spoke about what it had achieved  so  far.   The
      hope for an Iraqi national party had  not  occurred  and  it  remained
      ethnically based.

119.  As regards the comments at paragraphs  42  and  44  at  page  71E,  in
      particular the statement that modern Kurds expected that the  PUK  and
      KDP could be weakened by the Kurdistan election and  were  furious  by
      the uniting of the PUK and KDP in  one  list,  and  regarded  this  as
      undemocratic, this was not his view. He had no views in these  reports
      but gave the view of the majority of Kurds. There had been  a  lot  of
      hope that there would be one party and an opposition, but they  united
      and it was as if all parties in the  United  Kingdom  had  united  and
      asked a person to vote. There was no point to an election.  He did not
      agree with the suggestion that what he had said at  paragraph  51  was
      sweeping in stating that so far the objective evidence suggested  that
      the election in Iraq would not produce  stability  and  democracy  and
      civil society.  If there were going to be change it would be  now.  It
      would be the same after the next election. He  was  asked  whether  he
      considered paragraph 54 at page 71G to be an objective assessment.  It
      was said there that the elections in Iraq were like nowhere  and  what
      was known as Iraq had never existed in reality but rather involved the
      hammering  together  of   different   minorities   and   unrepresented
      governments,  in  particular  the  ousted  Iraqi  Arab  Ba'ath   party
      supported by the international  community  and  Arab  countries.  With
      regard to the statement at paragraph 59 at 71H that the situation  was
      leading to the creation of another strong central  government  perhaps
      not different from that of Saddam Hussein, he said that the  talk  was
      all about a military budget and it created a danger of another  Ba'ath
      regime.  No one was tackling matters such as the health of the  people
      but it was all about defence and oil. Iraqi central government did not
      work as a democracy.  The three distinct ethnic groups would not  come
      together in one government.

120.  He denied that he lacked objectivity. His job was facts and he  was  a
      tool. One could not be an  expert  if  he  did  not  know  enough,  by
      definition and nobody understood the issues better than he did.

The evidence of Ms Laizer
121.  Ms Laizer works as a Middle East specialist  writer  and  broadcaster.
      She has followed this profession since 1983.  She has written a number
      of books relevant to her area of expertise and has  been  involved  in
      the making of a number of television documentaries and news broadcasts
      for various television and radio companies. She  has  provided  expert
      opinions and testimony and information in a number of cases and  in  a
      number of countries. She has visited Iraq on a number of occasions and
      is  regularly  called  upon  by  governmental   organisations,   NGOs,
      academics, journalists and researchers  as  an  expert.  She  received
      certain regular sources on Iraq from such bodies as the Institute  for
      War and Peace Reporting and Amnesty International.   They reported  to
      each other. She had daily and  weekly  conversations  with  people  in
      Iraq. There were publishers' lists including titles  to  be  published
      and she ordered those and had regular  contact  with  other  reporters
      who, like her, came and went from the region. She  had  most  recently
      been to Iraq last September and October  with  Dr   Fatah.   She  also
      worked  very intensively on Turkish cases and for the  European  Court
      of Human Rights.

122.  With regard to Mr (                ),  she  considered  that  the  KDP
      would still be interested in him, as even though they cooperated  with
      the PUK it was an expedient form of cooperation and was limited.   Her
      report with Dr Fatah showed the extent to which  cooperation  was  not
      happening in  certain  areas  where  they  are  almost  like  separate
      countries, for example with regard to matters such  as  communications
      and the judicial system and the military. The KDP and PUK had separate
      peshmerga forces, and the families feeding  into  them  had  long  and
      unforgotten histories of mutual  animosity.  They  cooperated  to  the
      extent that an enemy of one would be handed  over  to  the  other.  Dr
      Fatah had given an example of this. They exchanged  people  for  their
      own interests.  In the upper echelons there was support,  for  example
      with regard  to candidacies, as long as they shared the resources.

123.  If the KDP traced and found Mr (               ),  she  believed  that
      he would be interrogated by the security services. She had  seen  them
      torture prisoners.  On her visit with Dr Fatah they had been  able  to
      speak  freely  with  one  of  the   few   independent   human   rights
      organisations in Kurdistan who had given them examples off the  record
      and referred to problems of accessing KDP prisons  even  for  lawyers.
      Many detainees simply disappeared in unclear circumstances.   Ordinary
      Kurds feared falling into the hands of the KDP  and the  PUK  security
      forces.  They had learned a lot under Saddam; suspicion  and  cruelty;
      and there was a culture  of  cruelty  throughout  the  society.  Their
      methods  would  take  the  form  of   torture   during   the   initial
      interrogation to establish the extent of the  leak  and  he  could  be
      scapegoated. The party might know that he was not in fact responsible.
      There were very delicate questions about access to information.

124.  There was no part of the KDP or PUK area where  Mr  (                )
      would be outside the reach of the  KDP, as both functioned in the same
      way  and  the  information  was  checked.  As  regards  the  situation
      elsewhere in Iraq, he was from a PUK area as were his two  colleagues.
      The PUK leader was likely to become President and they had offices  in
      Baghdad and had a huge veto  with  regard  to  the  government  to  be
      formed. A person with the potential to harm the party would  still  be
      regarded as a threat. Kurds had long memories.

125.   In  October  they  had  heard  that  the  old  records   were   being
      computerised  and  they  could  screen  insurgents  coming   in   more
      effectively.

126.  As to whether there was any part of Iraq where  Mr  (                )
      would be outsides the reach of the KDP, she said that if he had a past
      background of  part  of  his  family  being  located  elsewhere,  then
      perhaps, but if he had no links or roots then he would stand  out  and
      his identity would be discovered. There was a lot of  nervousness  and
      it was very difficult to move about. Kurds stood  out  and  he  looked
      very distinctly Kurdish.

127.  As to whether he  could  obtain  protection  in  Kurdistan,  from  for
      example the judiciary, if the KDP found him, she said that the party's
      jurisdiction was greater than the rule of law or respect for the  rule
      of law.   Protection came from the party or the tribe.  There  was  no
      independent place  to  provide  protection  and  even  leaders  needed
      bodyguards. The reach of the party was wide.

128.  As regards Mr (               ), Ms Laizer had spent four years  on  a
      PhD, up to 1992, on the depiction of Kurdish society in the nineteenth
      and twentieth centuries and society  and  media.  She  had  a  lot  of
      information on the early tribes. They were like a  lot  of  princedoms
      and it was true today. They had  very  powerful  wealthy  leaders  and
      control over a lot of fighters. She had spent a lot of time  in  Mr  (
                 )'s region and had gone there once during Saddam's  regime.
      In areas such as his, you were expected to pay respect to the  head of
      the tribe in the area.

129.  The Goli were very highly GolG
placed in the KDP. The father of  the  murdered  boy  was  a  peshmerga.  He
      controlled the pivotal town of Bignova where she had  once  sheltered.
      There was an old boys network of proud men and honour was a key matter
      for them.  The Barwary were intellectual  rather  than  military.   He
      said his family was not military but low level peshmergas.  There  was
      only him and a brother who was a baby when he fled and  there  was  no
      one to protect him. It was an important strategic town for the KDP.
130.  She agreed that the Goli were in a localised area, but she  said  that
      the tribe was central to the KDP.

131.  She did not believe that there was any  part  of  Kurdistan  where  he
      would not be at risk from the Goli.  She  knew  these  commanders  and
      their character well. There was a culture of revenge and they made use
      of their position and the parties and he would be vulnerable. It would
      be a matter of reclaiming the honour of a powerful man.  No-one  would
      be interested in protecting him. The tribes  fed  into  the  political
      parties which were a conglomeration of tribes, and matters  slid  into
      the tribal out of party interests.

132.  As to whether his own tribe could protect him, she said  that  he  did
      not have the protection as such. They were  intellectual  rather  than
      militant and were a smaller tribe and they did not command an area and
      could not summon up men to  protect  themselves.  His  was  a  farming
      family. There was  a social hierarchy within the tribe and they  could
      be contrasted with the  Jaff.   Lineage  was  needed.  Without  it  no
      support could be expected. His was a small family of farmers who  were
      pushed around by a tribe with military character.

133.  As to whether he would  be  safe  outside  Kurdistan,  she  considered
      that since the Goli was central to the KDP's power structure,  no  one
      was interested in taking on  a powerful unit within the KDP to protect
      him and his ID could be established by where he came from and he would
      be conspicuous as a lone Kurd in the part of  Iraq  where  he  had  no
      ties.

134.  If the KDP found him they would hand  him  over  to  the  Goli  tribe,
      given those values, and he would be returned to  the area  and  handed
      over.

135.  She was asked whether there were any examples of  that  and  she  said
      that from her interview with the  human  rights  association  head  in
      Dohuk an example had been given of people apprehended on suspicion  of
      being Islamic sympathisers or dissidents who posed a risk to  internal
      security and their fate was unknown. The parties  did  not  cooperate.
      People could be picked up because they looked  suspicious.   His  fate
      would be in the hands of the interrogators.  The KDP  security  people
      were trained to employ torture in order to get information  and  there
      was  a high risk of this and they  had  a  long  history  of  treating
      dissidents and opponents  thus.   He  would  be  at  risk  of  revenge
      killing, being the brother of the killer.

136.  In response to questions about Mr (               )'s case, Ms  Laizer
      said that she agreed with Dr Fatah that the Jaff was one of  the  most
      powerful of the Kurdish tribes and one of the most noble and had a lot
      of power.  They had a strong presence in Baghdad also. A lot  of  sub-
      tribes were affiliated to them. They had financed the  PUK  for  years
      and were very wealthy.  Prominent Jaff people had been high in the PUK
      for years and they were central to the PUK.

137.  She had met and interviewed Mr  Hamakaki  in  1992.   He  had  been  a
      commander in the   PUK,  a  regional  organiser,  and  had  been  very
      powerful. They had interviewed and filmed them when there was conflict
      within the  PUK in 1992.

138.  It was not unusual that Mr  (                )  did  not  mention  any
      personal links with a tribe. There were plenty of ordinary people like
      that who had no affiliation and Dr Fatah indeed was an example of such
      people. It was true of many intellectuals. If you were part of a tribe
      it was hard to be independent of it.

139.  As to whether there was anywhere  in  Kurdistan  where  the  appellant
      would be safe from the Jaff and/or the PUK, she said that it  was  the
      case that a very senior PUK figurehead had been killed. It was unclear
      why the killing had not been reported, though  she  seemed  to  recall
      hearing about it at the time. She thought because of the way that Mr (
                    ) was implicated, and bearing in mind the  Jaff's  power
      and wealth, that he was at very high risk. Indeed, he was at some risk
      in the United Kingdom and information about  people  here  could  feed
      back.

140.  She was asked about the fact that Mr (               )'s  brother  had
      been released, which apparently  conflicted  with  the  notion  of  an
      indefinite revenge motive.  She made the point that he was not from  a
      strong tribe and was not tribally affiliated. It was  pointed  out  to
      her that this was the cases of his brother also and her  response  was
      that the appellant was implicated in the original  incident.  She  was
      asked, however, about the fact of his brother's release in the context
      of a continuing blood feud through the family  and  how  that  squared
      with an ongoing blood feud. She said that he was not  a  member  of  a
      rival tribe and the party could take over jurisdiction  as  they  were
      not two powerful tribes. There were arrest warrants. In his  case  the
      party might have the more important jurisdiction.  There  was  a  grey
      area between the tribes and the party and it was  a  question  of  the
      degree of the tribe's influence. It was not a question of  two  tribes
      and it could go either way and could be entirely  dealt  with  by  the
      party but it was a risk because of the grey area.

141.  It was put to her that it was said that the blood feud  put  everybody
      at risk,  but the brother had been set free, and why had he  not  been
      killed, did she think. She did not know and said that they could  have
      killed him and he was not from a strong tribal  family.   There  would
      have been a greater risk of the brother being killed if the family was
      from a stronger tribe. She was asked if it was likely to go the party,
      and she said it was not an issue of honour and was a simpler matter.

142.  As regards the reach of the KDP, Ms Laizer agreed with  Dr  Fatah.  Dr
      Fatah had however forgotten to say that the  ID  which  a  person  was
      issued by the party was in addition to  the  national  ID  card  which
      contained  such  matters  as  details  of  the   person's  father  and
      grandfather and where the family lived and therefore it  was  possible
      to find out their entire family history. A  lot  of  Saddam  Hussein's
      information system was  now  in  Kurdish  hands.   Everyone  knew  who
      everyone else was and questions were always asked about a stranger and
      anonymity was difficult.

143.  Also they had radios at checkpoints. If a  person  did  not  have  the
      right ID then he would be handed over to security and if they were all
      right they would rescreened at the  next  checkpoint.   The  officials
      liked to show that they were in control. They had known all about her,
      for example, in 1993.  She had interviewed the KDP  head  of  security
      who had not liked how this came across and in 1996 the KDP  had  tried
      to stop her coming into their controlled area from Syria.

144.  Ms Laizer was asked about various aspects of the evidence put  forward
      on behalf of the Secretary of State.  With regard to paragraph 5.87 of
      the Country Report of October 2004, she considered that this was  very
      general. It was true that the nature of the power  structures  in  the
      area was largely unaffected.  The police were low level and had little
      training and were like  traffic police and the  security  forces  were
      more serious. It was true therefore, but general.

145.  As regards paragraph 6.73, this was  pretty  well  out  of  date.  The
      culture of suspicion did not allow for much tourism.  There  could  be
      picnics or wedding parties but this would be very limited as they  had
      found out      last year and there were very few   foreigners.   There
      were very few Arabs and you could not call it tourism.

146.  As regards the Joint British/Danish  report  of  September  2004,  the
      basis was properly set out at paragraph 4.1. The jurisdiction  of  the
      party went beyond the court.  Political issues did not come before the
      courts.  This did not deal with that point.  It was a tiny comment  on
      a large subject.  She and Dr Fatah had  spoken  to  a  lot  of  judges
      including Dr Fatah's sister  who  was   a  personal  status  judge  in
      Suleimaniyah. With regard to the question of freedom  of  movement  in
      Iraq dealt with at paragraph 6.7 of that report, she  said  that  most
      routes were difficult to travel, depending on who you were and who was
      with you.  It was difficult for Arabs  to  settle  in  the  north.  At
      present you could not just go and settle in Baghdad without links.  As
      the authors had said, they had limited resources and had  not  visited
      the country but relied on anonymous  informers.  It  was  a  good  but
      patchy report.

147.  She did not agree with the last two paragraphs of page 283  which  was
      part of the article on the Iraqi  judges.   Conditions  could  not  be
      described as normal by most standards of the  profession  except  with
      regard to ordinary matters such as marriage, divorce and burglary, but
      this had nothing to do with politics or security. As regards what  was
      said by Judge Latif Mahmood, he would have to say  that  to  keep  his
      position.  Not all the judges that they had spoken to had wanted to be
      identified. Such a person would be rooted  out.  With  regard  to  the
      article by the Assistant Legal Adviser of the Foreign  &  Commonwealth
      Office, she had commented on this in her addendum.  Only two or  three
      weeks ago a so-called independent judge who had been due to  hear  the
      case against Saddam Hussein had been assassinated.

148.  In her addendum she had also referred to the article by Mr  Karadaghi.
      She knew the author. It was a very   flimsy  article  to  rely  on  as
      having any  real weight. It was very general and he had not quoted his
      sources and was not working in the area. He was  pro-Kurdish  and  was
      celebrating and it did not merit any more weight. There were very good
      things in the Kurdish areas, for example, Kurdish police  wearing  the
      Kurdish flag in contrast to the  situation in Turkey.

149.  With regard to the Dutch report of December 2004, in particular  pages
      377 to 378, this was referred to in her  report.  She  believed  there
      were statistics but they had been unable to access  them  though  some
      had been published by  the  womens'  shelter  on  honour  killings  in
      Kurdistan and Dr Fatah had brought copies back, so  there  were  local
      statistics. They had seen a lot of documentary  evidence  and  locally
      reported cases while they were there.

150.  As regards the Dutch report of 2000, it was necessary to consider  the
      situation chronologically and most of the information was  from   late
      1999.  It was true, as was said at page 36, that  members  of  certain
      risk groups might find  themselves in danger in PUK and KDP controlled
      areas without the KDP or PUK being able or willing to afford effective
      protection. It would be better to consider much more recent  material.
      There had been a recent deterioration of law and order. With reference
      to the evidence in  that  report  concerning  settlement  of  disputes
      within the tribes, set out at page 39, the KDP and PUK would intervene
      if it was in their interests. They were superior to the  courts.  What
      was said was too general. It was a  question  of  whether  the  tribal
      chiefs who supported the  party  needed  to  identify  the  victim  or
      offender and link them to the party.  If the party wished it to go  to
      court it could and if they wished to leave it to the tribe they would.

151.  The report was out of date with regard to what it said about  internal
      relocation. There had been a change in the power structure. Everything
      was very tightly monitored, and the system of checkpoints had  already
      been described. It was like going to another country.

152.  The situation for a Kurd going, for example from a PUK to a KDP  area,
      was problematic as the two cultures were quite distinct and  they  had
      different dialects and did not understand each other. There  could  be
      historical family problems. Questions  would be asked.  There had been
      very little social investment in the population. The leaders developed
      their wealth and resources and there was little for  the  people.  The
      Kurdish culture was being lost. She was asked whether  such  a  person
      could ultimately make a life there and  she  said  it  was  also  very
      expensive.   Families were sustained by links to powerful parties  and
      there  was  very  little  money.   Resources   had   been   taken   by
      multinationals and returning exiles.  Money was not  going  back  into
      the population. Sanitation was very poor and there was open sewage and
      no electricity half the day, and it was also  very  hot  with  regular
      water cuts. The parties were not interested and it was very  hard  for
      unaffiliated people.

 153. When cross-examined by Mr Kovats, Ms Laizer was asked, with  reference
      to the article by  the  Assistant  Legal  Adviser  of  the  Foreign  &
      Commonwealth Office, and the reference there to  the  judiciary  being
      free from political interference and hopefully corruption, in response
      to which she had referred to the judge due to try Saddam Hussein being
      killed, she was asked how that showed political interference. She said
      that it was an example of the risks  generally  to  the  judiciary  in
      Iraq.  Criminals and politicians could interfere  and  it  was  not  a
      settled judiciary and there was no rule of law in  Iraq.  It  was  the
      rule of the butcher.

154.  She  was  asked  whether  she  could  not  see  a  difference  between
      influencing the result of a case and a physical threat  to  the  judge
      and she said that she saw that the  judges  were  subject  to  threats
      which affected how they heard their cases.  She  was  asked  what  her
      evidence for this was and she  said  it  was  speaking  to  judges  in
      Kurdistan. She was asked whether  an assassination  would  politically
      influence a case and she said it was only an example and she tried  to
      place her answers in context.

155.  It was put to her that though she had criticised the Dutch  report  of
      April 2000 as not referring to the killing of the communists  in  July
      2000, that this had happened after the report had  been  written.  She
      said it was an out of date report. It was put to her that  it  was  an
      unfair criticism and she said that she did not think so and there  was
      a lot not  reflected in the report.

156.  It was put to her that since a number of her answers were  by  way  of
      example from her experience from, for example from 1991  to  1992,  if
      they were relevant why was this not? She said that was she was dealing
      with  the roots of the social and political structures,  and  she  had
      known these people for years. There was a continuity in the  evidence.
      She was asked whether, if that was so, did it not also  include  2000,
      and she said that they were  reporting pre-2000 events. There had been
      a lot of change since then. The nature of  the  two  parties  had  not
      changed. She had tried to help understanding with the culture and  had
      to repeat information because there was a lack of taking  the  culture
      and personalities into account. She had seen and met  and  interviewed
      these people  between  1985  and  2005  and  had  seen  the  declining
      standards of living since Saddam Hussein's regime.

157.  She was asked about her  reference  to  working  very  intensively  on
      Turkish cases in the European Court of Human Rights and she said  that
      she read a lot of evidence of defendants and there were cases of extra-
      judicial security killings by security forces in  Kurdish  cases.  She
      read Turkish. She  worked  with  lawyers  to  provide  the  bicultural
      background.  She was asked whether she advised applicants and she said
      no, lawyers for the applicants. German Turkish  and  UK  lawyers.  The
      government was the aggressor. She worked for  the applicant.  She  was
      asked whether she assumed that the cases were  well-founded  and  said
      no, she read the papers. They accused the government of  torture  etc.
      and they were all cases where Turkey had been taken to court.  It  was
      the state and there was no recourse adequately in domestic law.

158.  She was referred to page 80 of Mr  Kovats'  bundle  at  paragraph  6.5
      where there was a quotation from the US  State  Department  Report  of
      2003 on Iraq.  She said that she had spoken about the failure  by  the
      parties to implement a lot of the legislation that they had sought  to
      introduce and she thought it was a partial observation.  She had cited
      many examples. There was a culture of abuse. She was asked whether she
      accepted that generally the laws were observed and she said  not  when
      it related to political matters. She knew the nature  of  the  sources
      consulted and they said there was insufficient access. She  was  asked
      who were the independent experts the US consulted and said she did not
      know.  She said that the US was generally one of the best sources  but
      it was a very general statement.

159.  She was asked about the fact that she used to work  as  a  coordinator
      for the Kurdish Community Centre and she said it was a charity and she
      was involved in fund raising  for  women  and  childrens'  groups  and
      providing training for refugees, as she spoke Kurdish and Turkish. She
      had been able to  help for a time but  it  was  very  unprofessionally
      managed and she had tried to teach them how things were  done  but  it
      was very difficult and eventually she had resigned. She had just  left
      Turkey where she had been living and it was in the mid-1980s.

160.  She was asked whether she accepted that she was  not  objective  about
      the Kurdish issue and she said not at all and she was very critical of
      things going on in Kurdish society and  this  could  be  seen  in  her
      books. She knew most of the most prominent intellectuals in  Kurdistan
      and in Europe and the USA.

161.  She was asked how many Kurds there were in Iraq outside  the  KAA  and
      said she did not know. They had always  lived  outside  and  many  had
      links with the regime.  It was easy to go back to the family  area  if
      you  had   roots.  There  was  a   significant    Kurdish   population
      everywhere.

162.  It was put to her that cities in Iraq were often  anonymous  and  clan
      links and so on would be weaker.    She said that this was not true in
      the Middle Eastern cities. People would be identified by their  father
      or a political  party and the family and its past  defined  a  person.
      She was asked whether the reports were therefore wrong to say that the
      situation was different in the cities. She said  the  situation  there
      was clearly more flexible, but people were conspicuous and people  did
      not move about so much as they did in large cities in the west.
163.  She was asked whether it was true for the appellants here that as  she
      had said with reference  to the  2000 report that that  was  unhelpful
      as you had to go back to the specific instances.  She agreed and  said
      that she did write negative reports. She had had no contact  with  the
      appellants.

164.  It was put to her that she  was  saying  in  her  reference  to  Judge
      Mahmood that in effect he was a political time-server. She  said  that
      was not  entirely  what  she  was  saying  but  she  referred  to  the
      difficulty of a person criticising his masters.  She was asked whether
      she accepted that he  was independent and if  he was untruthful if  he
      said he was independent. She said she referred  to  the  culture.   He
      could not be expressing his entire experience, but if he  was  serving
      the PUK loyally through  the  courts  she  accepted  it.  People  were
      required to speak in that way. If you wanted to be part of the  system
      you did not criticise it.

165.  It was put to her that perhaps since he said he had no  protection  he
      did not need it. She said that everyone needed protection. People were
      vulnerable at every moment on the streets in Iraq and judges  were  at
      risk and afraid for their security and most people had guns. He had to
      be very happy and lucky if he did not feel that.

166.  It was  put  to  her  that  she  was  being  cynical  because  of  her
      prejudices, and she said that she was not cynical but looking at  what
      happened daily. She knew the main players in the tribes  and  was  not
      prejudiced. She had spoken to a  lot  of  sources  and  was  respected
      within and without the community for her views. She had  been  accused
      of being a spy.  Amnesty International  had turned her down as she was
      too well  known  as  a  writer.  She  took  risks.  She  resented  the
      implication that she was prejudiced.

Mr Joffe's report
167.  There is also a report by Mr Joffe on Mr (                ).  Much  of
      that report is general, and we shall come back to parts of it  in  due
      course.   As regards Mr (               )'s case, Mr Joffe,  who  sets
      out his credentials at page  72  of  the  bundle,  states  that  Mr  (
            )'s neighbours were part of  the  dominant  Bahdinani  Kurmanji-
      speaking linguistic group who dominate in northern Kurdistan  and  the
      KDP.  He stated that the neighbours of Mr (               ) appear  to
      be part of the clan known as the Goli which may have been a  replicate
      of the southern    Kurdish Kolya'i but are more likely to  be  aligned
      to the Kurmanji-speaking Jezire or Botan.   He  states  that  normally
      linguistic affiliation is as important as location  in  Kurdish  trial
      groupings.

168.  He goes  on  to  say  that  the  Goli  would  pursue  the  blood  feud
      unrelentingly, and, given their support for the  KDP,  they  would  be
      able to do so with impunity.  If  Mr  (                )  were  to  be
      returned to Kudistan he would face an immediate threat  from  the  KDP
      given the location of the Goli clan within its  power  structure.   He
      goes on to consider that if the clan is also linked  to  the  southern
      Kurdistan Kolya'i then he could not be returned to the PUK  region  as
      he could be easily tracked down there as well.

UNHCR report of 29 January 2005
169.  We also have before us the report referred to above of  the  UNHCR  of
      29 January 2005  considering  the  possibility  of  applying  internal
      relocation to the situation of an Iraqi Kurd within Iraq.

170.  It is said at paragraph 3 of the first page of that  report  which  is
      at 1a of the appellant's bundle, that, depending on the  circumstances
      of the individual case, the application  of  the  internal  relocation
      alternative with respect to ethnic Kurds from Iraq may  be  neither  a
      relevant  nor  a  reasonable  option  and  that  in  particular  those
      concerned may not be  able  to  move  lawfully  to  other  regions  in
      northern Iraq, including the KAZ and the governorates  of  Kirkuk  and
      Mosul. It is said that they could also face unreasonable  hardship  as
      the conditions for legal integration and economic survival  might  not
      be met.  It is  also  said  that  the  quality  of  life  for  persons
      relocated to these areas would generally fail to meet the basics norms
      of civil, political and socio-economic  human  rights.   In  addition,
      Kurds would face discrimination   and  undue  hardship  based  on  the
      serious practical obstacles of obtaining protection, legal  residence,
      accommodation entitlement and other aspects which would  facilitate  a
      normal livelihood in the place of relocation.

171.  The report goes on to say at 1d that an  extremely  cautious  approach
      should be adopted in assessing the availability of an internal  flight
      alternative for Iraqi Kurds within Iraq.  The reports notes  that  the
      situation  in the three governorates in the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Zone
      (Suleimaniyah,  Erbil and Dohuk) has not changed  significantly  since
      the fall of the Saddam Hussein regime and though the overall  security
      situation there is  apparently  more  stable  than  the  rest  of  the
      country, the situation remains tense.  The PUK  and KDP   continue  to
      exist  separately  and  to  exercise  individual  rather  than   joint
      influence and control over the various socio-economic aspects of  life
      in the areas under their respect control in the   north.  Neither  the
      KDP nor the PUK allow political dissent in their respective  areas  of
      control and a long institutional memory of the deep divisions  between
      the two subsists. It is also said that  the  judicial  system  in  the
      Kurdish  administered  areas  has  not  reached  the  basic  standards
      regarding independence  nor is  it  capable  of  providing  sufficient
      protection from persecution by non-state actors.

172.  It is said at 1e that in effect any Iraqi who has been  abroad  or  in
      other  parts  of  the  country,  including  Kurds,  must  go   through
      checkpoints at the unofficial borders and this means  that  they  must
      possess documentation and proof of former residency  in  order  to  be
      allowed to cross into northern Iraq through the checkpoints. There  is
      also reference to a risk of discrimination if people are relocated  to
      areas from which they do not originate and it is  considered  that  an
      individual's fear of persecution from one faction would not be able to
      find safety in the areas dominated by the other faction.

173.  The report goes on to state that protection depends  upon  a  person's
      personal profile and connections as well as the tribal structure and a
      person who lacked family links or links to the community in  the  area
      in which they were relocated and whose  relocation  would  take  place
      without prior acceptance by  the  local  tribal  clan  leaders,  would
      undoubtedly be exposed to serious risk of rejection which  could  lead
      to physical insecurity and/or undue hardship and this would especially
      be the case for persons whose tribal affiliations were different  from
      those dominant in the area to which  they  were  relocated,  or  whose
      tribe was in conflict with the dominant tribe in that area.  A  person
      relocated to an area where they did not have family,  tribal  or  clan
      support would also face  difficulties  in  accessing  basic  services,
      accommodation and particularly the employment market.

174.  In a further letter of 24 March 2005, the UNHCR reiterate  their  view
      that the application of the internal flight alternative or  relocation
      alternative with respect to the ethnic Kurds in Iraq may be neither  a
      relevant nor a reasonable  option   and  that  an  extremely  cautious
      approach should be adopted in assessing the  viability of an  internal
      flight alternative.

The Dutch Report of 2000
175.  The Dutch Official general report on northern Iraq of  April  2000  is
      sourced by findings and reports  from  Netherlands  embassies  in  the
      region and documents from a variety of sources.

176.  At section 2.4 it is said that neither the KDP  nor the PUK would  put
      up with any acts of aggression by other groups within its own area and
      must basically be regarded as capable of protecting the population  of
      their areas from attacks by other forces.  There has been a  reduction
      in the number of checkpoints along the  front  line  between  the  two
      parties.
177.  Also within section 2.4, in particular  at  pages  39  to  40  of  the
      report is a section on blood feuds and clan  related incidents. It  is
      said that in the fabric of northern Iraq's predominantly  traditional,
      tribal society, blood feuds and practices whereby disputes are settled
      in customary ways or people take the law into  their own hands are not
      unknown, although blood feuds are said to be  less  common  than  they
      used to be.   Kurdish  tribal  traditions  mean  that  the  vendettas,
      against which the PUK and  the  KDP  cannot  always  proved  effective
      protection, sometimes cost lives. Murder, abduction, manslaughter  and
      serious injury are encountered. The holding of arms is  widespread  in
      northern Iraq.

178.  In seeking to resolve blood feuds and similar  inter-tribal  problems,
      in addition to the judiciary, in a relatively large  number  of  cases
      the various families and tribes are also involved.  The tribal  chiefs
      are often called in  to  reach  a  settlement  without  any  need  for
      magistrates to intervene.  It is common for conflict to be  'resolved'
      by payment of blood money and/or by marrying off women.

179.  It is also said that the PUK and KDP authorities  may  also  intervene
      to bring about settlements between  the  families,  clans  and  tribes
      concerned. Where tribal chiefs cannot  agree  or  in  the  case  of  a
      particularly serious criminal offence (such as murder) the KDP and the
      PUK will endeavour to ensure that due judicial  process  operates  and
      that a court judgment is in fact accepted. One means available to  the
      authorities here is the imposition of fines or reduction of sentences.



180.  The report goes on to say however that the ability and willingness  of
      the PUK and the KDP to intervene will depend in part on the power  and
      position of the individuals, families, clans and tribes concerned. The
      PUK and KDP will not always take action,  not  even  in  the  case  of
      'honour killings'.   The  point  is  also  made  that  problems  of  a
      traditional and  tribal nature arise mainly  in  the  countryside.  In
      Suleimania, Arbil and other urban centres, tribal ties are  of  lesser
      importance with more scope  for  departing  from  traditional  Kurdish
      customs.

181.  Section 3.3.5 deals with the judicial process.  It is  said  that  the
      judiciary  is  considered   to   be   independent   although   Amnesty
      International  claims that because of the  considerable  influence  of
      the parties and clans it cannot hitherto be  said  that  there  is  an
      independent judiciary in northern Iraq.

The October 2004 Country Report
182.  From the October 2004 Country Report we note that it is said that  the
      KDP and the PUK are increasingly combining their  political  resources
      and efforts to re-establish  the  joint  governance  of  the   Kurdish
      regions that was in place during 1992 to 1994.    It is said that  the
      judiciary in northern Iraq is generally independent, and both the  PUK
      and the KDP have established human rights ministries.  It is  said  at
      paragraph 6.5, quoting from the US State Department  Report  of  2003,
      that according to press reporting and independent observers, both  the
      PUK and the KDP have generally observed the  laws  they  have  enacted
      with regard to  such  matters  the  establishment  of  an  independent
      judiciary and freedom of  the  press.  Their  record  is  not  however
      unblemished, as can been seen from the same report.

The British/Danish Report of September 2004
 183. We turn next to the  joint  British/Danish  Fact  Finding  Mission  to
      Baghdad of 1-8 September 2004.  This Mission was conducted in  Baghdad
      and Amman, and the delegation met with as many of the Iraqi ministries
      as it was able to arrange in Baghdad and also met representatives from
      the Ministry of Displacement and Migration, the Ministry  of  Justice,
      the  Ministry  of  Human  Rights  and  a  number  of   other   sources
      knowledgeable about the situation in Iraq.

184.  At  paragraph 4.1 of the  report  the  importance  of  the  tribes  is
      emphasised, and it is said that the conflict solving  systems  of  the
      tribes are much more effective than the police and the  courts.  There
      is however more reliance on the court system in the north than in  the
      south.  It is said to be very common in Iraq to ask tribal leaders  to
      solve different problems in respect of  criminal  cases  and  problems
      between member of  different  tribes,  and  the  system  seems  to  be
      surprisingly effective. Sources from  the Ministry of Displacement and
      Migration in Baghdad said that in particular in  the  countryside  the
      tribal system worked well as  a  conflict  solving  institution.    UN
      sources in Amman said that tribal leaders had  an  effective  conflict
      solving power in rural  areas  whereas  in  the  bigger  cities  their
      competence was limited. However UNHCR  in Amman stated that the tribal
      conflict solving system was active all over Iraq.

185.  There was said to be no evidence to indicate whether the  PUK  or  KDP
      persecute each others members.

The Dutch Report of December 2004
186.  The next report which we consider is the  Dutch  Ministry  of  Foreign
      Affairs general country report on Iraq of December 2004.  This  covers
      the period from the 3 June to 24 November 2004.  It is based partly on
      information  from  public  sources  such  as  various  United  Nations
      organisations and non-governmental organisations and is also based  on
      on-site findings, (although it is noted that there was  limited  scope
      for investigation in the country during the reporting period owing  to
      the unstable security situation in Iraq),  and  also  on  confidential
      reports  by  the  Dutch  representations  in  Iraq,  the  neighbouring
      countries, EU member states and the United States.

187.  It is said that in the  provinces  under  the  rule  of  the  KRG  the
      administrative structure has changed little at operational level since
      the fall of Saddam Hussein and the governments in Erbil and Suleimania
      respectively function in exactly the same way as before the   military
      intervention. The two  governments  have  repeatedly  expressed  their
      intention of integrating their administrations and have  taken  a  few
      steps towards this, but little has  been  achieved  to  date  in  this
      regard.

188.  The reporting period revealed a further deterioration in the  security
      situation compared to the previous reporting period, though in the KRG
      areas it was relatively peaceful.   It was assumed that vendettas  and
      honour killings occurred throughout  Iraq  though  it  notes  that  no
      figures were available and it was not possible  to  give  an  accurate
      estimate of the extent to which it was  possible  to  find  protection
      against vendettas and honour killings from the present Iraqi  security
      organisations.  It is also said that it cannot   be  established  with
      certainty to what extent it  is  possible  to  escape  the  threat  of
      vendettas and honour killings by settling elsewhere in Iraq. There  is
      reference to a change in the law in 2002 in the KRG area to the effect
      that honour crimes are no longer permitted in this region.

189.  It is said that the security situation is relatively calm in  the  KRG
      areas in comparison with the rest of the country,  although  incidents
      of violence against Kurds are noted.  It is also noted that  according
      to UNHCR in the period between the  overthrow  of  Saddam  Hussein  to
      April 2004 some 80,000 - 120,000  Iraqis  returned  from  neighbouring
      counties and countries  in  the  region.  The  UNHCR   and  the  Iraqi
      authorities in the form of the Ministry of Displacement and  Migration
      were opposed to returns partly because of the security  situation  and
      poor living conditions and limited absorption capacity. The UNHCR  has
      facilitated  the  voluntary  return  of   Iraqis   from   neighbouring
      countries, including assisting some cases of  facilitated  returns  of
      Kurdish  Iraqis  from  Iran  to  the  KRG  region  though   this   was
      discontinued in late November because of poor weather conditions.

190.   As  regards  internal  relocation,  the  April  2000   Dutch   report
      considered that there was a  relocation  alternative  within  northern
      Iraq.  The same view was expressed in the August 2003 CIPU Report Iraq
      Bulletin and the October 2004 CIPU Report notes that there is  freedom
      of movement and tourism within the KAZ. The point is also made in  the
      September 2004 British/Danish Fact Finding Mission that Kurds from the
       northern parts of the country could resettle in the area outside  the
      Kurdish controlled zone and that every ethnic group could resettle  in
      the Baghdad area which is described as a real multi-ethnic  and  multi
      religious city.   In addition there is a  letter from the Foreign  and
      Commonwealth Office dated 2 February 2005, stating that  there  is  an
      unknown number of Kurds living in southern Iraq  and  no  evidence  to
      suggest that they were at increased risk from attacks.

Submissions
191.  We turn now to the submissions of the representatives. In addition  to
      their oral submissions, we have a  joint  skeleton  argument  from  Ms
      Braganza and Ms Adedeji, and a skeleton argument from Mr Kovats.

192.  Ms Braganza  argued, with regard to the question of the reach  of  the
      PUK and KDP and tribes, that nowhere was safe in northern Iraq and nor
      was there safety outside Kurdistan in central  and southern  Iraq.  If
      the Tribunal were with her and Ms Adedeji on that then the question of
      relocation did not arise.  The skeleton then went on to  consider  the
      extent of protection offered in Kurdistan and elsewhere in Iraq.

193.  With regard to the Country Guidance determination of the  Tribunal  in
      GH, the point was made that different experts gave  evidence  in  that
      case  and  different  factors  and  different  factual   circumstances
      existed and also different background material and the dating was also
      significant.  The Tribunal had heard oral evidence up  to  July  2004,
      with most of the evidence being up to May  2005.   The  situation  was
      volatile and fluid and there had been elections  after  that.  It  was
      only of very little relevance today.

194.  With regard to the comments on the Tribunal in GH on  the  UNHCR,  the
      matters relied on on behalf of the instant appellants from  the  UNHCR
      were matters where the UNHCR reported directly from  its  sources  and
      was not commenting. Also its views were in a number respects  endorsed
      by Ms Laizer and Dr Fatah. It was unclear  whether  the  Secretary  of
      State contended that Kurds could  relocate  to  central  and  southern
      Iraq.  There  was  general   insecurity  and  violence   and   general
      lawlessness.  Kurds   were   treated   as   collaborators   with   the
      multinational forces.  The UNHCR report of  January  2005  raised  the
      question  of  whether  there  was  effective  protection.   It  raised
      questions of the relationship between the PUK  and  the  KDP  and  the
      Tribunal had Ms Laizer's evidence on  that  also.  There  was  limited
      human rights monitoring in the two areas.  If it was relevant  to  the
      appeals  the  Tribunal  was  asked  to  find  that  there  was  not  a
      functioning and sufficiently effective judicial system  in  place.  If
      the Tribunal found there  was  a  safe  part,  then  all  the  factors
      concerning access to the safe part as well as living there  came  into
      play.

195.  It was clear from the UNHCR  report that it was necessary to  consider
      the issue of heavy dependency on tribe, family and community  and  the
      absence of effective state or quasi-state protection.  There was not a
      sufficiency of protection.  People returning to  Baghdad  would  never
      get to the north unless they were accompanied. Relocation  would  only
      be possible with prior acceptance.

196.  With regard to Dr  Fatah's report, his expertise should  be  borne  in
      mind. With regard to  Mr  Kovats'  suggestion  that  Dr  Fatah  lacked
      impartiality, it should be noted that everything he said  was  sourced
      and had examples.  He had given explanations for his answers  and  his
      evidence had not been undermined and he was a credible expert. Both he
      and Ms Laizer were very frank and detailed and reliable and  both  had
      been front-line reporters to the Tribunal and the Tribunal knew  their
      full histories and this should be contrasted with the other reporters,
      for example the Foreign & Commonwealth Office Assistant Legal  Adviser
      who set out his personal views but it was not clear what they were and
      what his sympathies were and caution should be exercised in  assessing
      the weight given to  unqualified and undetailed reports put forward on
      behalf of the Secretary of State.

197.   The  Tribunal  was  referred  to  the  expert  reports.   Ms   Laizer
      emphasised the importance  of  the  cultural  context.  Examples  were
      provided and it was actual evidence and not speculation. It was  clear
      that the situation after the elections was deteriorating. The  experts
      comments could be read on the Dutch report and Mr Joffe's  report  was
      of significance to the case of Mr Goli.

198.  Ms Laizer should not properly be regarded as  being  partial.  It  was
      not inappropriate for her to act for claimants and she did not provide
      reports if they were not favourable. In any event it  was  clear  that
      she worked for  government  organisations.  She  provided  a  detailed
      assessment of risk.  Her  reports  also  dealt  with  aspects  of  the
      objective evidence put forward on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.
      Emphasis was placed on the lack of security and stability in  northern
      Iraq and  the  instability  in  the  centre  and  the  south  and  the
      slightness of the police presence and  the  influence  of  the  tribal
      system.

199.  Ms Adedeji then addressed us. She took us to aspects  of  the  Country
      Report relating to such matters as the targeting  of  Iraqi  policemen
      and the fact that road travel  was  hazardous.    Police  quite  often
      ignored court orders. The picture was a bleak one. Militias  had  been
      in  control  in  certain  areas.  She  reminded  us  of  the  evidence
      concerning checkpoints. She contended that the evidence did  not  show
      that the PUK and KDP did not have a presence in the local  police  and
      also this was relevant to the intensity of the checks on the  borders.
      The expert evidence was that there were checkpoints throughout.

200.  The Secretary of State had put in very little evidence concerning  the
      tribes. Ability and willingness to protect were different matters.

201.  With regard to the particular appeals, Ms Braganza addressed us  first
      in relation to (               ). She referred us to paragraph  12  in
      the decision of the Court of Appeal in P and M [2004] EWCA  Civ  1640.
      There was no error of law. The issue of relocation had not been raised
      until after the hearing before the Adjudicator.

202.  As  regards  Mr  (                ),  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  not
      granting an adjournment. The Adjudicator said it would be easy for him
      to relocate and there would be a sufficiency of protection, but  there
      was no reference to the background material.  The Tribunal now had  Mr
      Joffe's report on the Goly.  The  Adjudicator  had  also  applied  the
      wrong standard of proof at paragraph 9.6.  It  was  unclear  what,  if
      any, Convention reason there was in the case. As to whether  that  was
      material depended upon what issues flowed  from  what  the  Convention
      reason was.  The two Conventions could not  be  used  interchangeably.
      This was a  fundamental  omission.   The  determination  was  entirely
      unsafe.

203.  As to the question  of why it was that the appellant's maternal  uncle
      was still running a business and there had been no action against  him
      if the blood feud was extended as it claimed, Ms Braganza argued  that
      the starting point was the Adjudicator's findings.   Mr Joffe did  not
      say that every male member of  the  family   would  be  at  risk.  The
      appellant had not been asked about this.  There was no basis  for  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions. The various points made should not just  be
      considered individually but also cumulatively.

204.   Ms  Adedeji  then  addressed  us   on   the   specifics   of   Mr   (
      )'s case.  It was clear that the Jaff tribe were linked with the  PUK.
      That  issue  had  been  before  the  Adjudicator.  The  issue  of  PUK
      protection presupposed that the appellant would be safe from the  Jaff
      tribe but that was not necessarily so. He  had  told  the  Adjudicator
      that the Jaff tribe was very large. The Tribunal was  reminded  of  Ms
      Laizer's and Dr Fatah's evidence on this also. Ms Laizer had  met  the
      deceased, Mr Hamakaki, who was a powerful figure within the  PUK   and
      it was therefore less likely that they would be willing to protect  Mr
      (               ). He had a fear of being handed over to the  Jaff  by
      the PUK.

205.  With regard to the judicial system, the Adjudicator had found that  on
      return Mr (               ) was likely to be acquitted. It was unclear
      how he came to that conclusion and unclear  what  the  basis  was  for
      thinking that there would be a trial. Clearly his cousin Aso had  been
      killed two days after being detained and had  not  been  tried.    The
      Adjudicator had not considered  whether  the  PUK  would  protect  the
      appellant in the light of his evidence. The determination  was  flawed
      and was unsafe.

206.  As to whether he would be at risk on return, it should be  found  that
      he would be, given the Adjudicator's credibility findings and  in  the
      light of the  evidence before the  Tribunal.   The  determination  was
      flawed and was unsafe.

207.  The PUK had issued arrest warrants, indicating a continuing  interest.
         The Adjudicator had accepted the documents. He had also found  that
      the passage of time did not  necessarily  diminish  the  risk  to  the
      appellant. There was enough evidence before the Tribunal to decide, in
      the light of the Adjudicator's findings, that the appellant  would  be
      at risk on return.

208.  With regard  to  the  brother  who  was  released,  he  had  not  been
      suspected of  complicity,  unlike the appellant, and  within  the  PUK
      the Jaff would be likely to use their influence to  get  hold  of  the
      appellant. The fact of the brother's release by the PUK did not negate
      evidence of a blood feud in this case.  It was a  recent  matter.  The
      uncle had been killed by Mr Hamakaki back in  1983.   The  Adjudicator
      had accepted that the deceased's family retained an  interest  in  the
      appellant.  He was targeted because the Jaff thought he had taken part
      in the murder and this was a matter that was specific to  him,  rather
      than  being a matter of targeting all male members of the  family.

209.  Ms Braganza addressed us again briefly in relation to  this  issue  in
      the case of Mr (               ). Mr Joffe had said that it  might  be
      directed and did not say it would be and it was dangerous to apply too
      much logic to persecutors.  The Tribunal was referred  to  C2  in  the
      appellant's initial statement where he had said that his  sister  told
      him that the Goli had been looking for him and  his  brother  and  his
      father and they were on  the wanted list and  that  was  why  no   one
      else, for example his uncle, was of interest. The  Tribunal  was  also
      referred to the appellant's latest statement at paragraph 5  referring
      to his only other family member being his maternal uncle whom  he  had
      tried to contract, unsuccessfully.  It could be that  the   uncle  had
      been targeted. Mr (               )  remained  at  risk  overall.  One
      should not be excessively analytical in assessing the motives  of  the
      persecutor. The blood feud could be manifested in different  ways  and
      in any event there was nowhere that either Mr  (               ) or Mr
      (               ) could go to escape. If the Tribunal found there  was
      a safe part then it would be unduly harsh.

210.  Mr Kovats divided his submissions  into  three  parts.  The  first  of
      these we have already dealt with, that being the nature of the KRA and
      its ability to protect as a matter of law. The  second  concerned  the
      general  country  guidance  issues  in  the  case  of  sufficiency  of
      protection and relocation, including his views on the witnesses.   The
      third concerned the individual appeals

211.  As regards Dr Fatah, Mr Kovats acknowledged that he was  clearly  very
      knowledgeable of the area and could be described as an expert  witness
      of knowledge. Also in his oral evidence he had been  at  pains  to  be
      objective and to assist the Tribunal as best he could.  Mr Kovats  had
      seven points, however, to make with regard to Dr Fatah's evidence.

212.  On a number of occasions he was  asked  leading  questions  about  the
      general situation and avoided direct answers and gave  examples.  This
      was fair, but it was necessary to note that he had restricted  himself
      to examples and did not say that  the  examples  were  necessarily  of
      general application.

213.  Secondly, despite his best efforts, it was contended that  because  Dr
      Fatah cared deeply about the situation of Iraqi Kurds he was too close
      to  the action to be clearly objective and this had come  across  with
      regard to his comments on the significance of the  elections  and  the
      position of the Kurds, and the Tribunal was referred to page 39 of the
      appellant's bundle at paragraphs 214 and 215  with   his  comments  on
      genocide.  It  could  be  an  understandable  personal  fear,  but  it
      portrayed an emotional response. The same comment could be made  about
      the election and how it had proved the United States wrong with regard
      to Mr Allawi.

214.  Also Dr Fatah had accepted that relocation within  the  KAA  would  be
      possible if there were no problems with the parties.  There  would  be
      problems with bureaucracy but it was possible.

215.  Understandably Dr Fatah's knowledge of Iraq outside the KAZ, at  least
      as regards recent events, was limited. This could be  contrasted  with
      his knowledge of the KAZ, though Mr Kovats accepted that he did  speak
      to people.

216.  Dr Fatah accepted that the KDP and the PUK were well aware  that  they
      needed to show the outside world that they  could  run  a  respectable
      government and protect human rights. The situation in Turkey could  be
      compared to this. They would not be likely to  jeopardise  matters  on
      the human rights front. He had also accepted that the PUK and the  KDP
      were not fighting each other, even if they did not  trust  each  other
      very much.

217.  If, as Dr Fatah said, the reach  of  the  KDP  and  the  PUK  extended
      throughout Iraq, then it must follow that that reach extended  to  the
      provision of protection throughout Iraq. These were two sides  of  the
      same coin.  The figures were  that  there  were  some  3.8m  Kurds  in
      Kurdistan and 1.2m outside Kurdistan so that one was talking  about  a
      lot of people.

218.  Finally, with  regard  to  Dr  Fatah,  the  security  concerns  within
      Kurdistan at  present  were  fears  by  the  authorities  of  Islamist
      insurgents and to a lesser extent disgruntled, displaced  Arabs  whose
      properties had been occupied. The concerns were therefore not  focused
      on fellow Kurds. The Tribunal was referred to pages 358 to 359  of  Mr
      Kovats' bundle. As regards whether the Islamists in question were  not
      Kurds, it could be  that  the  word  'Kurd'  was  being  used  in  two
      different senses and Islamists could be Kurds,  but  there  were  also
      people who saw themselves primarily as Kurds in contrast to those  who
      saw themselves primarily as Islamists.

219.   As  regards  Ms  Laizer,  Mr  Kovats  regarded  her  as  a  far  less
      satisfactory witness and he  argued  that  she  was  not  sufficiently
      objective to be an expert. He had six points to make on her evidence.

220.  The first was that she had shown a lack of objectivity  in her  answer
      about the political influence of the judiciary. Initially in  evidence
      she said that an example of this was the assassination of a judge  and
      he had put to her that it was a different issue  and  she  had  either
      failed to understand or did not accept this.

221.  Secondly, she had a tendency  to  make  unsupported  assertions.  With
      regard to the 2003 US State Department Report which he had  taken  her
      to, and the reference to independent observers,  she  criticised  them
      but she did not know who they were.

222.  There was also a  certain  inconsistency  in  her  evidence.  She  had
      relied on a lot of old examples from 1991 etc. and her recent examples
      tended to be of attacks by Islamists and not Kurds, yet she could  not
      accept that any weight should be attached to the  2000  Dutch  report.
      This was compounded by the fact that her own evidence, as she accepted
      when he had put it to her, was that one could not  generalise  and  it
      came back to the  specific case, but she would not accept   this  from
      the Dutch report at page 40 at the top.

223.  Some of her criticisms were captious, for  example  her  criticism  of
      the April 2000 Dutch report for failing to mention the killing of five
      people though this had occurred some months later in July.

 224. Her knowledge was not of the order of that of Dr Fatah.  For  example,
      she could not say how many Kurds lived in Iraq outside the KAZ.
225.  Also some of her answers  revealed a  partial  attitude.  For  example
      concerning her very extensive work on human rights cases,  she  seemed
      surprised when he had asked her if she had worked for governments  and
      her comment relating  to  whether  she  should  be  working  for  'the
      aggressor' should be noted, and  she had criticised the  UK/Danish  or
      the Dutch 2004 report as they had not  even  bothered  to  go  to  the
      country and this was untrue as could be seen from page  225  and  page
      363.

226.  Mr Kovats then moved on to the documentary evidence and he  relied  on
      the  references  made  in  his  skeleton  argument.   He   highlighted
      particular matters, for example paragraph 3.17 of the Country  Report.
      A lot of people had returned to Iraq since  the  overthrow  of  Saddam
      Hussein's regime and this was a factor of  considerable  weight.  Also
      the UNHCR reasons for not  encouraging  repatriation  were  logistical
      rather than being safety related and this was important in considering
      the position.

227.  With regard to the individual appeals, Mr Kovats  addressed  us  first
      on Mr (               ).  He accepted that  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter did not address relocation elsewhere in  Iraq,  and  there  had
      been no Presenting Officer before the Adjudicator.   He argued however
      that P and M could be distinguished  in that it was  confined  to  its
      own facts whereas this was  listed as a country  guidance  case.   The
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 allowed the  Tribunal  to
      have regard to matters arising after the  Adjudicator's  decision,  at
      s.102, and it must follow that the  Tribunal  could  when  appropriate
      determine matters of law  by  reference  to  matters  not  before  the
      Adjudicator. P and M had been a 1999 Act case and s.102 did not apply.



228.  As regards risk in Mr  (                )'s  case,  the  Tribunal  was
      referred to paragraphs  22 and 23 of the determination.  There was  no
      finding in the appellant's favour on the  question of risk of a  blood
      feud from two families. Nor was there any suggestion that he was  ever
      privy to any sensitive information and he did not suggest that he  had
      ever photocopied anything sensitive and all the evidence   pointed  to
      him being a very low level operator. On his own case he did  not  know
      what the  confidential information was that he was  supposed  to  have
      passed on and the Tribunal could  not   speculate,  so  there  was  no
      evidence that such information was ever passed on. The passage of time
      should also be borne in mind and it was for the Tribunal  to  consider
      whether it was a continuing live issue, especially in the  context  of
      relocation from the KDP to the PUK area. He was entitled to a  finding
      on risk and if he got over that, the appellant could relocate.

229.  With regard to  Mr  (                ),  the  Adjudicator  raised  the
      question of Convention reason but did not answer it. The Tribunal  was
      referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Skenderaj  [2002]
      4AllRR 555.   It was necessary to form a judgment as to  whom  it  was
      the appellant  claimed to fear especially whether it was  the  family,
      as was contended on behalf of the Secretary of State, or if it  was  a
      different entity, then what that entity was.
230.  As regards  relocation,  the  Adjudicator  had  dealt  with  this  and
      protection together and the  findings  should  stand  other  than  the
      erroneous Gardi point.

231.  On the question of sufficiency of protection, Ms Braganza  had  argued
      that it was inconsistent to find that he could relocate but  this  was
      answered at paragraph 9.5 of the determination  and  it  was  a  sound
      judgment on the facts.  The  fatal  shooting  had  been  done  by  the
      appellant's brother.  Dr Fatah had been in error with regard  to  that
      as he believed the appellant did the shooting. The appellant  had  two
      other brothers and he did not say that they or his  four  sisters  had
      fled.

232.  In his statement of 16 February 2005 he had heard  nothing  about  his
      father and the brother who had fled and said nothing about  the  other
      brother but referred to the maternal uncle.  At  least  there  was  an
      uncle and possibly a brother who had stayed put. He was not  suspected
      of being complicit in the murder so he  was  at  risk  only  from  the
      family connection.

233.  Dr Fatah had declined to say that the Goli tribe were  more  important
      than the Barwary and said that both had political influence  with  the
      KDP. They were both localised, he had accepted.

234.  As regards the reliance placed on Mr Joffe's  evidence,  the  Tribunal
      was referred to what had been said in GH on Mr Joffe who had been said
      not to be sufficiently objective. Even when looked on its merits,  his
      report was unsatisfactory and it was hard  to  see  how  he  got  from
      paragraph 1 to paragraph 5, and the report lacked reasoning.

235.  As regards the adjournment point, he had sought to  get  legal  advice
      and not evidence and it was known  that  the  solicitor's  letter  was
      dated 28 October and the hearing was on 11 November  which  had  given
      him ample opportunity to seek fresh legal representation  or  ask  for
      the assistance of his previous solicitors concerning the  approach  to
      the appeal.  He should not have been treated as  someone  on  his  own
      with no opportunity to put a case together.  There was no evidence  to
      the Adjudicator to indicate that an adjournment would have assisted.

236.  With regard to the appeal of Mr (               ) and the question  of
      sufficiency of protection, he did not fear the PUK  as  such  but  the
      influence of Mr Hamakaki's family. His own case was that although  the
      PUK had issued a warrant he  did  not  fear  them  but  Mr  Hamakaki's
      family. There was a Convention reason issue there.

237.  Dr Fatah had said that the Jaff were an amalgamation of  subclans  and
      groups. It was known that the PUK had arrested Mr (                )'s
      brother and released him after a few hours and he had not been  handed
      over to Mr Hamakaki's family.  Also it  was  now  the  case  that  two
      members of Mr (               )'s family had been killed and one  upon
      the other side so there was no obvious reason to  continue  the  feud.
      Apparently  there  had  been  nothing  since  2000  with   regard   to
      continuation of the feud.

238.  Taken together, the Adjudicator had a sound evidential basis  for  his
      conclusion that the PUK would protect the appellant and it  was  their
      duty to do so as the government of the area

239.  As regards the reach of the PUK outside the KAA, they could  harm  and
      they could protect  and  he  referred  the  Tribunal  to  page  15  at
      paragraph 70 of Dr Fatah's report of 3  January  2005.   The  Tribunal
      should not ignore Dr Fatah but have caveats about his evidence, but Ms
      Laizer's evidence should be disregarded.

240.  In reply, Ms Braganza contended that  it  was  very  serious  to  make
      findings that the experts were partisan or  partial.  Both  were  well
      aware of their duty to the Tribunal and of their role as experts.  The
      way in which Mr Joffe's evidence had been treated in GH was irrelevant
      to Dr Fatah and Ms Laizer. It was not only a question  of  their  oral
      evidence but also their expert reports and they needed to be  assessed
      for the weight to be attached to them. Dr Fatah  had  been  criticised
      for one line referring to 'genocide' and this should  not  lead  to  a
      condemnation of his evidence even if it was thought to be a warning he
      should not have made.   He should not be found not to be  reliable  or
      to be relatively valuable only.  Indeed Mr Kovats relied  on  what  he
      said at the time.  He had given answers by example  and  he  explained
      that he did not make bare assertions and the points were  set  out  in
      his report which should be read together. The  examples  given  by  Mr
      Kovats did not show that being close to the action made  his  evidence
      unreliable. He could not be selective with his  evidence.  As  regards
      the contention that he had limited experience of the situation outside
      the KAA, the Tribunal had his full CV and the extent of his visits and
      could assess his reliability.

241.  Ms Braganza disputed the point  concerning  reach  and  protection  as
      being two sides of the  same  coin.  Reach  was  communication  and  a
      network and was not the same thing as protection.

242.  As regards Ms Laizer, the Tribunal had her  full  CV  and  background.
      As concerned the contention of 'bare assertions' these were  supported
      by evidence and examples and again her oral evidence supplemented  the
      written reports.

243.  With regard to the point concerning  what  she  said  about  the  2000
      report, she had explained  her  past  historical  experience  and  the
      Tribunal would need to go back to the evidence and she  had  explained
      the context. The same people had been running the judiciary  so  there
      was no change. With regard to the complaint that she lacked  knowledge
      of the number of Kurds outside the KAZ as being indicative of  a  lack
      of knowledge generally, she had  been  asked  to  deal  with  specific
      issues and the point was irrelevant.

244.  Only one basis had been put forward for the suggestion  that  she  was
      partisan and this was the ECHR point.   She had not been asked if  she
      worked for the  respondent  government  and  the  government  was  the
      aggressor in those actions and they were actions against the state  so
      it was an accurate description. It was not a matter of weight and  was
      for the Tribunal to assess. It was asked  however  that  the  Tribunal
      accept both experts' evidence.

245.  As regards the point concerning P and  M  in  Mr  (                )'s
      case, the same point must apply here.  The evidence remained the same.
      The country guidance point in that regard was irrelevant, it was still
      necessary to identify an error of law. As regards the suggestion  that
      he was of low level, it should be noted that two of his colleagues had
      been shot so it  had been treated as a very serious  matter,  and  the
      Tribunal was referred to Ms  Laizer's  evidence  on  this.  It  was  a
      question of how he was perceived, and it was as a  traitor.  He  would
      still be of interest.

246.  As regards Mr (               ), Skenderaj could be  distinguished  as
      a case involving purely a family against a family.  This was a  tribal
      land dispute and an incident between the two which had evolved into  a
      tribal revenge killing. The Tribunal was referred to paragraphs 16, 18
      and 24 in Skenderaj. The Barwary were not just a family unit and there
      did not need to be a general blood feud between the two sides.

247.  Ms Braganza put in a decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Liu  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 249 and referred us in particular to paragraph 12.  She  went
      on to make  the  point  that  the  fact  that  not  all  Barwary  were
      persecuted was not a problem.  As to the question of the  causal  link
      and whether it was the land ownership and not the  membership  of  the
      tribe  that was the reason, she argued that it was a changing  set  of
      events even if the land was the triggering event. Tribal  intervention
      escalated the triggering event.

248.  In her final submissions Ms  Adedeji  referred  to  the  Adjudicator's
      findings with regard  to looking to the PUK for protection.  What  had
      happened to the cousin was very important. He was detained by the  PUK
      a  day  after  the  killing  and  a  day  later  he  was  dead.  Mr  (
       ) risked being given no opportunity to  explain  or  prove  his  non-
      involvement, given the perception. It had never  been  suggested  that
      the brother was involved.  The PUK would still be able  to  reach  the
      appellant if he relocated elsewhere. His evidence had been to link  Mr
      Hamakaki to the Jaff tribe and the Tribunal was referred in particular
      to paragraphs 34 and 35 of the determination.

Determination and Reasons
249.  We have found  it  convenient  in  structuring  our  determination  to
      follow broadly the approach adopted by Mr Kovats in his submissions of
      providing first of all some  comments  on  the  evidence  of  the  two
      experts from whom we heard, next setting out our views on the  general
      issues of country guidance which are before us and then finally  going
      on to consider the three individual appeals.

250.  We agree with Mr Kovats that Dr Fatah was in  general  a  witness  who
      showed a good deal  of  knowledge  of  Iraqi  affairs,  especially  as
      regards the situation in the north, though perhaps inevitably his  up-
      to-date assessment of the situation outside the north is more limited,
      though we bear in mind what he says about the regular contacts he  has
      and the ways in which he keeps himself up-to-date. We bear in mind the
      point made by Ms Braganza that it is difficult for an expert  who  may
      on the one hand have it said that he is too close to  the  action  and
      too involved such as to lack objectivity, and on the other  hand  that
      he  may  have  inadequate  knowledge  and  therefore  be  of   reduced
      assistance in that regard. On the whole we consider  that  Dr  Fatah's
      evidence can be taken as being reliable.  We note the extent to  which
      his reports are sourced and that clearly assists. We do  however  find
      ourselves in agreement with Mr Kovats that  at  times  in  Dr  Fatah's
      evidence his commitment to the Iraqi  Kurds  gave  the  impression  of
      affecting his judgment.  This is in particular found in  his  comments
      at paragraphs 214 and 215 of his first  report.   These  comments  are
      made in the context  of  a  section  headed  'The  Prospect  of  Iraqi
      Election for Kurds' and no paragraphs in that section are sourced.  In
      paragraphs 214 to 215 Dr  Fatah  surmises  that  the  Parliament  were
      mostly Shia and Shia concepts are not compatible  with  democracy  and
      voting and they simply watch the lips of the Ayatollahs to give fatwas
      and those fatwas will become decrees. He speculates that one of  these
      fatwas could be genocide of infidel Kurds. He goes on  to  state  that
      the Iraqi Parliament via a democratic  process  can  deprive  all  the
      rights  the  Kurds  gained  and  that  Kurds  have  no   international
      protection.  He states that the Kurds are back to  square  one;   look
      for an Arab solution to the Kurdish issue. He goes  on  to  state  the
      following 'And we all know,  throughout  painful  history,  what  this
      means, genocide'.

251.  We do not consider that this paragraph demonstrates  objectivity.   It
      may well reflect Dr Fatah's  private concerns about what may happen to
      Kurds in Iraq, but it is not sourced evidence  and  as  such  must  be
      taken as detracting from the overall view that we could otherwise come
      to that he is an objective source of information on the  situation  in
      Iraq.  We regard as being of lesser significance the point made by  Mr
      Kovats concerning Dr Fatah's views on  how  the  election  proved  the
      United States to be wrong with regard to Mr Alawi. It was perhaps  not
      a wholly objective comment, but it does not detract  in  any  material
      way in our view  from  the  general  weight  to  be  attached  to  his
      evidence.

252.  We turn to the evidence of Ms Laizer.  Mr  Kovats  made  a  number  of
      points as a consequence of which he invited us in effect to ignore her
      evidence.  We consider that a number of the points he  made  are  well
      taken. We do have a concern at her reference to the government in  the
      European human rights cases in relation to which she  has  advised  as
      being 'the aggressor'  as  indicative  of  a  partisan  attitude.  The
      criticism of the UK/Danish and Dutch Reports on the  basis  that  they
      had not been to Iraq is not made out. That again is at  best  careless
      and at worst indicative of partisanship, or at  least  an  element  of
      unwarranted contempt for the  processes  by  which  the  reports  were
      written. We were also concerned by the fact that  she  criticised  the
      independent observers referred to in the 2003 State Department  Report
      and yet she did not know who they were.  We also would  have  expected
      her to have some idea of the number of Kurds outside Kurdistan.    The
      criticism of the April  2000  Dutch  report  for  failing  to  contain
      comment on matters that had occurred after that report was written was
      again  a matter that flawed her evidence.   There  is,  we  agree,  an
      element of inconsistency in criticising  the  2000  Dutch  report  for
      lacking weight and being based on out of date information when it  was
      the case that the same was  true  of  a  number  of  elements  of  her
      evidence. We did not find persuasive her explanation  that  she  deals
      with the roots of the social and political structures  and  has  known
      these people for years.  She appeared to  be  drawing  an  unwarranted
      distinction between her techniques and those employed by  the  writers
      of the reports. We agree also with the point made by  Mr  Kovats  that
      she demonstrated a degree of a lack of objectivity in her response  to
      the questions about political influence on  the  judiciary  using  the
      example of assassination of a judge in this regard and  did  not  find
      her response when it  was  put  to  her  in  cross-examination  to  be
      satisfactory.

253.  We bear in mind of course the points made by  Ms  Braganza  concerning
      Ms Laizer's experience  and the degree of first hand  information  and
      the  nature of the sources which she uses to inform her  evidence.  It
      is of  course  the  case  that  a  good  deal  of  what  she  says  is
      uncontentious. We do not consider it appropriate to go as  far  as  Mr
      Kovats invited us to do in disregarding her evidence in its  entirety,
      but we consider that it must properly be regarded with  a  significant
      degree of caution given the specific flaws in her  evidence  which  we
      have identified above.

254.  The final matter which we should  address  before  moving  on  to  our
      assessment of the specific  issues, is the Tribunal  Country  Guidance
      decision in GH.   We agree with Mr Kovats that this should be regarded
      as a starting point for the consideration  of  the  country  position,
      given its status as a relatively recent and very  thorough  assessment
      of a number of issues concerning the situation in  Iraq.  Having  said
      that, we bear in mind the point made by Ms  Braganza  and  Ms  Adedeji
      that the situation in Iraq is  fluid  and  in   a  state  of  constant
      evolution, that there were different experts before the Tribunal in GH
      and  the  issues  there  were  in  a  number  of  respects  different.
      Nevertheless the Tribunal commented on a number of  issues  which  are
      relevant to the appeals before us and of course, as we  have  set  out
      above, provided a very thorough and careful assessment of  the  issues
      on the first point before us, for which we are indebted.

255.  We move on to consider the issue of  sufficiency  of  protection.  The
      issue of course does not arise if no real risk is found to exist,  but
      that is a matter which we consider is  more  properly  addressed  with
      regard to the individual appeals before us when we come on to them.

256.  In GH the Tribunal assessed the evidence before it as indicating  that
      the general picture was one of comparative stability in Kurdistan in a
      region under a common administration with a functioning  security  and
      judicial system.  The Tribunal  gave  specific  consideration  to  the
      views of the UNHCR in a letter of 6 May 2004.  The Tribunal  concluded
      that the views set  out  in  that  letter  represented  a  substantial
      extension of the obligations of signatories to the Refugee  Convention
      into far broader  general  humanitarian  considerations.  Among  other
      things they ignored the fundamental principle that the burden of proof
      was on the asylum claimant and that the  effect  of  the  judgment  in
      Horvath [2000] INLR 149  was  directed  to  the  general  question  of
      whether the relevant state authority  provides  a  general  system  of
      protection  to  its  citizens  which  it  is  willing  to  enforce  by
      appropriate  criminal  sanctions  without  discrimination.  The  UNHCR
      letter was  regarded  as  proposing  a  system  which  guaranteed  the
      protection of an individual claimant which in the view of the Tribunal
      sought to impose far too high a burden on the state authority. To that
      extent the views of the UNHCR did not reflect  the  asylum  and  human
      rights jurisprudence of the United Kingdom courts. The  Tribunal  went
      on to conclude at paragraph 126 that  those  representing  the  lawful
      authorities in Kurdistan were currently  providing  a  sufficiency  of
      protection against Islamic extremists and terrorists.

257.  It is of course the case that the issues  before  us  do  not  concern
      protection from Islamists or terrorists.  The  specific  concerns  are
      firstly, in the case of Mr  (                ),  that  he  remains  of
      interest to the KDP who wrongly suspect him  of  passing  confidential
      information to the PUK, and also fear of the family members of his two
      colleagues who were killed; in the case of Mr (               ) to  be
      at risk from members of the Goli clan to whom he  fears  he  might  be
      handed over by the KDP; and in the case of Mr (                )  that
      he fears that the PUK who issued arrest warrants concerning him  would
      hand him over to the Jaff clan subsequent to the killing by his cousin
      Aso of Mr Hamakaki, a prominent member of the PUK and  member  of  the
      Jaff clan.

258.  As we have set out above, we consider that the authorities in the  KAA
      are capable of providing protection as  a  matter  of  law  under  the
      Refugee Convention. The question must then follow, what the  situation
      is as regards protection as a matter  of  fact.   It  is  not  without
      relevance that the Tribunal in GH found that the authorities were able
      to provide a sufficiency of protection against Islamic extremists  and
      terrorists.  That  was  a  finding  on  the  factual  ability  of  the
      authorities and not just on their ability as a matter of law.   As  we
      have noted, this is however far from being determinative of the  issue
      of protection in these cases,  given  the  significant  links  between
      tribes and political parties in Kurdistan, which has  clear  relevance
      to the situation for Mr (               ) and  Mr  (                ),
      and of course Mr (               )'s concerns are that he is  at  risk
      from the KDP itself  as  well  as  from  the  family  members  of  his
      colleagues.  The two issues cannot be separated in the sense  that  in
      our view the extent to which protection can or may be provided in  the
      KAA will depend upon the nature of the risk in connection  with  which
      protection is sought. The points we have set out above from GH in this
      regard provide an example of that. We see no reason to  disagree  with
      the views expressed by the Tribunal in GH concerning  the  ability  of
      the authorities in the KAA to  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      against Islamic extremists and terrorists.

259.  What however of the situation for a person  who  for  whatever  reason
      has fallen foul of the PUK or the KDP? The first question must be  how
      a person who is from  the KDP or PUK will be treated within his or her
      own area. The point is made in the Country Report  at  paragraph  5.49
      that the judiciary in the KAA is generally independent,  and  the  KDP
      and PUK have  established  human  rights  ministries.   The  US  State
      Department Report of 2003 notes, as we have set out  above,  that  the
      KDP and PUK have committed human rights abuses in the past and  indeed
      there  have  been  reports  that  they  still  torture  detainees  and
      prisoners. It is however the case that prior  to  the   fall  of   the
      regime they both enacted laws establishing  an  independent  judiciary
      and generally observed such laws in practice and in addition both have
      set up human rights ministries to monitor human rights conditions  and
      submit reports to the relevant international bodies to recommend  ways
      to end abuses.

260.  The Secretary of State's bundle also contains the  Radio  Free  Europe
      article of 15 September 2004 quoting the Chief Justice  of  Kurdistan,
      Judge Latif Mahmood, who said that in Iraqi Kurdistan for  many  years
      they had had a well functioning judicial  system.  He  said  that  the
      judicial system is in place, a democracy  is  in  place,  there  is  a
      parliament in Iraqi Kurdistan and a judge is free to make  rulings  in
      accordance with his own convictions and without external pressure.

261.  By contrast, in the joint report of Dr Fatah and Ms  Laizer,   a  more
      negative picture is painted.  In their evidence they  both  emphasised
      the distinction between the civil judiciary system  in  Kurdistan  and
      the system where political and security matters are  involved.   There
      is a police force which comes under  the  civil  judicial  system  but
      security deals with other issues. They interviewed Judge  Razgar,  who
      said that the civil judicial system might be 'independent' but it  had
      been marginalised in the sense that there was no budget for  the  work
      and a lack of training.  He was asked if outside forces  such  as  the
      parties or the security services interfered with the  legal  processes
      of the court, and replied that no one had ever given him  instructions
      about what to do, but he said  that  the  security  forces  were  more
      influential than the judiciary because the party system depended  upon
      this.  He  said  that  the  police  were  basically  corrupt  but  not
      particularly influential.  By contrast Judge Shiyu said that there was
      external interference in the work of the court and gave  examples.  He
      did not accept that a judge could challenge party  decisions.  He  did
      not consider that a party leader who  committed  an  offence  such  as
      manslaughter or murder would be held accountable before a  court.   Ms
      Laizer was somewhat dismissive of what was said by Judge  Mahmood  and
      stated that he could not  be  expressing  his  entire  experience  and
      considered that people were required to speak in the way that he  did.


262.  For ourselves, we can see no reason why Judge Mahmood should not  have
      said what he did. No doubt the experience of the judges  in  Kurdistan
      will differ from person to person to an extent, but we  bear  in  mind
      the fact that he is the Chief Justice of Kurdistan,  and  we  consider
      that weight must be attached to what he said.  We bear  in  mind  also
      that Judge Razgar made it clear that no one had  ever  instructed  him
      about what to do, though we do  note  the  point  he  made  about  the
      influence of the security forces.

263.  We also attach weight to what is said in the  Dutch  report  of  April
      2000.  This represents to our mind a balanced  view  of  the  judicial
      process in the north, and we have no reason to suppose that there  has
      been any significant change since that time.  The point is  made  that
      it is difficult to determine the extent to which individual judges are
      genuinely politically independent. The report  also  deal  with  blood
      feuds and vendettas.  We have already mentioned the references  in  it
      to the situation in the KAA where it is said that in addition  to  the
      judiciary, a relatively large number of cases  involving  blood  feuds
      and similar inter-tribal problems involve  the  families  and  tribes.
      Tribal chiefs are often called in to reach a  settlement  without  any
      need for  a magistrate to intervene and blood  money  and/or  marrying
      off  women  are  ways  in  which  conflicts  are  commonly   resolved.
      Settlements are also brought about between families, clans and  tribes
      concerned, by the intervention  of  the  PUK  and  the  KDP  who  will
      endeavour to ensure that due judicial process operates and  a  court's
      judgment is in fact accepted.  With regard to this, Ms Laizer made the
      point that the KDP  and  PUK  would  intervene  if  it  was  in  their
      interest. She contended that this report was too general, if the party
      wanted the matter to go to court then it would, otherwise  they  would
      leave it to the tribes.

 264. In our view, the evidence indicates that a significant number of cases
      will end up being dealt with by the ordinary courts, and in regard  to
      such matters we conclude that the courts  are  generally  independent.
      Otherwise, it would seem that matters  raising  inter-tribal  problems
      are likely to be dealt  with  by  negotiations  involving  either  the
      tribal chiefs or intervention by the PUK or KDP  authorities.   It  is
      also relevant to note,  at  paragraph  3.30  in  the   September  2004
      British/Danish  Report, that  traditional  tribal  justice  and  other
      forms of conflict solution are accommodated in  the  articles  of  the
      penal and criminal procedure codes that deal with  reconciliation, and
      (paragraph 4.3 and 4.4 of the   same  report)  the  tribal  system  of
      conflict solving, most common in the southern parts of Iraq,  is  seen
      as surprisingly effective. It  may be that a person from the KDP  area
      who has fallen out with the KDP would face problems of a kind where of
      course questions of sufficiency of protection would not arise  because
      it was a problem  that he experienced with the authorities in  his own
      area. Though much would depend on the nature of  the  problem  he  had
      with the authorities in his own area,  we  consider  that  if  such  a
      person was of significant  interest to the authorities on  account  of
      perceived or actual disloyalty or political dispute, there is  a  real
      risk  that  he  would  experience  persecutory   ill-treatment.   This
      situation  is  of  relevance  of  course  to  the  appeal  of   Mr   (
       ). If the problems are from  Islamist  extremists  or  terrorists  or
      raise general issues involving the criminal law, then we are satisfied
      that there is a sufficiency of protection from the authorities in  the
      KAA as a question of fact.

265.  We move on to consider the situation where  a  person  such  as  Mr  (
               ) or Mr (               )  claims  problems  arising  out  of
      tribal conflict. We have set out above the points made  in  the  Dutch
      report of 2000 in this regard. We note Dr  Fatah's  disagreement  with
      the statement in that report that the KDP and PUK would  endeavour  to
      ensure that due judicial process operates and a court judgment  is  in
      fact accepted in cases where tribal chiefs cannot agree or in the case
      of  particularly  serious  criminal  offences.  He  did  not   however
      elaborate on his reasons for disagreement. For ourselves, we  can  see
      no reason to disbelieve what is said  in  the  Dutch  report  in  that
      regard.  Ms  Laizer's  evidence  was  that  a  key  question  was  the
      relationship between the tribe and the party. If  the  tribe  were  an
      essential part of the party then it would  not   want  to  offend  the
      honour of a valuable man but if it was a lesser matter the party could
      deal with it. The question of whether  honour  was  at  issue  was  of
      relevance.  The party might be more likely to take over  if it was not
      a matter of a dispute between rival tribes.

266.  We do not read Ms Laizer's evidence as significantly disagreeing  with
      the Dutch report of 2000, and insofar as it does, we prefer the  views
      of the Dutch report. We bear in mind the concerns  we  have  expressed
      above about Ms Laizer's  evidence. In our view the matters set out  at
      page 39 of the Dutch report set out the situation not only then but as
      of now, since we have no reason to  suppose  that  the  situation  has
      changed since then, no evidence in that regard having been brought  to
      our attention.  On the whole, therefore, we consider that inter-tribal
      and clan disputes are, in a significant number of cases,  likely to be
      resolved either by settlements negotiated by tribal  chiefs  or  as  a
      consequence of intervention by the PUK and  the  KDP  authorities.  We
      accept that in the case of a powerful tribe whose honour  is  seen  as
      having been affronted by the actions of a particular person, the party
      might in such a case not intervene, but we would consider that case to
      be very much the exception rather than the rule. It  is  important  to
      bear in mind the point to which Mr Kovats adverted in his  submissions
      of the  importance to the PUK and the  KDP   in  showing  the  outside
      world that they can  run  a  responsible  government  and  pay  proper
      attention to human rights matters. It is  not  unreasonable  to  infer
      that they would not be likely to espouse policies  damaging  to  their
      efforts to establish their human rights credentials..  That is  in  no
      sense a guarantee that  they  will  always  scrupulously  observe  the
      protection of human rights, but it is  nevertheless a factor  of  some
      materiality as part of the general context of  life  in  the  KAA   at
      present.

267.  We turn to the question of relocation within the  KAA.  This  is  most
      likely to arise in the case of a person who has  problems  within  for
      example the KDP area and raises the question  of  whether  he  or  she
      could  be expected to relocate to the PUK area.
268.  In GH the Tribunal noted that it  might  be  the  case  that  personal
      differences still existed on the basis of what took place  during  the
      period when the KDP and PUK were opposed to each other during the mid-
      1990s such that in some cases some people from the PUK area could  not
      live in the KDP area and vice versa,  but concluded that the degree of
      current cooperation and common cause which the parties have  did  not,
      in the Tribunal's view, support the contention that there could not be
      a general freedom of movement within Kurdistan. As we have  seen,  the
      Tribunal was also critical of the UNHCR's views on  relocation.  Those
      views are further set out in some detail in the January 2005 report to
      which we have referred above. It is important to bear in mind that the
      UNHCR's views are predicated on the  circumstances  of  an  individual
      case and refer to relocation as an alternative that may be  neither  a
      relevant nor a reasonable option. The UNHCR express the view at 1f  of
      the appellant's bundle in this report that within the KAZ  Kurds  from
      KDP controlled areas will face serious difficulties relocating to  PUK
      areas with the converse also  being  true.  It  is  said  that  inter-
      factional rivalry means that persons  originating  from  the  opposing
      faction's areas  will be  viewed  with  suspicion  and  hostility  and
      therefore individuals fearing persecution from one faction will not be
      able to find safety in the areas dominated by the other.  This  is  in
      many ways an effective pr�cis of the views of Dr Fatah and Ms  Laizer,
      who also, as can be  seen,  provided  detailed  evidence  particularly
      arising from their joint report concerning  checkpoints  in  Kurdistan
      and the kind of questions that are asked of  people  when  seeking  to
      move around within that  area.   As  against  that  the  October  2004
      Country Report noted that there is  freedom  of  movement  and  indeed
      tourism within Kurdistan. The September 2004 British/Danish report was
      advised there was no  evidence  to  show  whether  the  PUK   and  KDP
      persecuted each other's members. In this context it is  also  relevant
      to bear in mind, as is pointed  out  at  paragraph  6  at  1e  of  the
      appellant's bundle, taken from the UNHCR  Report of January 2005, that
      there are large Kurdish populations in other governorates in the north
       of Iraq such as Mosul and Kirkuk which would technically  fall  under
      the jurisdiction of the interim government as it was then in  Baghdad,
      and cannot be described as being assimilated to the situation  of  the
      KAZ.  It is also said that the situation in Mosul and Kirkuk has  been
      very tense in recent months. The point is made that  individuals  must
      possess documentary proof of former residence in order to  be  allowed
      to cross into northern Iraq through the checkpoints.   It is said that
      safe and practical  access  to  Mosul  and  Kirkuk  is  generally  not
      problematic but the area is not legally accessible to all Kurds  since
      in particular Kurds from  the KAZ face legal difficulties in accessing
      the area as the documentation they possess may have been issued by the
      KAZ authorities and as such would  not  be  recognised  by  the  local
      authorities of other areas. It is  said  that  people  such  as  Kurds
      originating from elsewhere who are  unable  to  prove  past  links  to
      Kirkuk would have  difficulty   in  legally  accessing  the  area,  as
      priority would be given to former residents who wish to return.

269.  We do not read that as indicating that the kind of  risks  which  have
      been described for a person going from the KDP to the PUK area or vice
      versa would exist.  There may well be difficulties in such cases,  but
      we consider that the evidence set out in the UNHCR document  does  not
      show either a real risk that such persons would be persecuted or  that
      the conditions they would face would be such as to give rise to a real
      risk of their human rights being breached.

270.  Much of  the  argument  before  us  was  essentially  related  to  the
      problems that would be experienced as a consequence of the information
      that would have to be given at the various  checkpoints.  We  bear  in
      mind in this context the views of the  UNHCR that we have already  set
      out above of the suspicion and  hostility that a  person  from  a  KDP
      area going to the PUK area would face, and vice versa. Dr Fatah in his
      oral evidence and in his joint report with Ms Laizer referred  to  the
      fact that the PUK and the KDP both give  temporary  IDs  to  a  person
      entering their area and there would be questions about the person  and
      their background and where they came from and where  they  were  going
      to.

271.  Though we accept that there is likely to  be  suspicion  of  a  person
      going from a KDP to a PUK area or vice versa,  if,  as  we  accept  is
      likely to be the case, it is discovered that they are from  the  other
      area, we do not consider that it can properly be said  that  a  person
      being viewed with suspicion and hostility  can be said to face a  real
      risk of persecution or breach of their human rights.   That  must  be,
      however, subject to the proviso that it would depend upon  the  nature
      of the information about the person concerned that was forthcoming. If
      they had been previously a significant thorn in the flesh of the party
      into whose area they now sought to move, then  we  can  envisage  that
      they might face real and potentially serious difficulties.  As regards
      the question of whether such a  person,  which  is  perhaps  the  more
      likely situation, could move to that area to escape  problems  in  the
      other area, we can see  no reason why the PUK would feel  impelled  to
      return to the KDP a person who had fallen out with them.  The   weight
      of Dr Fatah's and Ms Laizer's evidence, and also that of   the  UNHCR,
      was that the PUK and the KDP essentially  operate  two systems in  the
      north,  the  inference  being  that  such  cooperation  as  exists  is
      essentially at a high political level. The  situation  on  the  ground
      would appear to be significantly different, and the evidence does  not
      indicate a real likelihood of it being seen to be in the interests of,
      for example, the PUK, to return a KDP man  to  his  area.  They  might
      regard him with some suspicion, but given his reasons for leaving  his
      area we see no real risk of anything  more than suspicion.

272.  We consider next the issue  of  relocating  away  from  the  north  to
      southern or central Iraq. We bear in mind that it  is  likely  that  a
      claimant refused asylum may well be returned to Baghdad, but  that  is
      of course not guaranteed.

273.  The first issue is that of the reach of the PUK and  KDP  outside  the
      north.  The view is  expressed  in  the  British/Danish  Fact  Finding
      Mission of September 2004 that Kurds from the  northern  part  of  the
      country could resettle in areas outside the  Kurdish  controlled  zone
      and that every ethnic group could resettle in the Baghdad  area  which
      was described as being a real multi-ethnic and  multi-religious  city.
      Evidence from the Foreign & Commonwealth  Office  in  the  form  of  a
      letter of 22 February 2005 indicates that there is an  unknown  number
      of Kurds living in southern Iraq and that there  was  no  evidence  to
      suggest that Kurds in the south were at increased risk  from  attacks.
      The evidence suggests that there are something over one million  Kurds
      living outside the north.

274.  Dr Fatah's evidence was that it depended upon the person and  that  in
      any event he could not just choose to go and live away from the north.
       A Kurd would experience a lot of difficulty. In general they did  not
      speak Arabic and they were  very  localised  and  their  religion  and
      culture were different and they lacked a party  political  affiliation
      in the south and would be  suspect,  for  example,  in  Baghdad  where
      questions would be asked as to why they had moved there and they could
      be reported to one of the groups.  They were also seen as being better
      off than Iraqi Arabs  and  were  at  risk  of  kidnap  and  also  were
      adversely regarded on account of their perceived association with  the
      multinational forces.

275.  Though we bear in mind the difficulties described  by  Dr  Fatah,  and
      also by UNHCR at  paragraph  16  at  page  1f  of  their  report,  and
      confining our comments for the moment to the situation  where  a  Kurd
      does not have problems with the PUK or KDP, we do  not  consider  that
      the  evidence shows that relocation would be unduly harsh or give rise
      to a reasonable degree of likelihood of  breach  of  the  individual's
      human rights.  What is said by Dr Fatah and the UNHCR  and  Ms  Laizer
      also on this point has to be  seen in the context of  the  very  large
      number of Kurds who live outside the  north  and  including  the  very
      significant numbers in Baghdad.

276.  We consider next the question of the  reach  of  the  KDP  and/or  PUK
      outside northern Iraq.  In  this  regard  Dr  Fatah  referred  to  the
      increasingly national role played by the two parties.  Up to date they
      provided security for the capital. They now of  course  have  seventy-
      seven MPs in the Iraqi parliament and are the second  political  force
      in the country after the Shia and the new president would be the  head
      of the PUK. They are now  an Iraqi political force. As  a  consequence
      he did not think that there was any part of Iraq to which the  parties
      would not be able to extend their reach if they were interested  in  a
      person.   This was true of both the PUK and the KDP.

277.  As we have seen, Ms Laizer agreed with Dr Fatah on this. The  ID  card
      system would enable a person's entire family history to be discovered.
      Everyone knew who everyone else was and questions  were  always  asked
      about strangers.

278.  We consider, however, that this must depend upon the record  that  the
      person has.  The degree of  interest  that  the  particular  political
      party has in them must surely be a factor in assessing the  likelihood
      that the system of checks referred to would reveal a  person  in  whom
      the party had a significant interest. We  do  not  consider  that  the
      evidence shows that, even bearing in mind the national role  that  the
      PUK and the KDP now have, they in any sense  exercise  or  propose  to
      exercise their powers with a view to identifying people in  whom  they
      have an interest outside the north.  The bald statement by Dr Fatah at
      paragraph 78 of his third report at page 71K of the  bundle  that  the
      PUK and KDP can reach throughout Iraq  via  the  police  and  judicial
      system, does not indicate the ways in which  he  believes  that  reach
      would be effected. No doubt they have their own  judicial  system  and
      police and armed forces in the north, but we do not consider that  the
      evidence substantiates the contention that they have the kind of reach
      described by Dr Fatah and Ms Laizer.   We  consider  the  evidence  is
      lacking in this regard. There are systems with a  relative  degree  of
      sophistication to enable checks to be made in the north, but we do not
      consider that it has been shown that  similar  systems  exist  in  the
      south and that a person relocating, for example to Baghdad, would come
      across the kind of system of checks that would mean that  the  details
      would be passed on to the PUK and or the KDP simply because he  was  a
      person from that region and  that  as  a  consequence  this  would  be
      followed up by them leading potentially  to  adverse  consequences  to
      him.

279.   In  conclusion,  on  the  general  issues,  we  consider   that   the
      authorities in the KAA are able as a matter of  international  law  to
      provide security and protection to the inhabitants of that regime.  We
      also conclude that there is a general sufficiency  of  protection  for
      Kurds in the KAA  subject to the exceptional case where a  person  has
      either fallen foul of the party in his own  area  and  remains  within
      that area or where there is a tribal dispute which unusually would not
      be  resolved  either  by  mediation  or  by  tribal  leaders  or   the
      intervention of one of the political parties.  Relocation from the KDP
      area to the PUK area or vice versa in the north would not  be  without
      its difficulties, but in general we consider  that  it  would  not  be
      unduly harsh nor would it lead to treatment giving rise to a breach of
      a person's human rights. Mutandis mutandis we are of the same view  as
      regards relocation away from the area of a tribe with which  a  person
      has experienced problems. We also  consider  that  relocation  to  the
      south for a Kurd can in general be effected without this being  unduly
      harsh and without giving rise to a real  risk  in  all  but  the  most
      exceptional high profile cases of their relocation  being  brought  to
      the attention of one of the two political  parties i.e. the KDP or the
      PUK of whom they had a fear.
The individual appeals
280.  We turn to the individual appeals. The difficulty that  the  Secretary
      of State faces in the case of Mr (                )  is  that,  as  Mr
      Kovats accepted, the issue in relation to which permission  to  appeal
      was granted, that of the failure  of  the  Adjudicator  to  deal  with
      internal relocation, was not raised in the reasons for refusal  letter
      and nor, given that there was not a Presenting Officer  in  attendance
      before the Adjudicator, was it raised before the Adjudicator.

281.  At paragraph 34 in its judgment in P and M [2004] EWCA Civ 1640,  with
      reference to a similar failure  in  that  case  on  the  part  of  the
      Secretary of State to rely on the issue of internal  relocation  prior
      to  the  appeal  to  the  Tribunal,  the  Court  of  Appeal  expressly
      considered whether the Secretary of State should be permitted to raise
      the issue on appeal. In the view of the court, unless  an  explanation
      was put forward by the Secretary of State as to why the issue was  not
      raised earlier, the Tribunal should be slow to allow such an issue  to
      be raised on appeal.  As  we  have  noted  above,  Mr  Kovats,  having
      accepted that the reference to  relocation  in  paragraph  16  of  the
      refusal letter referred only  to  relocation  elsewhere  in  the  KAZ,
      argued that P and M was  confined  to  its  own  facts  whereas  Mr  (
            )'s case with the others was listed as a country guidance  case.
      This is a reference to paragraph 35 in P and  M  where  the  Court  of
      Appeal stated that it did not ignore the fact that it was an important
      part of the  role of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal to give guideline
      decisions which thereafter should be borne in mind by Adjudicators who
      were required to determine similar issues.  There was nothing  in  the
      Immigration Appeal  Tribunal's  decision  in  that  particular  appeal
      however to suggest  that  it  was  purporting  to  set  out  any  such
      guideline approach. The court went on to say that certainly before any
      such guidelines could properly be made there must be clear evidence to
      support a decision that it was intended to influence the decisions  of
      Adjudicators generally and that evidence  was  not  available  to  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal.

282.  Mr  Kovats  also  made  the  point  that  P  and  M  arose  under  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, whereas  s.102  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which governs the appeals  before  us
      today, allows the Tribunal to consider evidence about any matter which
      it thinks relevant to the Adjudicator's decision,  including  evidence
      which concerns a matter arising after the Adjudicator's  decision.  He
      argued that there was an intention that the Tribunal could identify an
      error of  law  by  reference  to  factual  material   not  before  the
      Adjudicator.

283.  In our view there is a clear distinction between  evidence  concerning
      a matter arising after the Adjudicator's decision and our jurisdiction
      to interfere with the Adjudicator's determination only if an error  of
      law is shown in it. We have not been offered an explanation as to  why
      the issue of relocation was not raised earlier.  It  may  be  surmised
      that relocation outside the KAZ did not form a part of the reasons for
      refusal letter since at that time  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
      proposing to return Iraqi Kurds to anywhere but  the  north.  But  the
      hearing before Mr  White took place in October 2003,  well  after  the
      downfall of Saddam Hussein's regime, and no submissions were put in to
      suggest that relocation was now a feasible alternative.  The Court  of
      Appeal in P and M at paragraph 33 expressed the view  that  to  expect
      the Adjudicator to determine the issue despite the fact  that  it  was
      not raised before her in that case was to  place  an  unnecessary  and
      inappropriate burden upon her and  upon  the  appellant  who  appeared
      before her.  To  our  mind  that  reasoning  applies  equally  to  the
      situation before Mr White.  We do not consider that it can properly be
      argued that there is an error of law  in  his  failure  to  deal  with
      internal relocation given the comments of the Court of Appeal in P and
      M on this.  It  is  not  a  matter  arising  after  the  Adjudicator's
      decision.  The issue of relocation and the possibility  of  relocating
      to the south was clearly an issue that existed prior to the   decision
      of the Adjudicator and at that time,  and  we  do  not  consider  that
      s.102(2) of the 2002 Act has any relevance to the point.

284.  Nor do we consider that there is merit to the argument that  a  proper
      distinction can be drawn  between  Country  Guidance  cases  and  non-
      country guidance cases in this regard. The comments of  the  Court  of
      Appeal at paragraph 35 in P and M cannot in our view properly be  read
      as limiting what the court had said at paragraphs 33 and 34 about  the
      inappropriateness of the issue of relocation being raised as  late  as
      the appeal before the Tribunal. We do not consider that it can be said
      logically to follow from the fact that a case is  a  country  guidance
      case that that can in some sense turn a matter which is not  an  error
      of law otherwise into an error of law.

285.  Accordingly we have concluded that the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
      identified an error of law in the Adjudicator's determination  in  the
      case of Mr (               ). The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

286.  However, since the  issues  raised  in  that  appeal  have  both  some
      general significance as noted above and relevance to the more specific
      situation of a person who has fallen out with the KDP  on  account  of
      suspicion of collaboration with or assistance to the PUK in the  past,
      we consider it is relevant to set out what our findings in this regard
      would be had we not concluded that there was no error of  law  in  the
      determination.

287.  The Adjudicator found that Mr (                )  would  still  be  of
      interest to the KDP, and there is no challenge to his findings in that
      regard. The question arises then of whether, on the one hand he  could
      relocate to the PUK area, or  on  the  other  hand  whether  he  could
      relocate elsewhere in Iraq.   We  consider  that  it  is  not  without
      relevance to bear in mind that the  events  in  question  occurred  in
      1999, and we agree with Mr Kovats that there is no suggestion that  he
      was ever privy to any sensitive information and he did not suggest  he
      had ever photocopied anything sensitive and  indeed  appears  to  have
      been no more than a very low level operator. As against that, however,
      as Ms Braganza pointed out, it is the case that his colleagues  Razgar
      and Bakir  thereafter attempted to flee to the PUK area but were  both
      shot.

288.  Although  from  this  it  can  properly  be  inferred  as  indeed  the
      Adjudicator  did, that he  would  remain at risk from the KDP,  we  do
      not consider that he would be unable to relocate to the PUK area.  The
      evidence has been somewhat paradoxical as to the extent to  which  PUK
      and KDP are or are not working together, but  given  that  the  weight
      particularly of Dr Fatah  and  Ms  Laizer's  evidence  was  that  they
      essentially operate two separate system in the north, we  can  see  no
      reason why the PUK would feel impelled to return the appellant to  the
      KDP on account of purported assistance to the PUK some five years ago.
      The inference from Dr Fatah and Ms Laizer  was  that  the  cooperation
      between the two is essentially at a high political level, and  on  the
      ground we can see no reason, as we say, why it should be thought to be
      in the interests of the PUK to return Mr (               ) to the  KDP
      area. We accept that he might  well  be  regarded  with  a  degree  of
      suspicion as a person from the KDP area, but on the assumption that he
      would say why it was that he had problems  with the KDP we can see  no
      reason why the PUK would return him.

289.  In the alternative we consider that he  could  relocate  elsewhere  in
      Iraq. We do not consider that he is a person with the kind of  profile
      who would be likely to be brought to  the  attention  of  the  KDP  as
      someone in whom they had any ongoing interest. It may be that memories
      are long, but as we have noted, we consider that there is  an  absence
      of evidence to indicate that there  exists  the  kind  of  information
      gathering machinery and assessment of such information as to  make  it
      at all likely that his identity would be brought to the  attention  of
      the KDP in for example Baghdad.

290.  As regards any risk he might face from the families of  the  two  dead
      men, we consider again that such risk as he might face from  them  can
      be resolved by relocation either to the PUK area or elsewhere in Iraq.



291.  We turn to Mr  (                )'s  appeal.   In  the  light  of  our
      findings on the Gardi point, we consider that the Adjudicator  clearly
      fell into error in concluding as he  did that the KAR was not  capable
      in law of providing protection to  him.  We  also  consider  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in not making a finding on whether or not there  was
      a Refugee Convention reason. We do not,  however,  consider  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in refusing an adjournment. It was  clear  that  his
      previous solicitors were not longer prepared to act for him and he had
      been given sufficient notice of that, in our view, to  enable  him  to
      obtain  alternative  representation.  The  Adjudicator  was  therefore
      correct to proceed to hear the appeal as he did.

292.  As regards  the  substance  of  the  case,  it  is  clear  from  Mr  (
          )'s evidence that the Goli have some 2/3000 members. He said  that
      they were everywhere and were  all  over  Iraq,  though  that  appears
      somewhat inconsistent with the claimed size of the tribe in  numerical
      terms. Dr Fatah says that the KDP is an association of tribes of which
      the Goli are one. He also thought that wherever Mr  (                )
      went in Kurdistan he would be discovered. The Goli could use their KDP
      influence even outside Kurdistan to find him potentially  wherever  he
      was in Iraq. He considered that they were an influential part  of  the
      KDP and did not think that there would be  a  problem  for  them.   He
      stated that the Goli tribe were rather localised and  were  mainly  in
      the KDP area and would not for example be found in Sulaimaniya.   They
      would normally take revenge and that would be in the form of  killing.
      As to whether the KDP would hand him over, he answered this by way  of
      an example which did not to our mind shed any particular light on  the
      likelihood of the KDP handing Mr  (               ) over to the  Goli.



293.  He questioned how long Mr (               )'s tribe would be  able  to
      protect  him. He accepted that the  Barwary,  Mr  (                )'s
      tribe, have  political  influence  in  the  KDP  also  and  again  are
      localised.   He  considered  that  that  political   influence   would
      nevertheless mean that it would not prevent it  being  very  difficult
      for them to protect Mr (               ). In cases where both had  the
      same influence it was a tribal issue and there was a grey area between
      the tribe and  the  party.  He  understood  the  Barwary  to  be  more
      educated.

294.  He considered that a settlement such as giving a woman  to  the  other
      tribe or a money settlement was possible but some tribes did  not  see
      it that way.

295.  Ms Laizer went so far as to say that the Goli are very  highly  placed
      in the KDP.  She contended that the father of the murdered boy  was  a
      peshmerga who controlled the pivotal town of  Bignova.   This  was  an
      important strategic town for the KDP.  The  tribe  would  not  protect
      him. They were intellectual rather than militant and  were  a  smaller
      tribe and his was a farming family.  If the KDP found him  they  would
      hand him over to the Goli tribe.

296.  We consider that Dr Fatah's evidence was rather more balanced than  Ms
      Laizer's in this regard. He seemed to us more realistic  in  accepting
      that a number of tribal solutions represented a  possible  outcome  to
      the problems that Mr  (               ) has with the Goli tribe.    He
      did not go as far  as  Ms  Laizer  in   his  statement  regarding  the
      importance of Goli  tribe  to  the  KDP.   The  localised  nature  and
      relatively small size in numerical terms of the Goli  should  also  in
      our view be properly borne in mind.

297.  We have considered  also the  report  of  Mr  Joffe  concerning  Mr  (
              ). We agree with Mr Kovats that there was something of a  jump
      in Mr Joffe's report from his statement that the rival tribe  appeared
      to have been part of a clan known as the Goli  who  may  have  been  a
      replicate of the southern  Kurdish Kolya'i but  were  more  likely  to
      have been linked to the Kurmanji  speaking  Jezire  or  Botan  to  his
      reference to Mr (               ) facing an immediate threat from  the
      KDP if returned to Kurdistan, given the  location  of  the  Goli  clan
      within its power structure. We  see no basis  for  his  assumption  in
      that regard on our reading of his report.  We attach therefore  little
      weight to Mr Joffe's views on the risk to Mr  (                )  from
      the Goli tribe.

298.  This case would appear to us on the evidence  to be  one  which  would
      be most likely to be resolved as between the tribes  with  or  without
      the assistance of the KDP. It is after all not  contended  that  Mr  (
                )  himself killed the member of the Goli tribe  but  it  was
      his brother who has subsequently fled.  We bear in mind what  we  have
      said above about  the  objective  evidence  concerning  resolution  of
      disputes, placing particular reliance as we have  done  on  the  Dutch
      report of 2000.

299.   If  we  are  wrong  in  this  regard,  we   consider   that   Mr    (
      ) would be able to relocate to the PUK area without this being  unduly
      harsh or giving rise to a real risk of breach of his human rights.  We
      do not consider that it is reasonably likely that the PUK  would  hand
      him over to the KDP or to the Goli tribe. We can  see  no  reason  why
      they would think it appropriate  or  necessary  to  do  so  given  the
      essential separateness to which we have  referred  above  of  the  two
      regimes in the north. Alternatively  again Mr (               )  could
      relocate to the south or elsewhere in Iraq, for  example  to  Baghdad,
      without this being unduly harsh or involving a real risk of  a  breach
      of his human rights for reasons we have set out  with  regard  to  the
      case of Mr (               ).

300.  We conclude therefore in the case of  Mr  (                )'s  appeal
      that,  though  there  were  errors  of  law   in   the   Adjudicator's
      determination, they were not material since  the  ultimate  conclusion
      dismissing the asylum appeal and the human rights appeal  was  in  our
      view a correct one albeit for rather different reasons.

301.   We  turn  now  to  the  appeal  of  Mr  (                 ).   Mr   (
      ) faces the potential difficulty that the tribe  concerning  which  he
      faces  a  potential  problem  is  by  general  agreement  a   powerful
      affiliation of a number of subclans and a major force in the PUK.   Mr
      Hamakaki, who was killed by Mr (               )'s cousin, was clearly
      a man of some influence in the PUK. The Adjudicator accepted that  the
      PUK have issued documents which effectively amount to arrest warrants.
      Mr (               )'s fear is of the Jaff party. He does not claim to
      fear persecution by the PUK but rather that he  will  not  escape  the
      family of Mr Hamakaki who will be determined to kill  him.   Dr  Fatah
      inferred that the PUK would be able to find him  wherever  he  was  in
      Iraq though his answer to the question in this regard was by way of an
      example concerning another  case  and  again  was  not  of  particular
      assistance.  Ms Laizer endorsed Dr Fatah's evidence about the size and
      influence of the Jaff.  It was relevant to bear  in  mind  that  Mr  (
               ) is not affiliated to a tribe but like  a  number  of  other
      people in Kurdistan lacks affiliation and that is  not  an  irrelevant
      aspect of the question of risk concerning him.  She considered that he
      was at very high risk  because  of  the  way  in  which  he  had  been
      implicated.

302.  It is not, however, without  relevance  that  Mr  (                )'s
      cousin Aso killed Mr Hamakaki some years after Mr Hamakaki had  killed
      Aso's father. Aso himself of course has now been killed.  It  is  also
      not without relevance that the appellant's brother was detained by the
      PUK for a number of hours and then released. The point is made however
      that the appellant is regarded as  being  implicated  in  the  killing
      since it was from his hairdressing salon that Aso shot Mr Hamakaki and
      therefore he is considered as being implicated in a way in  which  his
      brother is not.

303.   We  do  not  consider  on  the  evidence  before   us   that   Mr   (
      ) faces a real risk on return.  One relevant factor as we  have  noted
      above is that he is unaffiliated to a tribe and a consequence of  this
      is that the honour of the Jaff tribe has not been affronted in the way
      in which it might have been if a member of a similar tribe had  killed
      one of its members. There is also the very pertinent point adverted to
      by Mr Kovats that there have now been two killings on the side of Mr (
                    )'s family and only one killing on the Jaff  side.   The
      balance, as it were, is therefore in their favour. Ms Laizer  accepted
      that in Mr (               )'s case the party  might  have  the   more
      important jurisdiction than might otherwise be the case as he was  not
      a member of a rival tribe. The matter could go either way. We see this
      as resiling somewhat from her earlier statement  that  she  considered
      that he was at great risk.

304.  In our view an issue of particular determinative significance in  this
      regard is the fact that the PUK have issued warrants. To our mind this
      clearly indicates that they have decided that they will deal with  the
      matter.  This can hardly  be  said  to  have  been  done  without  any
      involvement of the Jaff tribe given what we are told about  its  power
      and influence within the PUK.  We are  satisfied  therefore  that  the
      decision in this case has been made that the matter will be dealt with
      by the PUK rather than by Mr (               )  being  placed  in  the
      hands of the Jaff tribe or that tribe having the  opportunity  to  get
      their hands on him insofar as, given the balance that exists in  their
      favour, they retain any real interest in him.  Accordingly we consider
      that he can properly be returned since he would be dealt with  by  the
      PUK who operate a judicial system of some independence and in relation
      to a charge concerning which  he  claims  not  to  be  guilty  and  we
      consider it is proper to conclude that he is not at any real  risk  of
      persecution or breach of his human rights. We  do  not  consider  that
      there is an error  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's  determination  and
      although in some regards our reasoning is somewhat different from his,
      we consider that  the appeal in this case must also be dismissed.




                                 D.K. ALLEN
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                          APPENDIX OF MAIN SOURCES


Four reports from Dr Rebwah Fatah

One report from Dr Fatah and Ms Sheri Laizer

Three reports from Ms Laizer

CIPU Country Report for October 2004

CIPU Iraq Bulletin of August 2003

Dutch General Report of April 2000 on North Iraq

Joint  British/Danish  Fact   Finding  Mission  on  Conditions  in  Iraq  of
September 2004

US State Department Bulletin of 26 March 2004

Joint British/Danish Fact Finding Mission to Damascus, Amman and  Geneva  on
Condition in Iraq of July 2003

General Country  Report on Iraq of the  Dutch Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs
of 14  December 2004

UNHCR report of 29 January 2005 on the possibility of applying the  internal
flight or internal relocation alternative for Iraqi Kurds within Iraq

UNHCR report on Iraq for 1 August 2004

Amnesty International  Report 2004 on Iraq

Human Rights Watch of 3 August 2004


IWPR Reports of 18 February 2005 and 4 March 2005











-----------------------
      1


