
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Williams (scope of "liable to deportation") [2018] UKUT 00116 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                          michael abayomi williAms
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Prime Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) A person who has been deported under a deportation order that remains
in force is a person who is liable to deportation within the meaning of
section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 and is therefore unable to bring
himself within section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002.

(2) By the same token, the fact that such a person has been deported does
not mean he or she is thereby able to avoid the application of the
considerations listed in section 117C.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rodger, promulgated on 11 January 2017,  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  on  2  February
    2016, to refuse his human rights claim.  Permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted on 21 August 2017.

 2. The appellant was born in 1980 in Nigeria.  He has three children,  all
    of whom are British citizens.  The appellant has a number  of  criminal
    convictions, most recently in July  2012,  when  he  was  convicted  of
    conspiracy to make false representations to make gain  for  himself  or
    for another or to cause loss to another or expose others to risk.   The
    appellant was sentenced to a term of 21 months' imprisonment.

 3. The respondent notified the appellant in November 2012 of his liability
    to deportation.  An appeal against the decision to deport was dismissed
    in July 2013.

 4. In May 2015, the appellant was removed to Nigeria.   It  is  from  that
    country that his human rights claim was  made,  the  refusal  of  which
    generated the present proceedings.

 5. Judge Rodger heard evidence from the appellant's mother  and  from  his
    partner.  Having set out the relevant law, the Judge's  findings  begin
    at paragraph 49 of her decision.  At paragraph 57, the  Judge  set  out
    her findings regarding the appellant's children.  A further  child  had
    been born in 2014, only a few months before the appellant was deported.



B. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

 6. The Judge found  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with K and M, his children by Ms W  but  that  he
    did not have any such relationship with another daughter by a different
    mother.  Although the Judge found that it would be  in  the  children's
    best interests to remain in the same country as their  father,  both  K
    and M were being looked after by Ms W.

 7. The Judge found that K had been "greatly affected by the absence of her
    father and ... she has received therapy" (paragraph 64).  K's  position
    therefore needed to be carefully considered by the Judge, by  reference
    to the expert reports  which  had  been  prepared.   At  paragraph  69,
    referring to an incident at school where K had cut her  own  hair,  the
    Judge held that there was "nothing before me such  as  to  persuade  me
    that this was treated as anxiety-related or anything other than  normal
    behaviour of a young inquisitive  child".   Overall,  the  Judge  found
    that, although K had had significant difficulties in adjusting  to  the
    separation from her father, she was not satisfied that K's reaction  to
    the situation was:

         "a compelling factor or  that  there  is  any  persuasive  risk  of
         significant deterioration once the situation has been made  certain
         by this decision or that the risk of deportation is  in  any  event
         likely to be  such  that  would  be  non-treatable  to  therapy  or
         support, especially when she has previously responded well when she
         first displayed significant anxiety symptoms when her father was in
         prison, or that it would be of such severity  as  to  amount  to  a
         compelling factor."  (paragraph 69)

 8. At paragraph 73, the Judge found that:-

        "After having  assessed  all  of  the  evidence  available  to  me,
        including the updated letters of ... I  am  satisfied  that  K  has
        started to adjust to the  absence  of  her  father  and  I  am  not
        satisfied that she has become so seriously affected by the  absence
        of her father that there is any  significant  risk  to  her  mental
        health."

 9. At paragraph 74, again dealing with the position of K, the Judge  found
    she was:-

         "not satisfied that her response is greatly in excess of that of  a
         normal distressing reaction of a  child  to  the  separation  of  a
         parent  that  they  were  close  to   ...    Deportation   involves
         distressing experiences due to the separation  factor  which  is  a
         natural consequence of  a  deportation  order.   That  is  why  the
         decision to deport is not taken lightly and which  is  taken  after
         consideration of Article 8 interests.  Whilst it is distressing for
         [K's] family to see her emotionally suffer from the absence of  her
         father, this has all arisen due to the  appellant's  own  offending
         behaviour and her response and difficulties  in  adjusting  is  not
         such as to make it a compelling factor  such  as  to  outweigh  the
         public interest  in  the  deportation  of  her  father,  a  foreign
         criminal who committed a serious offence whilst in the UK."

10. After further paragraphs, in which the Judge considered in  detail  the
    appellant's offending behaviour,  which  was  not  accompanied  by  any
    "persuasive signs of remorse" (paragraph  78),  the  Judge  struck  the
    balance under Article 8(2) as follows:-

         "81. Having weighed up the pros, namely my assessment of  the  best
             interests of the children and  the  reaction  of  [K]  to  her
             father's absence, the fact that the children will be separated
             from their father for at least 10 years unless they  join  him
             in Nigeria (which they are not expected to do but is simply an
             option, albeit not a reasonable option, for the  family),  the
             fact that none of this is the fault of the children  but  that
             they are the victims and  will  suffer  emotionally  from  the
             separation from their father, and that the appellant is a  low
             risk re-offender, but weighing all of the  above  against  the
             significant weight of the public interest in deporting foreign
             criminals and  the  legitimate  interest  in  deterring  other
             foreign persons committing crimes in the  UK,  the  fact  that
             they are being cared for well by their main carer and have the
             support  from  their  grandmother  who  is  able  to   provide
             [assistance] in nurturing and developing their dual  ethnicity
             backgrounds, and  that  they  are  receiving  the  appropriate
             support and assistance to meet their needs, I am not satisfied
             that the compelling factor test has been made out as there are
             no exceptional circumstances that mean the continuation of the
             order for 10 years is outweighed by compelling  factors.   The
             appellant was  rightly  deported  back  to  his  home  country
             following his own offending behaviour, which  he  did  despite
             the presence of his  family  in  the  UK,  and  there  are  no
             compelling factors such that outweigh the  significant  public
             interest in maintaining the deportation order and revoking  it
             prior to the elapse of a  10  period.   The  deterrent  factor
             would not be achieved by the initial deportation alone and the
             deterrent factor continues to be a relevant consideration when
             weighing  up  the  balance.   Further,  the  decision  is  not
             contrary to the human rights convention  as  the  decision  is
             lawful, necessary and proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of
             maintaining effective immigration control,  deporting  foreign
             criminals and protecting the interests of UK society."



C. Grounds of challenge: 3 to 8.

11. We can dispose of grounds 3 to 8 rapidly.  They are  all,  in  essence,
    challenges to the primary fact-finding of the Judge and to her striking
    of the requisite balance, by reference to the relevant legislation  and
    Immigration Rules.  So far as the findings regarding K  are  concerned,
    the grounds are wrong to contend that the Judge  was  underplaying  the
    adverse impact on K of maintaining the appellant's exclusion  from  the
    United Kingdom.  As we have seen, the Judge was, most definitely, aware
    of the adverse impact on K.  She did not, however, consider  that  that
    impact was of such  a  character  as  to  outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation of the  appellant.   The  Judge
    was fully entitled to that conclusion.  In reaching it, we are entirely
    satisfied that she overlooked nothing of material value in the evidence
    before her.

12. The suggestion in ground 7 that an apology from the appellant, recorded
    at paragraph 15, indicated that he had shown remorse  is  misconceived.
    The Judge was entitled to find,  in  all  the  circumstances,  that  no
    genuine remorse had been demonstrated.

13. The final challenge, in ground 8, is based on the  assertion  that  the
    Judge considered factors in isolation.   A  reading  of  her  decision,
    however, makes it evident that that is simply false.



D. Grounds 1 and 2

14. We therefore turn to the first two grounds, which plainly were the ones
    that led to permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal being granted.

15. At paragraph 53, Judge Rodger rejected submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 applied to the facts of this case.  Ground  2  contends
    that this was wrong  and  that  the  Judge  made  a  similar  error  at
    paragraph 54, in deciding that s117C applied to the appellant.

16. Both of these provisions are to be found in Part 5A of  the  2002  Act.
    That Part, so far as relevant, provides as follows:-

         "117A    Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
               determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts
               -

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
               tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
               question of whether an interference with a person's right to
               respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified  under
               Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
               cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
               public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
               interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
               that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
               Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons  who  can
               speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
               interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
               that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
               Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons -

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

               (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

               that is established by a person at a time when the person is
               in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
               a person at a time when the person's immigration  status  is
               precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
               public interest does not require the person's removal  where
               -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
               foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
               interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
               the greater is the public interest  in  deportation  of  the
               criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
               sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
               the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
               Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
               relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
               subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
               and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
               would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
               period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the  public
               interest  requires  deportation  unless   there   are   very
               compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
               Exceptions 1 and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
               into account where a court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
               decision to deport a foreign criminal  only  to  the  extent
               that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
               for which the criminal has been convicted."

17. Mr Karim's case for contending that the Judge wrongly failed  to  apply
    section 117B(6) and wrongly applied section 117C is a simple  one.   As
    soon as the appellant had been deported, he was no longer, according to
    Mr Karim, a person liable to deportation.  Accordingly, section 117B(6)
    meant  that  the  appellant  was  a  person  "who  is  not  liable   to
    deportation", with the result that the public interest did not  require
    the appellant's removal in circumstances where he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    Since both of those conditions were satisfied, on the findings  of  the
    Judge, the public interest in  maintaining  the  appellant's  exclusion
    from the United Kingdom fell away.

18. So far as it  concerns  section  117C,  Mr  Karim  submitted  that  the
    provisions of that section fell to be read as applying only in relation
    to a person who has  not  yet  been  deported.   Someone  such  as  the
    appellant, who had been deported, was not covered  by  the  provisions.
    This meant the respondent could not rely upon the "unduly  harsh"  test
    in subsection (5).




E. Discussion

19. In Secretary of State for the Home Office v ZP (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ
    1197 the Court of Appeal had to consider the application  of  paragraph
    390 et seq of the Immigration Rules, as then in force, in a case  of  a
    person who had been deported.

20. Paragraph 391 provides as follows:-

         "391.    In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
               conviction for a criminal offence,  the  continuation  of  a
               deportation order against that person  will  be  the  proper
               course:
                (a)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                    the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than four years, unless 10 years have elapsed since
                    the making of the deportation order
             ...
         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol relating  to
         the  Status  of  Refugees,   or   there   are   other   exceptional
         circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is   outweighed   by
         compelling factors."
21. At paragraph 24 of the judgments, the  Court  rejected  the  suggestion
    that paragraph 391 required a fundamental  difference  in  approach  in
    considering post-deportation  revocation  applications,  compared  with
    that which was followed  in  considering  pre-deportation  applications
    under paragraphs 390A/398-399A.

22. At paragraph 25, the Court (per Underhill LJ) said:-

         "It is inherent in the making of a  deportation  order  that  there
         must be a period before  the  deportee  becomes  eligible  for  re-
         admission: otherwise it would be a mere revolving-door.   Mr  Biggs
         did not contend that the ten-year prescribed period  applicable  to
         foreign  criminals  sentenced  to  between  one  and  four   years'
         imprisonment was itself irrational or that it  inherently  involved
         any breach of Article 8.  That being so, the default position  must
         be that the deportee should "serve" the entirety of the  prescribed
         period in  the  absence  of  specific  compelling  reasons  to  the
         contrary."

23. In IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 932, the Court of Appeal was, again, required  to  consider  a
    case involving a deportee who wished to return to  the  United  Kingdom
    and who accordingly applied for the revocation of the deportation order
    made against him.  The Court had no doubt that section 117C of the 2002
    Act applied to the appellant in that case.  Indeed, Arden LJ  described
    it as "effectively common  ground  that,  under  section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ... the deportation  order
    may only be revoked if  its  retention  is  determined  to  be  "unduly
    harsh"" ... (paragraph 2).  The court held that  "the  undue  harshness
    standard in section 117C ... means that the deportee  must  demonstrate
    that there are very compelling reasons for revoking a deportation order
    before it has run its course.  Section  117C  is  to  be  read  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules which make that clear" (paragraph  3).



24. At paragraph 52 Arden LJ held as follows:-

         "52. The function of section 117C is to set out the  weight  to  be
             given to the public interest to be taken into account  in  the
             proportionality exercise to be carried out under Article 8  of
             the Convention in the case of  a  foreign  criminal.   Section
             117C(1) states that the deportation of foreign criminals is in
             the public interest.  In this context, and indeed in the other
             uses of the word  "deportation"  in  this  section,  the  word
             "deportation" is being used to convey  not  just  the  act  of
             removing  someone  from  the   jurisdiction   but   also   the
             maintaining of the banishment for a given period of  time:  if
             this were not so, section 117C(1) would achieve little."

25. At paragraph 56, the Court addressed  the  submission  that  the  undue
    harshness test in section 117C(5) had in some way substituted a new and
    lower test for that which preceded it under the Immigration  Rules,  as
    considered in ZP (India).  The court rejected  this  submission  before
    holding as follows:-

         "59. Mr Howells realistically accepts that A would have to  show  a
             material change of circumstances between the dismissal of  the
             appeal  against  the  deportation  order  and  the  revocation
             application.  As Underhill LJ held in ZP India,  the  starting
             point must be that the assessment of what was  in  the  public
             interest at the date on which the deportation order  was  made
             cannot  be  of  any  less  weight  at  the  later  stage  when
             revocation is sought.   This  means  that  objections  to  the
             making of a deportation order which were unsuccessful  at  the
             time it was made are unlikely to  be  successful  grounds  for
             obtaining the revocation of a deportation order after  removal
             from the jurisdiction."

26. The Tribunal considers it is bound by IT (Jamaica) to hold that section
    117C applies not only to those subject to a deportation order, who have
    not yet been removed from the United Kingdom, but also to those subject
    to such an order, who have been removed or otherwise left the  country.
    The Court's finding on that matter was part of its ratio.

27. Even if that were  not  the  case,  the  Tribunal  rejects  Mr  Karim's
    submission on the scope of section 117C.  Section 117A(2)(b) requires a
    court or tribunal to have regard to  section  117C  considerations  "in
    cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals".   It  is,  we
    consider, evident that the present appeal concerns the  deportation  of
    the appellant for the simple  reason  that  he  is  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order.  If, therefore, he were  to  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom of his own accord, without executive or judicial authority,  he
    would be in breach of that order.

28. Accordingly, the references to "deportation" in section 117C fall to be
    read as covering  the  deportation  regime,  whether  before  or  after
    removal has been effected (or  the  person  concerned  has  voluntarily
    departed).

29. Mr  Karim  also  faces  the  difficulty  that,  if  the  position  were
    otherwise, then, as the Court of Appeal pointed out, much of the  force
    of section 117C would be lost.  Indeed, the position would  be  one  of
    absurdity.  A person who, a  few  hours  before,  was  subject  to  the
    provisions of section 117C would suddenly be free from them altogether.
     Underhill LJ's "revolving-door" would be worked off its bearings.

30. We turn to section 117B(6).  Mr Karim submits that, whatever  might  be
    the  position  with  section  117C,  his  client  "is  not  liable   to
    deportation" for the simple reason that he has been  deported.   Again,
    however, the submission founders on the fact that "the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals" covers everyone who is  the  subject  of  a  current
    deportation order.

31. We do not consider that Mr Karim is able to draw  any  assistance  from
    the fact that the 2002 Act does not define the  expression  "liable  to
    deportation" by reference to section 3(5) and (6)  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  Section 3(5) provides that a person who  is  not  a  British
    citizen is liable to  deportation  if  the  Secretary  of  State  deems
    deportation to be conducive to the public good; or if another person to
    whose family the person belongs is or has been ordered to be  deported.
    Section  3(6)  provides  that  a  person  "shall  also  be  liable   to
    deportation" if, after the age of 17, he is  convicted  of  an  offence
    which  is  punishable  by  imprisonment  and  on  his   conviction   is
    recommended for deportation by a  court.   The  in  pari  materia  rule
    applies to section 3 of the 1971 Act and Part 5A of the  2002  Act.  No
    express definition or linkage is required for the phrase in the  latter
    to take its meaning from the former.

32. Mr Karim's stance in relation to section 117B(6) likewise falls foul of
    the "absurdity" principle of statutory construction.  This is so,  both
    on its own terms and because if - as the Court of  Appeal  has  held  -
    section 117C applies to a person who is outside the United Kingdom  and
    subject to  a  deportation  order,  then  there  would  be  a  complete
    contradiction between the application of section 117C  to  that  person
    and the application to him of section 117B(6).

33. For these reasons, we find that Judge Rodger did not err in law  either
    in relation to her refusal to have regard  to  section  117B(6)  or  in
    relation to her decision to have regard to section 117C.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

                            Signed                    Dated: 1 March 2018






                            The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                            President of the Upper Tribunal
                            Immigration and Asylum Chamber



