
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


SM (Section 8:  Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing: 25 May 2005

                                             Date Promulgated: 5th July 2005

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Miss E Arfon-Jones (Deputy President)
                   Mr A Jordan (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A Bandegani of Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer

Even where section 8 applies,  an  Immigration  Judge  should  look  at  the
evidence as a whole and decide which parts  are  more  important  and  which
less.  Section 8 does not require the behaviour to which it  applies  to  be
treated as the starting-point of the assessment of credibility.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.  She claimed asylum in the  United
     Kingdom on 18 October 2004, saying that she had arrived that very day.
      After examining her claim, the Secretary of State refused  it  on  16
     December 2004 and on 17 December 2004 he decided  to  give  directions
     for her removal as an illegal entrant.  She appealed.  Her appeal  was
     heard by an Adjudicator, Mr J D Atkinson, on 28 February 2005 and,  in
     a determination sent out on 7 March 2005, he allowed her appeal.   The
     Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the Immigration
     Appeal  Tribunal,  which  was  granted.   Following  the  commencement
     provisions of the 2004 Act, that grant takes effect as  an  Order  for
     reconsideration by this Tribunal of  the  Appellant's  appeal  to  the
     Adjudicator.

  2. The Adjudicator's findings of fact are set out in paragraph 29 of  his
     determination in the following terms:

           "The Appellant was born on 7 April 1955 in  Abadan,  Iran.   The
           Appellant is a member of the Lorr  Bakhtiari  ethnic  group  who
           live generally in the north of Khozestan.  On  4  May  1980  the
           Appellant's husband was executed by the authorities  because  of
           his political opinion.  On 28 November 2003 the Appellant's son,
           Mohamedreza Sardsirian Junaki, was arrested and detained by  the
           authorities for his political  activities.   On  24  March  2004
           Mohamedreza Sardsirian Junaki fled  Iran.   H  was  subsequently
           granted asylum in the United Kingdom on 26 May 2004.  On 9 April
           2004 the Appellant was arrested and detained by the authorities.
            The Appellant was detained until 15 July 2004 during which time
           she was beaten, raped and ill treated.  On 18 September 2004 the
           Appellant was re-arrested and detained until 25 September  2004.
           During the detention period the Appellant was raped  and  hanged
           by the neck until she lost  consciousness.   The  Appellant  was
           released on her signature of a  blank  piece  of  paper.   On  5
           October 2004 the Appellant left her home town and  travelled  to
           Tehran.  From there, the Appellant made  arrangements  with  the
           assistance of her family to leave the country.   On  18  October
           2004 the Appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed
           asylum the same day."

  3. Those findings are stated to be based on the totality of the  evidence
     before him, including oral evidence from the Appellant  and  her  son,
     and documentary material submitted by both parties.  In  his  analysis
     of that evidence, the Adjudicator considers submissions made to him on
     behalf of the  Secretary  of  the  State  that  the  evidence,  or  an
     important part of it, was not  entitled  to  credit,  because  it  was
     vague, or implausible, or showed inconsistencies.   In  paragraphs  23
     and 24 of his  determination,  the  Adjudicator  specifically  rejects
     those  submissions  item  by  item.   Before  setting  out  his  final
     conclusions as to fact, the Adjudicator also alludes to section  8  of
     the 2004 Act, which was already in force at the  time  he  heard  this
     appeal.  In paragraph 28 of his determination, he states that  he  has
     taken into account all relevant matters under that section, "including
     all matters pertaining to her account of travelling from Iran  to  the
     United Kingdom".  He finds, nevertheless, that the evidence before him
     is consistent, detailed, plausible and supported.

  4. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal, which form the basis of this  reconsideration,  assert  that
     the Adjudicator erred in law in assessing credibility.  Paragraphs  4,
     5 and 6 of the grounds assert that the Adjudicator  did  not  properly
     consider certain  matters  of  detail  in  the  Appellant's  evidence.
     Before us, Mr Phillips told us that he had no  need  to  make  further
     submissions on those points.  We agree that it would have been a waste
     of time to do so.  There is clearly no merit in them, in the light  of
     the Adjudicator's careful treatment of these matters, to which we have
     already alluded.

  5. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the grounds of appeal are as follows:

           "2.   It is submitted that the  Adjudicator  has  erred  in  his
                 decision when assessing the Applicant's  credibility.   The
                 Adjudicator deals  with  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act  at
                 paragraph 28 of his determination, after he has  considered
                 the  credibility  of   the   Applicant   earlier   in   his
                 determination (paragraphs 23-26).   It  is  submitted  that
                 Section 8 of the 2004 Act should be the starting point  for
                 assessing an Applicant's credibility and should not  merely
                 be taken in the round having already drawn a conclusion  on
                 credibility as a whole.  Section 8 of the 2004  Act  states
                 that '... a deciding authority shall take into account,  as
                 damaging the claimant's credibility, of  any  behaviour  to
                 which this section applies' (my emphasis).


           3.    It is also submitted that the Adjudicator has erred in law
                 as he has failed to address the particular submission  made
                 by the Presenting Officer in relation to Section 8  of  the
                 2004 Act.  Specifically, the Adjudicator made  no  findings
                 regarding the Applicant's failure to claim asylum en  route
                 to the United Kingdom in a safe country."


  6. Mr Phillips made brief submissions in support of  these  grounds.   We
     did not need to call upon Mr Bandegani to reply to them.

  7. The purpose of section 8 of the 2004 Act is no doubt to reverse  dicta
     which have appeared from time to time  suggesting  that,  contrary  to
     what might be regarded as ordinary experience, certain matters have no
     impact at all on a person's credibility when  it  is  assessed  in  an
     asylum claim.  It has the incidental effect of  interfering  with  the
     well-established rule that the finder  of  fact  (in  this  case,  the
     Adjudicator or Immigration Judge) should look at  the  evidence  as  a
     whole, giving each item of it such  weight  as  he  or  she  considers
     appropriate.  That is unfortunate, and may in  some  circumstances  be
     difficult to manage.

  8. The impact of section 8 will no doubt be different in different  types
     of case.  In cases where there is some reason to doubt  a  variety  of
     elements of the Appellant's story, the effect of section 8 may well be
     simply to reinforce the salutary principle that if a person  does  not
     appear to be telling the truth on those parts of his evidence that can
     be checked, there is no real reason for believing that he  is  telling
     the truth in those parts of  his  evidence  that  cannot  be  checked.
     Where, on the other hand, for example, a person appears to be  telling
     the truth about having passed through a number of countries on his  or
     her journey to the United Kingdom,  the  effect  of  section  8  on  a
     deciding authority will be to draw clear  and  specific  attention  to
     certain features of the evidence as aspects which must (by statute) be
     regarded as casting some doubt upon the credibility of the Appellant's
     claim to be a refugee.

  9. Given the terms of section 8, it is inevitable that the general  fact-
     finding process is somewhat distorted, but  that  distortion  must  be
     kept to a minimum.  There is no warrant at all for the claim, made  in
     the grounds, that the  matters  identified  by  section  8  should  be
     treated as the starting point  of  a  decision  on  credibility.   The
     matters mentioned in  section  8  may  or  may  not  be  part  of  any
     particular claim;  and their importance will vary with the  nature  of
     the claim that is being made, and the other evidence that supports  it
     or undermines it.  In some cases,  (of  which  the  most  obvious  are
     perhaps those where there is contested evidence about the  journey  to
     the United Kingdom) it will simply not be  possible  to  know  whether
     section 8 applies until a preliminary  view  has  been  taken  on  the
     credibility of some other part of the evidence.

 10. In our judgment, although section 8 of the 2004 Act has the undeniably
     novel feature of requiring the deciding  authority  to  treat  certain
     aspects of the evidence in a particular way, it is  not  intended  to,
     and does not, otherwise affect the general process of  deriving  facts
     from evidence.  It is the task of the fact-finder, whether official or
     judge, to look at all the evidence in the round, to try and  grasp  it
     as a whole and  to  see  how  it  fits  together  and  whether  it  is
     sufficient to discharge the burden of  proof.   Some  aspects  of  the
     evidence may themselves contain the seeds of doubt.  Some  aspects  of
     the evidence may cause  doubt  to  be  cast  on  other  parts  of  the
     evidence.  Some aspects of  the  evidence  may  be  matters  to  which
     section 8 applies.  Some parts of the  evidence  may  shine  with  the
     light of credibility.  The fact-finder must consider all these  points
     together;  and, despite section 8, and although some  matters  may  go
     against and some matters count in favour of credibility, it is for the
     fact-finder to decide which are the important, and which are the  less
     important features of the evidence, and to reach his view as  a  whole
     on the evidence as a whole.

 11. It follows from the foregoing  that  we  reject  paragraph  2  of  the
     grounds of appeal.  The summary of the determination which we have set
     out above is sufficient to show that there is no merit in paragraph  3
     of the grounds.

 12. For the foregoing reasons, we find that the Adjudicator made no  error
     of law and we affirm his determination.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:


