
RM and BB (Homosexuals) Iran CG [2005] UKIAT 00117
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                          Dates of Hearing: 9 August 2004 & 15 February 2005
                                  Date Determination notified: 8th July 2005

                                   Before:

                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)
                       Mr A R Mackey (Vice President)
                       Mr C P Mather (Vice President)


Between:

                                                                  APPELLANTS

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

In this  determination,  we  provide  guidance  on  the  issue  of  risk  to
homosexuals in Iran.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellants are both citizens of Iran.  They  both  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal against determinations of Adjudicators (in the case of  B,  a
     determination of Mr P J Wynne who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
     Secretary of State's decision of 29 January 2003 to  issue  directions
     for his removal from the United Kingdom and refusing asylum;   and  in
     the case of E, against the determination of Mr P V  Ievins  dismissing
     his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 27  June  2002
     to issue directions for  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  and
     refusing asylum).

  2. These appeals have been heard together  as  they  were  identified  as
     raising a  common  issue,  that  of  risk  to  persons  identified  as
     homosexuals or as being involved in homosexual practices, on return to
     Iran.  The hearings took place on 9 August 2004 and 15 February  2005.
     Ms N Rogers, for Fisher Jones Greenwood appeared for B, and Mr I  Ali,
     for Ahmad  &  Williams,  appeared  on  behalf  of  E.   Mr  S  Kovats,
     instructed by the  Treasury  Solicitor,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
     Secretary of State.

  3. We should like to record at the outset our indebtedness to Counsel and
     those instructing them for the considerable amount of  work  that  has
     gone into the preparation and presentation of these appeals.  We  have
     benefited from having had put before us a great deal of evidence, much
     of it very detailed, concerning the relevant issues.  We  have  listed
     in an appendix the main sources placed before us, upon which  we  have
     relied.  Our main conclusions are to be found at paragraphs 123-4.

  4. B was found credible by  the  Adjudicator,  subject  to  a  couple  of
     qualifications.  He accepted, therefore,  that  he  had  had  problems
     since childhood on account of his homosexuality.  He had  been  caught
     by an officer committing a homosexual act  with  another  man,  whilst
     engaging in military service, and was made to lie on sand and  pebbles
     and lashed seventy times with a cable.

  5. Later, in 1998, B and a man, NK, with whom he was in  a  relationship,
     were having sexual relations at NK's house when they were seen by NK's
     mother through a window which faced the  garden.   She  reported  this
     incident to officials.  They were both taken away by officials and ill-
     treated and the Appellant was sentenced to four years and four  months
     imprisonment and one  hundred  and  twenty  lashes.   The  Adjudicator
     accepted that he served his prison sentence  in  appalling  conditions
     and was severely ill-treated whilst imprisoned.

  6. He and NK were both released in August 2002.  They met by chance  some
     two months later and went to a half-built school to have sex.   Whilst
     in the course of this, B  heard  a  noise  and  saw  officials  coming
     quietly and told NK of this and made his escape.  He believed that  NK
     was captured and heard NK screaming.  He went on a bus to a relative's
     house in Esfahan and discovered, via his relative, that his house  had
     been raided and his mother detained for one night,  although  she  had
     been released on bail.  He was advised to leave the  country  and  did
     so, coming to the United Kingdom via Turkey.

  7. The Adjudicator concluded that there was no reliable evidence that  NK
     had been executed, and the fact that the Appellant thought he had been
     was not enough.  Even if NK had been prosecuted, there was no  way  of
     knowing whether that was for homosexuality or for that offence coupled
     with something else.  It was clear from B's  evidence  that  when  the
     officials arrived, they could not possibly have witnessed  any  sexual
     activity between B and NK. The Adjudicator  did  not  believe  that  B
     would be of any interest to the Iranian authorities on account of  the
     incident at the building site.  The military would  not  be  involved.
     There  would  not  be  any  evidence  under  Shari'a  law  to   enable
     proceedings to be brought, let alone for a conviction to result.   The
     Adjudicator did not believe that the Appellant would even be arrested.

  8. B also produced medical evidence.  A Dr Winton said  that  B  suffered
     from paranoid schizophrenia associated with  depression,  anxiety  and
     obsessional compulsive disorder.  He did not, however, consider that B
     had post-traumatic stress disorder.  A Dr Nazar diagnosed B as  having
     depressive disorder associated with psychotic features.   He  did  not
     consider that he showed  any  first  rank  symptoms  of  schizophrenic
     illness, but despite this difference between  himself  and  Dr  Winton
     concluded that B suffered from a  severe  mental  illness  within  the
     meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983.  At the time of this report  in
     March 2003, B was being treated with a combination of  anti-depressant
     and anti-psychotic medication and arrangements had been made to  offer
     him regular follow-up appointments at Dr  Nazar's  outpatient  clinic.
     Dr Nazar considered that  it  was  too  early  to  make  a  prognosis,
     particularly as B was uncertain of his future.

  9. The Adjudicator did  not  accept  that  B  was  a  schizophrenic.   He
     preferred Dr Nazar's opinion because he was the  doctor  who  had  had
     more dealings with  B  and  was  treating  him,  and  considered  that
     treatment for depression was likely to be available to B in Iran given
     the objective evidence which the Adjudicator had considered.

 10. Permission to appeal against that decision was  granted  in  September
     2003 on the basis that it was arguable that the Adjudicator's  finding
     that the Appellant had been arrested, sentenced and imprisoned  for  a
     previous act of homosexual conduct placed him at greater risk from the
     authorities than practising homosexuals without such a conviction.

 11. E is also a homosexual, having had his first homosexual contact at the
     age of seventeen.  At the time of the hearing before the  Adjudicator,
     he was twenty-six years old.  He has never  experienced  any  problems
     with the state on account of  his  sexuality.   His  claimed  fear  of
     return to Iran arises as a  consequence  of  his  involvement  in  the
     making of a video in 2002.  He had decided to get  together  with  two
     friends of his, also homosexuals, to make a video in order to  educate
     the gay community about safe sex.  Six people were  portrayed  in  the
     film actually having sex, four gay men and two lesbians.   E  provided
     the premises where the film  was  made  and  also  was  the  on-screen
     presenter.

 12. The Adjudicator found this claim credible.  He also accepted that  the
     authorities in Iran had found out that this film  had  been  made  and
     that E was in some way  involved.   He  found  E's  evidence  somewhat
     speculative as to how the police found out, but nevertheless  accepted
     that the matter had come to their attention.   He  did  not,  however,
     accept that there was a serious possibility that E had been summonsed.
      The summons had not been produced, E having said that his  family  in
     Iran did not send it to him because they were strictly  religious  and
     ashamed of him.  The Adjudicator noted, however, that E's  uncle  knew
     about it and was sympathetic and had arranged for E's  departure  from
     Iran together with his brother, who had been caught  having  sex  with
     another man.  The Adjudicator considered that if  the  summons  really
     did exist, the Appellant's uncle could have sent it on to him  in  the
     United Kingdom.

 13. The Adjudicator found a lack of evidence as to  the  extent  to  which
     people were prosecuted in Iran for making pornographic videos.  It was
     unclear as to what, if any, offence had been committed  under  Iranian
     law.  He did not consider it was sufficient to say  that  Iran  was  a
     repressive society where any form of the expression of or promotion of
     homosexual behaviour would lead to a prosecution, if  not  death.   He
     therefore concluded that E was not at risk on return.

 14. In the grounds of appeal, the Adjudicator is criticised for not asking
     E during the hearing why his uncle could not have obtained the summons
     for him, despite the hostility of his family.  It is  noted  that,  in
     any  event,  the  authorities  had  become  aware  of   E's   actions.
     Permission was granted on the basis that on the  facts  found  by  the
     Adjudicator and in the  light  of  the  country  information,  it  was
     arguable that E would be at risk on return to Iran.

Relevant Iranian legal provisions

 15. We set out first of all the relevant  provisions  of  Iranian  law  on
     homosexuality. These are contained in Appendix 1 to the report  of  Ms
     Enayat (an expert who gave evidence on behalf of B) of 1 June 2004 and
     are accepted by the Honorary Legal Adviser to the British  Embassy  in
     Tehran, who also provided evidence.

     Chapter 1 - the definition of Lavat
     Article 108:  Lavat is an act of congress [vati] between males whether
     in [the form of] penetration or of tafkhiz [the rubbing  of  thighs/of
     the penis against thighs].
     Article 109:  Both the  active  and  passive  partners  to  lavat  are
     subject to the Hadd [punishment].
     Article 110:  The Hadd [punishment] for lavat  where  penetration  has
     occurred is death and the method of execution is at the discretion  of
     the Shari'a judge.
     Article 111:  Lavat is punishable by death so long as both the  active
     and passive partners are mature, of sound mind, and have acted of free
     will.
     Article 112:  If a mature man commits an act of  lavat  with  a  minor
     [immature youth] the active partner [ie mature man] will  be  executed
     and the passive partner  will,  unless  he  has  acted  under  duress,
     receive up to seventy-four lashes of the whip.
     Article 113:  Whenever an immature person commits an act  of  congress
     [vati:  ie whether penetrative or in the form  of  "tafkhiz  or  other
     similar acts"] with another immature person [both] will receive up  to
     seventy-four lashes unless one of them has acted under duress.
     Chapter 2 - the methods of proving lavat
     Article 114:  The Hadd  [crime]  of  lavat  is  proven  by  confession
     repeated four times before a Shari'a judge.
     Article 115:  Less  than  four  confessions  do  not  incur  the  Hadd
     [punishment] and the  person  who  confesses  will  be  subject  to  a
     discretionary punishment [ta'zir].
     Article 116:  Confession is valid where the confessor  is  mature,  of
     sound mind, in control, has free will and [acts with] intention.
     Article 117:  The Hadd [crime] of lavat is proven by  the  witness  of
     four just men who have observed the act.
     Article 118:  The Hadd of lavat is not proven by the witness of  fewer
     than four just men and the witnesses will be subject to the  Hadd  for
     slander [qazaf].
     Article 119:  The witness of women alone, or in conjunction with  men,
     does not prove the Hadd of lavat.
     Article 120:  The Shari'a judge may rule  [issue  a  verdict]  on  the
     basis of the knowledge  which  he  has  acquired  by  normal/generally
     acceptable methods.
     Article 121:  The Hadd of tafkhiz and similar acts  between  two  men,
     without penetration, will be punished by one hundred lashes  for  each
     [party to the act].
     Note to Article 121:  If the active partner is  "non-Muslim"  and  the
     passive partner is Muslim, the punishment for the  active  partner  is
     death.
     Article 122:  If tafkhiz and similar acts are  repeated  three  times,
     and have each time incurred  the  Hadd  [punishment],  on  the  fourth
     offence the Hadd [punishment] will be death.
     Article 123:  If two men,  unrelated  to  one  another,  lie,  without
     necessity, naked under the same cover, they will each be  punished  by
     up to ninety-nine lashes of the whip.
     Article 124:  If a person kisses another with lascivious intent,  they
     will be punished by up to sixty lashes of the whip.
     Article 125:  If a person who has committed an act of  sodomy  [lavat]
     or the rubbing of thighs [tafkhiz]  or  similar  acts  repents  before
     witnesses have delivered their testimony, he will not  be  subject  to
     the Hadd punishment.  If the person repents after the testimonies have
     been delivered, he will be subject to the Hadd punishment.
     Article 126:  If sodomy [lavat] or the rubbing of thighs [tafkhiz]  or
     similar acts is established by confession,  and  the  person  who  has
     confessed subsequently repents, the judge may request the Vali-ye  Amr
     [supreme leader] to exercise clemency.


 16. These are  provisions  taken  from  book  2  of  the  law  of  Islamic
     punishment.  We have Ms Enayat's commentary on these provisions in the
     bundle, and we shall turn to this subsequently.

Background evidence and relevant case law

 17. The Iran Country Report of October 2004 has a section  on  homosexuals
     and transsexuals.  It is  said  at  paragraph  6.171  that  there  are
     special parks in Tehran, known as homosexual meeting places, and there
     are also a large number  of  transvestites  walking  around  in  North
     Tehran.  It is said that a different  sexual  orientation  may  create
     problems, but as homosexuality is practiced every day, as long as this
     happens behind closed doors within one's own four walls and as long as
     people do not intend to  proselytise  transvestism  or  homosexuality,
     they will most likely remain unharmed.

 18. The report then sets out a number of the  provisions  of  the  law  of
     Islamic punishment which we  have  set  out  above.   It  is  said  at
     paragraph 6.174 that so far  no  cases  of  execution  solely  on  the
     grounds of homosexual relations have been identified and it notes that
     the burden of proof is quite high and it would be difficult  to  prove
     homosexual liaisons or intercourse.  There is reference to reports  in
     local papers to instances of executions of homosexuals but it does not
     confirm whether the homosexual act alone led to execution, or  whether
     the person was accused of other charges also.  There is also reference
     to a Reuter's report of 18 July 2002 on a man  accused  of  sodomising
     then murdering his nephew who was to be thrown over a cliff in a sack.
      No reports had been received that the sentence was ever carried  out,
     however.

 19. The report at paragraph 6.178 also quotes the  Canadian  IRB  in  1998
     that though theoretically homosexual behaviour is sharply condemned by
     Islam, in practice it is at present, and has been in the past, for the
     most part tolerantly treated and  frequently  occurring  in  countries
     where Islam predominates and  that  in  practice  it  is  only  public
     transgression of Islamic  morals  that  is  condemned,  and  therefore
     Islamic law stresses the role of eye-witnesses  to  an  offence.   The
     same source also states that the police are not  empowered  to  pursue
     and nor do they  actively  pursue  homosexual  activity  of  any  kind
     performed behind the "veil of decency" of closed doors.   It  is  also
     said at paragraph 6.180 that sources indicate that there are  held  to
     be very differing levels of homosexual activity within Iranian society
     and that in rural areas even "lavat" sexual activity can be considered
     socially to be compensatory sexual behaviour for  heterosexual  sexual
     intercourse and the practitioners held not to be homosexuals.

 20. In Mr Kovats' replacement skeleton argument, there  are  a  number  of
     references under the heading at paragraph 7  to  the  effect  that  in
     practice the Iranian authorities tolerate homosexuality as long as  it
     is discreet.   We refer only to the most recent of these.  There is  a
     letter from the British Embassy in Tehran dated 18 May 2004  referring
     to advice given by  the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser  that  laws  against
     homosexuality are rarely enforced and have not been for some years and
     the last case of capital punishment she  recalled  was  fifteen  years
     ago.  In a subsequent letter from the same source of 13 June 2004, the
     Honorary Legal Adviser was not aware of any  convictions  having  been
     made under Article 120 but said that statistics of this kind were  not
     available and there had been none in her own long experience.

 21. The point is made at section 11.4 of  the  UNCHR/ACCORD  7th  European
     Country of Origin Seminar in Berlin of 11-12 June 2001 at page 337  of
     Mr Kovats' bundle that the fact that irrespective of the  standard  or
     burden of proof, the sentence for homosexuality is  death  is  a  very
     important element in any assessment and it is said that  it  would  be
     inappropriate to water down the existence of the death  sentence  with
     arguments of a high burden of proof, relative tolerance  or  the  fact
     that there is no systematic effort to  prosecute  homosexuals.   UNHCR
     had not been able to trace any cases of execution only on the  grounds
     of homosexual relations and reference is made to  the  fact  that  the
     burden of proof is quite high and  it  would  be  difficult  to  prove
     homosexual liaisons or intercourse.

 22. There is also reference to the Australian Refugee Review Tribunal case
     NO1/37352 (2001), at pages 452 to 456  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     bundle, setting out independent evidence considered by  that  Tribunal
     concerning  homosexuals  in  Iran  noting  that  there  had  been   no
     executions of homosexuals carried out in recent  years  and  that  the
     authorities would be unlikely to bring charges  unless  an  individual
     had been notably indiscreet or was  of  interest  to  them  for  other
     reasons.  In a further  decision  of  the  Australian  Refugee  Review
     Tribunal, case NO1/37891 (2001), it was said at page  469  that  while
     the  legal  penalty  for  sodomy/homosexuality  is  execution,  it  is
     extremely difficult to get a conviction  on  those  grounds.   Amnesty
     International admits that it is difficult to substantiate  reports  of
     execution for sodomy or homosexuality and speculates at  best,  it  is
     said, on its implementation.  Attention is drawn to the fact that  the
     position of homosexuals does not feature in the  US  State  Department
     Report for 2003.

 23. Mr Kovats also drew our attention to two decisions on admissibility by
     the European Court of Human  Rights.   These  both  concerned  Iranian
     homosexuals.   In  the  first  case,  that  of  F  v  United  Kingdom,
     application 17343/03 (2004), the Court observed, at  page  495  of  Mr
     Kovats bundle, that the materials examined by the domestic authorities
     and submitted by the applicant did not disclose a situation of  active
     prosecution by the authorities of adults involved  in  consensual  and
     private homosexual relationships.  It is said that there are no recent
     substantiated  instances  of  trials  solely  on  the  basis  of  such
     relationships and that concrete examples relate to rape of  minors  or
     political activists.   It  is  said  that  this  is  at  least  partly
     accounted for by the high burden of proof for such offences  (eg  four
     eye-witnesses) whilst it is also asserted that Islam is more concerned
     with public immorality and not with what goes on in the privacy of the
     home.  It is said that the  few  sources  which  refer  to  trials  or
     execution for homosexual offences occurring  in  recent  times  appear
     vague and unspecific.  The Court agreed with the comment in the Danish
     report on 16 January 2002 which was a fact-finding mission to Iran  in
     September 2000 that the homosexual community would be expected to know
     of incidents of trials for homosexual offences alone.

 24. More recently in the case of IIN v  The  Netherlands,  application  no
     2035/04, points very much to the same effect are made at pages 12  and
     13 of that judgment.  The Court considered such materials as a general
     report on Iran of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign  Affairs  of  24
     August 2001, a more recent report from the same source of April  2004,
     the UNCHR background paper on refugees and  asylum  seekers  from  the
     Islamic Republic of Iran dated January 2001,  the  position  paper  on
     persecution of homosexuals in Iran issued by the UNCHR  branch  office
     in German in January 2002, the Danish fact-finding mission to which we
     have referred above whose report was issued  on  16  January  2002,  a
     Canadian Refugee Board report on  treatment  of  homosexuals  in  Iran
     dated 11 February 1998 and updated on 20 January 2003, and what was at
     that  time  the  most  recent  Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit
     Assessment of the Home Office.

Expert evidence

 25. We also had evidence from the British  Embassy  in  Tehran's  Honorary
     Legal Adviser.  She is an Iranian lawyer  of  some  twenty-five  years
     experience who holds a degree in law and will have passed examinations
     enabling her to practice at the level of barrister,  such  certificate
     being renewable on an annual basis.  This  particular  Honorary  Legal
     Adviser sits on the Human Rights Commission of the bar and  is  active
     on the Committee for the Defence of the Rights of Women and Children.

 26. There is a letter from the British Embassy in Tehran dated 18 May 2004
     referring to advice given by the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser  that  laws
     against homosexuality are rarely enforced and have not been  for  some
     years, and the last  case  of  capital  punishment  she  recalled  was
     fifteen years ago.  In a subsequent letter of 13 June  2004  from  the
     same  source,  the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser  was  not  aware  of  any
     convictions  having  been  made  under  Article  120,  but  said  that
     statistics of this kind were not available and there had been none  in
     her long experience.

 27. We also have evidence from Ms Anna Enayat, who is a  senior  associate
     member of St Anthony's College, Oxford  and  the  Middle  East  Centre
     there.  Her evidence is contained in two reports dated 1 June 2004 and
     16 December 2004, and in addition we have  her  full  comment  on  the
     translation of cases provided by Mr K (an Iranian lawyer who also gave
     evidence before us) which was submitted by  the  Home  Office,  and  a
     table numbering  the  judgments  referred  to.   We  also  heard  oral
     evidence from Ms Enayat.

 28. In her report of 1 June 2004 Ms Enayat commented on the  Adjudicator's
     determination in B and also on the  Country Report and  various  other
     aspects of the evidence concerning the situation  for  homosexuals  in
     Iran.  She did  not  argue  that  the  Iranian  authorities  conducted
     continuous  witch  hunts  or  actively  sought  out  homosexuals   who
     practised in private, but considered it to be extremely unlikely  that
     if for some reason a case was brought to their notice it would not  be
     investigated and prosecuted.  It was clear that there were  practising
     homosexuals in Iran and it was "well known" that homosexual  men  made
     contact with one another in parks in Tehran, the Dameshjoo Park  being
     the location most frequently mentioned in the literature, but it could
     not be inferred from the existence of such meeting places and the fact
     that undoubtedly many homosexuals managed to avoid prosecution that  a
     practicing homosexual does not face risks.  Nor did she consider  that
     it could be inferred that there was  anything  resembling  a  publicly
     accepted "gay scene" in Iran.  Homosexuals did not  congregate  in  an
     overt fashion.  Urban parks were patrolled by members of the Basij and
     other morality police units, some in plain clothes.   Homosexuals  who
     avoid showing overt signs of their sexual orientation  in  public  can
     for the most part avoid being targeted by the  controls.   Enforcement
     of the law is inconsistent on the part of the Iranian authorities.

 29. Ms  Enayat  considered  that  the  law  concerning  homosexuality  was
     accurately if briefly summarised in the  CIPU  so  far  as  sodomy  is
     concerned, but  she  referred  to  other  aspects  of  non-penetrative
     homosexual acts which the law also covers, and  took  issue  with  the
     description in the CIPU Report of some of the articles from the law of
     Islamic punishment of which we have set out her translations above.

 30. Ms Enayat emphasised that contrary to what is said in the CIPU,  there
     was no revision of the law in 1996 concerning  homosexual  acts.   She
     emphasised however that in practice homosexual acts may  be  subjected
     to what is known as  a  ta'zir  punishment.   This  is  in  essence  a
     discretionary punishment, that is to say a punishment whose  kind  and
     severity is at the discretion of the judge.  This contrasts to a  Hadd
     punishment which is one fixed in divine law and which must be  applied
     if the crime if proven.  The post-1979 codification categorises crimes
     according to the principles of the Shari'a and divides the five  books
     of the law on this basis.  According to Shari'a law, a ta'zir  penalty
     is at the discretion of the judge.  However the subjects of book  five
     of the codification which deals with the tazirat does  not  cover  all
     the contexts in  which  a  ta'zir  punishment  can  be  applied;  many
     articles of the law concerning homosexuality set out in  book  two  of
     the  codification  include  some  acts  to   which   in   practice   a
     discretionary punishment is attached.  For example  where  lashes  are
     concerned, ta'zir or discretionary punishments are distinguished  from
     Hadd punishments by the expression "up to" ninety-nine  or  sixty-four
     lashes rather than a fixed quantity.

 31. As regards what is said in the Country Report on methods and  standard
     of proof, she contended that the CIPU does not consider the  substance
     of the methods of proof.  She noted that the text  of  the  law  gives
     equal weight to the three alternative methods of proof  (witnesses  of
     four just men, confession of the accused repeated four  times  or  the
     knowledge of the judge derived through customary methods)  and  stated
     that it is erroneous to believe that witnesses are the most  important
     form of proof and that confession is often induced by torture and  the
     admission of circumstantial/ordinary evidence under the rubric of  the
     "knowledge of the judge" means that the legal framework  is  far  more
     flexible than is generally believed.

 32. With regard to "the knowledge of the judge", this was defined  in  the
     1992 Iranian textbook of general criminal law as meaning "the  judge's
     certainty that a crime has been committed ...".   The  acquisition  of
     such knowledge has, for the judge, the status of proof  in  the  sense
     that whenever the judge becomes certain of the truth/reality [of  what
     has occurred] he has no need to hear other  types  of  proof  such  as
     confession or witness.  The "knowledge of  the  judge"  has  the  same
     weight whether the case is criminal or civil.

 33. Ms Enayat considers that the "knowledge of the judge" is a  term  used
     in Shia Islamic jurisprudence  for  what  can,  broadly  speaking,  be
     described as circumstantial/ordinary evidence.  According to Ayatollah
     Gilani who for many years has been head of the Supreme Court, for  the
     crime of Lavat (and other divine right crimes) the "knowledge  of  the
     judge" is the most important method of proof.

 34. As regards the Country Report on the enforcement of the law, Ms Enayat
     contended that the source for much of what was said in an  article  by
     Maarten Schild regarding the  discrepancy  between  legal  theory  and
     actual  practice  concerned  homosexuality  in  Islamic  societies  in
     general rather than current practice in Iran.  She reiterated the view
     that we have set out above, that whether or  not  the  Iranian  police
     actively seek out homosexuals, if  they  caught  two  men  engaged  in
     whatever form or stage of sexual relations or received a report of the
     existence  of  such  a  relationship  they  would   almost   certainly
     investigate.  She referred  to  the  fact  that  there  are  campaigns
     against moral offenders of all kinds conducted intermittently in Iran.
      She also stated that an important  aspect  of  the  vulnerability  of
     practising homosexuals is the scope given in  Iranian-Islamic  law  to
     private complaints, and that very many  court  cases  involving  moral
     contraventions of one kind or another are in fact initiated by such  a
     "complaint" which may be brought directly to the courts by  a  private
     citizen or by one or other of the agencies which  police  morality  in
     Iran.   This  is  a  large  source  of  insecurity  for  a  practising
     homosexual in Iran.

 35. She went on to state that the Iranian government judiciary  and  press
     all adopt a general policy of "silence" over  homosexuality  and  that
     trials dealing with "moral contraventions" are for the most part  held
     in  camera.   She  referred  to  interviews  with  judges   concerning
     homosexual offences and the frequency on which they are brought before
     the Iranian courts.

 36. As regards capital charges, she referred to the variety of methods  of
     execution which exist in cases where sodomy  is  established.   It  is
     hard, she stated to find systematic documentation about the  sentences
     imposed on homosexuals by the courts.  She considered that  there  are
     good reasons to believe that  executions  of  homosexuals  take  place
     without being reported.  The difficulties lie in the fact  that  cases
     of homosexuality as with nearly all cases which offend  public  morals
     are heard in  camera  and  that  from  the  early  1990s  the  Iranian
     government according to international  monitors  ordered  the  Iranian
     press not to report on  all  executions.   Homosexuality  is  a  taboo
     subject in Iran and the family and friends  of  persons  convicted  of
     homosexual offences are extremely unlikely to campaign or publicise  a
     conviction owing to the social stigma attached to trial and conviction
     on  a  charge  of  homosexuality.   She  considered  that  it   is   a
     generalisation to state that death sentences are only imposed where  a
     multiple offence has taken place.

 37. As regards non-capital offences, for the  same  reasons  there  is  no
     information about the extent to which non-capital homosexual  offences
     are punished.  There are some references in evidence from such sources
     as an Iranian newspaper, an interview with the presiding judge of  the
     Ershad Judicial Centre and other sources which in general  terms  deal
     with cases involving moral evil or  illegitimate  relationships.   She
     stated that in cases of non-penetrative homosexual acts or  homosexual
     acts which have  been  proven  by  fewer  than  four  confessions  the
     punishment would generally be lashes although imprisonment, given  the
     concept of ta'zir, would in certain circumstances be an option.   Many
     sentences not involving lashes would not be recorded  either,  as  the
     judiciary  does  not  announce  them  all  because  the   crimes   are
     commonplace.  She stated that lashes are sometimes commuted  to  fines
     under Article 22 of the  law  of  Islamic  punishment  but  this  only
     applies to ta'zir punishments and could not for  example  apply  to  a
     punishment of lashes for a Hadd crime such as tafkhiz.

 38. In her evidence before us on 9 August 2004, Ms Enayat  developed  some
     of the points made in her reports.  As regards risks  for  homosexuals
     who conducted such acts  in  private,  the  law  did  not  distinguish
     between public and private acts except if the people were in a  mosque
     or public building there would be extra penalties for sodomy and other
     homosexual acts.  A person could be convicted without the  authorities
     seeing the act, on the basis of a confession or the knowledge  of  the
     judge.  In effect it would be on the basis of circumstantial  evidence
     and how that was assessed.

 39. As regards known cases of execution for homosexuality alone,  she  had
     seen  none  that  had  come  into  the  public  sphere   through   the
     international press, though Mr K would give evidence concerning cases.
      There was a tendency of the Iranian Authorities only to report  cases
     which satisfied their model of a corrupt homosexual.

 40. With regard to  what  had  been  said  by  the  British  Embassy  that
     knowledge of the judge was hardly ever used, there  was  reference  to
     this in the  "legal  loopholes"  document  that  formed  part  of  the
     evidence in E's case, including a reference to the  knowledge  of  the
     judge being used in 2.5 per cent of cases.  Admittedly this  was  only
     based on a sample of 48 cases taken at random from the Ershad Judicial
     Centre's case files.

 41. She had never heard that the  judiciary  were  given  instructions  or
     guidance as to how to deal with cases of homosexuality.   The  law  on
     homosexuality was no different now from how it had been when initially
     introduced in 1982 to 1983. A person caught could confess under duress
     and this was very frequent, and they could be medically tested so that
     traces of sexual activity could be detected.  This could  be  used  in
     evidence as part of the knowledge of the judge if the police had  seen
     a couple together.

 42. Ms Enayat had read Professor Afshar's report and also Professor Amin's
     and thought in general they were reliable, though she queried  one  or
     two small points.  Professor Amin was an expert on the  Iranian  legal
     system.  As regards Professor Afshar's report there was  an  error  at
     page 4 concerning the  ta'zirat  in  that  there  was  no  mention  of
     homosexuality in the ta'zirat code.  It was an  understandable  error,
     and otherwise she agreed with the report and the error  did  not  make
     any difference to the gist of the report.

 43. Discovery of homosexuals could happen by chance or by reports of other
     people or sometimes there were moral "crusades" and  they  might  seek
     out homosexuals.  She agreed that homosexual activity would usually be
     carried out in private.  It was very rare for two men to live together
     in Iran beyond student age, and though it was not an offence it  could
     arouse neighbourhood suspicions as being  very  unusual.   As  regards
     whether Iranian men behaved in a way that could be seen as  homosexual
     in the West, men kissed when they met, and would  go  out  arm-in-arm,
     and this was not seen as a problem.  As regards holding hands she  was
     unsure, and had rarely seen it.  It was clear that people  were  taken
     to court and punished though it  was  unclear  what  happened  in  the
     courts.  She was asked whether the homosexual community in Iran  would
     not publicise prosecutions and punishments, and she  said  that  there
     was no gay community in Iran in that sense.  As a lobby for  publicity
     it would be dangerous and a family would  not  publicise  it  if,  for
     example, their  son  was  executed  for  homosexuality.   She  had  no
     evidence of executions without publicity, questioning  how  she  could
     know about that.  The family would be forbidden to talk about it.  She
     did not attach weight to the US  Report,  which  made  no  mention  of
     homosexuals in Iran.  She was  not  aware  of  any  case  of  where  a
     homosexual couple had been prosecuted as  being  together  and  having
     been reported by the neighbours.  For the most part she  thought  that
     since the Revolution there would not be a discreet  gay  community  in
     Iran.  She thought that there was a certain degree of coordination and
     contact.  There were raids on homosexuals in parks in Tehran.

 44. We also heard evidence from Mr K who was a registered  member  of  the
     Iranian Bar with a number of years experience  of  legal  practice  in
     Iran.  He had provided two statements, the first dated 1 June 2004 and
     the second of 16 December 2004.

 45. In the first report he stated that Islam considers homosexuality to be
     a sexual deviation leading to a perverted act which goes  against  the
     natural order God intended for mankind.  According to Shari'a law,  if
     two male adults are proved to be engaged  in  homosexual  intercourse,
     both parties will be condemned to death.  He states that sexuality  is
     not a private matter in Islamic society, and there is no acceptance of
     gay culture or homosexuality as a lifestyle choice, and  no  tolerance
     of, or excuses for, homosexual activity.

 46. He referred to relevant provisions of the Iranian Penal Procedure Code
     and the Civil Code which set out the appropriate punishments depending
     on the nature of the homosexual act.  He stated that in  the  case  of
     sodomy, as the punishment is the death penalty, it is compulsory  that
     the defendant be represented by a first-class attorney, this being the
     highest rank of defence lawyer within the Iranian  legal  system.   If
     the accused person is unable to employ a lawyer by  himself,  then  an
     attorney would normally be appointed by  the  judiciary.   This  would
     happen through the medium of the Bar Association. He  stated  that  he
     had witnessed cases and defended such clients who  had  committed  the
     crime and who were sentenced to the death penalty in  Iran.   Although
     it was not final and could  be  appealed  in  the  Supreme  Court,  he
     claimed that there was a special court which  was  provided  for  such
     cases which simply gave a stamp of approval to  the  previous  verdict
     without considering the defence.  No journalist was allowed to  report
     on these cases  and  no  lawyer  could  obtain  a  copy  of  the  file
     documents.  He stated that there was no statistical evidence as to the
     number of people killed for this crime each year, given the threats to
     families not to talk about the reason for death.  He also stated  that
     the Islamic clerics insisted that these cases remain  private  to  try
     and protect  the  Islamic  society  from  being  corrupted,  and  that
     publicity might cause other people to commit these sinful activities.

 47. It became necessary to adjourn the hearing of 9 August 2004 since Mr K
     who had been due to give evidence on that day, produced two books, one
     of which was a digest of judgments over  a  ten-year  period  to  1999
     concerning  criminal  cases  and  the  other  being  a  textbook   for
     practitioners.  Though as regards the former he only wished to rely on
     one of those cases Mr Kovats indicated that he would wish to see  what
     the other cases said, and as regards the latter Mr Kovats preferred to
     see this in the context of the book as  a  whole.   It  was  therefore
     necessary to adjourn in order to enable the relevant documents  to  be
     translated and commented on.

 48. At the hearing on 15 February 2005 we heard oral evidence from  Mr  K.
     He confirmed that the contents of his statements were  correct.   Many
     people practised homosexuality in Iran and could meet openly  if  they
     were not committing anything.  They could freely meet and talk, but if
     they touched each other or held  hands  or  kissed  or  did  something
     similar then it would be a crime  and  they  would  be  arrested.   If
     something happened in private and no one knew, then no  one  could  do
     anything about it and the same would be true for any crime.   A  crime
     had to be discovered.  If  it  were  discovered  then  it  was  highly
     possible that there would be a prosecution.

 49. With regard to the suggestion by the Honorary Legal Adviser that  more
     recently the judiciary had been given guidance to be more lenient with
     regard to those crimes, he said that there was  a  difference  between
     what was announced by the judiciary and what they  actually  did.   He
     recalled a time when a  United  Nations  human  rights  representative
     wanted to come to Iran and make a report, and the  judiciary  and  the
     solicitors talked about having to deal with the crime in a lenient way
     as they did not want to be talked about and blamed by the human rights
     organisations, but at the same time they could  not  put  aside  their
     religious laws on such questions.  He referred to  an  interview  with
     Ayatollah Sanei at page 512 of Ms Rogers' bundle, where  it  was  said
     that it would not be possible to put aside execution of homosexuals.

 50. With regard to his own  experience  of  people  being  prosecuted  for
     homosexual acts, he had acted every year, as lawyers were required to,
     in accepting such cases without a fee and he  had  had  two  or  three
     cases where he had had to defend a client.

 51. In one case a university student had committed homosexual acts in  the
     dormitory, and it was proved that he had  done  it  and  he  had  been
     sentenced to death.  This was in 2000 or 2001.

 52. He had read the reports of both Professor Afshar and  Professor  Amin.
     With regard to  the  former  he  agreed  with  her  views  as  to  the
     likelihood  of  arrest  and  punishment  on  return   for   homosexual
     activities.  If other people carried out homosexual acts  there  would
     be another law in relation to which they would  be  tried.   This  was
     Article 639 of the Islamic law, and could give  rise  to  one  to  ten
     years' imprisonment and was appropriate for someone such as E, who had
     provided a place for others to commit these crimes.   For  making  and
     appearing on the video that would be the range of likely sentence.

 53. On cross-examination Mr K said that he had qualified as a first  class
     attorney in 1996 to 97.  He had left Iran in March 2002.   As  regards
     the pro bono cases, there was not a given quota, but it depended  upon
     the number of people who needed help.  He  had  appeared  in  many  of
     these cases, but only  two  or  three  had  been  in  connection  with
     homosexual crimes.  As regards the case other than the dormitory case,
     this had involved factory workers who had  committed  homosexual  acts
     and there was no witness and they had not confessed and they said they
     were just joking around and  were  given  lashes.   This  was  because
     according to the law the case  could  not  be  proved,  and  this  was
     Article 115.  If you were involved in the crime but  did  not  confess
     four times then you would be subjected to lashes.

 54. The student had been sentenced to  death  because  he  had  confessed.
     They had found sperm in his body.  There was no way  for  him  but  to
     confess.  He had carried out homosexual acts  for  a  long  time  with
     another student, and his room mate had realised this and  reported  it
     to the people responsible for the dormitories, and they  had  put  the
     person under surveillance and entered the room  at  the  time  he  was
     arrested.  He knew he would receive the  death  sentence  and  he  had
     confessed.  He did not, however, confess until  the  coroner's  report
     arrived, and even if he had not confessed, the crime would  be  proved
     by the personal knowledge of the judge according to Article  120.   He
     had confessed after the witness had given evidence.  Mr K did not know
     whether the sentence had in fact been carried out.  He had referred to
     the role of the coroner in that case and this was not only in  respect
     of death but also other matters and as a consequence  of  there  being
     aspects of legal medicine involved in the case including such  matters
     as drink driving or wife beating.  In a case such as this the body  of
     the passive person was referred to a doctor who also  knew  about  the
     law, and they would confirm what had happened.  It was  not  the  case
     that one of the parties had died.

 55. With regard to the interview with  Ayatollah  Sanai,  he  agreed  that
     unless you had full proper confessions  or  four  witnesses  with  the
     specified conditions you could not convict of a  capital  offence  but
     only the ta'zir offence.  The Ayatollah referred to the difficulty and
     unlikelihood of proof on the basis of four confessions  or  four  just
     witnesses, and Mr K agreed  with  this.   He  also  agreed  with  what
     Professor Afshar said about holding hands and kissing.   Islam  taught
     that they were brothers and you could kiss the face and hold hands and
     he did not mean they would be at risk in that way but  referred  to  a
     different kind of touching and kissing.

 56. He stated that in cases where there was  lashing  this  would  be  one
     hundred lashes.  He was asked why they were lashed  if  the  case  had
     failed, and said they had committed some act against Islamic laws, and
     ta'zir was a kind of punishment that  the  judge  would  determine  as
     regards the kind and extent, and he could decide whether it  would  be
     lashes or less than ten years in prison, and it was in the  discretion
     of the judge.  It was put to him that he had said that the cases could
     not be proved and he said they could not prove the intercourse part of
     the act.  The factory workers had been joking;  one of them  took  off
     another's trousers and "put a pipe on his back" so they  thought  they
     had perhaps committed homosexual acts and had investigated.  The judge
     had realised it was just a joke, so they were sentenced to lashes only
     so that they would not repeat the act.

 57. We have the translations of the Iranian  court  judgments  which  were
     submitted by the Treasury Solicitor to the  Tribunal  on  23  December
     2004.  We also have a further report from Ms Enayat dated  27  January
     2005 commenting on the judgments.  The translated judgments  all  come
     from the chapter on Lavat in the compilation by Bazgir whose title  is
     translated as "The Law on Islamic  Punishment  as  mirrored  known  in
     Supreme Court Rulings: Hodud Crimes Against Public Virtue" Tehran 1999
     to 2000.  There is also a book entitled "An Explanation of the Islamic
     Punishment Code" by Zera'at.  In her report of 16  December  2004,  Ms
     Enayat commented on a report by the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser  to  the
     British Embassy of 27 October 2004 and also on the Bazgir and  Zera'at
     books.  She  stated  that  her  response  drew  on  forty-one  Persian
     language court verdicts included under the title "Sodomy  and  tafkhiz
     in the Law Bank of the  Tehran  Judiciary",  this  being  an  internet
     database which may be freely accessed.   Of  the  forty-one  verdicts,
     thirty have been taken by the Law Bank from the compilation by  Bazgir
     and the cases would have been sent to Tehran.  Six are  from  a  legal
     textbook entitled "A Selection of Judgments from the Criminal  Courts"
     compiled by Sabri in 1999, and four are from  the  annually  published
     proceedings of the General Council of the Supreme  Court.   One  is  a
     ruling of the Disciplinary Court of Judges.  Four out of  six  of  the
     verdicts in the Sabri compilation are from the court of first instance
     and one is a ruling on an appeal to the Supreme Court.

 58. Ms Enayat dealt first with the jurisdiction of the  Supreme  Court  of
     Iran.  It is a court of cassation and also functions  as  a  court  of
     appeal for the review of verdicts  by  the  Public  and  Revolutionary
     Courts in cases including those where the crime is punishable  in  law
     by execution or stoning or where punishment is in excess of ten years'
     imprisonment.  A review is confined to points  of  law.   The  Supreme
     Court may uphold the decision of the lower  court  or  may  quash  its
     verdict and acquit the defendant or may remit it  back  for  rehearing
     either to the original court or to  a  different  court  at  the  same
     level.

 59. Ms  Enayat  made  the  point  that  the  judgments  published  in  the
     compilation by Bazgir and Sabri and reproduced in the judiciary's  Law
     Bank represent a selection from the Supreme Court chosen to illustrate
     the way various benches of the court have interpreted and applied  the
     law.  The cases cannot therefore be viewed as  representing  either  a
     comprehensive picture or a statistical  sample  but  are  selected  to
     illustrate the variety of situations which from a legal point of  view
     may arise in the courts and illustrate problematic rather than routine
     cases.

 60. Ms Enayat made the point that there are no systematic crime statistics
     published in Iran for any type of offence, but noted that in the  year
     2002 to 2003 over 86,000 criminal cases  were  classified  as  "crimes
     against public virtue".  She also made the  point  that  there  is  no
     general concept of precedent in the Iranian legal system and that  the
     judgments therefore do not constitute case law in the sense  of  which
     the common law would understand it.  The cases appealed to the Supreme
     Court in the compilations were  only  those  for  which  the  original
     charge  was  sodomy.   If  the  original  charge  was,   rather   than
     penetrative sodomy, tafkhiz, for which the punishment is  100  lashes,
     the provincial Court of Appeal would be the correct authority.   Where
     the verdicts of the court of first instance  were  quashed  they  were
     usually remitted to a different court of first instance to be reheard,
     though in two cases they were returned to  the  court  of  issue.   Ms
     Enayat added that to the best of her knowledge there are no  published
     examples of the rulings of provincial Courts of Appeal.

 61. She was asked to comment on the documentation produced by Mr K on  the
     9 August 2004, this being the Bazgir case reports and a  student  book
     on criminal law in Iran.  The extracts sought to  be  relied  on  were
     copied to the Honorary Legal Adviser and she was asked to respond to a
     number of questions drafted by Mr Kovats.

 62. The Honorary Legal Adviser stated that  the  case  histories  provided
     related  to  the  1970s  and  1980s  when  immediately  following  the
     revolution judgments were often much harsher than now and a number  of
     unqualified persons were being admitted to  the  judiciary  and  other
     institutions and therefore these case histories  did  not  necessarily
     reflect the current situation which was more amenable to international
     pressure and scrutiny.   She was aware that  five  to  six  years  ago
     judges circulated an unpublished letter recommending the avoidance  of
     sentences involving stoning, and instead lashes or  imprisonment  that
     were to be used and crimes if possible can  lead  to  lesser  offences
     under ta'zirat rather than Hadood.

 63. In her letter of 23 October 2004 the Honorary Legal Adviser  made  the
     point that other than in the case of confessions, establishing  sodomy
     had been committed was almost impossible as four pious men well  known
     for their righteousness must give  testimony  that  they  entered  the
     scene of committing of the sin, approached the individuals  committing
     the act and observed  with  their  own  eyes  the  full  and  complete
     commitment of the act according to its definition.  She made the point
     it is very difficult if  not  impossible  for  ordinary  social  human
     beings to continue the act of intercourse with its full definition  of
     such acts in such way as to provide full observance for four pious men
     well known in the society for their righteousness and who had  entered
     the scene in order to condemn them to death.  She stated that  if  the
     witness testimony ascertains apparent intercourse, then the punishment
     of the perpetrators will not be life  threatening  but  they  will  be
     condemned to whipping.  She stated that complaints were lodged only in
     case the perpetrator forces the act of sodomy upon  the  victim.   She
     also stated that a glance of the judgements available  in  respect  of
     illicit sexual relations of two or more males reveals that almost  all
     of the charges concerned child molestation.  She stated  that  to  the
     best of her knowledge homosexuals have not yet appeared before a court
     unless there has been a complaint lodged against them by an interested
     party such as parents and even in such cases the  perpetrators  manage
     to persuade the court to issue an acquittal by stubborn insistence  on
     their innocence or that their acts fall short  of  the  definition  of
     full and complete sodomy.  It is also of course the case that they can
     declare their remorse and repentance which will lead to them not being
     punished in the above ways.   She stated that with regard to the cases
     they were all prosecuted after complaints were lodged  with  court  by
     the victim or next of kin, and where  defendants  were  not  acquitted
     they were sentenced to whipping.   In  such  cases  the  evidence  was
     mainly the acknowledgement of guilt and confession by the perpetrator.
      She stated that the maximum punishment in cases cited in the book  is
     74 lashes and also says that the appeal courts  usually  overturn  the
     judgments of the first instance courts.  She stated  that  it  is  not
     known if the judgment which resulted in execution was actually carried
     out.  She also said that there are no  statistics  on  cases  in  Iran
     pertaining to homosexual  acts  and  to  the  best  of  her  knowledge
     homosexuals had not been prosecuted as there have been  no  complaints
     against them and charges may involve child molestation and rape.
 64. She also responded to further questions from the  British  Embassy  as
     follows.   She was asked whether the  knowledge  of  the  Judge  under
     Article 120 was sufficient to prove an offence of sodomy and  answered
     yes that a Judge could make a final verdict  where,  in  theory,  they
     would have to be a person of integrity and be  impartial,  experienced
     and learned but only if left in no doubt after listening to  witnesses
     and cross examination would the offence be proven.  To avoid the death
     penalty, confession would have to be made before any witness testimony
     was heard otherwise its value was diminished.

 65. Ms Enayat took issue with specific  comments  of  the  Honorary  Legal
     Adviser as regards certain aspects of these reports.  First of all she
     criticised the comment that the case histories provided relate to  the
     1970s and 1980s where it  is  said  that  judgments  were  often  much
     harsher than  they  are  now.   In  fact  the  earliest  case  in  the
     compilation is number 4/136 where the death  sentence  was  issued  in
     July/August 1989, and the majority are from the period 1991  to  1995.
     She  also  criticised  the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser's  comment   that
     complaints are only lodged in cases where the perpetrator  forces  the
     act of sodomy on his victim.  She cited eight examples in  the  Bazgir
     compilation  which  did  not  involve  force  and  two  in  the  Sabri
     compilation.  As regards the comment that homosexuals to the  best  of
     the Honorary Legal Adviser's knowledge had not yet appeared  before  a
     court  unless  there  was  a  complaint  lodged  against  them  by  an
     interested party, if this meant  an  individual  in  the  homosexual's
     personal sphere, there were at least  three  examples  in  the  Bazgir
     compilation of men charged with sodomy without the question  of  force
     being raised where the complainant was clearly the public  prosecutor.
     She notes that the identity of the complainant in  some  of  the  case
     summaries is obscure.

 66. Ms Enayat noted that out of the twenty eight appeals considered by the
     Supreme Court, six resulted in outright  acquittal  in  the  court  of
     first instance  appealed  by  the  complainant,  five  of  which  were
     confirmed by the Supreme Court and one remitted  to  be  reconsidered;
     twelve resulted in a conviction for sodomy and  a  death  sentence  on
     that account in the court of first instance, ten of which were quashed
     by the Supreme Court for procedural reasons and were  remitted  to  be
     reheard and one case resulted in the conviction of a minor for  sodomy
     who was sentenced to seventy four  lashes  confirmed  by  the  Supreme
     Court.  Nine cases resulted in a conviction  in  the  court  of  first
     instance for tafkhiz or an immoral act.  In six  of  these  cases  the
     Supreme Court confirmed the verdict and sentence and in one  case  the
     court ruled that there was inadequate evidence of tafkhiz and the case
     was remitted.  There is no information on the verdicts handed down  at
     the remitted hearings or the response of the Supreme  Court  to  them.
     There is some indication however in one or two of the  cases  of  what
     happened on remittal.  Case number  22  (Sabri)  (1993)  involved  the
     court of the first instance ruling on a case of forced sodomy remitted
     by the Supreme Court in 1992 to 1993 which is  not  among  the  Bazgir
     collection.  The verdict of the original court was not stated but  the
     new court declared its agreement with the Supreme Court and  sentenced
     the man to one hundred lashes on account of tafkhiz.

 67. Ms Enayat made the point that the identity of the complainant  is  not
     always  clear.   In  cases  of  charges  of  sodomy  of  a  minor  the
     complainant was always the next of kin of the child.   In  several  of
     the cases of sodomy not involving rape the complainant was the  public
     prosecutor.  Ms Enayat  reiterated  the  point  that  the  risk  of  a
     complaint being made by a neighbour, servant, spouse or  other  person
     in their orbit is a  large  source  of  insecurity  for  a  practising
     homosexual in Iran.  It is clear  from  Article  727  of  the  law  of
     Islamic punishment that there are certain  Articles  of  the  law  for
     which a case may be brought by a private complainant and in which  the
     prosecution ceases on the withdrawal of the complaint.   None  of  the
     Hadd crimes and none of the crimes against public virtue under book  5
     of the law of Islamic punishment are included in this list.  The  fact
     that a complaint is made by a private individual does  not  in  itself
     determine whether the case is treated by the courts  as  a  public  or
     private matter.

 68. Ms Enayat also made the point that in some of the case histories it is
     unclear what method of proof was used.  The knowledge of the judge was
     the method of proof used in ten of the  fifteen  cases  in  which  the
     method was explicitly set out.  In two cases confession was the method
     of proof and in three cases confession accompanied by reference  to  a
     medical certificate was cited.  In the case of  both  confirmed  death
     sentences the method of proof was "the knowledge of  the  judge".   In
     six of the ten cases where the knowledge of the judge was  the  method
     of proof, the Supreme Court confirmed the  verdict  of  the  court  of
     first instance.  In no case was the "witness of four just men" used as
     the method of proof.  She also made the point that the case  histories
     supply abundant indication of the use of knowledge  of  the  judge  in
     Hadd cases.  She noted that this conflicts with the statement  in  the
     Honorary Legal Adviser's report from the letter of the British Embassy
     of 13 June 2004 concerning a lack  of  awareness  of  any  convictions
     being made under Article 129 and the absence of statistics.  Ms Enayat
     went on to make the point that quite apart from the  verdicts  in  the
     Bazgir collection, it is  rather  puzzling  that  the  Honorary  Legal
     Adviser should believe the use of the knowledge of  the  judge  to  be
     redundant since articles on the subjects are  regularly  published  in
     the contemporary law literature, and she cited examples of this.

 69. As regards the Honorary  Legal  Adviser's  comment  that  the  maximum
     punishment in cases cited in the book was seventy four lashes, in  six
     cases the Supreme Court confirmed verdicts of tafkhiz at  100  lashes.
     In  two  cases  prison  sentences  (of  six  months  and  five   years
     respectively) were confirmed by the Supreme Court.

 70. As regards the Honorary Legal Adviser's view that  the  appeal  courts
     had usually overturned the judgments of the first instance court, this
     was in fact done in ten of the  twenty  eight  cases.   In  two  cases
     verdicts were returned to the court of issue for clarification, in one
     case the Supreme Court exceptionally ordered a review of  a  confirmed
     death sentence, and in six cases outright acquittals by the  court  of
     first instance were confirmed, though in one  case  an  acquittal  was
     overturned.  The majority of death sentences were overturned  and  the
     case remitted.  The majority of sentences for the lesser  offences  of
     tafkhiz or an immoral act were confirmed by the Supreme Court.

 71. As regards whether the death sentence was carried out, Ms Enayat noted
     that given the attitude of the Iranian  authorities  in  the  relevant
     period  it  was  highly  unlikely  that  executions  would  have  been
     announced,  though  there  was  some  evidence  from  the  UN  Special
     Representative for Iran and Amnesty International  concerning  numbers
     of executions.

 72. In her conclusions Ms Enayat stated the view that, for the reasons set
     out above, the cases could not be treated as a statistical sample.  It
     was clearly not the case that only cases  of  child  molestation  come
     before the courts.  She concluded that the knowledge of the judge is a
     commonly used method of proof across the various types of  case.   She
     considered that the examples showed that certain judges of the Supreme
     Court have been pedantic about what can be  accepted  as  evidence  of
     penetration (case 32/106 and case 18/108 are  examples  of  this)  and
     have frequently rejected the evidence of a medical certificate  alone.
     It was also the case that the medical reports were drawn up before the
     advent of DNA testing and there was no  information  on  the  attitude
     taken by the courts since that development.  She considered it  to  be
     evident that the courts have readily accepted verdicts of tafkhiz (non-
     penetrative homosexual acts) generally based on either  the  knowledge
     of the judge or confessions that are  viewed  as  imperfect  from  the
     point of view of each Shari'a.  There was  no  published  material  on
     cases that began with charges of tafkhiz or of immoral acts  since  of
     course these would not be appealed in the Supreme Court.

 73. In the light of the evidence thus far, Mr Kovats stated on  behalf  of
     the Secretary of State that it was accepted  that  if  a  person  were
     prosecuted for homosexual acts, there was a real risk, depending  upon
     the evidence, of conviction and, if convicted, of whipping.  The  main
     focus, therefore, was the likelihood of prosecution and whether  there
     was a real risk of evidence leading to a conviction.  It was  accepted
     that if whipping did occur, it was not in dispute that it  would  give
     rise to a breach of a person's Article 3 rights

Submissions

 74.  In  her  submissions,  Ms  Rogers  first   addressed   the   specific
     determination in the case of B.  She referred to paragraph 33  of  the
     Adjudicator's determination.  It was notable  that  it  was  difficult
     from the objective evidence to show how often the  death  penalty  was
     now used in Iran.  The expert evidence referred to the various reasons
     for this, such as problems in getting  evidence  in  a  moratorium  on
     reporting executions and a degree of sensitivity on the  part  of  the
     authorities.  It was clear, however, from the evidence that executions
     did take place, even if not for homosexual acts alone.  Mr K had given
     evidence today of the death sentence being passed for homosexual acts.

 75. The Iranian law on homosexuality was complex, and Ms Rogers  suggested
     that the easiest summary to follow was that at page 193 and thereafter
     in the bundle.  The Honorary Legal Adviser did not seek to differ from
     this.  She took it that its accuracy was not contested.  The Appellant
     did not need to show  that  he  would  be  executed.   Mr  Kovats  had
     conceded that lashing  would  be  such  as  to  cross  the  Article  3
     threshold and this was clearly right.  Under article 112, seventy-four
     lashes would be meted  out  and  otherwise  ninety-nine  lashes  under
     articles 123 and  124.   If  the  evidential  basis  for  sodomy  with
     penetration was  not  proved  before  the  judge,  then  the  fallback
     position was a large number of lashes, even though  the  evidence  was
     somewhat shaky.  Article 115 was relevant in this  regard.   If  there
     were other  evidence,  then  according  to  Mr  K,  the  discretionary
     punishment would occur where there was not a good  evidentiary  basis.
     The example from his experience in  this  regard  was  relevant.   One
     hundred lashes had been imposed.

 76. The Tribunal was referred to Ms Enayat's summary of the  Bazgir  cases
     at pages 660 to 666 of the bundle.  She said that none  of  the  cases
     were non-penetrative sex charge  cases.   A  case  only  went  to  the
     Supreme Court if the original charge was sodomy.  There was  therefore
     no  information  about  cases  where  the  charge  initially  was  one
     concerning non-penetrative homosexual acts.  At page 662,  there  were
     examples of discretionary punishments and this  could  be  up  to  ten
     years imprisonment.

 77. With regard to  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  concerning  the
     likelihood of prosecution if  homosexual  acts  were  carried  out  in
     private, this tied in with what had been  found  by  the  Adjudicator,
     though  the  Adjudicator  said  that  such  a  prosecution  would   be
     impossible.  Mr K and Ms Enayat said it was not impossible.  Ms Enayat
     referred to the likelihood of other parties such as family members  or
     neighbours reporting such acts, as in the case of B itself  where  the
     mother of his friend had told the authorities.  Iranian  law  did  not
     excuse from prosecution an act done in private.  Of course,  it  would
     need to be brought to  the  attention  of  the  authorities,  but  the
     question was whether that ever happened.

 78. At page 679  there  was  reference  to  the  insecurity  in  Iran  for
     homosexuals.  Mr K had described a case where his client was  informed
     on by someone else in the dormitory.  The reason for this went back to
     the religious views on homosexuality.  Pages 142 and  143  in  Mr  K's
     first report dealt  with  this.   The  Tribunal  was  referred  to  Ms
     Enayat's comments at page 675 concerning the Honorary Legal  Adviser's
     suggestion that public acts or cases  where  the  complainant  were  a
     victim were the only ones where there was a prosecution.  It was clear
     that there was a wide range of offences  attracting  punishments  from
     lashing to imprisonment, quite apart  from  the  death  penalty.   The
     UNHCR, at page 336 of Mr Kovats' bundle, did not really  grapple  with
     the wider picture and nor did a report at page 257 of his bundle.

 79. The Adjudicator's finding that it was impossible for a  person  to  be
     prosecuted if they carried out acts in private  was  not  sustainable.
     The evidence was that there was a real risk that an Appellant carrying
     out homosexual acts in private would be likely to be persecuted or  be
     at real risk of a breach of their Article 3 rights.  The Tribunal  was
     referred to the last paragraph at page 341.

 80. As regards the case of IIN put in  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
     European Court of Human Rights had not had the benefit of the kind  of
     evidence that the Tribunal had and its conclusions were unsustainable.
      The evidence did not bear  out  the  ECHR's  conclusions.   B's  case
     showed that it was not just a question of public morality and  a  lack
     of concern as to what happened in the home.  Today's evidence was  far
     from being "vague and unspecific" and reference was particularly  made
     to Mr K's evidence.  As regards the case involving homosexual acts  in
     the dormitory, the dormitory could still be a home like a home  shared
     with parents.  It was more public but it was still a  home.   In  that
     case, the bystander had felt compelled to report the acts and this was
     akin to the situation of a neighbour or a family member.  It  offended
     their morality and that was at the heart of this.

 81. There was no more recent Iranian case law than that in Bazgir, but  no
     doubt in time later case law would manifest itself.  Journalists  were
     not allowed to report as cases occurred, but only with  hindsight  and
     only after a number of years were they examined by  scholars  and  the
     cases mainly involved prosecutions for non-penetrative sex.  Ms Enayat
     had made the point with regard to prosecutions that it  was  difficult
     to obtain material.  Clearly there was a high number  of  prosecutions
     for acts against morality.  There was no change in  Islam  or  Islamic
     law to indicate that homosexuality was now  tolerated  in  Iran.   The
     laws remained in place.  The interview with the Ayatollah at pages 512
     to 514 made it clear that there was no softening in  the  approach  of
     the state.  The Tribunal was also referred to Ms  Rogers'  summary  of
     the  evidence  at  paragraph  11(b).   There  were  still  a  lot   of
     prosecutions for homosexual offences.  At  page  671  in  Ms  Enayat's
     second  report,  there  was  highlighting   of   the   statistics   on
     prosecutions  for  immorality.   There  were  no  statistics  for  any
     particular offences in groups,  but  there  were  some  86,000  crimes
     against public virtue recorded, and this was indicative  of  a  fierce
     Islamic regime with no tolerance in  law  for  crimes  against  public
     virtue.

 82. In his submissions, Mr Ali referred us to his skeleton argument.   The
     Adjudicator had accepted that E was  homosexual  and  the  authorities
     were aware of the film having been made and that  E  was  involved  in
     some way.  A lot of the objective evidence was relevant to both cases.
      He also referred to the expert reports in his bundle, firstly that of
     Professor Afshar.  She had concluded that E was likely to be  arrested
     and  punished  for  behaving  immorally.   Page  12  referred  to  the
     definition of the crime.  It was possible that he would face the death
     sentence.

 83. Two particular points arose from the evidence.   The  first  was  that
     there was a deliberate lack of reporting by  the  Iranian  authorities
     which made the task  of  deciding  harder  and  therefore  the  expert
     evidence was highly important.  Secondly, as  regards  those  reports,
     the points had been put to the experts and their evidence from all the
     evidence as a whole was consistent with a risk to E.   Therefore,  the
     reports of the experts should be given great weight.   Ms  Enayat  had
     considered the reports of his experts to  be  valid  and  had  largely
     agreed with Professor Afshar.  She had said that E's punishment  would
     be at the complete discretion of the judge  and  he  would  likely  be
     convicted on the basis of the knowledge  of  the  judge.   It  was  of
     significance that the authorities were aware  of  the  video  and  E's
     appearance in it.

 84. With regard to the Honorary Legal Adviser's views, it was argued  that
     the evidence of the  experts  should  be  preferred.   There  were  no
     disclosable  statements  from  the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser  and  her
     evidence had not been tested.  The experts'  reports  were  much  more
     detailed  and  clearly  evaluated  the  relevant  articles  and  cited
     evidence.  It was  significant  that  Ms  Enayat  had  said  that  the
     authorities would not be likely to overlook homosexual  activities  in
     private if they would not overlook kissing and hugging.

 85. The experts were also  supported  by  further  evidence  in  Mr  Ali's
     bundle, and he referred to pages 35 to 54 in this regard.  The  first-
     hand evidence was much  more  relevant  on  the  question  of  whether
     homosexuals were in fact pursued and prosecuted.  The essence  of  the
     evidence  was  that  this  did  take  place.   In  the  light  of  the
     authorities' knowledge of E's activities and also his fears  from  his
     own family, even if the sentence was prison or lashing, he would be at
     real risk of persecution or breach of his human rights.  Otherwise, Mr
     Ali was grateful to Ms Rogers for the evidence she  had  obtained  and
     the submissions made on that with which he associated himself.

 86. In his submissions, Mr Kovats referred first to the case of IIN in the
     European Court of Human Rights.  This was not binding but was  clearly
     of relevance.  Clearly, the Court had considered a range of  materials
     in coming to its conclusion that the claim should be rejected as being
     manifestly ill-founded.   The  conclusion  was  very  similar  to  the
     earlier decision in F v UK which was in Mr Kovats' authorities bundle.

 87. As regards the public order point, it was accepted  that  the  offence
     did not have to be committed in public but the relevance was what  was
     germane to public prosecution policy.  The mode of proof  showed  that
     it was seen as a public decency offence.   Realistically,  there  were
     never going to be four witnesses to a private offence.  This  was  not
     the only mode of proof, but was indicative  of  the  essential  public
     decency element.  The evidence supported this at page 225  to  228  in
     B's bundle in this regard in the extract from Maarten Schild's chapter
     on Islam.

 88. Mr Kovats referred to Ms Enayat's first report, at page 153.   Whereas
     on paper it was criminal and there was condign punishment, in practice
     the authorities did  not  actively  pursue  homosexuals  unless  their
     actions were carried out in public and comprised a public challenge to
     the  social  code.   It  was  nevertheless  possible   that   discreet
     homosexual behaviour would come to the attention  of  the  authorities
     and be reported, so it was then a question  of  what  the  authorities
     would do.  Mr Kovats accepted that this was a difficult and  sensitive
     issue.  It was difficult to ascertain what the evidence was  and  what
     the facts were on the ground.  There was a lot of evidence before  the
     Tribunal but it was not easy to know what to  conclude  from  it  with
     regard to the risk of the person  being  reported.   As  to  the  case
     mentioned by Mr K, it was queried whether a university dormitory could
     properly be equated with a bedroom in a  private  house.   An  Iranian
     university was a public place and he managed to disturb part of a body
     of good Muslims and so there was a public element.  Also the  Tribunal
     did not have the full facts, for example as  to  why  the  person  was
     reported and whether it was on the basis  of  a  personal  quarrel  or
     political difference.  All that could be safely said  was  that  there
     were no confirmed cases where people had  been  convicted  of  private
     consensual adult sodomy.  The two cases in Bazgir, although they  were
     death sentences, involved in one case the rape  of  a  minor  and  the
     other sodomy committed by a prison officer on prisoners.  Even if  one
     looked at lesser punishments, it was not possible to  say  that  there
     were any confirmed  cases  where  it  was  the  result  of  a  private
     consensual adult relationship.  It could be that this was so  in  some
     cases, but we could not be confident as the facts were lacking.

 89. Pointing the other way as cases such as F and IIN  did,  it  could  be
     argued that there was no real risk of such a prosecution and this  was
     also the view of the Honorary Legal Advisor.  She was, like  Mr  K,  a
     practising lawyer in Iran, though with more experience.   By  contrast
     to her experience, Mr K had been practising  in  Iran  for  about  six
     years and had said he had taken part in many trials but only gave  two
     examples of cases involving homosexual offences.  Mr Kovats had  dealt
     with the student case.  The other case appeared to have had  a  public
     element also, not having taken place behind closed  doors.   Professor
     Afshar and Mr K accepted that there was nothing untoward in showing  a
     fairly marked degree of personal affection and,  even  in  the  United
     Kingdom, people  committing  sexual  acts  in  public  might  well  be
     arrested.  The evidence was overwhelming that there was no  real  risk
     of capital punishment for the Appellants.  There was  no  evidence  of
     such for homosexual activities alone.  Today's letter  from  the  Home
     Office referring to the Agence France Press document was of  relevance
     in this regard.  The point was endorsed by the case law.

 90. It was clearly necessary to deal with the risk of whipping and  ta'zir
     punishment also.  Neither side had been able  to  find  statistics  on
     prosecutions for homosexual offences alone.  It was  argued  that  the
     weight of the evidence was that the Iranian authorities were concerned
     with homosexuality insofar as it was a challenge to the Islamic social
     and moral code, and if this were right it followed that they would not
     be interested in discreet private adult homosexual activity, and  this
     was consistent with the lack of cases.  If  matters  were  brought  to
     their attention, then this was a difficult question and  it  could  be
     that personal influence played a part and that a person with influence
     with the local judiciary could be in  a  different  position  from  an
     outraged parent who could be put to one side.  It would  be  necessary
     to look at each case on its own facts.  It was not argued  that  there
     could never be a case where an Iranian homosexual was not at risk, but
     it needed more than a  mere  discreet  adult  homosexual  relationship
     conducted in private.

 91. It was said that the Iranian judicial system was secretive, but  there
     had been a number of public pronouncements, for example  that  by  the
     Ayatollah set out at pages 512 to  514  of  Ms  Rogers'  bundle.   The
     Ayatollah had accepted that it was highly unlikely  that  the  capital
     offence would be proved.  Also, there were the  executive  regulations
     concerning regulation of punishments in 2003 at page 244  onwards  and
     page 248 contained the relevant article.  There it was said  that  the
     news of execution and the sentence would be announced  in  the  press.
     This was for capital offences only.  Given  that  regulation  and  the
     lack of evidence from the homosexual community, one could be confident
     about the lack of risk of execution in Iran for homosexuals.

 92. Turning to the particular appeals, B's  concerned  the  error  of  law
     jurisdiction only.  It was argued that there was no error  of  law  in
     the determination.  Ms Rogers had concentrated on paragraph 33 of  the
     determination and especially the use of the word  "impossible".   That
     sought to make one word bear far too much weight.   It  needed  to  be
     read as a whole and it  meant  that  there  was  no  real  risk.   The
     determination was full and detailed.  The Adjudicator had not had  the
     extra evidence that the Tribunal had, but that did not  show  that  he
     had been guilty of an error of law.  His findings of primary fact were
     not challenged.  He  accepted  that  B  had  been  punished  while  on
     military service and that action had been taken by a  rebuffed  senior
     officer, but this was not to be equated with a case of two parties  on
     an equal footing or in a private relationship.   There  was  a  public
     element to military service.  The Adjudicator had also accepted that B
     had been convicted and imprisoned for four years and four  months.  It
     was significant that it was his second offence and the punishment  was
     clearly substantial, but it did not cause him to leave Iran.   It  was
     the third incident that led to this.

 93. In paragraph 27, the Adjudicator had dealt with this.   There  was  no
     reliable evidence that the partner had been executed.  The Adjudicator
     had considered the objective and  expert  evidence  and  came  to  his
     conclusions.   If  the  Tribunal  accepted   Mr   Kovats'   submission
     concerning the strong public decency/public  order  element  then  the
     Iranian  authorities,  while  they  would  respond  immediately  to  a
     complaint, would not consider it was the kind  of  offence  that  they
     would prosecute years after when the threat to public order  had  long
     passed.  The military would not be involved.

 94.  As  regards  his  mental  health  and  punishment  for  leaving  Iran
     illegally, this had been dealt with in the skeleton.  The  Adjudicator
     had gone on to state that  homosexuals  could  meet  quite  openly  in
     Tehran and this was consistent with what the Tribunal had heard.   So,
     whether or not he  engaged  in  discreet  adult  homosexual  relations
     depended upon the evidence in the case.  The Adjudicator's conclusions
     were sustainable.

 95. As regards his departure from Iran, considered at paragraph  36,  this
     was dealt with in the replacement skeleton.  With regard to the  issue
     of his mental health, the Adjudicator had come to proper  findings  on
     this.  He was entitled to prefer  the  diagnosis  of  depression.   In
     Bensaid, it had been held that a schizophrenic would not face  a  real
     risk of breach of his Article 3 rights on return.  The threshold was a
     high one.  There was evidence at pages 412 to 416 at tabs 9 and 10  of
     Mr Kovats' bundle concerning the  evidence  of  medical  services  for
     mental  health  in  Iran.   The  Adjudicator  had   dealt   with   the
     determination in P.

 96. As regards E, the jurisdiction here was error of fact as well as error
     of law.  The Adjudicator had accepted that he was homosexual  and  was
     able to pursue a homosexual life in Iran without experiencing problems
     from the authorities.   He  was  the  presenter  of  the  video  about
     homosexuality and he provided the premises for the  filming,  although
     he had not performed in the film.  He was  therefore  at  no  risk  of
     prosecution on  the  basis  of  carrying  out  homosexual  acts.   The
     Adjudicator had accepted his claim that  the  film  had  come  to  the
     attention of the authorities.  The Adjudicator had not  accepted  that
     the summons was served.

 97. None of the evidence put before the Tribunal referred to the specifics
     of his case.  No copies of  the  summons  had  been  provided  and  no
     evidence was provided as to what had  happened  to  the  other  people
     involved in the film.  On the basis of the Adjudicator's assessment of
     the evidence at paragraphs 10 and 14, he was  entitled  to  find  that
     there was no summons.  In this case, therefore, the evidence  did  not
     show a real risk.  The findings of fact were sustainable.   Therefore,
     whatever the Tribunal found concerning  the  general  situation,  both
     Appellants failed.  He relied on the references in the skeleton to the
     evidence.

 98. With regard to pages 643 to 692 of Ms Rogers' bundle, which Mr  Kovats
     had only received that day, he was unlikely to be  in  a  position  to
     challenge points on translation as it would  not  be  a  good  use  of
     resources.  Issue was not taken with the table at page 668 as  far  as
     it went, but it did not go to the issue in this case which was whether
     an ordinary homosexual was at risk of prosecution and conviction.  The
     Bazgir cases showed that the Iranian judiciary approached its task  in
     the proper way.  The Supreme Court was very ready  to  intervene  when
     the requirements of the law were not met, and  overturned  convictions
     when there was a lack of detail in the evidence.  The Iranian judicial
     process was proper.  A person prosecuted would receive a  fair  trial.
     Mr K had not said that defendants did not get a fair trial in Iran and
     these cases involved ordinary offenders and not  political  offenders,
     so that was not relevant here.  In  conclusion,  it  was  accepted  on
     behalf of the Secretary of State  that  homosexuals  in  Iran  were  a
     particular social group.

 99. By way of reply, Ms Rogers argued, with reference  to  the  particular
     facts of the case in B, it was argued that Mr Kovats' submissions were
     inconsistent in that either the authorities were very interested in  B
     on account of his previous history (thirteen years before) or not with
     regard to events very soon after his release in 2002.   The  facts  of
     the case contradicted the Secretary of State's  main  submission  that
     homosexual acts were against public decency.  The Adjudicator accepted
     that there was a risk of very  severe  punishment  when  caught  in  a
     private act in a private home.  With regard to the point  made  by  Mr
     Kovats concerning public authorities' influence on the reporting of an
     incident and contrasting this with the situation of angry parents,  it
     was necessary to look at the facts of the case.  In  any  event,  this
     was contradicted by what was said by the Honorary Legal Adviser in her
     letter of 23 October 2004 on the second page.

100. As regards IIN, it was relevant to note that Mr Schild's evidence  was
     repeated in the objective evidence produced to the ECHR and updated at
     page 7 where this was entirely a replica of what Mr Schild had said in
     1993.  So therefore this repeated old material,  which  did  not  even
     relate to Iran but pertained generally to Muslim  countries,  but  was
     presented as an up-to-date report.  This weakened the authority of the
     ECHR's decision.  The Tribunal was also referred to Ms Enayat's report
     at page 158 and the references in the CIPU Report  which  condensed  a
     lot of other reports.  If  that  evidence  was  unravelled,  then  the
     amount of independent fact-finding  that  had  gone  on  was  in  fact
     minimal.

101. With regard to page 6 in IIN and the Danish report in the Secretary of
     State's bundle, it may be that there was not access to  the  necessary
     information and that the reports should be seen  in  that  light.   In
     respect of the report of executions, reference was made to  page  174.
     There was  clearly  frustration  at  a  lack  of  reporting  and  some
     executions were not reported.   As  regards  the  point  on  executive
     regulations, the Tribunal was referred to Article 30 at page 250.  Not
     enough was known about the Honorary Legal Adviser.  It  was  not  said
     that she was not qualified as claimed but she seemed  to  have  sparse
     knowledge.  For example, at page 411 concerning the absence of capital
     punishment cases for a fifteen year period, this was to be  contrasted
     with the cases now produced.  Much of what she said about article  120
     not being used, again should be contrasted with pages 660 onwards.  It
     seemed that she now accepted that a judge could make a  final  verdict
     based on article 120.  If she had knowledge going beyond Bazgir,  then
     she did not show it.  Ms Enayat dealt in detail in her  report  of  16
     December  2004  with  the  Honorary   Legal   Adviser's   very   short
     conclusions.

102. As regards B's appeal, the word "impossible"  meant what it  said  and
     should  be  taken  in  the  context  of  the   Adjudicator's   general
     conclusions.  With regard to this,  article  120  was  sufficient  and
     there were cases before the Tribunal where the knowledge of the  judge
     had been employed, and Mr Kovats had accepted that B was  of  interest
     to the authorities in the past, initially the military and later being
     subjected to severe punishment.  This was enough for knowledge of  the
     judge  even  if  there  was  no  evidence  other  than  circumstantial
     concerning his activities on the building site.  It could not be  said
     that there would be no risk to him.  Even if he did not face the death
     penalty, there was ample law and sufficient evidence for the  Tribunal
     to conclude that he was at real risk, especially given his history and
     that he would be prosecuted on return.

103. With regard to the Home Office letter of 15  February  2005,  even  an
     unsuccessful asylum applicant could be at risk according to  that,  so
     why would B not be of interest.  His mother had been detained  on  the
     night after he ran away.

104.  Noting  the  medical  evidence,  it  was  conceded  that  an  Iranian
     homosexual who was active  in  private  or  public  faced  a  risk  of
     prosecution if  caught.   This  created  insecurity.   This  had  been
     mentioned by Ms Enayat.  The second psychiatric report at pages 317 to
     325 was before the Tribunal.  His mental health  problems  related  to
     his abnormal beliefs that he could  be  identified  as  a  homosexual.
     People were prosecuted for any type of homosexual act and for  such  a
     person return had a heightened risk that their return would be inhuman
     or degrading.

105. Mr Ali, by way of reply, referred to the grounds  of  appeal  and,  in
     particular, ground 3.  There was a question of where the summons  was,
     and there was evidence in E's bundle.  There were two statements,  the
     first of 15 May 2002 at page 1 of the  bundle  at  paragraph  13,  and
     paragraph 20 of the second statement at page 8.  He accepted that  the
     Tribunal would be slow to disturb the Adjudicator's findings of  fact,
     but his conclusions were flawed, firstly  because  the  issue  of  the
     summons was not raised in the reasons for refusal letter and also only
     E had been represented at the hearing before the Adjudicator.  It  was
     accepted that the summons had still not been produced, but  E  in  his
     statement said that he could not produce it as he feared  his  family.
     He had expanded on this point in  his  supplementary  statement.   The
     family had it and his uncle had never possessed it.

106.  In  any       event,  there  was  the  fact  of  the  video  and  the
     Adjudicator's acceptance that the authorities were aware of that.   It
     was clear from the expert evidence that he would be at risk.

107. With regard to IIN, Mr Ali adopted the points made by  Ms  Rogers  and
     argued that the Tribunal should note the contrast between the evidence
     before it and that before the European Court of Human Rights.  If  the
     Tribunal accepted what Mr Kovats said that people were only pursued if
     their behaviour was public, then the video had been made  for  general
     distribution and therefore for public purposes.   The  report  of  the
     Honorary Legal Advisor should be contrasted with  Ms  Enayat's  second
     report.  Page 554 was of particular relevance  to  this.   The  Bazgir
     document referred to dealt with an actual conviction.  At page  51  of
     the bundle, there was a reference to the killing of three gay men  and
     two lesbians.  This was a  consequence  of  the  Iranian  government's
     policy calling for action against homosexuals.  The letter of the Home
     Office of 15 February 2005 pointed to the absence  of  guarantees  and
     risk to a person whose asylum claim had failed.  With  regard  to  the
     question of a fair trial, the Tribunal was referred to  the  Secretary
     of State's bundle at page 343 and the country report at paragraph 5.16
     to 5.34 which confirmed that the traditional court system was  subject
     to government and religious influence.

Conclusions

108. We consider  first  the  translations  of  the  Iran  Court  Judgments
     contained in the Bazgir book.  The title  of  this  is  translated  as
     follows "The law of Islamic punishment as mirrored  in  Supreme  Court
     rulings: Hadoud crimes against public virtue (Tehran 1999  to  2000)."
     These were commented on by the Honorary Legal Adviser and by Ms Enayat
     as  set  out  above.   Ms  Enayat,  as  well  as  commenting  on   the
     translations, set out a table numbering the judgments and  summarising
     the verdicts.  We bear  in  mind  the  point  made  by  Ms  Rogers  at
     paragraph 11 of her summary of evidence that it is important  to  note
     that these cases only represent a selection of  the  cases  that  will
     have been heard by the Iranian courts.  It is also the case that  they
     are only cases which have been appealed to the Supreme Court,  and  we
     accept that it is extremely difficult  to  assess  how  many  criminal
     cases in the Iranian court system will have been homosexuality related
     crimes.  We note also, as Ms Rogers points out, firstly that there  is
     no general concept of precedent in Iranian law,  which  means  that  a
     ruling by the Supreme Court in one case will have little or no bearing
     on subsequent cases on the same issue, and secondly that  the  outcome
     of cases returned for hearing by the Supreme Court is  unknown.   They
     are also cases concerning  only  instances  where  the  defendant  was
     originally charged with sodomy, since those are the cases  over  which
     the Supreme Court has jurisdiction.  It is said in Ms Enayat's  report
     that in the cases where the  defendant  was  originally  charged  with
     Tafkhiz, the provincial court of appeal would be the correct appellate
     authority.  We also take from Ms Enayat's report the fact  that  cases
     are very likely to be heard in camera, information is unlikely  to  be
     published at the time of hearing or  conviction,  and  the  suggestion
     that Iran is responding to international pressure on its  use  of  the
     death  penalty  and  other  human  rights  violations  by  suppressing
     information about its legal system, such that  little  information  is
     publicly available about current practices.  It is clear that a number
     of these cases were remitted by the Supreme Court.  Case  number  105,
     where the death penalty was confirmed, is a case where the charge  was
     murder and Tafkhiz.  Case 110 concerned forced sodomy  and  again  the
     death sentence was confirmed.  The same is  true  of  case  112.   The
     sentence in that case however  was  74  lashes.      The  accused  who
     received the lashes was fifteen years old at the time  of  the  crime.
     There are also examples  of  acquittals  being  confirmed.   Case  116
     involved a sentence of six months in the case of forced sodomy but  it
     was not a case of sex with a minor or a case of rape.   In  case  117,
     the sentence was six years where the relationship was with  a  fifteen
     year old and was deemed consensual.  It is clear  that  case  110  was
     proved on the basis of knowledge of the judge.  Case  112  appears  to
     have involved a confession.  It is unclear what the  method  of  proof
     was in case 116.  Case 117 appears to have involved the  knowledge  of
     the judge.  Case 125 involved  sodomy,  and  the  death  sentence  was
     confirmed by the Supreme Court.  This was proved on the basis  of  the
     knowledge of the judge, and a sentence of 100 lashes in Case  126  was
     again on that basis.  The same outcome and the same  method  of  proof
     applied in case 128.  Cases 129 and 130 are cases where a sentence  of
     100 lashes was confirmed by the Supreme Court.  Case  133  involved  a
     similar sentence with the method of proof being the knowledge  of  the
     judge in this case.

109. Ms  Enayat  made  the  point  that  the  cases  cannot  be  viewed  as
     representing either a comprehensive picture or  a  statistical  sample
     but are selected to illustrate the variety of situations which, from a
     legal point of view, might arise in the courts and be  problematic  as
     opposed to routine.  She  also  made  the  point  that  there  are  no
     systematic crime statistics published in Iran for any type of offence,
     although she noted that in the year 2002 to 2003 slightly over  86,000
     offences were classified as "crimes against public virtue" which would
     clearly include sodomy and Tafkhiz.

110. Ms Enayat's comments on the reports of the Honorary Legal Adviser take
     issue first of all with what it is said about the period to which  the
     case histories relate.  Ms  Enayat  made  the  point  that  the  great
     majority of cases pertain to the period 1991 to 1995.  She noted  also
     that  19  of  the  28  Supreme  Court  cases  were  cases  of   "child
     molestation".  There are eight examples in the Bazgir  compilation  of
     cases which did not involve "force".  She made the  point  that  there
     are at least three examples in the Bazgir compilation of  men  charged
     with sodomy where the complainant was clearly  the  public  prosecutor
     rather than it being a complaint by an "interested party" as  referred
     to by the        Honorary Legal Adviser.  She referred to  case  1/135
     of 1990 in which two men aged 18 and 26 years  old  respectively  were
     convicted of sodomy and sentenced to execution by the  first  instance
     court on the basis of confessions and a medical report.  The  sentence
     was overturned by the Supreme Court and remitted on the basis that the
     medical certificate did not provide decisive evidence  of  intercourse
     between them, and in Court the Appellants denied the act  despite  the
     confessions.  She referred next to case 13/133 of 1992 where a man was
     charged with committing sodomy with two  others.   The  Supreme  Court
     confirmed the sentence of 100 lashes.  The court in the first instance
     concluded that although there was inadequate evidence of  sodomy,  non
     penetrative sex (Tafkhiz) was proven on the basis of the knowledge  of
     the judge.  The complainant was the public prosecutor.

111. Case 14/117 of 1992 was a case  where  three  men  were  charged  with
     sodomy and acquitted for lack  of  evidence  by  the  Court  of  first
     instance.  The complainant was the public prosecutor, who appealed the
     case on the basis that they had confessed under interrogation  and  in
     the presence of an investigating magistrate, and if sodomy  could  not
     be proven the evidence was sufficient to prove Tafkhiz.   The  Supreme
     Court rejected the appeal.

112. Case 8, in the Sabri collection, of 1992, was a case where  a  thirty-
     six year old man was charged with sodomy and a fifteen  year  old  boy
     was charged with submission to  sodomy.   The  Court  found  that  the
     evidence of penetrative sex was inadequate and that the confessions of
     both parties were flawed but there were adequate grounds to  impose  a
     discretionary ta'zir penalty.  The thirty-six year old  was  sentenced
     to 74 lashes and exile for a period of five years and the boy, who had
     not at the time of the crime reached  the  age  of  maturity  (fifteen
     lunar years) was sentenced to 39 lashes of the whip.  The  complainant
     was the public prosecutor.

113. As regards the Honorary Legal Adviser's comments  on  declarations  of
     remorse and repentance, Ms Enayat referred to articles 125 and 126 and
     concluded that even in cases where repentance follows a confession  it
     is not in the power of the judge  hearing  the  case  to  absolve  the
     individual on the basis of their repentance and the Supreme Court  has
     ruled that judges in the court of issue are expected to  evaluate  the
     "quality" of a repentance following confessions.  Ms Enayat  concluded
     that the verdict based on the knowledge of the judge has an equivalent
     status in Shia jurisprudence to guilt  established  on  the  basis  of
     witnesses.

114. With regard to the Honorary Legal Adviser's comment that none  of  the
     cases resulted in a conviction for sodomy  except  one  in  1994,  she
     noted that in fact there are two cases on the Bazgir compilation where
     the Supreme Court confirmed the conviction of  sodomy  and  the  death
     sentence.  The first of these is case number 31/112 of  December  1994
     to January 1995 where an eighteen year old committed  homosexual  rape
     on a nine year old boy and was sentenced to death by being thrown from
     a height.  The second case no 27/125 confirmed in July 1993  was  that
     of a prison guard convicted for  multiple  acts  of  sodomy  with  his
     charges.

115. As we have seen, of the twenty-eight appeals considered by the Supreme
     Court, six resulted in  outright  acquittal  in  the  court  of  first
     instance, five of these being confirmed by the Supreme Court  and  one
     being  remitted  for  reconsideration,  and  twelve  resulted   in   a
     conviction for sodomy and a death sentence  on  that  account  in  the
     court of first instance, ten of  which  were  quashed  for  procedural
     reasons and  remitted  to  be  reheard.   Nine  cases  resulted  in  a
     conviction in the Court of first instance for Tafkhiz and  in  six  of
     these cases the Supreme Court confirmed their sentence but in one case
     remitted it on the basis of inadequate evidence.  We note  that  there
     is no information in the sources on the verdicts handed  down  at  the
     rehearings or the response of the Supreme Court to them.

116. Ms Enayat also commented that, as we have already noted, in  a  number
     of the cases of sodomy not involving  rape  the  complainant  was  the
     public prosecutor rather than being the victim or his next of kin.  It
     is the case that where the person was charged with sodomising a minor,
     the complainant was always the next of kin of the child.

117. At page 679 of the bundle in the course of this report Ms Enayat  also
     made the point that as a consequence of the status  given  to  private
     complainants in the Iranian legal system, a large source of insecurity
     for a practicing homosexual in Iran is that a complaint  may  be  laid
     against him by a neighbour, servant, a spouse or any other  person  in
     his orbit, either out of a sense of moral rectitude  or  for  revenge.
     She stated that such complaints automatically trigger a Court  hearing
     and, if the judge so decides, the formulation of charges.   A  crucial
     distinction is said to be not so much between the  private  or  public
     status of the original complainant but rather whether or not the  case
     can be dismissed if the private individual  or  association  withdraws
     the complaint.  None of the Hadd crimes and none of the crimes against
     public virtue under Book 5  of  the  law  of  Islamic  punishment  are
     included on the list of articles of the law where if a case is brought
     by a private complainant prosecution will cease on the  withdrawal  of
     the complaint.

118. As regards cases where the  prosecution  resulted  in  a  sentence  of
     whipping, and the Honorary Legal Adviser's view was that evidence  was
     mainly the acknowledgement of guilt and confession by the perpetrator,
     but Ms Enayat made the point that in some of the case histories it  is
     unclear what method of proof was used.  Where the method is  set  out,
     the knowledge of the judge was the method used in ten of  the  fifteen
     cases, and confession by itself was the method of proof in two of  the
     fifteen cases and in three cases confession accompanied  by  reference
     to a medical certificate was cited.  In both confirmed death  sentence
     cases the method of proof was the knowledge of the judge.  It is clear
     that in no case was the "witness of four just men" used as the  method
     of proof.  Ms Enayat concludes that the case history supplied abundant
     indication of the use of the knowledge of the judge in Hadd cases  and
     this evidence conflicts with statement of the Honorary  Legal  Adviser
     reported in the British Embassy's letter of 13 June 2004.

119. Ms Enayat also took issue with the Honorary Legal Adviser's view  that
     the maximum punishment in cases cited in the book is  74  lashes.   In
     six cases the Supreme Court confirmed  verdicts  of  Tafkhiz  and  100
     lashes.  As regards the Honorary Legal Adviser's view that the  appeal
     courts usually overturn the judgments of first instance courts, it was
     the case in fact that they had only done so in ten of the twenty-eight
     cases.  In six cases the Supreme Court confirmed  outright  acquittals
     by the Court of first instance  and  in  one  case  an  acquittal  was
     overturned.  The majority of death sentences were overturned  and  the
     case remitted.  However the Supreme Court confirmed  the  majority  of
     sentences for the lesser offences of Tafkhiz or an  immoral  act.   Ms
     Enayat also comments that it is highly unlikely that the executions in
     two cases of death sentence for sodomy in the Bazgir compilation would
     have been announced, given the approach of the Iranian authorities  in
     this period.

120. Ms Enayat set out her conclusions at paragraphs  687  to  689  of  the
     bundle.  Among these is her conclusion that the knowledge of the judge
     is a commonly used method of proof across the various types  of  case.
     She also considered it to be clear at least  from  the  examples  that
     certain of the Supreme Court Judges have been pedantic about what  can
     be accepted as evidence of penetration and  have  frequently  rejected
     the evidence of a medical certificate alone  and  that  the  arguments
     brought are that medical evidence  of  penetration  of  the  "passive"
     partner does not by itself establish that the penetration was  by  the
     accused or that evidence of penetration did  not  necessarily  involve
     penetration by the penis.  She also makes the point that  the  medical
     reports were drawn up before the advent  of  DNA  testing.   She  also
     considers it to be evident that the Courts readily accept verdicts  of
     Tafkhiz, generally based either on  the  knowledge  of  the  judge  or
     confessions which were viewed as imperfect (as proof  of  penetration)
     from the point of the Shari'a.  There  is  no  published  material  on
     cases which began with charges of Tafkhiz or immoral  acts  since,  as
     noted above, these would not be appealed in the  Supreme  Court.   She
     concludes that the judgments demonstrate that in  general  sodomy  and
     Tafkhiz  (whether  forced  or  not)  are  dealt  with  in   evidential
     frameworks that are far more flexible than that allowed by the picture
     given in the CIPU and many  other  accounts  and  they  have  drawn  a
     greater variety of punishments.

121. In his supplementary skeleton  argument  of  13  February,  Mr  Kovats
     accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the  material  now
     available shows that there are prosecutions and  convictions  in  Iran
     for offences of Lavat and Tafkhiz, though he suggests that details are
     sparse and most of the cases are cases of child abuse and or rape.  It
     is also accepted that there are two instances where the death  penalty
     for Lavat was confirmed by the Supreme Court and  notes  that  neither
     was a simple case of buggery, in one where the victim was a nine  year
     old boy and in the other the defendant was a prison guard convicted on
     account of buggery  of  several  prisoners  which  did  not  give  the
     impression of being a consensual homosexual relationship.

122. We have derived a good deal of assistance  from  the  translated  case
     summaries and also from Ms Enayat's careful commentary  on  them.   We
     see no  reason  to  disagree  with  the  comments  she  makes  or  the
     conclusions that she draws from  them.   We  have  therefore  had  the
     benefit of a significant degree  of  more  specific  information  than
     appears to have been available to previous  courts.   One  comment  we
     would make at the outset is to express our agreement with Mr Kovats in
     stating that an impressive level of care exists in the  Iranian  legal
     system with regard to these matters.  This can be seen from the number
     of cases remitted by the Supreme Court for a variety of reasons and in
     particular, as regards potential capital  sentences,  the  formalities
     required by the system.  In this regard it is relevant to refer to the
     translation of the e-mail question put to Ayatollah Sanai at pages 512
     to 513 of Ms Rogers' bundle.  It is clear that the specified manner of
     proving Hadd, ie four  confessions  or  four  just  witnesses  of  the
     specified conditions:  "most often and generally has not been and will
     not be witnessed after the age/time of the St Imams".   The  Ayatollah
     is also of the view that the ways of proving are limited to those  two
     ways and nothing else.  The degree of detail and observation  required
     is, as was pointed out in Ms Enayat's report, of such a degree  as  to
     make it extremely unlikely that in the absence of confession a capital
     sentence would be imposed.

123. We consider that we can properly conclude from the evidence that it is
     most unlikely, given the statistics and the problems  of  proof,  that
     the death penalty for sodomy is anything other than an extremely  rare
     occurrence.  It is clear however that, and here we  are  in  agreement
     with paragraph 24 of Ms Rogers summary of the evidence,  those  guilty
     of immoral acts under Article 147/115 and Tafkhiz  under  Article  121
     face harsh punishments which can include long prison sentences  up  to
     six years and up to one hundred lashes.  We remind ourselves  of  what
     Mr Kovats accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that a sentence
     of lashing would be such as to give rise to  a  breach  of  Article  3
     rights. Although we agree with Mr Kovats  that  the  interest  of  the
     Iranian authorities in homosexual  offenders  is  essentially  focused
     upon any outrage to public decency, it is in our view clear  that  the
     authorities would not simply ignore, as Mr Kovats suggested they might
     in certain situations, reports made to them of  persons  carrying  out
     homosexual acts albeit in private.  If a complaint is brought  to  the
     authorities then we are satisfied that they would act upon that to the
     extent that they would arrest the claimed offenders and question  them
     and thereafter there is a real  risk  that  either  on  the  basis  of
     confessions or knowledge of the judge  which  might  arise  from  such
     matters as previous history or medical evidence or the evidence of the
     person who claimed to have observed the  homosexual  acts,  that  they
     would be subjected to significant prison sentences and/or lashing.

124. Given that we consider therefore that there is  a  real  risk  that  a
     person who comes to the authorities' attention for having committed an
     act falling within the relevant provisions of the code, it must follow
     that since this can be presumed to be known by those engaging in  such
     acts, such actions would be likely to be carried  out  carefully.   We
     have not been addressed on the issue of discretion and whether  people
     engaging in such acts can be expected to  act  discreetly,  which  was
     considered  by  the  Australian  High  Court  recently,  in  Appellant
     S395/2002 v Minister for Immigration [2003] HCA 71.  That  is  another
     argument for another day and we would not wish this  determination  to
     be interpreted as imposing a requirement of discretion, but  rather  a
     recognition that in the legal context in which homosexuals operate  in
     Iran it  can  be  expected  that  they  would  be  likely  to  conduct
     themselves discreetly for fear of the obvious repercussions that would
     follow.  We also  consider,  bearing  in  mind  the  consequences  for
     persons prosecuted successfully for such  actions,  that  Adjudicators
     should view with healthy scepticism  claims  that  family  members  or
     friends or neighbours reported such actions to the authorities.  Given
     the severity of the  consequences  we  consider  that  proper  caution
     should be exercised in  assessing  claims  that  people  came  to  the
     attention of the authorities in such ways.  This must be  particularly
     so in the case of family members and friends.  In our view, it is  the
     case that homosexual acts carried on  in  private  between  consenting
     adults are most unlikely to come to the attention of  the  authorities
     and it is the case, and  we  think  it  is  common  ground,  that  the
     authorities do not seek out homosexuals  but  rather  may  respond  to
     complaints of consensual homosexual activity being  carried  on.  That
     then is the context in which these appeals must be decided.

125. We turn to the individual appeals.   We  consider  first  of  all  the
     appeal of B.  As we have seen, much of his claim was believed  by  the
     Adjudicator, but  the  Adjudicator  did  not  accept  that  there  was
     reliable evidence that B's partner NK had been questioned or  tortured
     nor that he had identified B to the  people  who  detained  him.   The
     Adjudicator did not make  findings  on  the  matter  set  out  in  B's
     statement at paragraph 23 that the authorities had  taken  his  mother
     into detention but released her on bail, the security being her  house
     deeds.  The information about the execution of NK came from his sister
     who relayed this information to the relative with whom B went to  stay
     after  he  escaped  from  the  officials.   There  is  therefore  some
     evidence, in relation  to  which  the  Adjudicator  did  not  come  to
     conclusions, indicating  an  interest  in  him  on  the  part  of  the
     authorities after his escape and which is consistent either  with  him
     having been recognised at the time or perhaps more likely that he  was
     identified by NK.  In the light of B's history having been found to be
     credible by the Adjudicator we consider that it is of clear importance
     that findings be made on the credibility of this aspect of the  claim.
     This appeal is therefore  remitted  for  consideration  afresh  by  an
     Adjudicator other than Mr Wynne.  It will come before the  AIT,  which
     will decide how it should proceed.

126. In the case of  E,  the  Adjudicator  again  found  his  claim  to  be
     essentially credible.  He did not however, as  we  have  seen,  accept
     that there was a serious possibility that E had been  summonsed  given
     the fact that the summons had not been produced.  He surmised that E's
     uncle would have been able to provide it, since he was sympathetic  to
     E, whereas E's immediate family was strictly religious and ashamed  of
     him.  The point was made on E's behalf that his uncle  should  not  be
     assumed to have ready access to the summons and therefore the  finding
     that failure to produce it meant that it did not exist was flawed.

127. We see force to the submission on behalf of E.   The  Adjudicator  was
     not entitled to assume that the summons did not exist, purely  on  the
     basis that his uncle had not sent it to him.  Proper findings need  to
     be made on this point, and it may be at the same time that the  nature
     of the offence under Iranian law which it is said has  been  committed
     by E can be clarified.  Certainly, the evidence of Professor Afshar is
     far from conclusive on the point.  This appeal is  also  remitted  for
     consideration afresh, by an Adjudicator other than Mr  Ievins.   Again
     it will come before the AIT which will decide how it should proceed.






                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


                                  APPENDIX


      Iran Country Reports of April and October 2004


      Reports of Ms Anna Enayat of 1 June 2004 and 16 December 2004 and  her
      commentary of 27 January 2005


      Reports of Mr K dated 1 June 2004 and 16 December 2004


      "Islam" by Maarten Schild (in "Sexuality and Eroticism  Amongst  Males
      in Moslem Societies (1991) p179)


      Translation of e-mail question to Ayatollah Ozama Sanei


      Report of Professor Afshar of 8 February 2003


      Report of Professor Amin of 27 July 2003


      US Department of State Report 2003


      Netherlands Report of August 2000


      Danish Report on Fact-Finding Mission to Iran of September 2000


      UNHCR/ACCORD Information Seminar of 11/12 June 2001


      Letters from the British Embassy in Tehran, 18 May 2004  and  13  June
      2004


