
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


SI (variation/curtailment - human rights ground) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00118
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 February 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                            THE HON. LADY DORRIAN
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                      SI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Khan, of Burney Legal Firm of Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs. D. Cantrell, Home Office Presenting Officer.

In an appeal against a refusal to vary leave or a decision to curtail  leave
or a decision to vary leave such that an individual's leave  is  effectively
curtailed, there is a right of appeal on  human  rights  grounds.  There  is
nothing in SA (Pakistan) & Ors v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 210 which suggests  to
the contrary or which was intended by the Court to contradict  its  judgment
in JM (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    In this case the appellant, a citizen of Pakistan who had entered  the
    UK as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  UK,  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent to curtail her leave to remain. At
    a hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it  was  recognised  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules. The
    appellant had also, however, claimed that the decision was in breach of
    her Article 8 rights. The Immigration Judge, in rejecting  her  appeal,
    said that he had not considered the issue of her article 8 rights as no
    removal directions had been issued in this case and  in  his  view  the
    case of SA (Pakistan) & Ors [2010] EWCA Civ 210 precluded such a matter
    being addressed at this stage.

2.    In our opinion the Immigration Judge  proceeded  on  a  misreading  of
    that case and so erred in law in refusing  to  address  the  Article  8
    point. In SA (Pakistan) the issue before the court was whether the  law
    requires that where the Secretary of State has refused  an  application
    for variation of leave to enter or leave to remain in the UK, he should
    at  the  same  time  issue  removal  directions  under  s.  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. For reasons which need not concern us,
    the court held that it did not have jurisdiction to decide that matter.
    In explaining the nature of the point the court stated: "The importance
    of the issue is that, if the immigrant is faced only with a refusal  to
    vary leave, it may be that he cannot,  on  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal, urge that he should nevertheless  be  allowed  to
    remain on compassionate or human rights grounds because no question  of
    his removal is at that stage live." We can only assume that the IJ  has
    taken this as  establishing  that  no  human  rights  argument  may  be
    considered where removal directions have not been given. In our opinion
    it does no such thing. The court was merely explaining what was said to
    be the importance of the point at issue before  it.  In  fact,  if  one
    reads on, it will be seen that the court quotes with approval from  the
    case of JM (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402  in  which  this  very
    point was decided. In that  case  the  court  was  concerned  with  the
    question of whether an ECHR claim could lawfully be determined  by  the
    adjudicator in the absence of an imminent threat of  removal  from  the
    UK. On this point the AIT had concluded that a human rights  claim  was
    not justiciable on a variation of leave appeal because in such  a  case
    the appellant's removal was not imminent and  the  case  did  not  fall
    within s. 84(1)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
    The appellant sought to argue that such a  claim  was  justiciable  and
    indeed he was supported in that proposition by the respondent, who  had
    obtained permission to cross-appeal on this very  point.  The  argument
    was that a refusal to vary leave was for the purposes of s. 84(1)(g) an
    immigration decision in consequence of which  the  appellant's  removal
    would be unlawful under s. 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being
    incompatible with Convention rights, since removal may at least  be  an
    indirect consequence of the refusal to vary. The court agreed that  the
    section in question should be given this wider interpretation, with the
    effect that the AIT should have considered the  Article  8  point.  The
    same argument applies to a decision to curtail  leave  as  occurred  in
    this case and the immigration judge should have  continued  to  address
    the Article 8 point. His failure to do so was an error of law. We  will
    now re-make the decision, limited to the Article 8 claim.

3.     In  that  regard  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   has
    established family life in the UK. She is 32 years of age. Reliance  is
    placed on the fact that she is reunited with her family after 20 years.
    However, we note that she came to this country at the age of 30 as  the
    spouse of a person settled in this country, not for reasons to do  with
    her more extended  family.  She  is  residing  in  Stockton-on-Tees  in
    hospital accommodation. The rest of the family live in  Southall,  West
    London. The documentation which has been submitted in  support  of  her
    claim does not indicate any dependency between  her  and  her  extended
    family nor does it indicate anything beyond the normal  emotional  ties
    which may be expected to  exist  between  adult  members  of  the  same
    family, even allowing for the breakdown of her marriage.  We  have  had
    regard to the family life also of other members of  her  family  -Beoku
    Betts [2008] UKSC 39 but the same points arise.  It is  submitted  that
    she would have no family to live with in Pakistan  because  her  sister
    lives in Rawalpindi with her  husband's  extended  family.  However  it
    appears that the appellant was able to  work  and  study  in  Islamabad
    without difficulty before she came to  this  country.   Accordingly  we
    conclude that article 8 is not engaged in respect of family life.

4.    In addressing the issue of her private  life  we  do  of  course  take
    account of her relationships with members of her family living  in  the
    UK albeit that is not enough to establish family life for the  purposes
    of the Convention.  We are satisfied that she does have a private  life
    in the UK which is expressed in terms of her employment,  relationships
    with her colleagues at work and her family.  However  she  studied  and
    practised as a doctor in Pakistan and will have developed similar  work
    relationships there. There is no reason to think she will  not  in  the
    future be able to do so. Although many of her family are here in the UK
    she would not be entirely without familial relationships  in  Pakistan.
    It is reasonable to expect that she could re-establish her professional
    private life in Pakistan in all its essential respects and yet maintain
    contact with colleagues here. Balancing all of her  circumstances  with
    the State's interests in  immigration  control  we  consider  that  the
    decision would not prejudice her private life to  the  extent  that  it
    would constitute a  breach  of  a  protected  right:  it  is  therefore
    proportionate.

Decision

5.    The decision of the immigration judge involved the making of an  error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be  set  aside  insofar  as  it
    relates to the Article 8 claim.  We have re-made the  decision  on  the
    Article 8 claim.  Our  decision  is  that  the  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8). The Immigration  Judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal on immigration grounds stands.


Signed

The Hon. Lady Dorrian
Approved for electronic distribution
