
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of JS) v Birmingham City  Council  AAJR  [2013]  UKUT
00122(IAC)


|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|On 11 and 12 February 2013                                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE application OF

                                     JS

               (BY HIS LITIGATION FRIEND THE REFUGEE COUNCIL)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                           BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Azeem Suterwalla, instructed by Bhatia Best
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Jonathan Cowen, instructed by Birmingham City
Council







                                  JUDGMENT

A  Introduction

1.   The applicant asserts that he is a  child  from  Afghanistan,  who  was
    aged 12 when he arrived in the United Kingdom from  Afghanistan.   This
    was in December 2008 (he first came to the attention of the  respondent
    on 15 December). He is recorded as having told  the  respondent  on  19
    December 2008 that "he'll be 13 in January [2009]" (bundle, tab  22/8).
    On 23 December 2008 the applicant claimed asylum from the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department.  The applicant contended that he was  in
    need of international protection as a result of  the  hostile  interest
    taken in him by those seeking retribution for certain  actions  carried
    out by the applicant's father, who had been "cruel"  to  villagers  and
    other people.  The applicant's mother had told the applicant  that  his
    father had killed people and that his father's enemies were  now  after
    the applicant.  As a result, the applicant had had  to  move  from  his
    village and live with his  grandfather.   Eventually,  the  applicant's
    grandfather  had  arranged  for  the  applicant  to  be  sent  out   of
    Afghanistan.

2.   On 9 April 2009, the Secretary of State refused to grant the  applicant
    asylum.  On  appeal  against  that  decision,  Immigration  Judge  Juss
    allowed the applicant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  The
    Immigration Judge's determination was, however, subsequently set  aside
    by a Senior Immigration Judge, who concluded that  it  was  "materially
    and irredeemably flawed in law and cannot  stand.   Indeed,  it  is  so
    flawed that I have concluded nothing can be preserved".  Following  the
    re-hearing of the appeal in October 2010, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson dismissed the  applicant's  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds, having found the applicant not  to
    be credible as regards his international protection  claims.   However,
    she allowed the appeal insofar as  she  found  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was not in accordance with the law.  This was  because
    Judge Robertson concluded that the applicant, though  not  the  age  he
    claimed,  was  16  years  of  age  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Accordingly, the Secretary of State had, according to the judge, failed
    to follow her policy of  granting  the  child  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The applicant currently has an undecided
    application before the Secretary of State for a variation of his  leave
    to remain.

B  The age assessments

3.   Upon the  applicant's  coming  to  the  attention  of  Birmingham  City
    Council, Mr Swaran Singh of its social care and health department  made
    a request on 15 December 2008 for  the  applicant  to  be  admitted  to
    Fairfield Children's Home (bundle, tab 22/44). The applicant was placed
    in Fairfield on that day.  Fairfield is  described  (tab  22/29)  as  a
    community home, catering for up to eight  young  people,  normally  for
    periods of up  to  twelve  weeks,  during  which  time  the  staff,  in
    conjunction with field social workers "will undertake  a  comprehensive
    assessment of the individual's needs of the child/young person.   These
    assessments will be completed in accordance with the framework for  the
    assessment of children in need and their families".  It appears that by
    8 January 2009 the applicant had been moved to a council facility at 36
    Millmead Road.

4.   The respondent carried out  an  age  assessment  of  the  applicant  in
    February 2009.  Mr Swaran Singh and Ms Ashmarie Berwise were the social
    workers who  undertook  the  interviewing  and  subsequent  assessment.
    Following  the  bringing  of  legal  proceedings  in  respect  of  that
    assessment, the respondent agreed to  carry  out  a  fresh  assessment,
    although "it is not admitted by the council  that  the  age  assessment
    completed on 5 February 2009 was not Merton compliant".

5.   The February 2009 age  assessment  had  concluded  that  the  applicant
    should be given a date of birth of 1 January 1990, making him over  the
    age of  18  upon  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  second  age
    assessment was undertaken in July 2009 by  Mrs  Diana  Bazurto  and  Ms
    Elizabeth Cant, social workers in  the  respondent's  social  care  and
    health department.  They concluded that the applicant was over  18  and
    ascribed to him a date of birth of 1 January 1991.

6.   The applicant applied to bring proceedings by way of  judicial  review,
    in order to challenge the July  2009  age  assessment.   Permission  to
    bring those proceedings was granted by the High  Court  on  9  December
    2010 and Hickinbottom J subsequently decided, in the  exercise  of  the
    Court's discretion under section 31A of the Senior Courts Act 1981,  to
    transfer the proceedings to the Upper Tribunal.  On 13  December  2011,
    the Upper Tribunal decided to quash the assessment by  the  respondent,
    on the ground that it had failed to follow its policy of complying with
    the  terms  of  the  "Age  Assessment  Joint  Working  Protocol".   The
    respondent appealed against the Upper Tribunal's decision and in R  (on
    the application of K and Others) v  Birmingham  City  Council  and  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  1432,  the
    Court of Appeal allowed the respondent's appeal on the ground that  the
    respondent had never had such a policy.

C.  The law

7.   Following the judgment of the Supreme Court in  R  (A)  v  Croydon  LBC
    [2009] 1 WLR 2557, our task in these  proceedings  is  to  resolve  the
    issue of the applicant's age, as a matter of fact.  In R (AE) v  London
    Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547 Aikens LJ said that:-

         "This is because the determination of a young  person's  age  is  a
         'precedent fact' to the local authority  exercising  its  statutory
         powers under section 20(1) of the [Children Act 1989].  There is  a
         right and a wrong answer and that, ultimately, is for  a  court  to
         decide." [3].


8.   In carrying out that exercise, the Tribunal must, effectively,  act  in
    an inquisitorial role, and decide, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whether the applicant was or was not a child at the  time  of  the  age
    assessment (R (AE) at [23] and R (CJ) v Cardiff CC [2011] EWCA Civ 1590
    at [22] and [23]).

9.   There is no burden of proof in these proceedings (R (CJ) at [22]).   We
    are mindful that at [21] of R (CJ) the Court made it clear that, whilst
    there is no formal "benefit of the doubt" principle, we are not thereby
    expected to eschew a "sympathetic assessment of evidence" and:-

         "In evaluating the evidence it may well be inappropriate to  expect
         from the claimant conclusive evidence of age  in  circumstances  in
         which he has  arrived  unattended  and  without  original  identity
         documents.  The nature of the evaluation of  evidence  will  depend
         upon the particular facts of the case."


D.  The evidence

10.  We have already referred to a bundle of documents.  As well as the  two
    age assessments to which reference has already been  made,  the  bundle
    includes a witness statement of the applicant, statements and  exhibits
    from Swaran Singh and Diana Bazurto, the determinations of Judges  Juss
    and Robertson and relevant correspondence.  There is  also  a  document
    dated 15 December 2008, signed by Ruth Grey of the respondent's  social
    care and health department, which  gives  the  applicant's  address  as
    Fairfield Children's Home.  Described as an "initial assessment record"
    (tab 22/16), it recommended that  the  respondent  should  undertake  a
    further  age  assessment,  as  the  applicant's   "physical   features,
    appearance and demeanour suggest he is older" than his claimed 12 years
    (tab 22/19).  Amongst the features noted are  a  "deep  broken  voice",
    facial and neck skin textures, "coarser and not supple as expected of a
    12 years  old  child",  "established  facial  hair  growth",  "no  play
    involved" in applicant's young life, precise  information  given  about
    "addresses and the group father was affiliated to"... "he was unable to
    explain a typical day in his life", and  that  the  applicant's  mother
    "told him his age when father went missing seven years ago".   A  "core
    assessment" prepared by Mr Singh on 22 January 2009  also  contained  a
    recommendation that an age assessment be undertaken.

11.  We heard oral evidence from the applicant  on  11  February  2013.   He
    spoke through an interpreter in Pushtu.  We  were  satisfied  that  the
    applicant could understand the interpreter, and vice  versa.   We  were
    satisfied that the applicant was fully aware of  his  ability  to  take
    breaks when giving his evidence, should he so require (he did not).  We
    also heard oral evidence from Mr Singh, beginning on  11  February  and
    ending the following day.  On 12 February we heard  evidence  from  Mrs
    Bazurto.  In reaching our conclusions, we have proceeded in  accordance
    with paragraphs [8] and [9] above.  We have considered the evidence  as
    a whole and in doing so have had regard to possible cultural  and  age-
    related explanations for what might otherwise be regarded as  flaws  or
    deficiencies in the evidence emanating from the applicant.

12.  There is one document in the bundle, which we have not examined.   This
    is the report on the applicant prepared by  Dr  Birch  in  March  2010.
    Neither party asked  us  to  have  regard  to  that  document.  On  the
    contrary, Mr Cowen specifically asked us not to do so.  We have not had
    regard to Dr Birch's report as a source of evidence to assist us in our
    task of assessing the applicant's age.



E.  Credibility

13.  Notwithstanding the holistic nature of our task, we have to  start  our
    assessment of the evidence somewhere.   In  the  present  case,  it  is
    appropriate to begin by considering the credibility of  the  applicant.
    It was plain from both parties' submissions to us that the  credibility
    of the applicant  is  an  important  feature  of  the  case.   For  the
    applicant, Mr Suterwalla's submission was that the applicant's  nominal
    date of birth  of  1  January  1996  should  be  accepted  because  the
    applicant "states that he knows his  age  and  has  given  a  plausible
    account of how he came to know of it".  Mr Cowen, for  the  respondent,
    submitted that credibility was the key because, if  the  applicant  was
    found not be a witness of truth, then his evidence was unreliable, with
    the result that the respondent's evidence,  in  the  form  of  the  age
    assessments, should be regarded as the best evidence available  to  the
    Tribunal.  It should be mentioned here that  there  is  no  documentary
    evidence emanating from Afghanistan in the present case.

14.  We reiterate that we have taken full account of the fact that,  whether
    or not the applicant  is  (still)  a  child,  he  would,  even  on  the
    respondent's assessment, be in his early 20's.  He is,  accordingly,  a
    young person, far from his native country, who has had  to  communicate
    through an interpreter, during the age  assessment  interviews  and  in
    oral evidence before us.  Having said that, we accept the  respondent's
    evidence that, when interviewed on various occasions in connection with
    the  age  assessment  exercises,  no  difficulties  were  recorded   or
    observed, as regards interpretation.  That is so, notwithstanding  that
    we accept that, as Mr Suterwalla contended, no specific questions about
    the adequacy of interpretation may have been put  by  the  respondent's
    officers to the applicant, at the time of the interviews.

15.    In his written statement of November 2010, the  applicant  complained
    about  the  quality  of  interpretation  "provided   by   a   Pakistani
    interpreter" [38] who spoke somewhat differently  from  the  applicant,
    and that this accounted for "differences in my answers". This complaint
    is both belated and vague. It is  also  contradicted  at  [32]  of  the
    statement, where the applicant gives a quite different reason  for  any
    discrepancies in his answers to the social workers.  The  criticism  at
    [38] refers to the allegedly problematic interpreter as  male;  but  on
    various occasions the interpreter  used was, in fact, female: eg at tab
    15/3, which records that on 8 January 2009 the applicant's "interaction
    with the female interpreter was dismissive"; and at tab  22/12,   where
    Mr Singh recorded that, on 12 February 2009, the respondent's  analysis
    regarding the applicant's age was read  out,  "item  by  item"  to  the
    applicant" by the  interpreter,  Nagina  Afzal,  whom  [the  applicant]
    understood completely".

16.   It is, accordingly, convenient at this stage to state that we  do  not
    consider any of the  problems  with  the  applicant's  credibility  can
    properly be ascribed to alleged  difficulties  in  interpretation.  Our
    credibility findings  are  set  out  below  under  the  following  four
    headings.




(1) Shaving

17.  Mr Cowen submitted that, whether the applicant was already  shaving  in
    2008/2009 was highly material to his overall credibility.  He submitted
    that the evidence showed clearly that the applicant did shave and  that
    there was "no middle ground" on the issue.

18.  The February 2009 age assessment of Mr Singh has this to  say.   On  15
    December 2009 the applicant made his initial visit to the unaccompanied
    asylum seeking children team, when the applicant was observed  to  have
    "clear facial hair growth... it was evident he shaves  but  [applicant]
    denies this, saying his facial  hair  is  just  sprouting".   This  was
    coupled with the observation that the applicant's voice was mature  and
    confident and that his facial and neck skin textures were courser  than
    might be expected of a 12 year old child.

19.  At interview on 22 January 2009, Mr Singh noted that  it  was  "evident
    that the  [applicant]  shaves,  even  his  small  moustache  has  gone.
    [Applicant's] explanation is that there were one or two hairs which  he
    has pulled  out".   Reference  is  then  made  to  a  report  from  the
    applicant's key worker at Millmead Road of 18 January 2009 (tab  22/78)
    that:-

         "On the 18th of January  staff  noticed  [applicant]  looked  clean
         shaven.  The previous day [applicant] had evidence of facial hair."


     On  22  January  2009,  Mr  Singh  recorded  that  "staff  at  Millmead
    Children's Home confirmed [applicant] shaves.  But  [applicant]  denies
    this".

20.  In oral evidence, the applicant said that he  last  shaved  about  five
    days before the hearing and that he had shaved for the first  time  not
    long ago, although he could not say exactly when.   He  disagreed  with
    the assessments of Mr Singh that he had been shaving in  2008/2009  and
    then said that he thought he had started shaving at the  end  of  2011.
    He denied that he had arrived in the United Kingdom as a young man  who
    was already shaving.  Asked by Mr Cowen how Mr Singh and the  staff  of
    the home could have all "got this wrong", the applicant said he did not
    know.  Later in cross-examination, the applicant was  asked  about  the
    adverse  credibility  finding  on  the  issue   of   shaving   in   the
    determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Robertson:-

         "67. He was observed over a period of time and it was noted that he
             had facial hair but he denied that he shaved... it  was  noted
             by Kay Magee, his key worker that there had been  evidence  of
             facial hair on 17 January 2009 and that staff noticed that  he
             looked clean shaven the next day.  The appellant's maintaining
             that he 'had one or two hairs that he pulled out' is  not  the
             same as having shaved.  Whilst presence of facial  hair  alone
             would not indicate that he was over 18, his desire to give the
             impression that he did not shave  was,  I  find,  designed  to
             mislead."


21.  The applicant said that he  had  mentioned  a  number  of  times,  most
    recently at the hearing on 11 February, that he had not been shaving at
    that time, and that he could not say what other people thought.   Asked
    if he had not wanted to admit to shaving because it showed  him  to  be
    older than he was claiming to be, the applicant said that  he  did  not
    know at that time what the  dispute  was  about  and  that  the  social
    workers had "put me under pressure".

22.  In his  closing  submissions,  Mr  Suterwalla  questioned  rhetorically
    whether there was "simply  a  misunderstanding  or  a  miscommunication
    between the parties" on the issue of shaving.  We do not consider  that
    either of those  explanations  accounts  for  the  discrepancy  in  the
    evidence.  Mr  Singh  is  a  social  worker  with  over  twenty  years'
    experience, who had conducted about 70 age assessments by the  time  he
    came to assess the applicant in 2009.  The question of whether a  young
    man appears as shaven, as opposed to an adolescent who has plucked  out
    one or two hairs from his face, is not one  that  depends  upon  ethnic
    differences.  Such differences may, we accept, account for why one  boy
    of a certain age might be shaving, when a boy of the same  age  from  a
    different ethnic background might not yet be doing so.  But that is not
    the issue here; rather, the  question  is  whether  the  applicant  was
    telling the truth about shaving.  Although  Millmead  Children's  Home,
    unlike Fairfield Children's Home, may not have  a  specific  assessment
    function, no reason has  been  given  to  doubt  the  veracity  of  the
    information emanating from Millmead as to the applicant  having  shaved
    there in early 2009; nor has it been shown  that  those  who  made  the
    observations were unqualified to conclude that the applicant  had  been
    shaving, as opposed to plucking the odd hair from his face.

23.  Mr Suterwalla submitted that, even if  the  applicant  "did  lie  about
    shaving, this does not of itself mean he is older  than  claimed".   Mr
    Suterwalla relied upon the following observation of Stanley  Burnton  J
    in R (B) v Merton LBC [2003] 4 All ER 280:-

         "Conversely, however, an  untrue  story,  while  relevant,  is  not
         necessarily indicative of a lie as to the  age  of  the  applicant.
         Lies may be told for reasons unconnected with the applicant's  case
         as to his age, for example to avoid his return to  his  country  of
         origin."


24.  In the circumstances of the present  case,  however,  this  observation
    does not assist  the  applicant.   No  rational  explanation  has  been
    advanced as to why, on the hypothesis that the applicant might not have
    been telling the truth about his shaving, this lie is unconnected  with
    his claim to have been 12/13 years old at the turn  of  2008/2009.   On
    the contrary, we consider that the untruth (for such we find it to  be)
    is intimately connected with the  "age"  issue.   Whether  or  not  the
    applicant was a young man who shaved does not, in itself, have anything
    to say about whether the applicant  is  or  is  not  at  real  risk  in
    Afghanistan from alleged enemies of his father.  By contrast,  it  has,
    we find, a great deal to say about whether the  applicant  was  telling
    the truth, in claiming to be a person who had arrived in Birmingham  at
    the age of 12.

25.  We find that the applicant has deliberately lied about this matter  and
    has persisted in those lies for some four  years.   We  agree  with  Mr
    Cowen that the issue of shaving is, in the circumstances,  of  profound
    significance in assessing the applicant's credibility.





(2)  Living an independent life

26.  There is a degree of interconnection between  a  number  of  the  other
    issues relating to the credibility of the applicant.  In  essence,  the
    respondent's case is that there is a striking contrast between, on  the
    one hand, the applicant's  alleged  age  and  his  alleged  history  of
    extreme social seclusion in Afghanistan  (living  indoors,  in  hiding,
    from age 5 to 12 with only his mother, brother and  -  on  occasions  -
    grandfather for company) and, on the other hand, the speed  with  which
    the applicant was, following his arrival in Birmingham, able to live an
    independent life, involving social interaction with friends (with  whom
    he stayed), surreptitious telephone conversations and finding  his  own
    way both within, as well as to and from, Birmingham.

27.  In the February 2009 age assessment,  Mr  Singh  recorded  that  on  22
    January 2009 the applicant said he "feels he is cooped up  at  Millmead
    Road" Children's Home.  His key worker had reported that the  applicant
    "tends to go outside of the unit when he receives calls on his mobile".
     When asked about this, the applicant  said  that  "this  is  the  only
    opportunity he has of going outside". Kay Magee recorded in her fax  to
    Mr Singh of 20 January 2009 that:-

         "Staff have also witnessed [applicant] has  frequent  conversations
         on his mobile.  He has not disclosed who  he  is  speaking  to  but
         daily will receive and make several calls."


28.  In his exchange with the applicant on 23 January 2009, Mr  Singh  asked
    him to describe a day in his life in Afghanistan, to which the response
    was that he "got up between 9:00 and 10:00am and spent the rest of  the
    day worrying about the enmity he felt from an unknown  source".   On  8
    January 2009 the applicant had indicated his refusal to participate  in
    in-house basic English education at the children's home "on  the  basis
    he should be attending school".  Mr Singh found that "curious", as  the
    applicant had told him that "he did not attend any formal  or  informal
    education establishment" in Afghanistan.  It was, however,  noted  that
    the applicant had said his grandfather sent him to "London" to  receive
    an education.  Mr Singh recorded the applicant has  "mostly  stayed  at
    home doing nothing.  No playing with children alone or other ages".

29.  Mr Singh noted that at Fairfield Children's Home, where  the  applicant
    was initially accommodated, the applicant had been said  to  have  been
    able to carry out "a whole range of tasks involving  self-care,  health
    issues, cooking, laundry, cleaning etc".  The assessment from Fairfield
    is at tab 20.  The applicant was found to be "independent"  as  regards
    stripping and making his bed; general tidying of his bedroom;  cleaning
    of his bedroom;  washing  up  and  drying  up;  cleaning  the  kitchen;
    understanding basic  hygiene;  machine  washing  clothes;  and  ironing
    clothes.   So  far  as  cooking  was  concerned,  he  was  assessed  as
    "independent" as regards preparing a "basic meal" and understanding the
    need for a balanced diet.  As for first aid, he was said  to  have  "no
    understanding of basic first aid, however if he  needs  help  he  knows
    where to go".  Under "Computer Skills" he was said to be "able  to  use
    the internet however if he is given a task on  the  computer  he  would
    need assistance".  He had "a basic understanding of a  24  hour  clock"
    and was "able to travel alone by bus".

30.  Mr Singh regarded  it  as  significant  that  the  applicant  made  and
    received phone calls but did not disclose with whom he was speaking, as
    well as that he would leave the building when he received  some  calls.
    Mr Singh also considered it noteworthy  that  the  applicant,  although
    allegedly having "lived in seclusion", was "able to use the  internet".
    His general self-help/care knowledge and skills  were  "incongruous  to
    his statement at the initial  assessment  that  he  can  conduct  basic
    personal care tasks  but  everything  else,  such  as  preparing  food,
    laundry,  was  mother's  responsibility".   Also  significant  was  the
    ability to understand a 24 hour clock.

31.  At the July 2009 assessment, the applicant told Mrs  Bazurto  that  his
    mother was "illiterate" and that he himself "could not read or  write".
    After the disappearance of his father, his mother had told him that  he
    "wasn't allowed to leave the house".  He would "stay at home  with  his
    mother and his little brother, where his mother would "teach him  about
    the Quran and that he would also play with his brother".

32.  By the time of the July  2009  assessment,  the  applicant  had  fallen
    under  the  responsibility  of  NASS,  following  the   conclusion   of
    Birmingham City Council that the applicant  was  an  adult.   NASS  had
    arranged  accommodation  for  the  applicant   in   Nottingham.    This
    background helps to explain the following passage from  the  July  2009
    assessment:-

         "On 27-07-2009 Social  workers  received  a  phone  call  from  the
         refugee council stating that [applicant] was there and that he  was
         not going to come to the Sycamore Centre [the respondent's  offices
         in  Birmingham]  because  he  did  not  know  how  to  get   there.
         [Applicant] had come from Nottingham on his own  [on]  at  least  2
         occasions and had been able to navigate the city in the past.  When
         asked about the fact that he was able to leave the Sycamore  Centre
         on his own and knew where he was going,  how  come  this  time  was
         different?  [Applicant] stated that he did not  remember  and  when
         asked again he replied 'I don't know'.  Social workers explained to
         [applicant] that it was hard to believe that he would not  remember
         how to  get  to  the  Sycamore  Centre  as  he  had  done  recently
         ([applicant] stayed quiet at that point suggesting that he did  not
         have an explanation).  The fact  that  [applicant]  is  very  vague
         about a matter that should be straightforward such as do  you  know
         how to get to the  Sycamore  centre  suggests  that  he  is  either
         deliberately trying to make it more difficult for social workers to
         finalise the age assessment or that he is trying to present that he
         is a vulnerable minor by stating that he does not have the capacity
         to navigate the city on his own."

33.  At the July 2009 assessment,  the  applicant  reiterated  that  he  had
    never attended school and was not allowed out of his home; and that  he
    did not know how to read and write.  He said he would  like  to  access
    education in the UK.

34.  Under the heading "Independence/Self-Care Skills" we find this:-

         "[Applicant] maintains that he cannot look after himself,  that  he
         does not know how  to  cook,  wash,  clean  or  manage  his  money.
         However it was observed  that  during  the  latest  age  assessment
         interviews [applicant] was clean and appropriately dressed for  the
         weather.  [Applicant] has also stated that he cannot  navigate  the
         city; however he  has  been  able  to  travel  from  Nottingham  to
         Birmingham and has been to  his  solicitor's  office,  the  refugee
         council and the sycamore centre on his own.  It is not rare  for  a
         young man from [applicant's] background not to  be  able  to  cook,
         wash or clean as it is traditional of his culture for females to do
         all of the household [c]hores which will [include] such  things  as
         cooking and cleaning.   Although  it  is  important  to  take  into
         account the fact that [applicant] may find it difficult to  perform
         the above mentioned self care skill it is also  important  to  take
         into account the cultural differences that may have led for him not
         to know how to perform such skills and therefore even though it may
         point out some of the needs of  [applicant]  they  may  not  be  an
         accurate way to establish his age."

35.  At some point  after  the  July  2009  age  assessment,  the  applicant
    returned to live in Birmingham.  In December  2011  he  was  living  in
    emergency accommodation at Bearwood Court  Hotel.   Starting  in  early
    January 2012, copies from the Bearwood  Court  Hotel  daily  "sign  in"
    sheets show that there have been numerous occasions when the  applicant
    is recorded as not having stayed the night at the hotel.

36.  In the summer of 2012, Mr Singh had a meeting with the  applicant,  who
    was concerned that the facilities at Bearwood Court Hotel were not such
    as to enable him to observe the Ramadan fast.  He was offered access to
    the hotel's kitchen facilities (normally reserved for families) so that
    he could prepare meals before the  fasting  time  of  day  began.   The
    applicant rejected this as unsatisfactory.  The daily signing in sheets
    record the applicant as having moved out of Bearwood Court in  November
    2012.  He is now accommodated in a two bedroom house in Winston  Green,
    Birmingham, where he looks after himself.  Although it was envisaged by
    the respondent that a second person would be sent to live in the  house
    with the applicant, as at the date of hearing this had not  transpired.
    Asked how he was managing to live, the applicant said that he was given
    �35 a week by the respondent and that he lived on  takeaway  food.   He
    was also taking driving lessons.

37.  The applicant said in oral evidence that he had not been questioned  by
    the staff at Millmead Road Children's Home about who he was speaking to
    on his mobile.  He went outside because he wanted to  do  so  and  felt
    depressed.  He would speak to two Afghan friends of his own age,  Zakir
    and Ali.  One of these was at Millmead Road.  He had met them only when
    he had been at Fairfield.

38.  Mr Suterwalla submitted that it was not a  "big  deal"  in  the  modern
    world for a person, such as the applicant, to be able to use  a  mobile
    telephone.  The  suspicions  raised  by  Kay  Magee  at  Millmead  Road
    Children's Home were merely insinuations; in  any  event,  no  one  had
    challenged the applicant about them at the  time.   It  was,  in  fact,
    indicative of childlike behaviour to speak on  one's  mobile  phone  to
    someone else who was in the same house.   The  applicant's  explanation
    for wishing to go outside to make and/or receive calls was plausible.

39.  So far as absences from Bearwood Court were  concerned,  Mr  Suterwalla
    asked us to note that the applicant  had  friends,  with  whom  it  was
    reasonable for him to stay on occasions.  In any event, by  this  time,
    the applicant had, he submitted, learnt  to  become  independent  as  a
    result of his experiences in the United Kingdom.  By  the  same  token,
    being able and willing to go to live in a house on his own  in  Winston
    Green in 2012 was incapable of  shedding  any  relevant  light  on  the
    applicant's age on arrival in 2008.  The evidence  that  the  applicant
    subsisted on takeaways had not been challenged by Mr Cowen and was  not
    indicative of adult behaviour.  So far as the use of  the  internet  in
    2009 was concerned, the applicant's evidence was that he had been shown
    by a friend in the children's home how to use the internet and this was
    what had been observed by the staff.

40.   We have  taken  account  of  those  submissions.   We  have,  however,
    concluded  that  the  evidence  to  which  we  have  referred   further
    undermines the applicant's credibility.  The cumulative effect  of  the
    various pieces of evidence is just too  great  to  be  explained  away.
    Furthermore, it is, taken as a whole, strikingly incompatible with  the
    applicant's account of a life, from age 5 to  leaving  Afghanistan,  of
    extreme social exclusion.

41.  It is, frankly, bizarre that as early as 22 January 2009 the  applicant
    should complain of being "cooped up at Millmead Road".  It  is  unclear
    precisely in what circumstances the applicant came  to  have  a  mobile
    telephone.   In any event, within  a  matter  of  days  he  was  making
    frequent use of it, both to receive and to make calls.   He  says  this
    was to make contact with friends who, despite his social isolation,  he
    had encountered and formed friendships with; again, within a very short
    period of time  of  his  arrival  in  Birmingham.   Given  his  alleged
    background, as a person who had spent most of  his  life  indoors,  the
    explanation that he went outside because he felt "depressed"  at  being
    "cooped up" is not credible. Nor is there any evidence to  substantiate
    the assertion that making or receiving a telephone call  was  the  only
    opportunity that the applicant had to go outside outdoors  at  Millmead
    Road.

42.  Whilst we accept that the evidence from Ms Magee  of  20  January  2009
    does not categorically state that the applicant had  been  asked  about
    the telephone conversations he was having, the fact that Ms  Magee  saw
    fit to inform Mr Singh that the applicant "has not disclosed who he  is
    speaking to" strikes us as  significant,  given  her  position  as  the
    applicant's key worker: a role which presupposes a  significant  degree
    of interaction with the applicant. In other words, it is plain that the
    applicant's keyworker was concerned he was not being forthcoming  about
    his telephone conversations.

43.  In coming to these conclusions, we also consider it  relevant  to  note
    the following matter.  In his statement, the applicant  describes  how,
    when he got off the lorry  in  Birmingham  "there  was  an  Indian  man
    nearby, I asked him to take me to a police station to  get  some  help.
    When I was at the police station the social services came..." [25].  In
    oral evidence, however, the applicant described how he had been  picked
    up after leaving the lorry by someone who took him to a house, fed  him
    and gave his clean clothes, before taking him to  the  police  station.
    The overwhelming likelihood is that this person was either a friend  of
    the applicant or a  part  of  the  people  smuggling  operation,  which
    clearly involved much more than  merely  depositing  the  applicant  in
    Birmingham.

44.  Even accepting the applicant's description of someone showing  him  how
    to use the internet, the Fairfield evidence describes him as being able
    to use a computer, which is difficult to  reconcile  with  his  claimed
    total  illiteracy.   We  say  that,  notwithstanding  Mr   Suterwalla's
    submission that even an illiterate person can "click" on an "icon".  In
    fact, the applicant's asserted illiteracy  is  itself  problematic.  He
    could sign his name on various forms, very shortly after arrival, using
    a signature instead of a cross or other mark.

45.  Also significant, we find, is the  applicant's  ability,  as  a  person
    allegedly without education or any real awareness of time and dates, to
    grasp, again within days, the principle of the 24  hour  clock.  In  so
    saying, we are mindful that at [19] of  his  statement,  the  applicant
    says the agents who transported him across continents gave him a watch,
    so as to be ready to leave at a certain time: "I had never used a watch
    before the agent gave us a watch each, but I learned to on that journey
    because the  agents  made  us  use  watches".  There  is,  however,  no
    indication in the applicant's evidence that the watches handed  out  by
    the "agents" were of the 24 hour digital variety. In  any  event,  when
    the issue of knowing the 24 hour clock was put to the applicant  on  12
    February 2009, it was recorded that he "maintains he doesn't understand
    the 24  hour  clock"  (tab  22/12).  We  prefer  the  evidence  of  the
    respondent on this issue.

46.   The applicant's refusal to engage in training in English,  because  he
    was not allowed to go to school, is not compatible  with  his  asserted
    wish to receive an education in the United Kingdom, which was  one  (if
    not the main) reason why he was allegedly sent  here.  We  consider  it
    highly unlikely that a  person  of  the  applicant's  claimed  age  and
    background would have had the confidence  or  maturity  to  refuse  the
    offer of English training and that his  refusal  suggests,  instead,  a
    somewhat sophisticated appreciation of the link between going to school
    in the United Kingdom and being regarded as a child, with all that this
    entails.

47.  By the summer of 2009, the applicant was, we find, able to travel  from
    Nottingham to Birmingham on a number of occasions.  We do not  consider
    that his alleged inability to do so, as recorded in the July  2009  age
    assessment, is credible, particularly since he had done this before and
    could offer no explanation to the social workers as to  why  he  should
    subsequently lose that skill.  At [39] of the applicant's statement, he
    asserts that "I did not know how to get to the Centre. This was because
    I had never been there before". That this is not true is plain from tab
    22/13, where Mr Singh recorded on 13 February 2009 that  the  applicant
    "refused to receive the paperwork and go to the R.C. [Refugee  Council]
    for support. After about an hour [applicant] left the Sycamore Centre".
    On 16 February 2009, Mr Singh recorded  "[applicant]  returned  to  the
    Sycamore Centre of his own accord ... and was given  money  for  a  day
    saver ticket to go to the R.C." The  reality,  we  find,  is  that  the
    applicant decided that the proficiency he  had  hitherto  exhibited  in
    finding his way around was incompatible with his  claim  to  be  (then)
    only 13.

48.  We see no reason to doubt the assessments undertaken  at  Fairfield  in
    December/January 2008/2009, regarding the range of skills exhibited  by
    the applicant.  The clear thrust of his evidence was  that  his  mother
    had done everything for him at home, other  than  as  regards  personal
    hygiene.  That is strongly  incompatible  with  his  ability  to  cook,
    albeit a basic meal, use a washing  machine  etc.  At  tab  22/101,  Mr
    Singh's manuscript notes of his interview with the applicant record the
    latter as saying that "he just put them [presumably,  clothes]  in  the
    [washing] machine". If that was all the applicant was seen to  do,  the
    Fairfield assessment (otherwise nuanced, as can be seen from the above)
    would have said so.  Mr Suterwalla submitted  that,  if  the  applicant
    did, in fact, do these things, they were indicative of  his  desire  to
    please those running the home.  That may be the case; but it  does  not
    explain how the applicant was able to do so, within only a few days  of
    arrival.

49.  Whilst we accept that,  by  the  time  of  the  applicant's  return  to
    Birmingham, he had had experience of living in various environments  in
    the United Kingdom, nevertheless, having regard to the  evidence  as  a
    whole, we  find  that  his  decision  to  absent  himself  on  frequent
    occasions from Bearwood Court Hotel and to effectively initiate a  move
    to his present, unsupervised accommodation is indicative of  a  pattern
    of behaviour, since arrival in late 2008, that points strongly  to  the
    applicant's being significantly older than his  claimed  age.  In  this
    regard, it is noteworthy  that  at  tab  22/12  there  is  recorded  an
    instance of similar behaviour  from  as  early  as  11  February  2009:
    "[Applicant] informed of meeting tomorrow and advised to  pack  a  bag.
    Initially obliged then later became challenging and wanted a day saver,
    supposedly to go to the Mosque. When this was refused, as  he  goes  to
    the Mosque accompanied, [applicant] left the unit without permission".

(3)  Contacting the applicant's family in Afghanistan

50.  On 8 January 2009, Mr Singh discussed with the applicant the  issue  of
    contacting his family in Afghanistan:-

         "[Applicant] states he has had no contact  with  his  birth  family
         since coming to the UK.  I suggested a referral be made to the  Red
         Cross to pass on details to the family that [applicant] is safe and
         well in England.  [Applicant] rejected this  recommendation  saying
         he will ask his friend, Rahim, to contact his grandfather.  I asked
         for  Rahim's  details  such  as  his  full  name,   address,   etc.
         [Applicant] said he knew him as Rahim only and did not  know  where
         he lived.  But if [applicant] goes to a Mosque he will  ask  around
         and find him.  Also, [applicant] said when he attends a Mosque,  he
         will ask people for his  grandfather's  contact  details:  because,
         when he was about to leave the village, telephone lines were  being
         laid, and, given  his  grandfather  is  well-known  in   the  area,
         someone will have a 'phone number' for him."

51.    In  her  2010  determination,  Judge  Robertson  made  the  following
    findings on the issue of the Red Cross and contact with the applicant's
    family:-

         "65. He was asked by social workers, in  the  context  of  the  age
             assessment, if he would like the Red Cross to try and  contact
             his family to let them know that he was safe; he declined this
             offer.  This is not the action of a young boy who  would  want
             his family to know that he is safe.


         66.  In declining this offer, he  stated  that  he  would  ask  his
             friend Rahim to contact his grandfather.  When  asked  by  the
             social workers for Rahim's details, he stated that he did  not
             know his full name or his address but could  find  him  if  he
             goes to the Mosque and asks around.  Yet when asked during the
             hearing what attempts he had made  to  locate  his  family  in
             Afghanistan, he stated that so far he  had  made  no  attempts
             because he did not have anyone here.  He also said that he had
             accepted the offer of Red Cross help, which is contradicted in
             the BSS report."

52.  In oral evidence to us, the applicant was asked about [65] and [66]  of
    Judge Robertson's determination.  He said that he  probably  was  asked
    about the Red Cross but he had "no idea what they were talking  about".
    Asked if he would not  wish  to  know  if  his  family  was  safe,  the
    applicant replied that Mr Singh had handed the applicant  over  to  the
    Refugee Council.  Asked about Rahim, the applicant  said  that  it  was
    another person who knew Rahim at the  mosque  and  that  the  applicant
    himself did not know Rahim.  The applicant had been introduced  at  the
    mosque to Rahim by someone else, who had told Rahim that the  applicant
    was new to the United Kingdom.

53.  All of this  is  intensely  problematic,  as  regards  the  applicant's
    credibility.  No cultural, ethnic or other alleged difference has  been
    put forward to explain why the applicant, as a child of 12  or  13  who
    had lived  an  entirely  family-orientated  existence  in  Afghanistan,
    should  refuse  an  offer  of  assistance  to  trace  his   family   in
    Afghanistan.  The allegation in the oral evidence, that he did not know
    what the Red Cross was, is extremely belated and  directly  contradicts
    what is recorded at [66] of Judge Robertson's  determination.   In  any
    event, the point is that  the  applicant  was  being  offered  help  in
    tracing his family, regardless of whether  he  understood  the  precise
    agency involved.

54.   Furthermore, the story about Rahim is incoherent.  The facts  that  he
    knew such a person by name as a friend; that he knew how to  find  him;
    and that he considered Rahim  capable  of  contacting  the  applicant's
    grandfather, all sit poorly with the applicant's assertion that he knew
    no one in the United Kingdom.  Indeed, the first reference to Rahim  is
    in Mr Singh's notes of a conversation with the applicant on 19 December
    2008, when the applicant first rejected the offer that Mr Singh made to
    contact the Red Cross, on the basis that he would use Rahim, said  then
    to be a friend of his from a "neighbouring village" and that,  although
    he did not know where Rahim lived, "when he goes to  the  mosque  he'll
    ask about Rahim and someone will definitely  know  Rahim"  (tab  22/8).
    The thrust of what the applicant is recorded as saying is that  he  had
    not yet been to a mosque in the  United  Kingdom.   How  the  applicant
    could know so much about Rahim is, accordingly,  puzzling  if,  as  the
    applicant said in oral evidence, he did not know Rahim and  had  to  be
    introduced by another person at the mosque.

55.  We consider that the inescapable conclusion of all this is as  follows.
     The applicant was well aware from the outset of the offer  being  made
    to trace his family.  He consciously declined to take  up  that  offer,
    fearing that if he did, there  was  a  danger  that  his  entire  story
    (including that of his age) would unravel.  But, in seeking to  deflect
    enquiries by invoking the person called  Rahim,  the  applicant  merely
    created further problems with his credibility.


(4)  Mosque attendance and religious observance

56.  In speaking to Mr Singh on 8 January 2009, the applicant,  as  we  have
    already noted,  expressed  "a  very  keen  desire  to  attend  mosque".
    According to the assessment the applicant "also very  readily  said  he
    observed fasting at the appropriate festival times".   This  caused  Mr
    Singh to observe that "my very  basic  understanding  is  that  fasting
    starts post puberty and there is a gradual introduction".  We have also
    noted how, in the same conversation, the applicant said that if he were
    to go to a mosque, he would ask  around  and  find  the  person  called
    Rahim.  The assessment  continues:  "also,  [applicant]  said  when  he
    attends a Mosque he will  ask  people  for  his  grandfather's  contact
    details".

57.  In answer to questions from the Tribunal on 11 February, the  applicant
    said that he first went to a mosque in the United Kingdom in 2009.   He
    had not attended a mosque in  Afghanistan,  although  he  knew  what  a
    mosque was.  He then said that he  had  accompanied  his  father  to  a
    mosque when he was very young; but had not done so after his father had
    disappeared.

58.  That oral evidence, which Mr Suterwalla did  not  seek  to  explore  in
    supplementary questioning, sits poorly with the  evidence  about  Rahim
    contained in the February 2009 age assessment,  which  demonstrates  an
    awareness of the opportunities  for  social  interaction  presented  by
    attendance at a mosque.

59.  As for the applicant's having "readily said he observed fasting at  the
    appropriate  festival  times",  we  have  already  noted  the  evidence
    concerning the applicant's stated wish to observe the Ramadan  fast  in
    the summer of 2012.  But he told us in oral evidence that this was  the
    first Ramadan fast that he had observed.  When asked how that  was  so,
    he said that he had spoken to a Mullah who told him that he should  now
    be fasting.  The applicant asserted that he was 16 at that time.

60.  This  evidence,  which  Mr  Suterwalla  did  not  wish  to  explore  in
    supplementary questioning, directly contradicts what the applicant said
    to Mr Singh on 8 January 2009.  We  consider  that  the  truth  of  the
    matter is that the applicant did, as he stated in January 2009, come to
    the United Kingdom as someone who had already  begun  the  practice  of
    Ramadan fasting, whilst in  Afghanistan.   No  evidence  has  been  put
    before us to suggest that boys of 12 or 13 are supposed to fast; on the
    contrary, the applicant's own case is to the contrary.  Accordingly, we
    consider that this issue also is one that  undermines  the  applicant's
    credibility.  The applicant has, we find, sought  to  resile  from  his
    earlier statement, having belatedly realised that it was indicative  of
    him being significantly older than his claimed age.

Conclusions on credibility

61.  Our conclusion is that each of the sets of  findings  under  the  above
    four headings, on its own, is such as to  destroy  the  reliability  of
    anything the applicant has to say on the issue of his age.

62.  The applicant's lies  in  respect  of  each  of  these  matters  cannot
    properly be said to be for reasons "unconnected  with  the  applicant's
    case as to his age" (R (B) v Merton.   On  the  contrary,  we  consider
    their motivation to be closely connected with the  applicant's  attempt
    to gain the advantages that he knew full well, when he came here, would
    be extended by the authorities of the United Kingdom to a child  of  12
    or 13 years of age.

63.  Certain elements of our findings on the applicant's credibility are  to
    be found in the two age assessments of  the  respondent.   Although  we
    have used those assessments, and the materials relating to them, as  an
    evidential source in reaching our credibility findings, those  findings
    are our own.  In reaching them, we have not deferred to  the  views  of
    the respondent's social workers.  We  have  also  had  full  regard  to
    factors that might point to the applicant's being a witness  of  truth,
    such  as  the  fact  that  he  has  consistently  ascribed  a  need  to
    international protection by reference to the activities of his  father,
    and that he has consistently averred that he was 12 when he arrived  in
    the United  Kingdom  in  December  2009.   We  have  also,  as  already
    indicated, borne in mind that, even according to  the  respondent,  the
    applicant is, even now, a relatively young person, whose  communication
    with those tasked with making decisions about his future has had to  be
    through  interpreters.   Notwithstanding  all  this,   we   are   fully
    satisfied, to the requisite standard, that the applicant's word is  not
    reliable.

F.  The weight to be accorded to the age assessments

64.   Were we to find, as we have, that the applicant's word  is  unreliable
    Mr Cowen submitted that the best evidence in this case was to be  found
    in the age assessments of the respondent.  Although it is the July 2009
    assessment that is the subject of the present proceedings,  it  is  now
    common ground that the respondent has in no sense resiled from what  is
    written in the February 2009 assessment  and  that,  accordingly,  both
    assessments may have a part  to  play  in  our  task  of  deciding  the
    applicant's true age.

65.  That does  not  mean,  however,  that,  having  decided  the  issue  of
    credibility against the applicant, we should automatically defer to the
    views expressed by the respondent's social workers in the  assessments.
    Mr Suterwalla advanced a number of submissions as to why  we  ought  to
    decline to put weight upon the age assessments. We shall address  those
    submissions.

(a) Lack of training

66.  Both Mr Singh and Mrs Bazurto accepted that, at  the  times  they  made
    their respective age assessments of the applicant in 2009, neither  had
    received specific training on how  to  compile  such  assessments.   Mr
    Singh described what appeared to be  an  informal  in-house  system  of
    training "on the job".  We accept that other local  authorities  might,
    at  the  time,  have  offered  specific  training  in  undertaking  age
    assessments.  However, we do not consider  that  the  absence  of  such
    training in Birmingham at the time is such as materially to affect  the
    weight to be placed on either of the respondent's  assessments  in  the
    present case.  Mr Singh had already undertaken many such assessments in
    the more than four years that he had been in his current role, bringing
    him into contact with many  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  minors  and
    those asserting to be such.  He has been with Birmingham  City  Council
    for some 26 years, as a social worker. Having heard him give  evidence,
    we formed an entirely positive view  of  Mr  Singh's  truthfulness  and
    professionalism.  We are fully  satisfied  that  he  brought  a  wholly
    professional approach to his assessment of  the  applicant's  age.   We
    also consider it significant that, when asked at  the  present  hearing
    whether he stood by the assessment he had made, in  the  light  of  his
    present experience (and having had significant further contact with the
    applicant  since  the  latter's  return  to   Birmingham),   Mr   Singh
    unequivocally stated that he did.  So too did Mrs Bazurto, although her
    recent involvement  with  the  applicant  appears  to  have  been  more
    limited. We should say here that we formed a similarly positive view of
    Mrs Bazurto's honesty and professionalism.

(b) Absence of an independent adult

67.  In 2009, Birmingham City Council did not have a  practice  of  offering
    those undergoing age assessments the presence of an  independent  adult
    at the face-to-face meetings.  Since 2009, this practice  has  changed.
    However, Mrs Bazurto told us that her recent experience is that many of
    the young persons concerned specifically decline to have an independent
    adult present.  Be that as it may,  we  have  concluded  that,  in  the
    circumstances of the present case, the absence of such a person at both
    of the assessments involving the applicant has not been shown  to  have
    made a material difference.

68.  The applicant has not identified  any  specific  matter,  where  it  is
    alleged that the presence of such an adult at the meetings  would  have
    materially changed what was said or observed.  We  have,  nevertheless,
    borne this issue in mind in considering the criticisms advanced  by  Mr
    Suterwalla regarding the assessments.

69.   We note that, in R (Z) the Court of Appeal held (at  [25])  that  "the
    claimant should have had the opportunity to have an  independent  adult
    present". It is,  however,  important  to  note  that  R  (Z)  was  the
    determination of an appeal against the refusal of  a  deputy  judge  to
    grant permission to apply for judicial review and that the  absence  of
    an opportunity to have an independent adult present "contributes to our
    decision whether [the claimant] should be given permission to proceed".
    The Court was, therefore, not  saying  that  the  absence  of  such  an
    opportunity invariably means that the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
    assessment must be limited. It is a factor to be borne in  mind,  along
    with everything else.

(c) Interpreter issues

70.    We have considered the interpreter  issues  mentioned  above  in  the
    context of our own credibility  findings.   To  reiterate,  we  do  not
    consider that the applicant has  shown  that  any  of  the  matters  in
    respect of which we  have  not  found  him  credible,  or  any  of  the
    credibility issues that troubled the social workers,  can  properly  be
    ascribed to difficulties in interpretation.

(d) Mr Singh's initial assessments

71.  Mr Suterwalla submitted that Mr Singh  had,  in  effect,  made  initial
    assessments of the applicant's age before the February 2009  assessment
    ( tab 22/19; tab 14/1-8), without going through the  proper  processes;
    in particular, without giving the applicant an opportunity  to  comment
    on the findings.  We reject that submission.  It is clear that, because
    of concerns Mr Singh had on first  encountering  the  applicant  on  15
    December 2008, which of necessity were based on limited information, Mr
    Singh's recommendation for action was that the applicant needed  to  be
    provided with accommodation, whilst further  assessments  were  carried
    out, given the doubts  about  the  applicant's  stated  age.   Such  an
    initial assessment was, thus, in no sense to be equated with  a  "full"
    age assessment.  In any event, towards the bottom of page  19  we  find
    this:

|The completed Initial          |Agrees with the           |
|Assessment and Initial Plan    |information he has        |
|should be discussed with a     |provided but maintains he |
|child/young person and their   |is 12 years old.          |
|parents/carers.                |                          |


    The "core assessment" of 22 January 2009 merely recommended that an  age
    assessment be carried out in respect of the applicant.


(e) Mrs Bazurto's failure to put issues of concern to the applicant

72.  Mr Suterwalla put to Mrs Bazurto that she  had  not  raised  issues  of
    concern  with  the  applicant,  in  connection  with  the   July   2009
    assessment.  Mrs Bazurto demurred.  Again, we do not find merit in this
    submission.  Mrs Bazurto's manuscript notes (tab 21/13)  include  those
    of a meeting with the applicant, where  it  is  plain  that  the  typed
    assessment (tab 16) was read  to  him  in  translation  and  where  the
    applicant is recorded as making a number of comments, by  reference  to
    specific pages of the typed document.  Thus, for example, on page 5  of
    the latter we find social workers noticing that the applicant  said  in
    the past:

         "that he was sent to the UK to  access  education  and  when  asked
         about how he felt about coming to the UK  he  stated  that  he  was
         happy to go to the UK and get an education.  Such statements  makes
         SW question if [applicant's] main reason to  come  to  the  UK  was
         education rather than trying to escape his father's enemies  as  he
         did not make reference about  saving  his  life  when  asked  about
         specific feelings about leaving Afghanistan".






73.  As to this, the manuscript notes record as follows:-

         "Education


         I left Afghanistan from my father's enemies and in the UK I want to
         learn English because every [sic] speak English".


74.  As another example, on page 6 of the typed document, it was noted  that
    in the previous age assessment the applicant had attributed a  burn  on
    his left forearm to a deliberate protest on his part  "because  he  was
    not getting any food from the agent".  In the  present  assessment,  by
    contrast,  the  applicant  had  said  that  he  was  hungry  and   lost
    consciousness "and must have burnt himself with something".  Again, the
    manuscript notes make it plain that the applicant was able  to  address
    this issue, as follows:-

         "Page 6 - about his burn.  On the way to UK I had no food nothing -
         because of that some [things] happened to my hand  and  I  lost  my
         conscious and burned my arm."

75.  The manuscript notes conclude as follows:-

         "Pg 7 - I don't accept the result of age - I will come back to  you
         when you say I am a minor.  If you are saying that  I  am  over  18
         years I don't accept this."

76.  The interpreter and the applicant signed the manuscript notes.

77.  The applicant was given a full opportunity to deal  with  issues  that,
    given his experience in respect of the first age assessment,  he  would
    have known were of concern.  Thus, he was asked where his  father  went
    and then whether he knew anything further about his father (he said  he
    did not).  The notes dated 10 July 2009 record this:-

               "My father's enemies used to look for us we used to  move  to
         other parts.
         Q:   What other parts?
         A:   Whenever my grandfather knew they were coming we would  go  to
             another city.


         Q:   How long would you stay there?
         A:   Sometimes months, sometimes weeks.


         Q:   How come you did not tell that to Liz when she asked about any
             events prior to [your] journey to the UK?
         A:   Because I did not understand the question.  Can I  change  the
             answer now."


78.  We also note that in the July 2009 assessment it is recorded  that  "We
    discussed with [applicant] that if he  said  something  different  than
    what he had previously stated we could draw out these discrepancies and
    this would affect his credibility in maintaining his  age.  [Applicant]
    said that he understood" (tab 16/2).

79.   Overall, we are entirely satisfied that no procedural  fairness  issue
    arises, such as to cause us to limit the way that  we  might  otherwise
    put on the July 2009 assessment.

(f) "Stock stories"

80.  Mr Suterwalla criticised Mr Singh's assessment for saying this:-

         "During the assessment [applicant] informed us he was 12  years  of
         age.  He knew this because his mother told him his age seven  years
         ago when his father went missing.  Then he said he knows he  is  12
         years old because his mother told him before he  left  Afghanistan.
         I have age assessed a number  of  Afghan  males  and  a  very  high
         proportion state their mothers told them how old they were a  short
         time before leaving their home country.  This sounds like  a  stock
         phrase and I wonder whether the agent's advise individuals  to  say
         this."


81.  Mr Suterwalla submitted that this passage demonstrates  that  Mr  Singh
    "dismissed [the applicant's] account of how he  knew  his  age  without
    considering it properly... it would appear he was predisposed to reject
    [applicant's] account because his case was that [applicant's] claim was
    a 'stock phrase'".

82.  We do not consider that the passage just quoted in any way  shows  that
    Mr Singh had made up his mind about the applicant, on the basis that he
    had heard the same story before about Afghan males  not  knowing  their
    ages until their mothers told them,  shortly  before  departure.   Both
    this Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal  have  heard  such  evidence,
    many times.  It is, however, plain from the  January  2009  assessment,
    and the rest of the evidence involving Mr Singh, that he  assessed  the
    evidence holistically.  It cannot properly be said that the  rhetorical
    question he posed caused him to reject out of hand  evidence  probative
    of the applicant's claimed age.

83.  In any event, there is no indication in the  July  2009  assessment  of
    Mrs Bazurto that she regarded the applicant's evidence  regarding  what
    his mother had allegedly said as destructive or even  damaging  of  his
    credibility.  On the contrary, Mrs Bazurto and Ms Cant went into  great
    detail with the applicant as to  his  account  of  his  experiences  in
    Afghanistan.



(g) "Badgering" the applicant

84.  Indeed, the applicant complains that he was,  in  effect,  badgered  by
    the social workers during his age assessment questioning:-

         "31. When I met the social workers, I felt that they asked a lot of
             questions which were quite complicated  and  many  of  them  I
             could not answer.  Whenever I would  not  be  able  to  answer
             their questions I would simply tell them that I did not  know.
             However they did not accept this and made me guess at answers.
              When I would guess, which sometimes was not  until  they  had
             asked the same question 4 or 5 times, they would  just  accept
             the answer as if I was certain of it.  They would never ask me
             how I knew the answer even when it was clear that I did not.


         32.  ...during the interview, the social services would  ask  me  a
             lot of questions which I could not provide answers to.   These
             largely involved precise dates  and  places  in  which  events
             occurred throughout my life, such as when I went to live  with
             my maternal grandfather and when I left Afghanistan.  Whenever
             I was asked a question which I could not give an answer to,  I
             would explain honestly  that  I  did  not  know.   The  social
             services would not accept this  and  would  ask  me  the  same
             question again and again demanding a precise answer."

85.  We will shortly look in more detail about certain lines of  questioning
    by Mrs Bazurto.  However, having had the opportunity of  observing  the
    applicant, Mr Singh and Mrs Bazurto give evidence  to  us,  and  having
    regard to the fact that we are being asked to consider interviews  that
    took place in 2009, we do not consider  that  there  is  any  realistic
    possibility that the applicant's performance at  those  interviews  was
    adversely affected by oppressive questioning on the part of the  social
    workers, or that the applicant was otherwise unfairly treated by  them.
    Mrs Bazurto expressly accepted in oral evidence that  dates  and  times
    are not important in Afghan culture.  We are fully satisfied  that,  in
    conducting the July 2009 assessment , Mrs Bazurto had  full  regard  to
    that matter.  As we shall see, in any event, the  main  concerns  about
    the truthfulness of the applicant's story lay elsewhere.

Credibility issues of concern to the social workers

86.  As we have already indicated,  our  own  credibility  findings  have  a
    degree of overlap with those  to  be  found  in  the  age  assessments.
    However, each of the social workers in charge of  the  assessments  had
    additional  credibility  issues  with  the  applicant's  account.    In
    deciding whether we can place weight on the respondent's assessment  of
    the applicant's age, the Tribunal  is  not  required  to  determine  in
    respect of each such issue, whether we would or would not take  exactly
    the same view as the social workers.  Rather, it is necessary for us to
    consider whether any of  the  criticisms  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    applicant is such as to lead us to the conclusion that any weight  that
    we might otherwise place on the age assessments falls to be reduced.

    (i) Speaking Urdu


87.  Mr Singh, who speaks Urdu, noted that the applicant asked if  he  could
    speak Urdu with him, in order to communicate without the  need  for  an
    interpreter.   According  to  the  applicant,  this  led  Mr  Singh  to
    insinuate that the applicant does not come  from  Afghanistan.   During
    questioning of Mr Singh at the hearing before us, Mr  Suterwalla  asked
    Mr Singh if Pushtu and Urdu might  be  similar.   Mr  Singh  said  they
    might; but we have not been furnished with any  objective  evidence  on
    this issue.


88.   In  any  event,  we  consider  the  matter  to  be  of   no   material
    significance. As Judge Robertson noted at [55] of her determination, Mr
    Singh's "view as to the country of origin does not appear on  the  list
    of factors on which the conclusions [of his age assessment] are  based,
    which are set out on page 7".




    (ii) Tattoo


89.  The social workers noted a tattoo on the back of the  applicant's  left
    hand, which he stated was done by his mother.  Neither Mr Singh nor Mrs
    Bazurto considered the presence of this tattoo to  be  compatible  with
    the applicant's claimed age on arrival.  Although we have not chosen to
    place any weight on this issue in assessing credibility, we do not find
    that the applicant has demonstrated that it was  unreasonable  for  the
    social  workers  to  do  so.   Both  Mr  Singh  and  Mrs  Bazurto  have
    significant experience of dealing with young Afghan men.  They  plainly
    considered it unusual for a person of the applicant's  claimed  age  to
    have been tattooed, and to have had this done  by  is  mother.   Again,
    their view does not materially impact upon the weight to  be  given  to
    the age assessments.

    (iii) Inconsistencies identified by Mrs Bazurto


90.  On page 7 of the July 2009 age assessment, Mrs  Bazurto  set  out  what
    she considered to be inconsistencies in  the  applicant's  story.   The
    first related to where the applicant was born.   Mrs  Bazurto  observed
    that the applicant had said he was born in Suliki (Paktia province) but
    later said he was born in Mirzaka,  in  Gardiz  province.   When  asked
    about this in oral evidence,  Mrs  Bazurto  said  that  she  understood
    Mirzaka and Gardiz were different districts within Paktia province.

91.  The applicant has declined to put forward  any  objective  evidence  on
    this matter.  In the circumstances, he cannot be heard to say that  Mrs
    Bazurto  has  unreasonably  taken  a  point  against  the   applicant's
    credibility.

92.  Mrs Bazurto noticed clear discrepancies in the evidence regarding  when
    the applicant had moved, after his father's alleged disappearance,  and
    whether he knew how old he  was  when  this  happened.   Mr  Suterwalla
    submitted that "it  would  be  unsurprising  if  there  were  not  some
    inconsistencies in his account".  This touches on  the  criticism  that
    the respondent's social workers had allegedly been predisposed  against
    the applicant.  We reject that submission.  Having heard Mr  Singh  and
    Mrs Bazurto give evidence, and  having  regard  to  their  professional
    qualifications, responsibilities and experience, we do not believe this
    to be the case.  It does not, however, mean that they were  obliged  to
    agree with the applicant's claimed  age,  in  the  face  of  compelling
    evidence to the contrary.

93.  Likewise, Mrs Bazurto was entitled to find that there  was  a  conflict
    in the evidence regarding how and when the applicant came  to  know  of
    the alleged activities of  his  father.   We  have  already  noted  the
    discrepant evidence regarding the circumstances in which the  applicant
    was burnt.  He now asserts that he was burnt various times  during  his
    trip.  However, Mrs Bazurto was specific in her evidence to us that she
    referred to the visible burn on the applicant's arm and  it  was  about
    this particular burn that he was questioned.




    (iv)  The vagueness of evidence regarding childhood


94.  On page 7 of the July 2009 age assessment Mrs Bazurto said this:-

         "Taking  into  account   that   [applicant]   was   given   several
         opportunities to provide details  of  his  story  and  that  social
         workers explained to him several times the importance of getting as
         much information as possible [applicant's] responses to many of the
         questions about his story and age [were] limited to 'I don't  know'
         or 'I don't remember' i.e. when  trying  to  make  a  timeline  and
         social workers asked about significant details of his life."

95.  Mr Suterwalla spent some time in cross-examination of  Mrs  Bazurto  in
    an attempt to  suggest  that  the  applicant  had,  in  fact,  provided
    appropriate information.  Mrs Bazurto was, to some extent, hampered  by
    the fact  that  her  colleague,  Elizabeth  Cant,  with  whom  she  had
    conducted the July 2009 assessment, subsequently left the employment of
    the respondent and Mrs Bazurto's own manuscript notes did  not  reflect
    the totality of what  had  been  asked  and  answered.   Mrs  Bazurto's
    recollection of events, however, struck us as generally (and genuinely)
    good and we accept her evidence that, when questioned about what he did
    as a child, following his  father's  alleged  disappearance,  and  what
    memories he had of that time, the applicant was unforthcoming  and  had
    to be pushed to say even such generalised things as he eventually  did;
    for example, that he played with his brother.  Mr Suterwalla  submitted
    that, following the father's disappearance, the applicant's  life  may,
    indeed, have  been  genuinely  boring.   However,  even  (or,  perhaps,
    particularly) if a child is confined to the  house  for  six  or  seven
    years from age 5, that child is likely to  have  memories  of  specific
    events, even if these are mundane by objective standards.

96.  It is, perhaps, in relation  to  this  line  of  questioning  that  the
    applicant's statement complains of being asked more than once  to  give
    answers that he was unable to provide.  If so - and it  strikes  us  as
    highly likely - then the applicant was not being  asked  anything  that
    assumed any inappropriate knowledge of dates.



    (v)  Reasons for leaving Afghanistan and emotions on leaving


97.  In the July 2009 age assessment, Mrs Bazurto stated as follows:-

         "Social workers asked [applicant] about how he  felt  when  he  was
         told he had to leave Afghanistan and he stated that he was happy to
         go to the UK and get an education which contradicts the  fact  that
         he had to leave in order to escape his  father's  enemies.   Social
         workers asked how he felt about travelling alone to the UK;  if  he
         felt scared, happy, sad or any other feeling  towards  the  journey
         that he was about to take.  [Applicant]  stated  that  he  was  not
         scared because he did not know  what  was  happening.   When  asked
         again he stated that he was happy."

98.  Mrs Bazurto commented that:-

         "It was hard to believe that a child aged 12 would  not  have  been
         scared or have any feelings of anxiety towards  a  journey  to  the
         unknown.  In addition you would expect a  child  aged  12  to  have
         feelings of separation and loss given the fact that he  spent  most
         of his life in a closed  environment  not  leaving  the  house  and
         totally dependent on his mother; you would also expect a child aged
         12/13 to display signs of anxiety about not  knowing  his  family's
         whereabouts which has not been the case [applicant]."

99.   We  do  not  accept  that  Mrs  Bazurto  has  recorded  this  exchange
    inaccurately.  Whilst the applicant has asserted that  there  were  two
    reasons for him to come to the United Kingdom: to escape retribution at
    the hands of his father's enemies and  to  receive  an  education,  the
    social workers were entitled to regard it of significance that  it  was
    the education aspect that featured in the applicant's answer  to  them.
    Most strikingly, the applicant evinced  no  sadness  or  alarm  at  the
    thought of leaving Afghanistan.  However, by the time of his  statement
    in 2010, the applicant said, "I was very scared of having to  leave  my
    family because I was so young but they told me I had  to  go  with  the
    agent as it was the only way that I would be safe and because of my age
    I did what they told me" [13].  If that was the truth, it is  difficult
    to understand why the applicant did not say so to Mrs Bazurto.   Again,
    the applicant has failed to show that the respondent was not reasonably
    entitled to say what is recorded on page 4 of the July 2009 assessment.

Coda: Information from mother that applicant was 12

100. It is  entirely  obvious  that  the  present  proceedings  involve  the
    applicant's challenge to an assessment of age by the respondent,  which
    in turn inevitably involved the conclusion that the applicant has  lied
    to the respondent's social workers about his age and that  his  account
    of his life in Afghanistan is  thoroughly  unreliable.   That  was  the
    stance adopted on behalf of the respondent by Mr Cowen at the  hearing.



101. In his closing submissions, Mr Suterwalla submitted  that  it  was  not
    the respondent's case that the applicant "was lying when he said he had
    been told his age by his mother" and that  there  had  been  no  cross-
    examination on this issue. There  were,  however,  questions  from  the
    Tribunal regarding the record in the February 2009 assessment that  the
    applicant knew he was 12 "because his mother told  him  his  age  seven
    years ago when his father  went  missing".   The  applicant  sought  to
    explain that by saying it was his mistake and that he meant his brother
    was 7 years old at the time the applicant left the country.

102. Mr Suterwalla  attempted  to  advance  the  proposition  that,  in  the
    absence  of  direct  cross-examination  on   the   issue,   there   was
    "unchallenged evidence of how [the applicant] came to know his age  and
    what he was told by his mother".  Mr Suterwalla said this dictated that
    the applicant's account of his age should be accepted.

103. Mr Cowen took strong exception to this submission.  He  contended  that
    the respondent's case was clear.  He had challenged the honesty of  the
    respondent's claim to his age in cross-examination  and  there  was  no
    duty to put each and every point.

104. We have no hesitation  in  agreeing  with  Mr  Cowen  in  rejecting  Mr
    Suterwalla's submissions on this issue.  No procedural fairness  matter
    arises.  The applicant has been aware for several years of  the  nature
    of the case against him, concerning his age. He will have realised that
    the respondent did not believe  the  age  allegedly  told  him  by  his
    mother. If the respondent had believed him, there would  have  been  no
    need for the present proceedings. Furthermore, the applicant's claim to
    international protection was rejected by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson in an undisturbed determination, in which she found that  the
    applicant was not a credible witness by reference to the issue of age:

               "I find that he was well aware that if he were  found  to  be
          over 18 years of age as a result  of  the  age  assessment  there
          would be implications in terms of the care that he would receive.
           I find that his  account  of  his  life  in  Afghanistan  lacked
          credibility... I find that his account was concocted  to  support
          his asylum claim".


         As  with  the  respondent's  stance,  this  finding  of  the  judge
    inevitably involved a refutation of the truth of any information as  to
    age allegedly imparted by the applicant's  mother  shortly  before  his
    departure from Afghanistan.

105.  In all the circumstances, the submission that fairness "dictates  that
    [the applicant's] account of his age is accepted" because of  what  his
    mother is said to have told him is entirely devoid of merit.

G.  The Tribunal's assessment of the applicant's age

106. It is necessary to take stock of the position we have  reached.   There
    are very serious problems with the applicant's credibility,  such  that
    his word  cannot  be  relied  on.   The  respondent  has  assessed  the
    applicant's age, in the decision under challenge, as "18 plus" in  July
    2009, ascribing him the notional date of birth of 1 January 1991.  This
    date of birth is not, we consider,  incompatible  with  the  assessment
    carried out in February 2009 by Mr Singh.  As emerged in oral evidence,
    Mrs Bazurto's and Ms Cant's task was to determine whether the applicant
    was over the age of 18, not to assess by how  much  the  applicant  was
    over the age of majority.  The effect of ascribing the notional date of
    birth of 1 January 1991 is, nevertheless, to put the applicant  in  the
    position of being - just - under the age  of  18  when  he  arrived  in
    Birmingham in December 2008.

107. Besides rendering the applicant's account unreliable,  our  credibility
    findings have a second function.  Leaving aside cases of mental illness
    or infirmity, a person who lies about their age must be doing so for  a
    reason.  In the present case, no  reason  has  been  advanced  for  the
    applicant's lies, other than that he considered  it  would  be  to  his
    advantage, if he were to be treated in the United Kingdom  as  a  child
    (i.e. a person under the age of 18).  Indeed, one  of  the  applicant's
    stated aims was to come to the United Kingdom for an education.   Given
    the sophistication of the operation that  brought  the  applicant  from
    Afghanistan to Birmingham and then provided assistance to him there, it
    is highly likely, in our view, that the applicant arrived in the United
    Kingdom, fully aware of the fact that, if he were found to be under 18,
    he would receive material assistance at public expense.

108. All this has a bearing on why the applicant claimed  to  be  12  rather
    than, say, in his mid teens.  In all the circumstances, we consider  it
    more likely than not that the applicant  either  already  knew  or  was
    informed by those responsible for smuggling him, that a possible effect
    of claiming to be significantly younger than he was  would  be  that  a
    relevant decision maker would eventually conclude  that,  although  not
    12, the applicant was still significantly below the age of 18, and that
    this would enable him to secure greater advantages than if he  were  to
    be found to be only marginally under the age of 18.  We do not consider
    that this is speculation.  On the contrary, we  consider  it  would  be
    na�ve to assume that those who have the means to bring  a  person  from
    Afghanistan to Birmingham are unaware of such matters and do not advise
    their clients accordingly.

109. Indeed, this is precisely what happened in the  applicant's  case.   In
    2010, Judge Robertson, although finding  the  applicant  not  to  be  a
    witness of truth both as to his claim to be in  need  of  international
    protection and as to his claimed age, nevertheless found  that  he  was
    then 16 (instead of 14) years of age.  This resulted in  the  applicant
    being granted leave to remain, with all that that entails.

110. Mr Suterwalla urged us to have regard to the fact that two  judges  had
    found the applicant  to  be  younger  than  the  age  assessed  by  the
    respondent, and to make our finding in line  with  them.  Judge  Juss's
    determination was, however, set aside in its entirety and it  would  be
    inappropriate to regard it as reliable on any matter. Judge Robertson's
    finding on age was reached without the benefit of  the  full  range  of
    evidence available to us, which  includes  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    social workers.  She also took into account  the  report  of  Dr  Birch
    ([15]  of  the  determination).  We  see  no  reason  to  follow  Judge
    Robertson's finding as to age.

111. Accordingly, we find that the applicant's lack  of  credibility  points
    strongly towards him being above or very close to attaining the age  of
    maturity, when he arrived in the United Kingdom.

112. For the reasons we have given, we reject the spirited attempts that  Mr
    Suterwalla has made on behalf of his client to diminish the  weight  to
    be placed on the respondent's age assessments.   We  consider  that  we
    should place weight on the following matters.

113. It is a  feature  of  both  assessments  that  the  social  workers  in
    question (and other professionals who had had contact with him  at  the
    children's homes) considered the applicant's appearance  and  demeanour
    to be strongly indicative of someone significantly older than  12.   So
    far as the first assessment was concerned, this was not just  the  view
    of Mr Singh but also of his manager, Ms Hall (tab 15/3).   They  formed
    this impression from the applicant's body  language  and  interactions,
    such as "confrontational staring when asked for  clarification  of  his
    life in Afghanistan".  There was also a marked degree of sophistication
    in the applicant's threat to destroy his ID card and the response, when
    told that he might require it to show to the  police,  that  "that  was
    alright as he would tell them he was in a children's home".

114. In the July 2009 age assessment, social workers observed the  applicant
    as "comfortable when speaking to adults but was irritated and impatient
    when asked about details of his life in Afghanistan".   We  have  taken
    account of the fact that,  in  places,  the  assessment  might  suggest
    childlike behaviour on the part of  the  applicant;  such  as  that  he
    "would fidget often and lose concentration" (tab 16/2).   However,  the
    clear picture that emerges from the professionals is that  the  overall
    impression given by the applicant was far more indicative  of  a  young
    adult; e.g. becoming "impatient when we asked to give more details  and
    be more specific about his story" and appearing  "quite  arrogant",  as
    well as not showing  "any  sign  of  worry  or  vulnerability  when  we
    explained that by not giving us clear information  he  could  undermine
    his age assessment".  The conclusion of Mrs Bazurto  and  Ms  Cant  was
    that  the  applicant's  "confidence  and  unphased   passive   attitude
    reflected that of an adult rather than a minor".

115. In having regard to these matters, it is important to observe that  the
    respondent's template specifically reminded the social workers, amongst
    other things, to note both the verbal and non-verbal behaviour  of  the
    person; to take account of differing cultural terms;  to  be  aware  of
    cultural variations in attitudes to elders; and to keep  in  mind  that
    the position of the social worker "will be seen as one of power", which
    may influence the way the person interacts with you".

116. Both of  the  age  assessments  dealt  with  physical  appearance.   Mr
    Suterwalla criticised the emphasis which he  said  that  Mr  Singh,  in
    particular, had placed upon this  issue.   We  agree  that  there  are,
    plainly, dangers in placing too much emphasis on  one's  impression  of
    the physical appearance of an individual, in assessing his or her  age.
    That said, and having heard both Mr Singh and Mrs Bazurto,  we  do  not
    find that either of them placed undue emphasis on this matter.  We have
    dealt already with the issue of shaving.  Added to this  was  the  fact
    that, as noted by Mrs Bazurto, the applicant had expression marks and a
    mature tone.  Mr Singh noted the applicant's voice, which  he  regarded
    as mature.  The applicant says of this in his statement that "I do  not
    remember my voice ever changing throughout my life and  think  that  it
    has always been the same" [29].  We accept what the social workers said
    on this matter.

117. We also consider that our findings regarding  the  applicant's  ability
    to live an independent life  fall  to  be  viewed  in  the  round  with
    demeanour, interaction and appearance, in deciding the applicant's true
    age.  We note that the applicant has identified two individuals who, he
    says, would have been about the same as his claimed age  in  2009,  and
    with whom he said he was associating.  We are prepared to  accept  that
    this  may  be  the  case;  but  we  reject  the   applicant's   claimed
    relationship with these persons as the sole  or  main  reason  for  his
    surreptitious telephone calls. The fact that the applicant may have had
    some interaction with them does not, in all the circumstances, point to
    his being the same age as them.

118. We also  find  that  the  conclusions  of  the  social  workers  accord
    entirely with our impression of the applicant, in giving  his  evidence
    to us. Having reminded ourselves of other  possible  factors,  such  as
    ethnicity  and   cultural   differences,   the   applicant's   physical
    appearance, comprehension and  demeanour  were  each  indicative  of  a
    person in his early twenties.


H.  Conclusion

119. Taking account of all the evidence, we find that the  applicant's  date
    of birth is 1 January 1991.  We make a declaration to that  effect  and
    will hear Counsel if they cannot agree the format of that order or  the
    terms of any further order sought, in particular on the issue of costs.



Signed   [pic]                               Date: 27 February 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
