


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                  |AM (Risks in Bujumbura area)  |
|                                  |Burundi [2005] UKAIT 00123    |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 18 August 2005                       |                         |
|                                        |On 2 September 2005      |
|                                        |.........................|
|                                        |....................     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Senior Immigration Judge)                              |
|Mr A L McGeachy (Senior Immigration Judge)                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Cantor (Refugee Legal Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

This case is reported in to provide confirmation  of  the  general  guidance
given in SS Burundi CG [2004] UKIAT 0029.  Individual  appellants  who  come
from particular areas may still establish a well-founded fear of return.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Burundi born in 1976.   On  24  February
      2005 an Adjudicator (Mr P D Southern) dismissed her appeal against the
      decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  on  30/9/04  to  refuse   her
      application for asylum.  She applied for permission to  appeal  on  10
      March 2005.   This was dealt with under  the  transitional  provisions
      and the Tribunal granted the application in the form of  an  order  to
      the Tribunal to reconsider the decision of the Adjudicator.

2.    The appellant's nationality was originally in  dispute  but  this  was
      resolved in her favour by the Adjudicator.   Indeed, he found  all  of
      her evidence to be credible.   The appellant's history is conveniently
      summarised  by  the  Adjudicator  in  paragraphs  11  to  23  of   the
      determination as follows:

           "11.  The appellant says that she was born in Buyenzi, which  is
                 a suburb of the capital of Burundi, Bujumbura, on 14  April
                 1976.  She is Hutu.  She lived there with her  parents  and
                 her six brothers and a sister.  A father was a  farmer  and
                 they lived in  a  compound  where  it  seems  she  lives  a
                 somewhat insular life, rarely being allowed  to  leave  the
                 immediate vicinity of her home.  Although  it  is  accepted
                 that Kirundi is  the  language  of  Burundi  the  appellant
                 herself speaks Swahili as a first language and knows only a
                 few words of Kirundi which she has picked up  from  hearing
                 other people speak the language.


             12. The first incident referred to by the appellant took place
                 in 1993, a few days after  President  Ndadaye  was  killed.
                 She describes how her house was raided by  Tutsi  soldiers.
                 Two of her brothers were killed and  she  was  raped  by  a
                 Tutsi solider.  Her  mother  and  sister  were  also  raped
                 during this raid.


             13. In January 1994 the appellant was again raped by  a  Tutsi
                 soldier who came across her when she was out of her  house,
                 in the compound.  She became pregnant by this rape and gave
                 birth to a son, Sylvester, in 1994.


             14. Later in 1994 there was a further attack described by  the
                 appellant during which her remaining brothers were captured
                 and later killed.  Those  brothers  lived  in  a  different
                 compound but the appellant knows that they were taken  away
                 by rebels and have not been seen  since  and  so  they  are
                 assumed  to  have  perished  at  the  hands  of  the  Tutsi
                 soldiers.


             15. Shortly after this attack the appellant and the  remaining
                 family sought refuge in a church in Buyenzi.   They  stayed
                 therefore two or  three  weeks  until  her  father  thought
                 things had calmed down a bit and so they returned to  their
                 home in Buyenzi.


             16.  Soon  after  returning  to  their  home  in  Buyenzi  the
                 appellant suffered a further rape.  This occurred when  her
                 father and some other neighbours had gone out to  the  land
                 that was being farmed by them  and  while  they  were  away
                 Tutsi soldiers came and the appellant and her  sister  were
                 raped.   This  time  she  describes  being  raped  by   two
                 soldiers.


             17. The appellant does not seek to describe each of  the  many
                 attacks she has described having taken place but  does  say
                 that her village was being attacked "all the time"  by  the
                 Tutsi soldiers.


             18. In or about February 2003 the appellant  says  that  there
                 was a raid by Tutsi  soldiers.   It  seems  from  what  the
                 appellant says that the principal purpose of this raid  was
                 to recruit young males as she describes  them  wanting  her
                 brothers who,  of  course,  had  already  died  some  years
                 earlier.  On this occasion  the  appellant  was  raped  yet
                 again and on this occasion she was also beaten with a chair
                 leg.  Her mother was raped on this occasion and  afterwards
                 her father decided that they would have  to  try  and  move
                 somewhere else.  They left their home and went to stay with
                 an uncle in a place Bwiza which was about two  hours'  walk
                 away.


             19. The appellant was asked in interview she had not sought to
                 relocate earlier and explained that her father was  growing
                 coffee on the land that he farmed and they had  temporarily
                 moved  to  churches  in  order  to  obtain  help  from  aid
                 agencies.


             20. Once the family had re-established  itself  in  Bwiza  the
                 appellant describes how she met a man called  Charles  with
                 whom she began to live as man and wife during April or  May
                 2003.  The appellant describes how attacks from  the  Tutsi
                 soldiers continued and how her husband  had  been  attacked
                 and beaten on many occasions.  Sometimes this occurred when
                 he was trying to protect  her.   She  describes  that  they
                 would handcuff him and beat him and sometimes take him away
                 and detain him overnight.  This  happened  frequently.   At
                 the hearing she said that it sometimes happened seven times
                 a week.  However, her evidence in this regard  is  somewhat
                 confused as she  also  said  in  her  more  recent  written
                 statement that she had witnessed this only three  occasion.
                 She also explains how sometimes they could avoid the  worst
                 consequences  of  these  visits  by  paying  money  to  the
                 soldiers who would sometimes be in  uniform  and  sometimes
                 would be in plain clothes.  The  appellant  says  that  she
                 suffered further rapes whilst staying in Bwiza.


             21. The appellant said that later in 2003 her father  returned
                 to Buyenzi to see what had happened  to  their  home.   She
                 later heard from neighbours that the area had been attacked
                 by rebels and her father had been killed  in  this  attack.
                 The remaining family travelled to Buyenzi for a funeral but
                 then returned to Bwiza.


             22. The last incident described by the appellant took place in
                 April 2004 when she was raped again,  this  time  by  three
                 Tutsi soldiers.  At the  time  she  was  about  two  months
                 pregnant with the child of Charles to whom  she  refers  as
                 her husband although it does not appear there was a  formal
                 marriage ceremony.  This  was  a  particularly  distressing
                 experience since she was raped by three Tutsi soldiers  and
                 the rape took place in front of her son  Sylvester.   After
                 the soldiers left she heard that her mother-in-law had also
                 been raped during his attack. After this  her  husband  and
                 his brothers began to think of how  they  could  leave  the
                 country.  One of her husband's brothers was able to arrange
                 some money from people he knew.  It seems  that  the  whole
                 family contributed to provide the necessary funds  for  the
                 appellant to travel to the United Kingdom.  There was  only
                 enough money for her to travel and it was decided that  she
                 should go first because she was pregnant.  She travelled by
                 lorry, with a number of other Hutus  who  were  seeking  to
                 leave, on a long journey to an  unknown  destination  where
                 after a stay in a church with a number  of  other  refugees
                 she was introduced to an agent with whom she  travelled  to
                 the United Kingdom.  On her arrival he took her to  Croydon
                 where she claimed asylum.  She says that  her  husband  and
                 her son remained in Burundi but  will  follow  her  to  the
                 United Kingdom soon.


             23. Since arriving in the United  Kingdom  the  appellant  has
                 given birth to her second child.  She says that she  cannot
                 return to any part of Burundi because women are being raped
                 all the time in that country.  She also said, in her  first
                 written statement, that she would be detained  and  put  in
                 jail upon her return  because  the  government  of  Burundi
                 would know that she has told secrets of her country to  the
                 government of the United Kingdom.   However,  she  has  not
                 pursued that aspect of her appeal in her later statement or
                 in her evidence at the hearing."

3.    Among the issues before  the  Adjudicator  was  the  question  of  the
      appellant's  language.    There  was  expert   evidence   before   the
      Adjudicator that Swahili was widely spoken in Burundi.

4.     Having  carefully  considered  all  the  material  before   him   the
      Adjudicator resolved various matters in favour of  the  appellant  and
      concluded that the appellant  was  a  credible  witness  and  she  had
      established to the required standard that  her  account  of  her  past
      experiences was true.   The  Adjudicator  then  had  to  turn  to  the
      current situation in Burundi.  He refers at length to  the  background
      material in paragraphs 44 to 59 of the determination.   He  then  sets
      out references from the Tribunal country guidance case of  SS  Burundi
      CG [2004] UKIAT 00290.

5.    The Adjudicator  noted  at  paragraph  62  of  his  determination  the
      summary of the Tribunal's decision as follows:

            "In summary out conclusions are:

           (a)   The civil war in  Burundi  has  ended.   Accordingly,  the
                 guidance in Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v
                 Adan should not be  applied  in  determining  the  risk  of
                 future persecution in Burundi.

           (b)   Hutus are not, in  general,  at  real  risk  of  treatment
                 amounting to persecution in Burundi.

           (c)   A Hutu or a Tutsi woman is not, in general, at  real  risk
                 of rape or sexual violence in Burundi  on  account  of  her
                 race/gender."


6.    Paragraph 63 of the determination is criticised  by  Mr  Cantor  among
      other aspects of the determination and we reproduce it here:

           "I turn next, therefore, to the  objective  evidence  and  other
           news reports produced by the appellant's representatives to  see
           whether there is any more recent country  evidence  which  might
           lead me to a different conclusion than that reached by  the  IAT
           in SS in respect of  these  matters.    It  is  of  considerable
           significance that  in  all  of  the  material  produced  by  the
           appellant the source material  pre-dates  the  decision  in  SS.
           Further, the reports of episodes of sexual violence of the  type
           that the appellant has been a victim in the  past  all  pre-date
           the last of the appellant's experiences of such sexual  violence
           which tends to confirm the view of the Tribunal that  there  has
           been a significant improvement  in  the  situation  and  a  very
           significant reduction in the risks faced by those now living  in
           Burundi."


7.    Mr Cantor submits that the Adjudicator was simply wrong  to  say  that
      all of the  material  produced  by  the  appellant  pre-dated  the  SS
      decision.   It is somewhat surprising that the Adjudicator should have
      said this since he himself reproduces some of the material  later  on.
      He may have been mislead by the fact that the  Tribunal  decision  was
      promulgated on 29 October 2004 but the Tribunal had made it  clear  in
      its decision that the review of the objective evidence did not  extend
      to the situation as at that date.   Reference was  made  to  paragraph
      22.7 of the Tribunal's decision.  A further challenge by Mr Cantor was
      made to the Adjudicator's approach to the case of SS.   Mr  Cantor  in
      effect  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  treated  the  case  as
      applicable in all circumstances  rather  than  noting  the  words  "in
      general" which featured in paragraph 25  of  the  summary  of  the  SS
      decision.   The Adjudicator had  not  had  regard  to  the  particular
      circumstances  of  the  appellant  in  her  particular  locality.   In
      paragraph 22.7 of SS the Tribunal noted that the UN Secretary  General
      in his report of 16 March 2004 had referred to a situation of calm  in
      most provinces "although security concerns remained for the  Bujumbura
      area".

8.    The Adjudicator's determination concludes as follows:

           "64.  I have had careful regard to the report of Professor James
                 Fairhead.  At paragraph 3 of his report he says this:


                       "Before  engaging  with  specific   issues,   it   is
                       important  for  the  court  to  note   that   Burundi
                       continues to be an extremely  violent  and  dangerous
                       country, that the appellant is from the most  violent
                       region in it, and that  this  has  continued  despite
                       innumerable peace processes.  This is outlined  in  a
                       recent "Human Rights Watch" Report (Burundi Suffering
                       in  Silence:   Civilians  in  Continuing  Combat   in
                       Bujumbura Rural).   This  report  describes  how,  in
                       recent  months,  soldiers  of  the  government   army
                       (Forces Arme�s Burundaises, FAB)  and  combatants  of
                       rebel forces violated international humanitarian  law
                       by killing, wounding, raping and pillaging  civilians
                       in areas just outside the capital that  neighbour  on
                       Buyenzi, where the appellant is form".


            65.  However, this is somewhat misleading since  the  way  this
                 information is presented, in  a  report  dated  28  January
                 2005, suggests that the killing, wounding  and  raping  had
                 taken place in recent months whereas in fact that phrase is
                 used in the Human rights  Watch  Report  dated  June  2004,
                 which means that it is referring to the period towards  the
                 beginning of 2004 which would also be consistent  with  the
                 various reports in the CIPU  report.   I  cannot  see  that
                 there is reference to anything more  recent  than  that  in
                 Professor Fairhead's report and so I do not accept that the
                 content of that report in any way undermines the conclusion
                 of the Tribunal in SS.


            66.  There is a further report in the appellant's bundle by  Mr
                 Andrew  Manley,  a  journalist  and   researcher   with   a
                 particular interest in  North  West  and  Sahelian  Africa.
                 This  report  was  not  prepared  specifically   for   this
                 appellant but is  relevant  for  what  it  says  about  the
                 country situation as Mr Manley sees it to be.  This  report
                 is dated 23 January 2005.  However,  once  again,  although
                 there are references to dates arising   subsequent  to  the
                 decision of the Tribunal in  SS  these  do  not  relate  to
                 incidents of the type with which I am concerned  and  there
                 is nothing at all in that report which relates to  episodes
                 of sexual violence occurring after April 2004.


           67.   The next report in the appellant's  bundle  is  the  Human
                 Rights  Watch  Report  dated  January  2005,  the   opening
                 observation of which is this:


                       "Most of Burundi enjoyed relative peace for the first
                       time in a decade during 2004,  but  the  province  of
                       Rural Bujumbura just outside the national  capital  a
                       battleground between the  rebel  National  Liberation
                       Forces (FNL) on one side and the  combined  Burundian
                       Armed Forces  and  the  Forces  for  the  Defence  of
                       Democracy (FDD) on the other.  The FDD  is  a  former
                       rebel movement that joined the government at the  end
                       of 2003.  The FNL, drawn largely  from  the  majority
                       Hutu population, remains outside the peace process"


                 There is reference to  "the  more  recent  limited  combat
                 outside the capital" and to the more serious problems  from
                 before the peace accord.  Again, I do  not  find  that  the
                 content of this report supports  the  suggestion  that  the
                 appellant would continue to be at risk of  being  subjected
                 to  sexual  violence  upon  her  return   to   Burundi   in
                 circumstances such as they are today.


           68.   Next in the appellant's bundle  is  a  brief  news  report
                 concerning a clash between FNL and government forces at the
                 beginning of January 2005 in which 45 FNL  combatants  were
                 killed and three government soldiers  were  killed.   There
                 follows a Human Rights  Watch  Report  dated  September  7,
                 2004, and a Human Rights Watch Briefing  Paper  dated  June
                 2004, this being the report referred to in  the  report  of
                 Professor Fairhead.


           69.   I conclude from all this  that  the  position  in  Burundi
                 today is as described by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in
                 SS.  It is no longer the case that rape and sexual violence
                 is being carried out in a gross and systematic  fashion  as
                 has been the case in the past and there is no reason at all
                 to suppose that  the  appellant  is  at  risk  particularly
                 because of her specific circumstances.


           70.   There is no evidence that the appellant is at risk of harm
                 because of her ethnicity.  Indeed, whilst she describes her
                 past attackers as principally being Tutsi she had indicated
                 that some Hutus were included within the groups that  case.
                 The objective evidence  suggests  that  there  has  been  a
                 significant change in the country situation since the  last
                 incident described by the appellant in April 2004.


           71.   Article 1 of the 1951  Convention  defines  a  refugee  as
                 someone  who,  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of   being
                 persecuted for  reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,
                 membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or  political
                 opinion is outside the country of his  nationality  and  is
                 unable or, owing  to  such  fear,  is  unwilling  to  avail
                 himself of the protection of that country.


           72.   There is no reason at all to depart from the view  of  the
                 Immigration appeal Tribunal and I find therefore that Hutus
                 are not in  general  at  risk  of  treatment  amounting  to
                 persecution in Burundi and that there is nothing about  the
                 appellant's circumstances such as to put her in  any  worse
                 or difference position.  Similarly, I  find  that,  despite
                 the appellant's own past experiences, she is not  today  at
                 real risk of rape or sexual violence in Burundi on  account
                 of her race or gender and, again, there  is  nothing  about
                 the appellant's own specific circumstances which  puts  her
                 at any greater risk than any other Hutu or Tutsi woman.


           73.   There is no other reason recognised by the 1951 Convention
                 that is engaged by the circumstances  of  this  appellant's
                 claim.


           74.   I next consider the  appellant's  rights  under  the  1950
                 Convention.  There is no real risk that  her  rights  under
                 Article 2 would be breached since there has never been such
                 a real risk to her life as is evidenced by  the  fact  that
                 had that been the case those who sought to do her harm  and
                 ample opportunity in the past to  take  her  life  but  had
                 chosen not so to do.  In the improved circumstances such as
                 they are there is clearly no real risk  of  that  happening
                 upon her return today.


           75.   The situation is the same with regard to Article 3,  which
                 I consider separately from the appellant's claim under  the
                 1951 Convention.  With the exceptional  of  the  continuing
                 efforts of the FNL  to  cause  difficulties  to  government
                 troops in the area around  Bujumbura  there  is  no  longer
                 civil war in Burundi.  It would appear that  the  appellant
                 left the country just as these difficulties we coming to an
                 end.  Indeed, she does not suggest that either she  or  her
                 family experienced any difficulties  between  the  incident
                 she described in April 2004 and  her  departure  in  August
                 2004.


           76.   I find, therefore, that there is not a real  risk  of  the
                 appellant being subjected to treatment such as  toe  engage
                 her rights under Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.


           77.   With regard to  Article  8  of  the  1950  Convention  the
                 appellant has established  a  family  life  with  her  baby
                 daughter in the United Kingdom but that family  life  would
                 not be interfered with or interrupted as a  result  of  the
                 decision under appeal since clearly the child would  return
                 to Burundi with the appellant.  The appellant has no  doubt
                 also established a private life in the United Kingdom since
                 her arrival in August 2004.  However, her family remains in
                 Burundi and it has not been suggested on  her  behalf  that
                 she would  be  unable  to  rejoin  them  upon  her  return.
                 Therefore, any interference with her private life would  be
                 in accordance with the law to pursue the legitimate aim  of
                 the maintenance of a firm immigration control and  so  such
                 interference  would  be   entirely   proportionate   in   a
                 democratic society to that legitimate aim."

9.    Mr Cantor did not criticise the Adjudicator for applying  the  country
      guidance decision of SS.   However the Adjudicator was criticised  for
      treating SS as if determinative of risk in the case of the  appellant.
       Mr Cantor submitted that the appellant came from Buyenzi which was an
      outlying Northern Suburb of Bujumbura which was surrounded by outlying
      settlements and hills which form part of  Bujumbura  Rural.    It  was
      acknowledged in SS that conflict continued in this area as was  indeed
      acknowledged in the material referred to by  the  Adjudicator  in  his
      determination.   Mr Cantor relied on  Demirkaya  [1999]  Imm  AR  498.
      There had been no material change of circumstances and  the  appellant
      would face a real risk of continued persecution in her home area.   Mr
      Cantor took us to material included in his bundle which indicated that
      there had been no material change in the circumstances.

10.   Mr Saunders  requested  the  Tribunal  to  uphold  the  determination.
      There was no material error of law.    The Adjudicator had detected  a
      distinct improvement  and  indeed  since  the  Adjudicator's  decision
      elections had taken place.

11.   Mr Saunders submitted that although the Adjudicator might have  missed
      a couple of references which post-dated the decision of SS  these  did
      not materially impact on his decision.  If the Tribunal  were  against
      him and a material error of  law  was  found,  then  the  question  of
      internal relocation arose.   Fighting was localised.    The  appellant
      would not have to travel through a war zone.  She  would  be  starting
      her journey from the United Kingdom.   She would not  be  at  risk  of
      rape in the airport which was to the North West  of  Bujumbura.    The
      appellant's language would  not  be  a  problem  since  she  would  be
      returning to her family and the language was widely spoken in Burundi.

12.   Mr Cantor submitted that whether one took the date of the  proceedings
      before the Adjudicator or the  date  of  the  proceedings  before  the
      Tribunal (assuming an error of law was found) the  situation  was  the
      same.   Reference was made to a UN Mission in  Burundi  (ONUB)  Report
      covering events in April to June 2005.   The frequency of human rights
      violations was increasing especially in  the  provinces  of  Bujumbura
      Rural and Makanba.    Burundi's  transitional  government  had  signed
      ceasefire agreements with all former rebel movements  except  the  FNL
      which is most active in Bujumbura Rural and Bubanza provinces.

13.   Mr Cantor also referred to an ONUB report dated 4 August 2005.    This
      noted that sexual abuse is top most among  the  daily  acts  of  human
      rights  violations.    To  change  this  trend,  ONUB'S  Human  Rights
      Division and local and International NGOs had, over the past 3 months,
      been conducting an awareness campaign across  the  country  on  sexual
      abuse.   According to Mr Diallo (who is a director of the Human Rights
      Division of ONUB): "It will take another couple of months to determine
      the impact of this campaign, but one can say that  there  has  been  a
      positive change in people's behaviour  with  regard  to  sexual  abuse
      which is perpetrated mostly against young people and  minors  of  both
      sexes."

14.   Mr Cantor submitted that it would not be assumed that  the  danger  to
      the appellant from sexual abuse had been abated by  this  information.
       The impact of the campaign had not been fully assessed.    A  Reuters
      report dated 31  July  2005  refers  to  Burundi  rebels  killing  300
      civilians in 2 months.  This was a blow to "otherwise good process  in
      the plan to end the  central  African  Nations  12  year  civil  war".
      African's said there would be no real peace  "until  the  FNL  can  be
      brought into the peace process".

15.   Whether one looked at the new evidence  or  the  evidence  before  the
      Adjudicator, Mr Cantor submitted,  the  objective  material  indicated
      much the same.  A report by Irin dated 4  January  2005  referring  to
      thousands of civilians being displaced following  fierce  fighting  in
      Burundi's western province of Bujumbura Rural.   Until  the  fighting,
      refugees and internally displaced people had been returning  to  their
      homes in record  numbers.     The  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  dated
      January 2005 refers  to  the  deliberate  targeting  of  civilians  by
      combatants.  These combatants "deliberately  killed  civilians,  raped
      women and girls,  burned  houses  and  stole  property.    FNL  forces
      assassinated those known or thought to be working with the  government
      and stole or extorted property from civilians."  By late 2004  it  was
      reported  that  government  and  FDD  forces  were  regularly  looting
      civilians immediately after they had received humanitarian assistance,
      like food, blankets or other household items.

16.   On the question of  internal  relocation  it  would  appear  that  the
      appellant would be returned to the airport near Bujumbura which  would
      be surrounded by Bujumbura Rural and she would not be able to access a
      safe area without going through an area troubled by the conflict.  She
      had already tried to  relocate  once  to  her  uncle's  house  without
      success.   Freedom of movement was restricted in practice as  appeared
      from the US State Department Report.  According to  the  Human  Rights
      Watch and local NGOs one tactic the CNDD-FDD regularly  employed  "was
      to search local areas for persons not known by the areas  inhabitants,
      or to search for wounded individuals, and to  summarily  execute  them
      under suspicion of belonging to the Palitpehutu-FNL". Security  forces
      had restricted  access  by  humanitarian  organisations  to  parts  of
      Bujumbura Rural province although authorities said insecurity in those
      areas made delivery of aid impossible.   There was also  the  risk  of
      land mines and acts of banditry - civilians would be ambushed in  mini
      buses on the highways.   The appellant  only  spoke  a  few  words  of
      Kirundi and therefore would have difficulty communicating outside  her
      home area.   While she had family in Burundi her  family  remained  in
      areas where the appellant had been regularly raped and attacked.    Mr
      Saunders submitted that Swahili was widely spoken in Burundi according
      to the expert evidence.

17.   At the conclusion of the submissions both sides  indicated  that  they
      had covered all the points which they would need  to  cover  were  the
      Tribunal to have found that there had been a material error of law  in
      the Adjudicator's determination and  it  would  not  be  necessary  to
      adjourn for further material to be lodged or for  further  submissions
      to be considered.

18.   We are very grateful to the representatives for their submissions  and
      to Mr Cantor for his lengthy and well researched skeleton argument.

19.   The determination is generally a well  researched  and  well  prepared
      one but it does appear to us that the Adjudicator fell into error from
      paragraphs 63 onwards.  He  appears  to  refer  to  relevant  material
      concerning the appellant's home area and then failed  to  explain  why
      the appellant would not be at risk on return there.   He  treated,  as
      Mr Cantor submits, the case of SS as if determinative  of  the  issues
      and did not properly explore the appellant's individual circumstances.
       It is quite  apparent  that  the  peace  process  has  had  important
      beneficial repercussions across large areas of Burundi and  that  huge
      numbers of refugees have been returning.   The UNCHR  facilitated  the
      voluntary repatriation of 83,849 Burundian refugees by the end of 2004
      and there were  in  addition  approximately  6,500  refugees  who  had
      spontaneously repatriated to their country - see page  10  of  the  US
      State Department Report covering events in 2004.    However conditions
      are difficult and an estimated 750,000 refugees remained  outside  the
      country.   The report notes that civilians were regularly displaced as
      a result of fighting in Bujumbura Rural province.  At any time  during
      the year some 25,000 to 70,000 persons were so displaced.

20.   However, we see no reason why  the  appellant  would  or  should  draw
      comfort from the general improvement faced with a return to  her  home
      area.   The general guidance given in SS clearly noted  a  distinction
      between the generalised position and  the  security  concerns  in  the
      Bujumbura area.    We find that the Adjudicator misdirected himself in
      law as submitted by Mr Cantor in failing properly to  analyse  the  SS
      decision and failing to explain why the appellant would not be at risk
      in her home area.   A further subsidiary error is the  fact  that  the
      Adjudicator considered it was of considerable  significance  "that  in
      all of the material produced by the appellant the source material pre-
      dates the decision in SS."   Mr Saunders submitted that this in effect
      was not a material error.   We agree that it is not so significant  an
      error as the main error.  The main  error  was  not  to  look  at  the
      appellant's case in its context against the background provided by  SS
      regarding security concerns in the Bujumbura area.   In particular  we
      do not find that the Adjudicator properly explained why in  the  light
      of the report to which he makes  reference  in  paragraph  67  of  the
      determination the appellant would not be at risk on return to her home
      area.

21.   Because of the fact that we have identified a material  error  of  law
      in the Adjudicator's determination, we are able to  consider  material
      not available to the Adjudicator.   Mr Cantor submitted that  it  made
      no real difference whether one took the up to  date  material  or  the
      material before the  Adjudicator.   Mr  Saunders  on  the  other  hand
      submitted that elections had taken place which were  likely  to  clear
      the Hutu majority's path to power - see the Reuters Foundation  Report
      dated 29 July 2005.   On the other hand, since the polls the FNL "have
      staged deadly attacks in Bujumbura Rural and Bubanza provinces on  the
      outskirts of Bujumbura ..." - see the report dated 12 July  (a  report
      from Agence France - Presse).    We  have  referred  earlier  in  this
      determination to the report  by  ONUB  and  the  fact  that  ceasefire
      agreements had been signed "with all former rebel movements except the
      FNL which is most active in Bujumbura Rural  and  Bubanza  provinces".
      Human rights violations  were  reported  as  increasing  in  frequency
      especially in the provinces of Bujumbura Rural and Makamba.

22.   The appellant experienced persecutory treatment  over  a  considerable
      period.   Her experiences took place in her  home  area  and  did  not
      abate when she moved to stay with her uncle.  There is no evidence  of
      a change of circumstances in the appellant's home area, in our view.

23.   That is not to say that there is not cause  for  optimism  as  to  the
      future and we note in particular the initiative taken by ONUB together
      with various NGOs to conduct a campaign  across  the  country  on  the
      question of sexual abuse.  The director of the Human  Rights  Division
      of Onub stated that while it would take another couple  of  months  to
      determine the impact of the campaign one could  say  "that  there  has
      been a positive change in people's behaviour  with  regard  to  sexual
      abuse which is perpetrated against mostly young people and  minors  of
      both sexes".   Furthermore, the elections are clearly a  step  in  the
      peace process which would appear to give cause for some optimism as to
      future developments.   Nevertheless, the situation in the  appellant's
      home area still  appears  to  be  volatile.    Circumstances  are  not
      demonstrated to have changed materially in that area.

24.   Because of the Adjudicator's findings he did not examine the  question
      of internal relocation.  Mr Cantor submitted that the appellant  would
      need to access a safe area after travelling through a war zone.    She
      would have various hazards to encounter en route, including land mines
      and banditry.   Her family apparently lived in the area where she  had
      previously been raped and suffered other abuses.    The appellant  had
      previously attempted to relocate from her home area to stay  with  her
      uncle in Bwiza.   This attempt to avoid  her  problems  had  not  been
      successful and she had continued to suffer as she had before.    There
      is evidence of the difficulties that the  appellant  would  encounter,
      particularly as she has a  young  child  with  her,  in  travelling  a
      greater distance.   Reliance is placed on the language aspect and  the
      fact that the appellant only speaks a few  words  of  Kirundi.    This
      point is probably not a determinative one since the expert evidence is
      to the effect that Swahili is widely  spoken  in  Burundi  -  see  the
      report by Dr Chege Githiora.   Nevertheless, looking at the matter  in
      the round, bearing in mind the  appellant's  particular  circumstances
      and her  past  experiences,  including  her  unsuccessful  attempt  to
      relocate, it would be  unreasonable/unduly  harsh  to  expect  her  to
      exercise the internal flight option.

25.   It was submitted by Mr Cantor  that  the  persecution  feared  by  the
      appellant would be for a Convention reason.     Mr  Saunders  did  not
      argue that the appellant's  fears  were  not  based  on  a  Convention
      reason.  In the case of SS the  Tribunal  dealt  with  the  matter  at
      paragraph 16 of its determination.   It said that if there was a  real
      risk of rape for a Refugee Convention reason  the  appellant's  appeal
      would succeed on asylum and human rights grounds.   As we say, it  was
      not argued before us that the appellant's appeal  would  fail  on  the
      basis of no Convention reason.   Mr Cantor in  his  skeleton  argument
      submitted that the  conflict  in  the  appellant's  home  area  had  a
      peculiarly ethnic component.   The  Adjudicator  considered  that  the
      appellant was not at risk of harm because  of  her  ethnicity  because
      some Hutus had been included within the groups that had attacked  her.
        As is pointed out in  the  skeleton  argument,  the  only  time  the
      appellant had given evidence that she had been  attacked  by  a  mixed
      group was in 1994 when her brothers had been  taken  away.    At  that
      time the appellant's home area (Buyenzi)  had  still  been  ethnically
      mixed and it was only later that it had acquired a  steadily  stronger
      Hutu identity.  The appellant's attackers had included Hutus at a time
      when the violence had not yet taken on its current  ethnic  character.
      As we say, this particular aspect did not appear to be the subject  of
      contention before us.  We would not agree with  the  Adjudicator  that
      the fact that some Hutus had been included within the people  who  had
      attacked the appellant indicated that she had  not  been  targeted  on
      ethnic grounds.

26.   For the  reasons  we  have  given,  we  find  that  the  Adjudicator's
      decision was flawed by a material error of law.   He was right to rely
      on the decision of SS which continues to give, as Mr Cantor  accepted,
      useful general guidance.    However,  in  particular  localities,  and
      particularly in the appellant's home area, individual  appellants  may
      still succeed in their appeals despite the general improvement in  the
      situation in Burundi.   This case turns on its own facts and turns  on
      the evidence before us.    As we have  observed,  attempts  have  been
      made to address the problem  of  rape  and  there  may  be  cause  for
      optimism in the light of the recent  elections.     Nevertheless,  for
      the reasons we have given, the appellant is  entitled  to  succeed  on
      asylum grounds and human rights grounds (Article 3).

Summary of Decision

27.   The decision of the Adjudicator contains  a  material  error  of  law.
      The following decision is accordingly substituted:

      We allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

      We allow the appeal on human rights grounds.




                                                                      G Warr
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge



                    approved for electronic distribution

