
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                        ACAppeal number: TH/06221/2004
           ' ('Regularisation Period':  Rights of appeal) Zimbabwe
                             [2005] UKAIT 00128

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing: 9 May 2005
                                           Promulgated on: 19th August 2005.


                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                           AARON TSIKAYI CHISANGO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M Fletcher of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Evans, Home Office Presenting Officer

A person who made an unsuccessful  application  during  the  'regularisation
period' can be the subject of  a  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.
Section 5 of the 1988 Act applies if appropriate:   but  if  the  appealable
decision was made after 1 October 2000, human rights  grounds  can  also  be
relied on.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


History

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.   On  14  February  2003,  the
     Respondent decided to make a deportation order against him.  That  was
     an appealable decision and the Appellant  appealed  against  it.   His
     appeal  was  dismissed  by  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  S  S  Chohan,  in  a
     determination dated 8 October 2004.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Permission to  appeal  was  given  on  2
     February 2005.   Following  the  coming  into  force  of  the  appeals
     provisions of the 2004 Act, that permission has effect as an order for
     reconsideration of the Adjudicator's determination on the ground of  a
     material error of law.  We note that although the Vice  President  who
     granted leave to appeal to the Tribunal had full grounds  before  him,
     he gave no reason at all for his grant of permission.

  2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom on 17 September 1998.  He was
     given leave to enter until 31 October 1999 as a student, subject to  a
     prohibition on employment or other work without  the  consent  of  the
     Secretary of State.  He studied nursing at the University  of  Central
     England.  (Although after the academic year 1998/99 the Appellant  had
     no permission to be in this country, the University  appears  to  have
     allowed him to continue his course in  each  of  the  four  successive
     years, awarding him a diploma in 2003.)  It is not recorded  that  the
     Appellant made any application for further leave to remain as student.

  3. On 29 September 2000, he applied for leave to  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom in accordance with the Immigration (Regulation  Regularisation
     Period for Overstayers) Regulations 2000 (SI 2000/265)  andmade  under
     section 10 9 of the 1999  Act.   His  application  was  refused.   The
     Secretary of State being satisfied that the  Appellant  was  remaining
     without leave, he decided to make  a  deportation  order  against  him
     under s5 s3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 by virtue of the  Appellant
     being liable to deportation under s 3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act  as  an
     overstayer..  That decision was made, as we have said, on 14  February
     2003.  The notice of appeal to the Adjudicator is on two grounds:  the
     Secretary of State's discretion to deport should have  been  exercised
     differently, and his decision breaches the  Appellant's  human  rights
     under Articles 3, 8 and 14.

  4. Following the Secretary of State's decision, the Appellant claims that
     he entered into a traditional marriage in December 2003.  He says that
     that marriage was celebrated in  Zimbabwe  by  a  traditional  meeting
     between families.  His "wife" is in the United Kingdom as  a  student,
     with limited leave to remain, and must be considered as a  person  who
     intends to leave the United Kingdom  on  termination  of  her  studies
     during 2005.  They have a child,  born  some  four  months  after  the
     "marriage" on 22 April 2004.

  5. In our determination, we consider  the  following  issues  which  were
     raised before us:  whether the Appellant is amenable to a decision  to
     make a deportation order against him;  whether the  Adjudicator  erred
     in his assessment of credibility;  and whether the  Appellant's  human
     rights would be infringed by his removal.  Despite the  terms  of  the
     skeleton argument, we are not concerned with any asylum claim, for the
     Appellant has never made one, although what we  say  about  Article  3
     would have equal relevance to any asylum claim.  We should  also  make
     it clear that the Respondent has never invoked the public  good  as  a
     ground for the Appellant's deportation.

Can the Appellant be deported as an overstayedoverstayer?

  6. Section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act introduced deportation  as  the  usual
     process for removal from the  United  Kingdom  of  a  person  who  had
     overstayed his or her leave to enter or remain.  As a decision to make
     a deportation order is always a matter of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     discretion,  an  overstayer  could  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
     discretion should have been exercised differently.   By  s  5  of  the
     Immigration Act 1988, that ground of appeal was removed in the case of
     a person who had been in the United Kingdom less than seven years, who
     in future could appeal only on the ground that there  was  in  law  no
     power in his case to  make  the  deportation  order  for  the  reasons
     specified in the notice of decision.

  7. The regime was altered substantially by the 1999 Act.  Section  10  of
     that  Act  substituted  removal  in  accordance  with  directions  for
     deportation as the appropriate course of action against a  person  who
     had  overstayed  his  or  her  leave  to  enter  or  remain.    By   a
     consequential amendment to s 3(5) of the 1971 Act, the power to make a
     deportation order on the ground only  that  a  person  had  overstayed
     leave was removed.  Thus, generally speaking, since  the  coming  into
     force of the principal provisions of the 1999 Act on 2  October  2000,
     an overstayer can as such not be the subject of a decision to  deport,
     but only of a decision to remove.

  8. Section 9 of the 1999 Act empowered the Secretary  of  State  to  make
     regulations for a "regularisation  period"  during  which  overstayers
     could apply for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   That  section
     came into effect on 11 November 1999.  The  regularisation  provisions
     are  the  Immigration  (Regularisation  Period  of  for   Overstayers)
     Regulations 2000 (SI 2000/265).  The regularisation  period  ended  as
     the principal provisions of the 1999 Act came into force on 2  October
     2000.  The transitional provisions are somewhat complex, but there  is
     no doubt that they have the following effect  on  an  overstayer  who,
     during the regularisation period, made an  application  for  leave  to
     remain.

        i. The Secretary of State retains the power to make  a  deportation
           order against such a person  as  an  overstayer:   that  is  the
           effect of paragraph 2(3)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration and
           Asylum  Act  1999   (Commencement   No   6,   Transitional   and
           Consequential Provisions) Order 2000 (SI  2000/2444),  continued
           by  paragraph  2(3)(b)  of  Schedule  2  to   the   Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement No 4)  Order  2003
           (SI 2003/754).


       ii. The subject of such a deportation decision has a right of appeal
           under s 15 of the 1971 Act:  that is the effect of paragraph  12
           of Schedule 15 to the 1999 Act, extended by  paragraph  2(6)  of
           Schedule 2 to the 2002 (Commencement No 4) Order.


      iii. The restrictions on the rights of appeal imposed by s 5  of  the
           1988 Act apply  to  such  a  person:   that  is  the  effect  of
           paragraph 12(2) of Schedule 15 to  the  1999  Act,  extended  by
           paragraph 3(b) of Schedule 2 to the  2002  (Commencement  No  4)
           Order.


       iv. Despite that restriction, if  the  decision  was  made  after  1
           October 2000, the person affected has an appeal on human  rights
           grounds (under s 65  of  the  1999  Act),either  (1)  under  the
           preserved right of appeal given by s 15 of the 1971 Act  because
           the Secretary of State has in law "no power in law"  to  make  a
           decision to deport the  Appellant  as  an  overstayer  breaching
           which breaches the Appellant's human rights or (2) under s 65 of
           the 1999 Act because the decision to make  a  deportation  order
           (made after 1 October 2000) is  a  "decision...relating  to  [a]
           person's  entitlement  to...remain  in   the   United   Kingdom"
           following R(Kariharan and others) v SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ  1102;
           [2002]  INLR  383.   In  both  instances,  the  breach  of   the
           Appellant's human rights is to be determined on the basis of the
           circumstances as at the date of the hearing.


           (Sections 82(2)(j) and 84(1)(g) of the 2002  Act  would  provide
           the same right of appeal on human rights grounds  for  decisions
           made on or after 1, April 2003.)

  9. The Appellant is accordingly liable to be  deported  and  may  be  the
     subject of a deportation order as an overstayer..  His appeal is under
     s 15 of the 1971 Act.  As he was last granted leave to  enter  the  UK
     less than seven  years  before  the  decision  against  which  he  now
     appeals, he has no appeal His appeal is uunder s 15 of the  1971  Act.
     As he was last granted leave to enter less than seven years before the
     decision against which he now appeals, he has  no  grounds  of  appeal
     based on the exercise of the Secretary  of  State's  discretion.   His
     appeal is limited to, but he has a human rights appealgrounds under  s
     15 or, alternatively, under s 65 of the 1999 Act..

The Adjudicator's assessment of credibility and of the facts

 10. The Appellant was born in Zambia and, at  the  time  he  came  to  the
     United Kingdom on a Zimbabwean passport, he appears also to have  been
     a citizen of Zambia.  His Zimbabwean passport expired  in  July  1999.
     He is said to have received advice that he could not renew it  without
     renouncing his Zambian citizenship.  (The reason for that is  unclear,
     as there is no reference to dual citizenship in his passport, but  for
     present purposes we will assume that the advice was  good.)   He  took
     steps to do so.  It appears that his renunciation was executed  on  15
     September 2000, and there is a letter dated 4  August  2004  from  the
     Zambia High  Commission  in  London  saying  stating  that:   but  the
     Appellant's renunciation (on which, incidentally,  he  has  failed  to
     indicate whether or not he is married) is dated 4 August 2004  and  is
     stated to have been made in the Zambia High Commission on  that  date.
     Also dated 4 August 2004 and in the Appellant's  bundle  is  a  letter
     from the Zimbabwean High Commission in the following terms:

           "To whom it may concern


           This serves to advise that Aaron Tsikayi Chisango will  need  to
           travel to Zimbabwe to obtain a Zimbabwe national  identity  card
           and renounce his right to Zambian citizenship to enable  him  to
           apply for a new passport."


 11. The Adjudicator was concerned solely with the evidence  going  to  the
     Appellant's claim that his human  rights  would  be  breached  by  his
     deportation from the United Kingdom.  His claim  to  that  effect  was
     made for the first time, and in extremely vague terms, in  his  notice
     of appeal dated 26 February 2003.

 12. At the hearing before the Adjudicator, the  Appellant  said  that  the
     reason why he had not made proper arrangements to extend his stay when
     his leave to enter the United Kingdom expired was  that,  because  his
     passport had also expired, he  was  afraid  that  he  would  get  into
     trouble.  In any event, he said, he was a supporter of the MDC and  he
     thought that in 1999 or 2000 they would come  to  power  or  at  least
     obtain some acceptance in Zimbabwe.  The Adjudicator noted the time it
     had taken for the Appellant to do anything  about  his  overstay,  and
     decided that he did not believe the explanation  that  he  was  given,
     based as it was on the Appellant's claim not  to  have  consulted  any
     lawyers until shortly before his application for leave to remain.

 13. In our view, the Adjudicator was amply justified in his assessment  of
     the Appellant's credibility.   The  Appellant  knew  that  he  was  an
     overstayer after 31 October 1999.  He made no  attempt  to  regularise
     his position or indicate to the United Kingdom  authorities  what  his
     problems  were.   His  first  attempt  to  deprive  himself   of   the
     possibility of returning to Zambia as a citizen was made  only  a  few
     days before his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
      If he genuinely had  any  fear  of  returning  to  Zimbabwe,  we  are
     confident that he would have retained the option of living in  Zambia.
     Following his application for leave  to  remain,  he  did  nothing  to
     indicate to the United Kingdom authorities that he  had  any  fear  of
     return to Zimbabwe, the only country of which by then he was  entitled
     to citizenship.  We are confident that if he  had  genuinely  had  any
     fear of ill-treatment on return to Zimbabwe, he  would  have  made  an
     asylum claim.

 14. In fact, it does not appear that the Appellant's attempt  to  renounce
     Zambian citizenship was effective at first.  He  had  to  make  a  new
     declaration in August 2004.  He appears to have done  so  voluntarily.
     If he had had at that stage any genuine fear of return to Zimbabwe, we
     are confident that he would have explored the matter with the  Zambian
     authorities rather than continuing with his  renunciation  of  Zambian
     citizenship.  There is, after all, no doubt at all that by that  stage
     he knew that the Secretary of State would not willingly allow  him  to
     remain in this country.

 15. The skeleton argument asserts that the  Adjudicator  "finds  appellant
     honest".  That is not correct.  What the Adjudicator  found  was  that
     the Appellant "may well have been honest" in telling him  why  he  had
     overstayed, but that the reason did not justify his not informing  the
     Home Office;  and the Adjudicator went on to set out  in  some  detail
     his disbelief of the rest of the Appellant's claim.

 16. The Adjudicator considered the other evidence  before  him  which  was
     alleged to support the Appellant's claim to be an MDC member and to be
     at risk on  return.   The  Adjudicator  did  not  believe  either  the
     witness, Mr Malinga, or the documents.  Again, in  our  view,  he  was
     justified in his approach.  The Appellant's own  history  and  conduct
     demonstrates positively that he does not genuinely consider himself to
     be at risk.

 17. For these reasons, we reject the Appellant's grounds insofar  as  they
     are based on the Adjudicator's assessment of credibility and  findings
     of fact.

The appeal on human rights grounds

 18. For the reasons  given  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  there  is  no
     substance in the Appellant's claim that his deportation  would  breach
     his rights under Article 3.  Article 14 was mentioned in  his  grounds
     of appeal to the Adjudicator, but there has never been any  indication
     of how his rights under Article 14 would be affected.

 19. That leaves Article 8.  The claim under Article  8  is  based  on  his
     "marriage" and his "wife's" child (we do not  know  if  the  child  is
     his).  The Appellant's partner made  a  statement  in  September  2004
     claiming a fear of return to Zimbabwe.  Her position is,  however,  as
     we have indicated, that she is a student and  her  existing  leave  is
     dependent upon her intention to leave the United Kingdom.   That  must
     be the background of the relationship between her and  the  Appellant,
     and the birth of their child.  We assume  for  the  purposes  of  this
     determination that the relationship between these three people is very
     close, whether or not there is anything that could properly be  called
     a marriage.  But there is no reason at all  in  our  view  to  suppose
     that, when the Appellant leaves the United Kingdom,  his  partner  and
     her child could not and, in the light of her own  immigration  status,
     should not go  with  him.   Like  the  Adjudicator,  we  are  entirely
     unpersuaded that there would be any breach of Article 8.

Conclusion

 20. The Adjudicator  made  no  material  error  of  law.   We  affirm  his
     determination.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:



