
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Adubiri-Gyimah and others (Post-study work - Listed institution) Ghana
[2011] UKUT 00123 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 February 2011                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       THE HON. MR JUSTICE LLOYD JONES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BATISTE


                                   Between


                           ROSEMARY ADUBIRI-GYIMAH
                                 DICKSON AMOAH
                          TRACEY SERWA-AKOTO AMOAH
                                  GRACE AMOAH

                                                                  Appellants
                                         and

                     THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Ollennu, instructed by Messrs Shores Anchor
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Presenting Officer

The requirement imposed by the  Immigration  Rules,  Appendix  A,  Table  9,
paragraph 2(a) on an  applicant  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
relates to the status of the relevant institution at the time of study.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are all citizens of Ghana. The first appellant  is  the
      main appellant; the second appellant is her husband; and the third and
      fourth appellants are their children, both of whom  are  minors.  They
      have obtained  permission  to  appeal  against  the  determination  of
      Immigration Judge Coleman who  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
      decisions of the respondent  on  17  May  2010  to  refuse  the  first
      appellant leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant,  and
      to refuse the other appellants leave to remain as her dependents.

   2. The material facts are not in dispute. The first appellant  originally
      came to the UK on 8 December 2001 with leave to enter until 31 January
      2003. Her husband also came to the UK as a student in January 2001 and
      he has successfully obtained a  diploma  in  management,  banking  and
      financial services and an MBA  in  finance  at  Leicester  University.
      Their two children were born here. The first appellant's  leave  as  a
      student was extended on three occasions to enable her to study at  the
      Inter-Continental College for an honours degree in health  and  social
      care at the Open University. The last extension was on 7 November 2008
      when she was granted further leave to remain as  a  student  until  30
      April 2010. On 31 December 2009 she was awarded her B. Sc. degree from
      the Open University, the certificate for  which  she  received  on  10
      February 2010. On 15 April 2010,  within  the  period  of  her  extant
      leave, she made the application which is the subject of these appeals.
      She wants to stay in the UK for two years to obtain work experience in
      international health and social care  systems  for  which  the  UK  is
      renowned before returning with her family to Ghana.

   3. The Respondent refused her application  on  various  grounds,  all  of
      which the judge determined in the first appellant's  favour  save  for
      one. There is a requirement in paragraph 2 of Table 9 of Appendix A to
      the Immigration Rules, which  imposes  the  following  requirement  in
      applications such as this.

             "(a)  The  applicant  has  studied  for  his  award  at  a  UK
             institution that is UK recognised or  is  a  listed  body,  or
             which holds a sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the points-based
             system."

   4. In respect of this requirement and article 8, the judge  concluded  as
      follows.

             "24.... I accept that both the cases of  Pankina  [2010]  EWCA
             Civ 719 and CDS (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 00035 (IAC)  do  indicate
             that there would be cases relating to education and the points-
             based system where article 8 could be engaged.


             25. Having said that however I do not find that this is one of
             those cases. Both the appellant and her husband have  made  it
             clear in their statements and evidence before me that they  do
             not consider themselves to be permanently  settled  in  United
             Kingdom and were seeking extension of their stay simply to get
             work experience to further their prospects on return to Ghana.
             It has therefore always  been  in  the  contemplation  of  the
             parties that their stay in the United Kingdom was a  temporary
             not permanent one. Given that, they inherently accept that  it
             is reasonable for them to return to Ghana and to  re-establish
             their private life there.  They  both  have  good  educational
             qualifications obtained in this country. Their claim  is  that
             their career  prospects  would  be  harmed  by  lack  of  work
             experience in this country is not backed up  by  any  evidence
             whatsoever.  They  appear  to  have  skills  that  are  needed
             worldwide. Although the children had been here for some  years
             it is not suggested that it was not in  the  contemplation  of
             all the parties that the children would also return with  them
             to Ghana. They are in education but the younger one  has  only
             just started nursery level and the older one is still only  at
             primary school. It is not been suggested they could not  adapt
             to Ghana where they are nationals.


             26.  Although  I  do  accept  that  this  decision   is   very
             inconvenient  for  the  parties  I  do  not  find   that   the
             inconvenience is so serious such as to  engage  article  8.  I
             therefore find that the appellants had failed  to  prove  that
             any interference with their private life  by  reason  of  this
             decision  would  be  disproportionate  to   the   lawful   and
             legitimate aim  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  maintaining
             immigration control..."

             27. Although I have dismissed the appeal under article 8 as  I
             have stated above I have a great sympathy for  the  appellants
             and I find that they are just caught in a dilemma due  to  the
             change in the structure of the rules dealing  with  study  and
             post-study work. In light of the fact that the only reason the
             appellant has not  succeeded  under  the  rules  is  that  her
             college, which was accepted by the respondent  as  a  suitable
             place to study while she  was  there,  failed  to  succeed  in
             obtaining a tier 4 registration after the  appellant  obtained
             her qualification, so as to satisfy the rule in place  at  the
             date of application, I urge the Secretary of State to consider
             exercising  discretion  in  this  matter  and   allowing   the
             appellant to remain for post-study work in  the  light  of  my
             other findings of fact."

   5. The appellants appealed under the rules and in respect of  article  8.
      The chief presenting officer replied on 7 December 2010 to the grounds
      of appeal, stating that:


             "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellants'  appeal  and
             invites the tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral
             (continuance)  hearing  to  consider  whether  the  appellants
             succeed under Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) or article 8."

   6. Permission to appeal was then granted on the following material terms.

             "2. The only ground upon which the immigration judge dismissed
             the appeal under the Immigration Rules was that the college at
             which the first appellant had studied for a  degree  that  was
             awarded by the open University was not, at  the  date  of  her
             application, a UK recognised or a listed body,  or  one  which
             holds a sponsor licence  under  Tier  4  of  the  points-based
             system..


             3. It is arguable that the  judge  erred,  as  argued  in  the
             grounds, in so finding  given  that  at  the  time  the  first
             appellant was studying at that institution it  was  registered
             and further the Open University is recognised.


             4. It is also arguable  that  given  the  immigration  judge's
             findings as to the genuineness of the appellant, the length of
             time the family has been in the UK and the fact that  the  two
             children have been born in the UK, her conclusions on  article
             8 are perverse, especially given the judge's recommendation to
             the Secretary of State that she should let the appellants stay
             outside the rules...."


   7. Directions were then made to the  effect  that  paragraphs  13  to  15
      inclusive of the determination (which contained the findings  of  fact
      by the judge) should stand, whilst the judge's conclusions with regard
      to the rules and article 8 should be set aside.


   8. It was on this basis that the appeals came before us for  hearing.  Mr
      Gulvin indicated at the outset of the proceedings that he was  content
      that paragraph  16  of  the  determination  (which  contained  judge's
      findings in favour of the appellants on the other  issues   under  the
      rules raised by the respondent in  the  reasons  for  refusal)  should
      stand in addition to the findings of fact. Moreover, he accepted  that
      there was nothing contentious in the written statements by  the  first
      and second appellants and accordingly he did not wish to cross-examine
      either of them. We proceeded on that basis.

   9. Mr Ollennu submitted that the college must have  been  listed  at  the
      time of the last grant of leave by the respondent or leave  would  not
      have been granted. It appeared that the  college  had  applied  for  a
      sponsor licence under the newly introduced  points  based  system  for
      Tier 4 (General) Students. However it had been refused such a  licence
      at some point after the appellant had completed her course.  This  was
      what the judge had  stated  as  a  fact  in  paragraph  27.  Thus  the
      appellant satisfied the requirements of the rules as the  college  was
      listed at the time she studied there. Alternatively as her  degree  in
      health care required, as an important component, some post degree work
      experience, she had a legitimate expectation that she would be allowed
      a limited period to acquire these skills. In the further  alternative,
      even if  the  appellant  failed  under  the  Rules  and  in  terms  of
      legitimate expectation, she should succeed under article 8.

  10. Mr Gulvin submitted that the requirement under table 9 was clear.  The
      college was not recognised at the time of the appellant's application.
      This was the relevant time as was indicated by the use of the words in
      table 9 "is a listed body". Thus the  application  could  not  succeed
      under the rules. He conceded that the college was listed at  the  time
      the appellant was last given leave to remain. He invited us to dismiss
      the appeal on all grounds. We  asked  him  if  he  could  provide  any
      further information about the transitional period for applying  for  a
      sponsor licence, the actual application of the college for a  licence,
      and when the college was no longer deemed to  be  listed.  However  he
      said he was unable to assist us further.

  11. We also asked Mr  Gulvin  whether  given  (as  it  appeared  from  the
      tracking version of the Immigration  Rules)  that  the  categories  of
      listed and recognised bodies were deleted on 6 April  2010,  then  the
      reference to them in table  9  should  be  interpreted  thereafter  as
      historic and relating back to the period of study, notwithstanding the
      use of the word "is". Mr Gulvin said that  he  did  not  know  without
      taking instructions and could not immediately obtain instructions.  In
      those circumstances and in view of the time, we rose and reserved  our
      decision on the basis that we  invited  written  submissions  on  this
      point and in relation to article 8. Any such submissions  were  to  be
      sent to the tribunal within 14 days and they would then be taken  into
      account.

  12.  In  the  event  both   representatives   provided   further   written
      submissions. Mr Gulvin indicated he was  instructed  to  maintain  the
      refusal under the rules and to rely upon  the  plain  meaning  of  the
      words in paragraph 2 of table 9 as he had argued at the hearing.  With
      regard to article 8 he accepted that the appellants had a private life
      that would be adversely affected by the respondent's decision so as to
      potentially engage the operation of article 8. However  he  maintained
      that the decision was proportionate in that the private  life  of  the
      family as a whole whilst deserving of respect was  outweighed  by  the
      need  to  maintain  effective  immigration  control.  He  relied  upon
      paragraph 17 of CDS (Brazil) as follows.

             "17. It is apparent from these principles that article 8  does
             not provide a general discretion in the immigration  judge  to
             dispense with the requirements of the Immigration Rules merely
             because the way that they impact in  an  individual  case  may
             appear to be unduly harsh. The present context is not  respect
             for family life that  can  in  certain  circumstances  require
             admission to or extension of stay within the United Kingdom of
             those who do not comply with the general Immigration Rules. It
             is difficult to imagine how the private life of  someone  with
             no prior nexus to the United Kingdom would  require  admission
             outside the rules for the purpose of study. There is no  human
             right to come to the UK for education  or  other  purposes  of
             truly voluntary migration."

  13. Mr Ollennu re-asserted in his written submissions the arguments  which
      he had raised at the hearing. He provided some additional  information
      on dates and maintained it would be unjust not  to  allow  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules. Moreover,  and  in  the  alternative,  it
      could be argued that even though the appellant  had  obtained  tuition
      from her college, her course was with the Open University which was  a
      UK recognised body. With regard to article 8, he submitted that one of
      the children born in the UK is coming up to her  eighth  birthday  and
      has only known the UK and is presently at school here. The main  point
      however is that further work experience would  assist  the  family  in
      establishing a better quality of family life in Ghana and it would  be
      disproportionate not to allow them some further time  to  obtain  this
      work experience.


  14. Having considered these submissions we conclude that  the  outcome  of
      these appeals depends upon whether the first appellant can satisfy the
      requirements of table 9 on their  true  interpretation.  We  say  this
      because, with regard to article 8, we have come, on our own assessment
      of all the material factors in  the  balancing  exercise  relating  to
      proportionality, to similar conclusions  to  those  described  by  the
      judge in paragraphs 25 and 26 of his determination. It has always been
      and continues to be the position of the appellants that they  wish  to
      return to Ghana and do not seek to remain indefinitely in  the  United
      Kingdom. It is implicit in this that they accept that their return  to
      Ghana in the not too distant future would not involve disproportionate
      interference with their family lives together. We find it follows also
      that, unless they can bring themselves within the  Immigration  Rules,
      it will not be a  disproportionate  interference  with  their  private
      lives for the Secretary of State to refuse  their  applications  given
      the weight to be attached to her policy  of  maintaining  a  fair  and
      consistent immigration system. Similar considerations apply to  defeat
      the  point  about  legitimate  expectation.  There  is  no  legitimate
      expectation that having been given leave to study in the UK the  first
      appellant will be given further leave to  remain  to  gain  post-study
      work experience other than  as  provided  for  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. Moreover we note and accept  that  there  is  no  corroborative
      evidence of the assertions of the first  and  second  appellants  that
      good post-study work experience of the type sought by  the  appellants
      required cannot be obtained in Ghana.


  15. Thus, as we have said, the crucial issue is whether the appellants can
      satisfy the relevant requirements of the Immigration  Rules  on  their
      proper interpretation. There is no dispute as to which version of  the
      rules applies. It is well established that in cases such as this it is
      the rules in force at the time of the appellants' applications  on  15
      April 2010. The issue is the interpretation of paragraph 2(a) of table
      9 of Appendix A.

  16. We consider there  is  inherent  ambiguity  in  the  wording  of  that
      paragraph. This arises out of the tension  created  by  the  different
      tenses of the two verbs which are used in the one  sentence,  ie  "the
      applicant has studied for his award at a UK institution that is .... a
      listed body." It  is  common  ground  between  the  parties  that  the
      appellant's college does not hold a sponsor licence and was  never  UK
      recognised (as it was defined in the rules). It is  also  implicit  in
      the terms of any application for post-study work  that  the  applicant
      must have finished any material studies. Thus, the words "has studied"
      in the past tense correctly reflect this. The  ambiguity  arises  from
      the use of the present tense in reference to whether  the  institution
      at which the applicant studied "is" a listed  body.  In  Mr  Ollennu's
      submission it means it is a listed body at the time of the undertaking
      of those studies.  In Mr Gulvin's submission it means it is  a  listed
      body at the time of the application.

  17.  The  paragraph  concerns  the  20  points  to  be  claimed  for   the
      "institution of study".  There  are  separate  points  and  provisions
      relating to the actual qualifications achieved. Given  the  ambiguity,
      we have tested each of these two interpretations to ascertain how they
      would work out in practice. Mr  Ollennu's  interpretation  would  mean
      that an applicant qualifies for the points only if the institution  at
      which he studied was a listed body at the time of  those  studies.  In
      other words, "is" relates back and is linked to the timeframe of  "has
      studied". This fits well with what we understand the underlying policy
      to be, in that the respondent is concerned to ensure  that  the  place
      where  the  studies  were  undertaken  was   a   genuine   educational
      institution. The wording of the paragraph could  have  been  expressed
      more clearly, but this  interpretation  appears  to  chime  with  both
      policy and common sense.

  18. However  if  one  separates  the  two  verbs  and  treats  each  as  a
      freestanding condition, as Mr Gulvin's interpretation  demands,  there
      are some rather bizarre consequences. For example a  person  may  have
      studied at an unlisted and wholly inadequate institution but if, after
      the studies were completed, the institution was  improved  and  became
      listed, then the student would be entitled to the points  even  though
      he actually studied at an inadequate institution. Equally  bizarre  is
      the converse scenario where  a  person  studies  and  qualifies  at  a
      properly listed institution but is denied the  points  retrospectively
      if for example the college  subsequently  closes  down  prior  to  the
      student's application for leave being made. That does not reflect what
      we  understand  the  underlying  policy  to  be;  nor  does  it   make
      commonsense; nor is it fair.

  19. Thus, for these reasons, we conclude that the  correct  interpretation
      of paragraph 2(a) of the Immigration Rules is that in order to qualify
      for the 20 points for the institution of study, the student must  have
      studied at a UK institution that was at the time of  study  either  UK
      recognised or was a listed body, or which held a sponsor licence under
      Tier 4 of the points based system.

  20. Our conclusion is reinforced by our understanding of the chronology of
      the introduction of  the  points-based  system,  as  revealed  by  the
      tracking version of the Immigration Rules. The  different  tiers  were
      introduced at different times. Tier 1 was introduced on 30 June  2008.
      Table 9 was introduced as part of this as it related to  Tier  1.  The
      provisions for Tier 4 (General) Students were introduced by HC 314  on
      31 March 2009 and table 9 was adopted  into  them.  As  part  of  this
      process, sponsor licences replaced the previous categories  of  listed
      and recognised  bodies.  There  was  a  period  of  time  allowed  for
      institutions to apply for these new sponsor licences. Then, on 6 April
      2010, the definitions of listed and  recognised  bodies  were  deleted
      from the Rules. In this context,  the  intentions  of  paragraph  2(a)
      become clearer. From  6  April  2010,  institutions  required  sponsor
      licences. The references in the rules (as they were at the time of the
      appellant's application) to listed and recognised bodies was  intended
      to cover  transitional cases where students  had  studied  with  leave
      last granted under the previous regime, but were applying for  further
      leave under the points-based system. The very fact that listed and  UK
      recognised bodies can still  qualify  for  the  institution  of  study
      points without having a sponsor  licence  suggests  that  a  historic
      perspective was intended. This  reinforces  our  conclusion  that  the
      proper interpretation of paragraph 2(a) is that the institution had to
      be recognised or listed at the time of the  period  of  study  by  the
      student rather than at the time of the application.

  21.  We have then examined how our conclusion impacts on the appellants by
      merging the material facts as established, with the above chronology.

             7 November 2008 - the appellant was granted further  leave  to
             study at the college. The points  based  system  was  then  in
             place for Tier 1 applicants but not for Tier  4  students.  Mr
             Gulvin has conceded that the college must have been listed  at
             that time.


             31 March 2009 - the provisions relating  to  Tier  4  students
             were introduced into the rules. The appellants, having  extant
             leave until 30 April 2010, were not affected


             September 2009 - the appellant last  studied  at  the  college
             prior to taking her exams. Her offer letter from  the  college
             dated 18 August 2008 states however that the  completion  date
             for the course is December 2009.


             October 2009 - the appellant sat her last exam paper  for  the
             Open University degree.


             31 December 2009 - the appellant was awarded her  degree.  She
             did not then have the certificate and so could not  yet  apply
             to the respondent for further leave. So far as  the  appellant
             was aware, the college was still listed at the end of 2009 and
             had  applied  for  a  sponsor   licence,   which   was   under
             consideration. This is confirmed by the judge in paragraph  27
             of the determination.


             10  February  2010  -  the  appellant  received   her   degree
             certificate. She only then had the necessary documentation  to
             submit her application to the respondent for post-study work.


             January to April 2010 - at some unknown point in this  period,
             the first appellant's college was refused its sponsor  licence
             under Tier 4 and closed down.


             6 April 2010 - the definitions of listed and recognised bodies
             were removed from the Immigration Rules.


             15 April 2010 - the appellant  submitted  her  application  in
             time and when it was refused made enquiries about the  college
             and discovered what had happened.

  22. What we derive from this chronology is that the appellants  have  done
      correctly everything that was in their power  and  have  been  refused
      leave in circumstances of which they were unaware and over which  they
      had no control. This  illustrates  the  illogicality  of  Mr  Gulvin's
      suggested interpretation of the ambiguous paragraph 2(a). We  conclude
      that the judge erred in law in accepting that interpretation.

  23. We are able now however  to  cure  that  error  by  reaching  our  own
      conclusions. The judge sustainably found in the appellants' favour  on
      all disputed issues under the rules, save for whether  they  qualified
      under  paragraph  2(a).  For  the  reasons  described  above  we  have
      concluded that the first appellant did study for her  award  at  a  UK
      institution which at the time of her studies was listed and thus meets
      the requirements of the rule. Thus the appellants' appeals must all be
      allowed.

      Decision

      The appeals of the four appellants are allowed.









      Signed




      Upper Tribunal Judge Batiste



