
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


  Jarusevicius (EEA Reg 21 - effect of imprisonment) [2012] UKUT 00120(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 February 2012                           |On 5 April 2012              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                            nerijus jarusevicius
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, instructed by Global Immigration Solution
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.      In order to acquire a right of permanent residence under  regulation
   15 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  and  the
   Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC a person had  to  show  five  years  lawful
   residence within the meaning of EU law.

2.    On the present state of the authorities, a period in prison  does  not
   count towards the acquisition of the five years residence.

3.     Once a permanent right of residence is acquired it is not lost  save
   by an absence from the United Kingdom for  a  period  in  excess  of  two
   consecutive years. The learning of the Court of Justice of  the  European
   Union suggests that the  continuity  of  residence  for  the  purpose  of
   regulation 21(4) (10 years residence)  is  not  broken  by  a  period  of
   imprisonment.

4.    In the circumstances it seems probable that a period of  imprisonment
   should not be equated to voluntary unemployment that may lead to loss  of
   worker status and the loss of continuity  of  lawful  residence  for  the
   purpose of acquiring the right of permanent residence and  the  decisions
   of the AIT in LG and CC  (EEA  Regs:  residence;  imprisonment;  removal)
   Italy [2009] UKAIT 00024 and the  UTIAC  in  SO  (imprisonment  breaks  -
   continuity of residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00164 (IAC) that in addition
   to not counting towards the  five-year  period,  prison  also  broke  the
   continuity of residence for that period, may have to be re-examined.

5.    Even where an appellant had acquired a right of permanent  residence,
   the UKBA Criminal Casework Directorate Instructions (attached as Appendix
   B to LG and CC) are not to be treated  as  exhaustive  or  conclusive  of
   which convictions would lead to  an  assessment  of  serious  grounds  of
   public policy or public security.

6.     Conspiracy to handle stolen goods is different  from  the  kinds  of
   offences referred to in the UKBA Instructions note but the  Tribunal  was
   entitled to conclude that it  amounted  to  serious  grounds  within  the
   meaning of regulation 21(3). However,  a  conviction  for  conspiracy  to
   handle stolen goods  is  unlikely  to  constitute conduct  amounting  to
   imperative grounds of public policy  within  the  meaning  of  regulation
   21(4).



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Lithuania, born on 30 June 1977,  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 24 January 2011 to make  a
    deportation order by virtue of section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971
    ("the 1971 Act").

2.    The Secretary of  State  decided  that  the  Appellant  would  pose  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  interest  of
    public policy if he were to be allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom
    and that his deportation was  justified  under  regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the
    Regulations")  in  the  light  of  his  conduct  as  evidenced  by  his
    conviction on 1 June 2010 at Chelmsford Crown Court for  conspiracy  to
    handle stolen goods.

3.    Consequential decisions were  made  to  remove  and  prevent  re-entry
    under regulation 19(3)(b) and regulation 24(3) requiring him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and prohibiting him from re-entering while the order
    was in force.  For the purpose of the order,  section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    1971 Act would apply.  The Secretary of State  thus  proposed  to  give
    directions for the Appellant's removal to  Lithuania,  the  country  of
    which he was a national.

4.    The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8 April 2011 and permission to appeal  was
    granted to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds that regulation 21 had not
    been properly applied in this case.

5.    The brief immigration history of the Appellant is that  he  claims  to
    have arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  September  2004,  although  no
    record would have been kept of this entry because as an EEA national he
    would not have been treated as subject to immigration control  at  this
    time.

6.    On 21 March 2007 at Stratford Magistrates' Court, he was convicted  of
    driving  a  motor  vehicle  with  excess   alcohol   and   received   a
    disqualification from driving for three years, a community order unpaid
    work requirement for 200 hours, a supervision  requirement  for  twelve
    months and a curfew requirement for two months with electronic tagging.

7.    On 20 May 2008 at Barking  Magistrates'  Court  he  was  convicted  of
    breaching a community order and received a curfew for  one  month  with
    electronic tagging.

8.    On 1  July  2010  at  Chelmsford  Crown  Court  he  was  convicted  of
    conspiracy to handle stolen goods  and  was  sentenced  to  42  months'
    imprisonment.  Consideration was given to his deportation thereafter.

9.    The Appellant failed to provide the Secretary of State  with  evidence
    that he had been in the United Kingdom since 2004.   It  was  therefore
    considered that there was no evidence of his  residency  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years.   The
    Appellant claimed to have a partner and two  children  in  the  UK  but
    failed to provide the Secretary of State  with  any  evidence  of  that
    claimed relationship.

10.   On 3 December 2010 the Appellant  wrote  to  the  Secretary  of  State
    stating he wished to leave the United Kingdom and return  to  Lithuania
    under the Early Release Scheme. He subsequently changed  his  mind  and
    appealed against the decision on the basis that he and his  family  had
    made their home in the United Kingdom, that  he  did  not  represent  a
    present threat to public policy and deportation was disproportionate in
    all the circumstances.

11. The first issue for the First-tier Tribunal was whether  the  appellant
    had acquired a right of permanent residence.  Regulation  21,  applying
    the provisions of the Citizens Directive, distinguishes between:


          a. Public policy, public security and  public  health  (regulation
             21(1));
          b. Serious grounds of public policy for  those  with  a  right  of
             permanent residence (regulation 21(3))
          c. Imperative grounds of public policy for someone who has resided
             for a continuous period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the
             relevant decision (regulation 21(4)).

12.   Regulation 15 sets out the circumstances in which a person acquires  a
    right of permanent residence.  An EEA national or the family of an  EEA
    national who has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years acquires the right of
    permanent residence.

13.   In her Letter of Refusal dated  24  January  2011,  the  Secretary  of
    State pointed out that consideration had been given to the  Appellant's
    period  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.    In   that   context
    'residence' meant residence within the wider community.   She  did  not
    consider that the time the Appellant had spent in  prison,  constituted
    residence for the purpose of the Regulations.

14.   Consideration had been given to the principles set out  at  regulation
    21(5) that states  that  a  decision  to  deport  a  person  under  the
    Regulations must be taken in accordance with the following principles:

         "(a)      the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;


           (b)    the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;


            (c)     the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;


         (d)      matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;


         (e)       a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision".


15.   The Secretary of State observed that the Appellant had  been  involved
    in a highly organised car cloning organisation.  Cars were stolen  from
    peoples' homes and then sold on.  False ID documents were prepared  and
    the Appellant was involved in  the  selling  of  the  cars  and  duping
    unsuspecting buyers.

16.   It was further noted that His Honour Judge Hayward-Smith QC, had  this
    to say in his sentencing remarks:

         "There are a number of features relevant to the sentences I  should
         pass.  This was highly organised with cloned  cars  for  sale  very
         quickly after they had been stolen,  there  were  expert  documents
         that many people were taken in. False ID  documents  prepared,  the
         speed and expertise with which this operation was carried out  make
         it clear many others were involved.


         Twenty eight cars were stolen and there were thirty three different
         indemnities found for the cars.  Twenty were stolen in  night  time
         burglaries from dwellings, where the homes were entered,  car  keys
         taken and the cars stolen from outside resident's properties.


         ... were involved in selling cars and duping unsuspecting  clients.
         It is said that you were attracted to easy money  and  coerced  and
         you told the jury a  totally  unbelievable  story.   I  reject  any
         suggestion that you were  innocents  duped  into  this.   You  were
         thoroughly dishonest to a number of people and  knew  exactly  what
         you were doing.  There is no  evidence  that  you  knew  about  the
         burglaries but I take the view that you did not care.  You are  not
         ringleaders but lieutenants".

17.   In addition it was noted that the judge went on to say that:

         "Only a small fraction of the truth has been  uncovered.   None  of
         (the defendants) made any attempt to tell the truth  of  what  went
         on, with lying, obfuscation, blame on others or silence."


18.   The Secretary of State considered that:

        i) The Appellant committed this offence for financial gain.
        ii)      The Judge had stated the Appellant was attracted  to  easy
             money and knew exactly what  he  was  doing  and  that  it  was
             illegal.
        iii)     The Appellant had  stated  that  he  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom to work and had failed to provide any evidence that  he
             had taken employment since 2004.
        iv)      It was therefore believed that  the  Appellant  would  re-
             offend if in need of funds.
        v) All the available evidence indicated that the Appellant had  the
             propensity to re-offend and  that  he  represented  a  genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
             justify his deportation.
        vi)      Deportation was  the  right  course  and  a  proportionate
             response  having  assessed  the  strength  of  the  Appellant's
             connections with the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  regulation
             21(6) and Article 8 ECHR.

19.   Given the nature of  the  offence  the  Appellant  committed  and  the
    threat that he posed to society, the Secretary of State considered that
    even if the Appellant had permanent residence as a result of five years
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom, the requirement for serious
    grounds of public policy would have been satisfied.

20.   Regulation 21(6) states that:

      "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy or
         public security in relation to a person  who  is  resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of a person, the person's length of residence in
         the United Kingdom, the person's social  and  cultural  integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin".


21.   It was considered that the Appellant was 33 years of age and  believed
    to be in good health.  He claimed to have a partner and two children in
    the United Kingdom but had failed to provide any evidence  about  their
    residence previously in the United Kingdom.  He had spent his youth and
    formative years in Lithuania and had stated that he wished to leave the
    United Kingdom under the Early Release Scheme.  It  was  therefore  not
    accepted that his removal from the United Kingdom  would  result  in  a
    breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of ECHR.

22.   The First-tier Tribunal took account of both the  Appellant's  witness
    statement of 18 March 2011 and his oral evidence before them.

23.   It was noted that  the  Appellant  had  remained  in  Lithuania  until
    approximately 1999 or 2000 when he went to Spain to look for work.   He
    was trained as a carpenter but was forced to  leave  due  to  the  poor
    employment situation, to look for a better future abroad.  Having spent
    approximately four years in Spain and due, again, to the lack of  work,
    he heard from a friend that work was available in  the  United  Kingdom
    and decided to come here.  The  Appellant's  mother  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom in or around 2002 or 2003 in order to find work and  the
    Appellant believed he could live with his mother here  until  he  found
    employment.

24.   It was whilst living in Spain that the Appellant met his partner,  and
    soon after they  met,  the  couple  started  living  together  and  the
    Appellant's partner agreed to come to the United Kingdom with him.  She
    also gave evidence before the Tribunal  that  after  she  came  to  the
    United Kingdom the  couple  lived  together  until  the  Appellant  was
    remanded  in  custody  and  after  the  Appellant  was   sentenced   to
    imprisonment.

25.   The First-tier Tribunal took account of the  Appellant's  evidence  as
    to his employment record.

26.   It was further noted that the Appellant claimed to have no  family  in
    Lithuania.  He stated that his father had  separated  from  his  mother
    when he was about 10 years old and his father had died  in  2010.   His
    only brother lived in Spain.  The Appellant claimed  that  his  partner
    had no close family in Lithuania since her mother was in Spain and  her
    brother was in the United Kingdom.  He had not lived in Lithuania since
    2000 and any friends that he had there were from about  ten  or  eleven
    years previously.

27.   The Appellant and his partner gave evidence before the  Tribunal  that
    their two daughters had made their lives in the United Kingdom and  the
    Appellant's partner gave evidence that neither she  nor  her  daughters
    would return to live in Lithuania even if the Appellant was deported.

28.   The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    immigration history his account of his  employment  record  and  family
    life.

29.   However, with regard to the Appellant's conviction for  conspiracy  to
    handle stolen goods, the First-tier Tribunal were  not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant's involvement was as limited as he claimed or that he was
    as na�ve as he suggested and that the reasons for the commission of the
    offences was solely to gain money to support his family.   The  reality
    was that the Appellant's partner was claiming state benefit as a single
    parent to which she was not entitled. She had given evidence  that  she
    was totally unaware that the Appellant was involved in this  conspiracy
    and therefore did not receive any money from the  Appellant,  resulting
    from his criminal conduct, which undermined the Appellant's reasons  as
    to why he committed the criminal offences.

30.   The Tribunal took full  account  of  the  sentencing  remarks  of  His
    Honour Judge Hayward-Smith QC.

31.   Having further taken account of  the  case  law  to  which  they  were
    referred, the Tribunal were satisfied that the offences  of  conspiracy
    and handling stolen goods, the particular circumstances and aggravating
    features of that  conspiracy  and  the  fact  that  they  were  serious
    offences, could constitute serious grounds of public policy  or  public
    security.

32.   There was no parole report or any other report from the prison,  other
    than a letter from Officer McNeil dated 23 March 2011.    The  Tribunal
    had no reason to doubt the details contained  in  his  letter  and  was
    satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  completed  a  variety  of  courses
    including improving his potential for employability and that he was  in
    a very trusted position whilst he was in prison.

33.   The Tribunal considered that the evidence given by the  Appellant  and
    his partner with regard to family in Lithuania was contradictory.   For
    the  reasons  given  at  paragraph  38  of  their  determination,  they
    concluded that they were satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  numerous
    relatives living in Lithuania including cousins and aunts.

34.   The First-tier Tribunal concluded that notwithstanding  their  finding
    that the Appellant had provided reliable evidence as to his work record
    in the United Kingdom, they were not satisfied that he had worked for a
    continuous period of five years.  The Tribunal also took the view  that
    time spent in prison "could not be counted as residence  in  accordance
    with the  EEA  Regulations"  and  they  were  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant lived and worked in the United Kingdom in accordance with the
    Regulations for five years at the time of his arrest and nor were  they
    satisfied that the Appellant was a qualified person in accordance  with
    regulation 6(1) (c) that related to a self-employed person. Accordingly
    the Appellant had not acquired a right of permanent residence.

35.   The Tribunal concluded,  however,  that  even  if  they  had  been  so
    satisfied,  it  was  apparent  that  the  Appellant's  offences   would
    constitute serious grounds for justifying his removal. It took  account
    of regulation 21(5) and the judge's sentencing remarks, as well as  the
    relevant jurisprudence, on whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    wife and children to relocate to Lithuania and the impact of removal on
    the best interests of the children. It concluded:

         "We are satisfied the Appellant was involved in a highly  organised
         car cloning operation where  vehicles  were  stolen  from  people's
         homes at night time  as  part  of  burglaries  and  that  false  ID
         documents and other expert documents had been prepared when selling
         the cars and in duping unsuspecting buyers of those vehicles.   The
         Judge  was  satisfied  the  Appellant  told  the  jury  a   totally
         unbelievable story and that he knew  exactly  what  he  was  doing.
         Whilst we accept that the Appellant has acted with credit whilst in
         prison, in the absence of any other reliable documentary  evidence,
         the lack of honesty by the Appellant as  to  the  reasons  for  the
         commission of this offence and his part within the  conspiracy,  we
         are satisfied that the Appellant has a propensity to  reoffend  and
         that he represented a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat to the public to justify deportation".


36.   The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Tribunal had erred:-

        i) in discounting the period the appellant had spent in custody  on
             remand  as contributing six months to the period of  five years
              for permanent residence;
        ii)      in adding to the qualifying period the six months spent on
             bail prior to his sentence when he was  self  employed  and  or
             looking for employment;
        iii)     in overlooking that the European Court of Justice  in  the
             cases of C-482/01 and C-493/01 Orfanopoulos and others  and  C-
             383/03 Dojan had made it clear that a person who  was  excluded
             from the labour market as a result  of  detention  rather  then
             choice, but who became a worker or jobseeker on release, should
             not be treated as having ceased to be a qualifying person;
        iv)      if  the  Appellant  had  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
             residence the  Tribunal,  was  wrong  in  concluding  that  his
             conduct engaged serious grounds of public policy;
        v) in placing reliance on LG and CC (Italy) [2009] AIT 00024, where
             the Tribunal   had  referred  to  the  UKBA  Criminal  Casework
             Directorate  Case  Owners  Process  Instructions  set  out   at
             Appendix B to the decision and the list of offences that  might
             constitute serious grounds of public policy or public security.
              It was submitted the offences contained in that case, did  not
             suggest that the offence of which the Appellant was  convicted,
             should be regarded as sufficient grounds to justify his removal
             on serious grounds of public policy of security;
        vi)      in giving inadequate reasons why the Appellant represented
             a present threat to public policy, even if he had not  acquired
             a right of permanent residence;
        vii)     in giving inadequate consideration to the Article 8 rights
             of the Appellant's partner and two young children  that  should
             have been regarded as crucial matters to be taken into account,
             particularly in view of the requirements of section 55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2007 to safeguard  and
             promote the welfare of children in the United Kingdom.

37.   The application was refused by Judge Spencer who had this to say:

         "In SO (imprisonment breaks  -  continuity  of  residence)  Nigeria
         [2011] UKUT 00164 (IAC) the Tribunal, presided over  by  Silber  J,
         held that time spent in prison however short, was to be disregarded
         in the calculation of the period required  to  obtain  a  permanent
         right of residence with the consequence that  that  period  had  to
         start again on release.


         It is clear from reading the determination, that the  Tribunal  did
         consider the proportionality of the Appellant's deportation, as its
         reference  to  Article  8(2)  of  ECHR  as  paragraph  48  of   its
         determination shows.  It is also the case the Tribunal  had  regard
         to the best interests of the Appellant's children as the  reference
         to the case of ZH (Tanzania) and LD (Article 8 - best interests  of
         the child)  in  paragraph  47  of  the  determination  shows.   The
         Tribunal was entitled to find that it would be reasonable  for  the
         Appellant's partner and children to accompany him to Lithuania,  of
         which country they were all nationals."


38.   The Appellant made further  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal, submitting inter alia, that the case  of  SO  was
    "immaterial"  and  that  the  Appellant  had  established  a  right  to
    permanent residence. On this occasion the Appellant's  application  was
    successful and in granting  permission  to  appeal  Senior  Immigration
    Judge Allen (as he then was) had this to say:

         "I am less sure than the draftsman of the grounds that  time  spent
         on remand must count towards residence under the  Directive  but  I
         think the point is arguable.  I also  see  arguable  merit  in  the
         point at paragraph 3 of the  further  grounds  in  respect  of  the
         Tribunal's conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  a  propensity  to
         reoffend and there is also force in the challenge to the Article  8
         findings in respect of the children".


39.   Thus the appeal came before us for consideration on 14 February  2012.
     The Appellant relied on the grounds set out at [47] above.  Our  first
    task was to decide whether the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    disclosed a material error of law, that being  an  error  of  law  that
    might have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

The Regulations

40.   In addition to those regulations to which we have above referred,  the
    following are also relevant.

41.   Regulation 15(1) provides as follows:

            "The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in  the
UK permanently

                         (a) an EEA national who has resided in  the  United
              Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
              period of five years".

42.   Regulation 21(6) provides as follows:

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or grounds of public security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and  economic  situation  of  the  person,  a  person's  length  of
         residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social  and  cultural
         integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of the  person's
         links with his country of origin."


43.   Regulation 21(5) and (6) incorporates the requirements of  Article  28
    of Council Directive 2004/38/EC that govern restrictions on  the  right
    of residence on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
    health and Article 8 more particularly relates  to  protection  against
    expulsion.


      Its provisions are as follows:

         "(1)     Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health, family and economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the host  member  state  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.


         (2)      The host Member State may not take an  expulsion  decision
             against Union citizens or their family  members,  irrespective
             of nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on
             its territory, except on serious grounds of public  policy  or
             public security.


         (3)      An expulsion decision  may  not  be  taken  against  Union
             citizens, except  if  the  decision  is  based  on  imperative
             grounds of public policy as defined by Member States if they:


             (a) have resided in the host Member State for the previous ten
                  years; or


             (b) are minor, except if expulsion is necessary for  the  best
                  interests of the child, as  provided  for  in  the  United
                  Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  of  20
                  November 1989".


44.   Article 28(2) does not tell us  how  a  person  acquires  a  right  of
    residence.  For that we must go to Article  16  and  more  particularly
    16(1):

         "Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
         five years in the  host  Member  State  shall  have  the  right  of
         permanent residence there."

Submissions

45.   Mr Yeo, in the course of  his  oral  submissions,  made  reference  to
    Tsakouridis (European Citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-145/09  [23  November
    2010].  This was a reference for a preliminary hearing  concerning  the
    interpretation of Article 16(4) and 28(3)(a) of  Directive  2004/38/EC.
    Mr Yeo referred us to paragraphs 32 to 34 of that decision:

    "32.   As to the question of the extent to which absences from the host
         Member State during the period referred to in Article 28(3) (a)  of
         Directive 2004/38, namely the 10 years preceding  the  decision  to
         expel the person concerned,  prevent  him  from  enjoying  enhanced
         protection, an overall assessment must  be  made  of  the  person's
         situation on each occasion at the precise time when the question of
         expulsion arises.


    33.    The national authorities responsible for applying Article  28(3)
         of Directive 2004/38 are required to take all the relevant  factors
         into consideration in  each  individual  case,  in  particular  the
         duration of each period of absence  from  the  host  Member  State,
         cumulative duration and the frequency of those  absences,  and  the
         reasons why the person concerned left the  host  Member  State.  It
         must be ascertained whether those absences involve the transfer  to
         another State of the centre of the personal, family or occupational
         interests of the person concerned.


    34. The fact that a person in question has been the subject of a forced
        return to the host Member  State  in  order  to  serve  a  term  of
        imprisonment there and the time spent in prison may, together  with
        the factors listed  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  be  taken  into
        account as part of the overall assessment required for  determining
        whether the integrated links previously forged with the host Member
        State have been broken.


    35. It is for the national court to assess whether that is the case  in
        the main proceedings. If that court were to  reach  the  conclusion
        that Mr Tsakouridis's absences from the host Member State  are  not
        such as to prevent him from enjoying enhanced protection, it  would
        then have to examine whether the expulsion decision  was  based  on
        imperative grounds of public security within the meaning of Article
        28 (3) of Directive 2004/38."


46.   The court in Tsakouridis  pointed  out  that  in  the  application  of
    Directive 2004/38 a balance had to be struck more particularly  between
    the exceptional nature of the threat to public security as a result  of
    the personal conduct of the person concerned, assessed if necessary, at
    the time when the expulsion decision was to be made.   In  that  regard
    reference was made inter alia to the joined  cases  C-  482/01  and  C-
    493/01 Orafanopoulos and Oliveri [2004] ECR 1-5757 paragraphs 77 to 79,
    by reference in particular to the possible penalties and the  sentences
    imposed, the degree of involvement in the  criminal  activity  and,  if
    appropriate the risk of re-offending (para 50).

47.    Mr Yeo also referred us to Maria Dias v SSHD  [2011]  EUECJ-C-325/09.
    Dias was a reference for a preliminary  ruling  concerning  the  proper
    interpretation of Article 16 of the Directive. Ms Dias was a Portuguese
    national who, in May 2000, was issued with a residence permit  pursuant
    to the predecessor provisions of the Citizens Directive valid for  five
    years. The Court concluded:
         58      Inasmuch as periods of residence of a Union citizen  in  a
         host Member State which were completed on the  basis  solely  of  a
         residence permit validly issued under Directive 68/360, but without
         the conditions governing entitlement  to  any  right  of  residence
         having been satisfied, cannot be regarded as having been  completed
         legally for the  purposes  of  the  acquisition  of  the  right  of
         permanent residence under Article 16(1) of Directive  2004/38,  the
         question then arises as to what the effect is on  that  acquisition
         of such a period of residence which occurred before 30 April  2006
         and after a  period  of  five  years'  continuous  legal  residence
         already completed prior to that date.
         59      In that connection, it should be borne in mind,  first  of
         all, that the  Court  has  already  ruled  that  Article  16(4)  of
         Directive  2004/38  refers  to  loss  of  the  right  of  permanent
         residence by reason of absences of more than two consecutive  years
         from the host Member State and that such a measure may be justified
         because, after an absence of that duration, the link with the  host
         Member State is loosened (see Lassal, paragraph 55).
         60      Next, the Court has also held that that provision falls to
         be applied independently of whether the  periods  of  residence  in
         question were completed before or after  30 April  2006,  for  the
         reason that, since residence periods of five years completed before
         that date must be taken into account for the purpose of acquisition
         of the right of permanent residence provided for in  Article  16(1)
         of Directive 2004/38, non-application of Article 16(4)  thereof  to
         those periods would mean that the Member States would  be  required
         to grant that  right  of  permanent  residence  even  in  cases  of
         prolonged absences which call into question the  link  between  the
         person concerned and the host Member State (Lassal, paragraph 56).
48.   We drew the parties' attention to the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Carvalho [2010] EWCA Civ 1406, decided December 2010 in which  their
    Lordships considered the extent to which  the  time  spent  in  prison,
    might count towards the qualifying period for permanent residence under
    regulation 15(1)(a).  The Court noted:-

         i) A series of domestic decisions  of  the  United  Kingdom  courts
             indicating that time spent in prison did not count towards  the
             qualifying period (see HR (Portugal) [2009] EWCA  Civ  371  and
             Bulale [2008] EWCA Civ 806;
         ii)      the ECJ authorities  of  Nazli  [2000]  ECR  1-957,  Dogan
             [2005] ECR 1-6237 and Orfanopolous  and  Oliveri  [2004]  ECR-1
             5257 where periods of imprisonment  on  remand   or  serving  a
             sentence were held not to break the continuity of status  as  a
             worker long resident in the host Member State;
         iii)     the view of the AIT in  the case, that a  distinction  was
             to be  made  between  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the
             acquisition of permanent residence rights by  lawful  residence
             in accordance with the  Directive  and  circumstances  where  a
             person who had acquired those rights lost them;
         iv)      the guidance note of the Commission  from July  2009  that
             'Member States are not obliged  to  take  time  actually  spent
             behind bars into  account  when  calculating  the  duration  of
             residence under Article 28 where no links with the host  Member
             State are built'.

      The Court dismissed Mr Carvalho's appeal.

49.   We informed the parties, that we had additionally  considered  LG  and
    CC (Italy) [2009] UKAIT 00024 that held that time spent in  prison  did
    not count towards the ten years' residence  which  would  give  an  EEA
    national a higher level of  protection  against  expulsion  (regulation
    21(4)).  However, time in prison did not remove a  right  of  permanent
    residence that had been acquired before the prison sentence.

50.         Finally we had considered  SO  that  held  that  time  spent  in
    prison, however short, was to be disregarded in the calculation of  the
    period required to obtain a permanent  right  of  residence,  with  the
    consequence that that period had to start again on release.

51.   In summary Mr Yeo submitted:-

        i) that  periods  of  residence  did  not  have  to  be  continuous
             residence.
        ii)      Tsakouridis indicated that  imprisonment  could  be  taken
             into account in establishing links (see paragraphs 33 and  34).
             Imprisonment was only one factor to take into  account  in  the
             assessment.  It was not suggested that periods of  imprisonment
             were an absolute bar to residence.
        iii)      in  any  event  the  Tribunal's  conclusions  as  to  the
             Appellant's propensity to re-offend really  was  no  more  than
             speculation.  He  contended  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
             support the Tribunal's finding in that regard.   There  was  no
             probation report or any other report or evidence  that  related
             to the Appellant's risk of  reoffending  before  the  Tribunal.
             There was nothing to suggest that the Appellant was at high  or
             medium risk of offending.
        iv)      in the assessment under Article 8, it was not open to  the
             First-tier Tribunal to say that the Appellant's children  could
             maintain  contact  with  the  Appellant  by  "modern  means  of
             communication".  Further, that because the  Appellant  did  not
             spend enough time with them this was a further  factor  in  the
             Tribunal's assessment of proportionality as to the  Appellant's
             removal from the United Kingdom.

52.   Ms Tanner responded as follows:

        i) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed no  error
             of law.
        ii)      The Tribunal were perfectly correct in  finding  that  the
             Appellant had not established five years' residence.
        iii)     The period of  imprisonment  spent  by  the  Appellant  on
             remand in custody, did not count towards residence.
        iv)      It was open to the Tribunal on the evidence to reason that
             the Appellant  had  a  propensity  to  reoffend.   He  had  not
             accepted his culpability. He had lied before the court.
         v)      She referred us to paragraph 38 of the Tribunal's decision
             where they found that the evidence  given  by  the  Appellant's
             partner was contradictory as to their situation  in  Lithuania.
             Although that did not directly go to Article 8, it showed  that
             it was an aspect of the Appellant's conduct and character, that
             the Tribunal  took  into  account  at  paragraph  42  of  their
             determination in relation to which,  the  Tribunal  noted  that
             this was reflected in the Judge's sentencing remarks.
        vi)      The Tribunal had considered  the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's children and found that those  interests  would  be
             best served by their living with their parents as a family unit
             in Lithuania.

53.         We reserved our decision.

Conclusions: (1) Permanent residence

54.   The First-tier Tribunal found reliable  evidence  that  the  Appellant
    was working from March 2005. In our judgment the  question  whether  he
    had acquired a right of permanent residence depends on whether  he  had
    resided 'in accordance with these Regulations for a  continuous  period
    of five years' (regulation 15 (1)(a)).

55.   Applying the guidance in Dias that means determining whether he was  a
    worker or exercising other Treaty rights that give rise to a  right  of
    residence under Article 7 of the  Citizens  Directive.  Mere  residence
    under national law or intending to find work does not suffice for  this
    purpose.

56.   The Appellant was remanded  in  custody  in  June  2009,  nine  months
    before he would  have  acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence  by
    employment or self employment.  He was  out  on  bail  for  six  months
    before he received his sentence in June 2010. Even if this period  were
    to be added to the 4 years and 3 months he had apparently  achieved  by
    June 2009, he would not have acquired 5 years residence  continuous  or
    otherwise unless his period on remand were to count in his favour.

57.   We are bound by the authority of Carvalho  to  conclude  that  periods
    spent in detention do not count towards the accrual of the  five  years
    continuous lawful residence necessary to achieve a right  of  permanent
    residence.

58.   We conclude that the decision  in  Tsakouridis  neither  requires  nor
    entitles us to reach a contrary result.  That case was  one  where  the
    right to permanent residence had been acquired long before the claimant
    spent time in prison. The right was  not  lost  by  his  short  absence
    abroad and nor was it lost by his  remand  in  custody  and  subsequent
    sentence on return. We note that in the calculation of  the  ten  years
    residence, EU law requires the decision maker to count  back  from  the
    date of the decision to deport, whilst  the  acquisition  of  permanent
    residence means counting  forward  from  the  date  that  it  is  first
    established by economic activity or other means under Article 7 of  the
    Directive.

59.   In our judgment  all  the  cases  cited  draw  a  distinction  between
    acquisition of the right to reside permanently and  the  loss  of  that
    right. The learning from the Court of Justice suggests that:-

           i) once a right of permanent residence has  accrued  it  is  not
              lost by a remand in custody or a short sentence or a sequence
              of them (Nazli, Dogan);
          ii) prison is not to be equated to voluntary  unemployment   that
              may lead to loss of worker status and the loss of  continuity
              of lawful residence for the purpose of acquiring the right of
              permanent residence (Orfanopoulos and Oliveri);
         iii) the continuity of residence for the  purpose  of   regulation
              21(4)(a) (ten years residence)  is not broken by a period  of
              imprisonment (Tsakouridis).

60.   This may mean that the conclusions of the decisions of the AIT in   LG
    and CC (Italy) and the UTIAC in  SO that in addition  to  not  counting
    towards the five year period,  prison  also  broke  the  continuity  of
    residence for that period may have to be re-examined. It is  one  thing
    to conclude that a period spent serving a sentence of  imprisonment  is
    not lawful residence for the  purpose  of  acquiring  an  EU  right  of
    residence, it is another to conclude that  lawful  residence  prior  to
    such a sentence could not be aggregated  with  lawful  residence  after
    service of it. It  is  difficult  to  see  why  if  such  a  period  of
    imprisonment does not break "continuous" residence for the  purpose  of
    regulation 21(4)(a), it should do so  for  the  purpose  of  regulation
    15(1)(a). Equally it is difficult to reconcile the  conclusion  of  the
    AIT in LG and CC that service of a sentence of imprisonment in  the  10
    years before the decision to deport prevents the greater protection  of
    "imperative grounds" arising,  with  the  conclusion  of  the  CJEU  in
    Tsakouridis reached on the basis that it could. In a  case  where  this
    issue is central to the  outcome,  it  may  be  necessary  to  consider
    whether the UT is able to reach its own conclusion on  the  matter,  or
    should make a reference to the CJEU  or  is  bound  by  a  CA  decision
    pending any reference that is made by that court.

61.   However, neither of  these  problems  is  before  us  in  the  present
    appeal.  We conclude that the Appellant did not acquire  the  right  of
    permanent residence because:

          i) He had not worked or exercised any other  Article  7  Directive
             rights for 5 years from March 2005.
         ii) His period of remand in custody June 2009 to December 2009  did
             not count towards such a period as he was not exercising Treaty
             rights  during  that  period.  We   note   that   this   period
             subsequently counted towards sentence by direction of the trial
             judge.
        iii)  We  are  doubtful  whether  the  evidence  was  sufficient  to
             establish that the Appellant was exercising  Article  7  rights
             during the six months on bail before conviction and sentence.
         iv) Even if he were still to be considered a worker  when  released
             on bail and  even if the period of remand in  custody  did  not
             break the continuity of lawful residence  for  the  purpose  of
             regulation 15 (1) (a), this would still not amount to  a  total
             period of 5 years.
        v)    The period spent in prison between June 2010 and  the  date
             of the deportation decision in January  2011  did  not  count
             towards lawful residence for  the  same  reason  as  in  (ii)
             above.

Conclusions: (2) Public policy

62.   We reject the submissions that the tribunal misdirected itself  and/or
    was not entitled to conclude that  in January 2011 or at  the  date  of
    the appeal before it, the Appellant's continued residence was  contrary
    to public policy within the meaning of regulation 21(5).

63.   We make the following observations in support of that conclusion:

           i) The Appellant was convicted of a conspiracy to handle  stolen
              goods. This was not a case of a single  offence  of  handling
              but an agreement to play  a  significant  part  in  organised
              criminality  for  financial  gain  over  a  period  of  time,
              involving  a  range  of  serious  crimes  and  a  number   of
              criminals. Gang related crime of this nature is more  serious
              than single acts of dishonesty.


          ii)  The  Appellant  was  not  of  good   character   before   he
              participated  in  this   conspiracy.   While   his   previous
              convictions  were  completely  different  in  character  they
              represented some evidence of unwillingness to  abide  by  the
              criminal laws of the United Kingdom.

         iii) The Appellant denied his guilt and the trial judge  concluded
              that he had lied in his evidence by seeking to  minimise  his
              participation in the conspiracy. The Tribunal found that  the
              Appellant continued to minimise his part  in  the  conspiracy
              when he gave evidence before it.  This was evidence  that  he
              showed  little  or  no  remorse,  lacked  insight  into   the
              seriousness  of  his  activities  and  despite  his  sentence
              continued to be willing  to  mislead  judges  in  courts  and
              tribunals.

          iv) The Appellant  did  not  produce  any  positive  evidence  of
              insight into his crimes and reformation.  The  evidence  from
              the prison service of absence of disciplinary problems and co-
              operation with the authorities is not the same as a  NOMS  or
              other evidence based assessment of a change of  attitude  and
              associations.

           v) The fact that the Appellant's wife was claiming benefit as  a
              single person  to  which  she  was  not  entitled,  was  some
              evidence  of  financial  need  and  a  willingness  to  abuse
              residency rights.

Conclusions: (3) Serious grounds of public policy

64.   This ground does not arise in the  light  of  our  conclusion  on  the
    absence of a right to permanent residence.

65.   However, even if, contrary to our assessment, it were  concluded  that
    he had acquired a right of permanent residence, we do  not  regard  the
    UKBA Criminal Casework Directorate Instructions (attached as Appendix B
    to  LG and CC ) to be exhaustive or  conclusive  of  which  convictions
    will lead to an assessment of  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security. We recognise that conspiracy to handle stolen goods is
    different from the kinds of offences referred to in that guidance note,
    but like serious sexual and  violent  offences  it  carries  a  maximum
    penalty of more than ten years imprisonment.

66.   For the reasons given above, the scale of the offences and the  number
    of offenders who participated in  the  conspiracy,  the  burglaries  of
    private dwelling houses to obtain the keys to steal the  vehicles  that
    were handled  makes this a particularly serious form of crime.

67.   Whilst we could not envisage this class  of  conduct  giving  rise  to
    imperative grounds of public policy, we conclude that the Tribunal  was
    in the alternative entitled to conclude in this case that  it  amounted
    to serious grounds.

Conclusions (4): Family Life and Proportionality

68.   The Tribunal made a careful evaluation of all the relevant factors  in
    the case and reached an overall conclusion to which it was entitled  to
    come.

68. Although the Appellant's mother and his wife and their children (aged 3
    and 5 years) were all resident in this country, they were all nationals
    of Lithuania and could readily return to that country if they wanted to
    be with the Appellant. His wife and children had not acquired their own
    right of permanent residence as their residence rights derived from the
    Appellant himself. Their length of residence in the United Kingdom  was
    not substantial and the evidence of community  ties  limited.  If  they
    preferred to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  event  of  the
    Appellant's removal to Lithuania that was very much a matter of  choice
    for them rather than an obstacle of any degree of difficulty.

69. We do not consider it is necessary to cite the extensive  case  law  of
    the Upper Tribunal and the superior courts on the  proper  approach  to
    the best interests of  the  child  as  a  primary  consideration.   The
    Tribunal by  its  detailed  reasoning  was  clearly  aware  of  it  and
    considered it in the light of their findings of fact.

70. There  was  no  evidence  that  either  moving  back  to  Lithuania  or
    separating the children from their father  would  cause  them  positive
    harm. The loss of their father's company,  if  their  mother  chose  to
    reside here with them, is of course  a  loss  of  a  child's  right  to
    regular contact with a parent,  but  that  right  is  not  a  paramount
    consideration  in  deportation  cases,  and  such  separation  may   be
    justified where the father has committed serious crime: see Sanade  and
    others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048  (IAC).
    There is no question  here  of  anyone  being  required  to  leave  the
    European Union.

71. We do not understand the Tribunal to be minimising the  impact  of  the
    removal of their father on the children by its reference to the ability
    of the family to remain in contact by "modern means of  communication".
    It would be an error of approach  if  they  had,  but  in  context,  we
    conclude that it was merely observing that removal need not necessarily
    lead to a total and permanent rupture. As an EU national it was  always
    open to the Appellant to apply to revoke a  deportation  order  on  the
    ground of change of circumstances.

72. The ultimate question was whether the separation of the  children  from
    their father resulting from the  mother's  voluntary  decision  not  to
    return to the country of her nationality  could  be  justified  in  the
    present circumstances in the interests  of  public  policy  and  public
    order.  The Tribunal concluded it was.  It was a decision to which they
    were entitled to come.

Decision

73. For each of these reasons we can detect no misdirection of approach  by
    the Tribunal, and none that would justify us setting aside the decision
    and remaking it.  There is no material error of  law.  This  appeal  is
    accordingly dismissed.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein                           2 April 2012
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
