
                                                             [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

HS (Palestinian - return to Gaza) Palestinian Territories CG [2011] UKUT
124 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 and 16 December 2009,                   |                             |
|And at Field House on 22 and 23 February 2010,|                             |
|                                              |                             |
|Closing submissions received on 10 June 2010  |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE NICHOLS
                        MRS A J F CROSS DE CHAVANNES

                                   Between

                                     HS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


(1)   The Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider practical issues  concerning
    the return of a Palestinian family to Gaza.  GH [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1182
    and HH (Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ 426 applied.

(2)   Palestinians from  Gaza  with  passports  (expired  passports  can  be
    renewed via a straightforward procedure)  are  unlikely  to  experience
    problems in obtaining and, if necessary getting  extensions  of,  visas
    from the Egyptian authorities to enter Egypt and cross  into  Gaza  via
    the Rafah crossing.

(3)   The conditions likely to  be  experienced  by  Palestinians  in  Egypt
    while awaiting crossing into Gaza are not  such  as  to  give  rise  to
    breach of their human rights.

(4)   On the basis of the authorities: MA [2008] Imm AR 617; MT  [2009]  Imm
    AR 290 and SH [2009] Imm AR 306, it would  not  be  persecutory  or  in
    breach of their human rights for Palestinians to be  refused  entry  to
    Gaza.

(5)   The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to decide whether  Israel  has
    acted in breach of  customary  international  law  in  respect  of  its
    treatment of Palestinians within the Occupied Palestinian Territories.

(6)   The conditions in Gaza are not such as to  amount  to  persecution  or
    breach of the human rights of  returnees  or  place  them  in  need  of
    international protection.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, instructed by Harrison Bundey & Co,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Wastell, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a stateless Palestinian from  the  Gaza  Strip.   She
    appealed to an Immigration  Judge  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 16 September 2008 varying her leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom under s 3(3)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  such  that  there
    would be no leave remaining.

2.    The appellant had left Gaza via Egypt and came to the United  Kingdom,
    in September 2003, together with her husband and children.  Her husband
    had limited leave to remain until 31  January  2009  to  undertake  PhD
    studies and the appellant and their (then) five children  were  granted
    leave to remain on the basis that  they  were  dependants.   Due  to  a
    reduction in the funds available to the family to support themselves as
    the funding for her husband's studies had been  stopped,  she  and  the
    children returned to Egypt and tried to enter Gaza but were  unable  to
    do so, so she returned to the United Kingdom, and applied for asylum on
    27 March 2008.

3.    The Immigration Judge who heard her appeal in  October  2008  did  not
    accept that the appellant was  "stateless".   He  found  her  to  be  a
    national of the Palestinian Authorities and considered that even if she
    were stateless, she had been habitually resident in the area controlled
    by the Palestinian Authorities.  She had not left Gaza because  of  any
    difficulties experienced there or on account of political  activity  or
    adverse conditions, but in order to accompany her husband on account of
    the grant to him of limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a
    student.  The Immigration Judge considered it was not seriously  likely
    that if the appellant genuinely feared persecution in Gaza  she  would,
    of her own free will, leave the United Kingdom with  the  children  and
    attempt to re-enter Gaza.  He did not accept that the situation in Gaza
    between the time of her leaving  the  United  Kingdom  and  re-entering
    became so much more severe  as  to  cause  her  to  claim  asylum.   He
    considered that she had claimed asylum to obtain financial support  for
    herself and her children as her husband was  able  to  support  himself
    from his part-time earnings but could not support her and the children.
     He noted that she had chosen to go to Ireland to  give  birth  to  her
    sixth child because she had been informed that in doing  so  the  child
    would be entitled to Irish nationality, and she said that she did  that
    because it might be of use to her in the future.  He took into  account
    the fact that the appellant and her  husband  had  a  large  number  of
    relatives in Gaza and that prior to their departure in  2003  they  had
    lived with the appellant's husband's parents.

4.    In respect  of  the  appellant's  husband's  claim  that  he  was  not
    prepared to leave the United Kingdom, the Immigration Judge found  this
    to be entirely lacking in  credibility.   He  found  that  it  was  not
    credible that the husband,  who  had  limited  leave  to  remain  until
    January 31 2009, would not accompany his wife  and  children  on  their
    removal from the United Kingdom, nor that his desire  to  complete  his
    studies would override his  desire  to  support  his  family.   He  had
    suggested that he would  be  faced  with  adverse  treatment  from  the
    Palestinian Authorities  if  he  returned  to  Gaza  having  failed  to
    complete his studies in the United Kingdom, but the  Immigration  Judge
    considered that if that were in fact the case, he had not explained why
    he himself had not applied for international protection,  even  bearing
    in mind that he had  leave  to  remain  as  a  student.   Nor  did  the
    Immigration Judge accept that there was any substance to the claim that
    the appellant's Article 8 rights would be breached in  respect  of  her
    family members in Gaza on the basis that she  was  not  able  to  enter
    Gaza.  There was no  evidence  of  any  dependency  upon  those  family
    members although it was accepted that they could support the  appellant
    if she was returned to Gaza.  He dismissed the appeal in respect of the
    Geneva Convention and Article 3 and  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, noting medical evidence concerning one of  the  appellant's
    children who suffers  from  epilepsy  but  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    evidence showed  that  she  no  longer  received  medication  for  that
    condition and in any  event  objective  evidence  showed  that  medical
    treatment was available in Gaza albeit perhaps not of the same  quality
    as in the United Kingdom, and hence there would be no breach of Article
    3 rights in respect of her.

5.    The appellant sought reconsideration of this  decision,  arguing  that
    the Immigration Judge had erred in  respect  of  his  consideration  of
    relevant case law which flawed his findings on the  Refugee  Convention
    and Article 3.  It was also  argued  that  the  determination  did  not
    properly consider the appellant's Article  8  rights.   Reconsideration
    was ordered on the basis that the Immigration Judge had arguably  erred
    in  concluding  that  the  appellant  did  not  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return if she could be returned, to the Gaza  Strip  and
    that the humanitarian protection and Article 8  issues  might  also  be
    argued.

6.    On 7 April 2009 a Senior Immigration Judge concluded that there was  a
    material error of law in the  determination  for  reasons  set  out  in
    detail at paragraph 3 of the determination in that respect, a  copy  of
    which is annexed to this determination.  In effect,  a  re-hearing  was
    ordered on the basis of the appellant's grounds.

7.    The hearing before us took place on 15 and 16 December 2009 and on  22
    and 23 February 2010.  There were also subsequent written  submissions,
    the last of which was  received  on  10  June  2010.   Mr  P  Draycott,
    instructed  by  Harrison  Bundey  &  Co,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.   Mr  R  Wastell,  instructed  by  the  Treasury  Solicitor,
    appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.  Both representatives put
    in further documentation in addition to the three bundles that each had
    already provided.

8.    At the hearing on 15 December 2009 Mr Draycott sought  an  adjournment
    in respect of two particular matters.  The first concerned the  ability
    of the appellant to obtain a transit visa from the Egyptian  Consulate,
    and, if she were able to  gain  access  to  the  border,  the  question
    whether she would  be  able  to  access  the  Gaza  Strip  through  the
    crossing.  There was then the question of how long she  would  have  to
    wait there, bearing in mind  that  she  would  be  accompanied  by  six
    children, the youngest of whom was only 1�.  There was an issue  as  to
    the kind of conditions in which she would have to reside.  The evidence
    showed that the border was opened only sporadically and  unpredictably.
    On one interpretation of the evidence from the Egyptian Consulate,  the
    amount of time for which a visa would be granted was the  same  as  the
    time it would take for the application to  be  processed,  which  would
    make it meaningless.

9.    A further issue  concerned  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant
    needed to renew her status with the Israeli authorities and if she  had
    not done so whether she would be removed  from  the  database  and  not
    allowed to enter Gaza.  There were relevant issues in  this  regard  in
    connection  with  the  forthcoming  country  guidance  case  of   Azam,
    concerned with the West Bank.  The matter might  be  clarified  if  the
    appeal was heard after Azam had been determined.

10.   Mr Wastell opposed the application  for  an  adjournment.   He  argued
    that the last point had not been made before, and there had been a good
    deal of time in which it  could  have  been  made.   It  would  not  be
    appropriate, bearing in mind the amount of time and money that had been
    invested in preparation for the case, to adjourn on  that  basis.   The
    fact was that the evidence showed that the crossing was open  at  least
    three days a month and there was evidence on this in Dr George's report
    at page 256 of  the  appellant's  evidence  bundle.   Further,  if  the
    appellant could get into Egypt, the evidence showed that the  Egyptians
    would do what they could to get her across the  border  and  the  visas
    would be extended, and if  she  could  not  get  into  Egypt  then  the
    Tribunal would have no jurisdiction to  consider  the  matter  in  that
    regard as no removal directions had been set.

11.   By way of response, Mr Draycott argued that, as  it  was  an  intended
    country guidance case, there was a  need  for  more  latitude  for  the
    parties to ensure all the issues were properly dealt with  rather  than
    being done again later.  A short adjournment to enable the matter to be
    dealt with after Azam would lead to both determinations being  produced
    at around the same time.  He did not agree with Mr Wastell's submission
    in respect of the Tribunal's  lack  of  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
    issues pertaining to method and route of return.

12.   After consideration we concluded that it would not be  appropriate  to
    adjourn.  We should say that we have not set out in full all the points
    made by the representatives in regard to the adjournment request in the
    interests of brevity, and also because  some  of  those  arguments  are
    relevant to further issues which were subsequently  argued  in  greater
    detail  before  us.   We  saw  force  to  the  point   concerning   the
    desirability  of  clarifying  the  arrangements   with   the   Egyptian
    authorities and the database point.  It seemed  to  us  that  we  could
    nevertheless go ahead  and  take  the  evidence  and  hear  submissions
    concerning the legal issues pertaining to statelessness and  concerning
    conditions within Gaza and leave the issue of  access  to  Gaza  for  a
    further day (in the event it became necessary to re-list the matter for
    two further days) with any  further  evidence  in  this  regard  to  be
    provided by the end of January, shortly before the date of the  hearing
    in Azam.

13.   We then heard evidence from Dr  Alan  George.   He  had  provided  two
    reports, and stood by both of these.  In addition, he  had  provided  a
    small further bundle of documents, including an interview with  Dr  Al-
    Khatib, the Head of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society.

14.   He was asked about the terrain, especially on the  Egyptian  side,  of
    the Rafah border crossing.  He said he had never  been  there  but  had
    seen photographs.  The border went through the town of Rafah, so it was
    an urban environment.  As it was near the coast, there was rain  so  it
    was not desert but as one went further south from Rafah into Egypt  for
    30 or 50kms that would be total desert and likewise inland  from  Rafah
    after 6 or 7 miles.

15.   He was referred to what he said in  his  report  about  conditions  in
    Gaza.  In particular at page 255 he had referred to drinking water  and
    sewage spillage and was asked whether he had any  views  about  whether
    the water and the environment had been affected  as  a  consequence  of
    Operation Cast Lead.  Dr George said he was not  aware  of  a  problem.
    There were scattered munitions but it was not a  problem  in  terms  of
    contamination, as, for example, after  the  Gulf  War.   He  had  heard
    nothing about this, but that did not mean there was not a problem.   He
    was asked whether he had anything to add to  what  he  had  said  about
    malnutrition, and he said it seemed to him that one had to  be  careful
    with definitions.  He referred to the World Health Organisation  report
    of July 2009, at pages 217 to 218 of the Home Office bundle B as  being
    especially relevant to  this.   There  was  reference  to  a  level  of
    anaemia.  It should be questioned whether anaemia  meant  malnutrition.
    Dr Al-Khatib had referred to malnutrition as a significant problem  and
    Dr George thought it was necessary to use the word with some care.   He
    had gathered clearly from Dr Al-Khatib that the water  supply  and  the
    sewerage in Gaza were in a very poor  condition.   That  was  partly  a
    consequence of neglect over many years but significantly because of the
    military action in 2008 to 2009 and the effect of  the  blockade.   The
    quality of water, for example, would depend partly on the area  of  the
    Gaza Strip that one was in.  Generally, water supplies in the area were
    not good.

16.   He was referred to the fact that, in respect of the blockade,  funding
    for reconstruction had been  earmarked,  but  there  was  a  logjam  in
    getting building materials in.  He was asked how much had been possible
    prior to the provision of his most recent report.  He said that it  was
    very limited.  Funding as such was not a problem,  but  being  able  to
    spend it effectively  was  a  problem.   They  had  been  building  Red
    Crescent hospitals as a consequence of French intervention to which  he
    had referred at page 256 of his report, but that was  exceptional.   Dr
    Al-Khatib was happy to have his comments relayed to the court.

17.   Dr George was asked what parts of the Gaza  Strip  were  hardest  hit.
    He was referred to the map at page 152  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    bundle B.  Dr George considered that the map was  not  really  helpful.
    The main concentrations of population were the hardest hit.   This  was
    particularly so in Gaza City.  Rafah had been less  badly  hit.   Rural
    areas were relatively small and less dependent on sewerage  systems  of
    an urban nature and were less affected by the devastation.  As  regards
    the point at page 161B concerning the proposed wall to be built, he was
    asked how he saw this impacting on conditions in Gaza.  Dr George  said
    that this was  potentially  very  serious.   The  Gaza  Strip  survived
    largely because of the tunnels to Egypt which enabled transit of  goods
    and also weapons.  Such economic activity as  there  was  in  Gaza  was
    largely related to that traffic.  The wall would extend 18 metres below
    the surface to stop the tunnelling and was likely  to  have  a  drastic
    impact.  In the interview with Dr Al-Khatib, at page 257 of the bundle,
    he had said that even those goods to which he referred would  start  to
    disappear from the market.  He was asked whether he had  any  knowledge
    or view as to why this had happened.  He said  that  he  found  Egypt's
    position in this mysterious.  He had been  told  by  Dr  Al-Khatib  and
    other Palestinians that when the Israelis withdrew from the Gaza  Strip
    in 2005 they had planned to dump the problem on Egypt,  and  Egypt  had
    resisted by putting up barriers between itself and the Gaza  Strip  and
    aligning itself to the PLA who were at odds with Hamas  who  controlled
    the Gaza Strip, so in effect Egyptian solidarity with the PLA  and  its
    link to the USA which was  pro-Israel,  affected  this  position.   The
    Egyptians were silent as to why they did as they did on the border.

18.   He was asked how much influence the Israeli authorities  had  on  what
    the Egyptians did concerning the operation of the border crossing.   Dr
    George said he would be astonished if they were not intimately involved
    with border openings and closures.  They were involved de  jure  before
    the Hamas takeover and had an  intimate  interest  in  maintaining  the
    closure of Egyptian and Israeli borders.   The  Israeli/Egyptian  links
    and processes were not public but this was  a  matter  of  Dr  George's
    opinion.  In respect of page 257 of  the  bundle  also  concerning  the
    interview with Dr Al-Khatib with regard to the blockade and Israel,  he
    was asked whether there was any evidence concerning the general Israeli
    perspective on Palestinians, especially those  from  Gaza.   Dr  George
    said, with reference to his direct experience in Israel  and  the  West
    Bank, that Israelis stereotyped Palestinians.  What Dr  Al-Khatib  said
    was an accurate view.  Dr George gave an example of a visit he had paid
    to Hebron in 2007 when, during the course  of  a  conversation  with  a
    person  in  a  cafeteria,  this  person  said  they  wished  that   all
    Palestinians were dead.  This was the extreme end of Israeli opinion on
    the subject.  He had returned in 2007 to a kibbutz he had spent time in
    40 years earlier, and had observed the view of  Palestinians  expressed
    as them being a dehumanised  mass.   Any  resistance  on  the  part  of
    Palestinians was characterised as terrorism.   The  enemies  of  Israel
    were habitually dubbed by Israel as being terrorists.

19.   When cross-examined by Mr  Wastell,  Dr  George  was  asked  how  many
    countries were within his expertise roughly, and he said six or  seven,
    referring to Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel, Egypt, Kuwait  and  Yemen.
    He had been to all of these countries.  He had  been  to  the  Occupied
    Territories in 1967, 1972 and 2007: in 2007 for around  ten  days.   He
    had never been to Gaza.  He had been to the Erez crossing in  2007  but
    the Israelis had denied him entry.  He had  never  been  to  the  Rafah
    crossing.  He had been to Israel once since 1975.  He  considered  that
    visits were valuable, but they were not the sole source of information.
     It was put to him that that constrained his evidence  about  the  Gaza
    conditions in that he had never been there and he said  that  that  was
    true to a very  minimal  degree,  but  he  had  a  lot  of  sources  of
    information about  Gaza.   It  was  suggested  to  him  that  the  main
    constraint was that he could not see what was going on and he said that
    from the edges of the Gaza Strip one could see in as far as 150  yards.
    Parts of it were a buffer zone.  It was suggested to him that there was
    also a constraint in that the reports he got would not concern everyday
    life but were weighted to negativity, including  reports  from  Amnesty
    International, the International Committee of the  Red  Cross  and  the
    Palestinian Red Crescent.  He said he did not only rely  on  those  but
    there were a number of ways in which he obtained information.   He  met
    Gaza and Foreign and Commonwealth Office officials and journalists  and
    had  internet  sources  and  read  specialist  publications,  including
    academic publications and he met people from Gaza and spoke to them  on
    the telephone also.

20.   Adverting to Dr George's evidence in MA (Palestinian Arabs -  Occupied
    Territories - risk) [2007] UKAIT 00017 which he was not  going  to  ask
    questions about, Mr Wastell asked whether it was Dr George's view  that
    he could describe Israelis as colonising the  West  Bank  and  he  said
    "yes".  He was asked whether he sympathised with the Palestinian  cause
    in respect of the Israel versus Palestinian conflict.  He said that  he
    took international humanitarian law as his landmark and reference point
    and the laws of war.  He had upset the  Syrians  with  a  book  he  had
    written and was not allowed back there  and  he  sympathised  with  the
    Palestinians and the Israelis in some respects.  Mr Wastell said he was
    asking this partly because earlier Dr George had said  he  agreed  with
    the inference that for Israelis all Palestinians were  terrorists.   Dr
    George said it was an often-repeated view of Israelis, yes, and he gave
    the example again of the girl to whom he had spoken in the cafeteria as
    being at the very extreme.  It was put to him  that  this  was  a  very
    sweeping statement since he had been there once  in  31  years  and  he
    denied this.  Dr George said it was being inferred that  that  was  the
    source of his evidence and there was a lot more than that  and  it  was
    not the only basis for what he said.  It was put to  him  that  it  was
    nevertheless a sweeping statement and he said there was  nothing  wrong
    with that as such as there had to be generalisations to an  extent  and
    the question was whether it was  accurate.   He  did  not  accept  that
    having made one visit in 35 years constrained that view.

21.   He was referred to paragraph 22 of his first  report,  with  reference
    to the Oslo Accords and it was suggested to him that it was  much  more
    complicated than that, i.e. the fallout  from  the  Oslo  Accords.   Dr
    George said that in the context  of  the  limited  report,  it  was  an
    attempt to summarise accurately.  There were UN reports and Foreign and
    Commonwealth Office reports and meetings with diplomats.  He was  asked
    whether he accepted that it was a two-sided breakdown, and he said that
    there were two sides, but there was a fundamental imbalance  of  power.
    Israel had held all the cards and had exploited that.   The  essentials
    were as he had said.  It was not only his view but such bodies  as  the
    United Nations endorsed it, albeit of course the Israelis did not.   It
    was suggested to him that the Oslo Accords  did  not  provide  for  the
    removal of settlements and that was to be negotiated in the future  and
    he said no, but it had left open the possibility of a continued Israeli
    presence.  A third of the land had been seized for the colonists.

22.   He was referred to the fact that he had not mentioned the  Camp  David
    summit of July 2000.  He was asked whether what was said at page  22(a)
    in the Secretary of  State's  bundle  B  was  a  fair  summary  of  the
    breakdown of the talks and he said on a simplistic level, yes.   Offers
    were made to the Palestinians which they could not  have  accepted,  so
    they had rejected them.  It was a matter of  dispute  as  to  what  was
    offered, and there were different interpretations.

23.   He was referred to his paragraph 23  and  was  asked  whether  he  was
    saying that in 2002 to 2003  the  Gaza  economy  was  already  severely
    damaged.  He said that it was always  in  a  terrible  condition  given
    where it was and having a largely refugee population.  In Gaza in 2003,
    there was mass poverty and food insecurity.  Israeli  settlements  were
    still there.  A lot of the Palestinian population  depended  on  UNRWA;
    65% to 70% then as now.  In 2002 to 2003 there  were  small  industries
    which were  no  longer  functioning,  such  as  construction  and  food
    processing and cash crops and flowers.  It was quite  bad  by  European
    standards but was not as bad as today.  At that time many Gazans worked
    in Israel doing construction and similar work.

24.   It was put to him that at  paragraph  24  at  the  end  he  had  over-
    simplified and he said he stood by it.  Ariel Sharon would state  that.
    There had been violence in Gaza in 2001 to 2002 and that was always the
    case.  It was much more violent than the West Bank  after  the  Israeli
    occupation.  It was  put  to  him  that  the  events  he  described  at
    paragraph 24 were welcomed by the Palestinian National Authority at the
    time and he said it was a matter of yes and no.  Yes, it was  the  case
    that Israel was departing with their colonies and colonists, but it was
    a unilateral Israeli move and was not  agreed  or  conducted  with  the
    Palestinian Authorities or in connection with Palestinian concerns,  as
    Gaza was a nuisance to them and they  would  concentrate  on  the  West
    Bank.  That was the Palestinian view.  He was  asked  whether  what  he
    said at the start of paragraph 25 was his view and  he  said  that  the
    Israelis made no  secret  of  this  as  could  be  seen  from  the  BBC
    reference, and it was their reason for leaving Gaza.  It was put to him
    that the BBC report was an analytical report by a correspondent and had
    not purported to be the final  word  on  the  Israeli  withdrawal.   Dr
    George said that a lot of Israeli spokesmen at the time made  it  clear
    that that was the plan.  It was put to him that it was not a  universal
    view, i.e. the commentator's views  of  the  Israeli  reasons  for  the
    withdrawal, and he said that was true, not all commentators agreed, but
    the policy was stated by Israeli government officials.  It was  put  to
    him that Hamas and the EU and the USA had backed it and he said that no-
    one had opposed it.

25.   He was referred to paragraphs 31 and 33 concerning the  blockade.   He
    agreed that both sides had been accused of international war crimes  in
    Operation Cast Lead.  He also agreed that since the ceasefire and as of
    today there  were  relatively  low  levels  of  violence.   As  regards
    paragraph 9 at page 242, referring to continuing violence in  the  Gaza
    Strip that was since the July report.  He had wanted to give a flavour.
     As regards whether the references on 19 and 26 November  were  to  the
    same individuals he  thought  that  they  were  different.   It  was  a
    snapshot from July to today.  With regard to paragraph  39,  concerning
    conditions in Gaza after the military operation ended in January  2009,
    he was asked whether that was not the position today and he said it was
    as he described it and of course it was not the position today  but  it
    was as it was at the time.  It was better since then.  There was not  a
    major war going on.  He was asked whether he agreed that since the  end
    of Operation Cast Lead the position was better, and he said it was,  in
    the sense that Europe was better after World War II.  It was put to him
    that there had been a huge influx of aid,  and  he  said  that  it  was
    necessary to define one's terms.  He was referred to bundle  B  of  the
    Secretary of State's evidence at pages 136 onwards,  in  particular  at
    page 142 concerning the amount of money.  It was put to him  that  that
    was a vast increase since 2007 and  he  said  he  did  not  know,  that
    pledges of money did not necessarily translate to physical aid and also
    the problem was one of getting goods through.  It was put to  him  that
    the pledge of money was in the billions, and he said that  he  did  not
    have the figures before him and preferred to focus on what was  on  the
    ground.  He accepted what Dr Al-Khatib said.  With regard  to  what  he
    said at paragraph 40 at A1 concerning the blockade being  a  punishment
    of Gaza, he was asked whether that was his view also and he  said  yes,
    there were no rational military reasons for  such  a  blockade.   Judge
    Goldstone and Human Rights Watch were also of this view.  It was put to
    him that this was not a universal view, for example with  reference  to
    the United States of America, and Dr George said he was  not  too  sure
    about that.

26.   He agreed that the Goldstone report had been criticised by the UK  and
    US governments.  40 countries had abstained on the UN vote, it was  put
    to him, and he said  a  fair  number  had.   He  was  asked  about  the
    criticism that Israel's views had not been satisfactorily  represented.
    Dr George said that Judge Goldstone had asked Israelis  to  participate
    and provide information and they had not done so.   The  report  was  a
    political hot potato.  The US views reflected  its  realpolitik  rather
    than the contents of the report.  There was not much  validity  to  the
    criticisms.  It was put to him that it was also said to be too partisan
    in respect of Hamas' defence of the criticism  of  the  war  crimes  in
    which they were said to have  used  civilians  as  human  shields.   Dr
    George said that was an example.  The Israelis  had  alleged  that  the
    Palestinians had used ambulances to carry weapons and  that  had  never
    been substantiated and was untrue as far  as  anyone  could  tell.   He
    agreed that it was the case that Israel had made allegations.   It  was
    put to him that it was not just a matter of allegations by the Israelis
    but there were criticisms of the report that, for example, it was not a
    sufficiently strong critique of Hamas' role.  Dr George  said  that  it
    had become such a political issue that all sorts  of  allegations  were
    flying round.  Judge Goldstone could defend his report better  than  Dr
    George could.  It was put to him  that  the  Economist  had  also  been
    critical, and he said he was aware of criticism, mainly  of  bias,  the
    essence of the UN activity and its abstentions.

27.   He was referred to paragraphs  42  and  46  of  his  report  where  he
    contrasted the West Bank and  Gaza.   He  agreed  that  there  were  no
    settlements in Gaza and there were no checkpoints restricting  movement
    inside Gaza.  It was put to him that more aid had been pledged to  Gaza
    in monetary terms and he said he did not know whether that  was  so  or
    not.  He was referred to the figures at bundle B at pages 142  and  143
    and he said he did not know  what  those  figures  meant  in  practice.
    Flows took place over a period of time.  It was a question of how  much
    was spent in each.  It was put to him that it concerned six  months  of
    aid since Operation Cast Lead and he said  it  was  unsurprising  after
    such events that there would be a hike in aid pledges but  he  did  not
    know how much of it had been received.  He was  referred  to  the  fact
    that he said the West Bank conditions were less severe and therefore it
    was relevant to know how much aid Gaza received.  Dr George  said  that
    70% of people in Gaza depended on UNRWA.  He stood by what he  said  at
    paragraph 46 concerning food and  water  in  the  West  Bank.   He  was
    referred to the reference to high levels  of  food  insecurity  in  the
    decision in MA  by  the  Tribunal  and  there  being  up  to  40%  food
    insecurity.  It was put to him that therefore he was not right  and  he
    said it was a question of definition.  MA had been decided in  November
    2006 and he was writing about now.  He was asked whether that  was  his
    evidence in MA and he was asked whether he thought that what  was  said
    in MA was wrong and he said it depended on the  definitions,  and  what
    was meant by "food insecurity" in comparison  to  starvation.   He  was
    asked whether he did not accept that there were food supply  issues  in
    the West Bank in 2006, and he said he would have to  do  the  necessary
    research.  It was not the position today, and he referred to  paragraph
    46 of the report.  Food was available and people were not starving.  In
    2007 there was no evidence of foodstuffs being  in  short  supply.   He
    agreed that he had not done the same research  in  Gaza,  but  he  said
    there were good reports about this in the public domain.  It was put to
    him that he did not have a definition of "food insecurity" and  he  had
    said there were no food shortages in the West Bank but one  reason  was
    that he had seen for himself and he agreed that that was the case.

28.   He was referred then to his second  report.   He  was  asked  to  what
    extent negotiations about the captured soldier had impacted and he said
    that it was not much.  He was asked whether an  offer  to  release  the
    soldier would have any bearing on the blockade and he  said  it  might.
    It would more likely lead to a release of  Palestinian  prisoners.   It
    was put to him that there had been some  movement  in  respect  of  the
    blockade and reference was made to the  recent  export  of  flowers  as
    mentioned in an article which had been handed up and was now at page  4
    of the Secretary of State's bundle D.  He was asked  whether  this  was
    not a positive step by the Israelis.  Dr George said it was referred to
    as "a rare easing".  It was the first time since 2007 and  he  said  it
    was a one off.  He was asked whether he knew that to be the case and it
    was put to him that it could be every season thereafter and he said  it
    could be but "pigs might fly".  He would believe it if he saw it.   You
    had to be cautious.  Both sides were entrenched.  He  tended  to  be  a
    pessimist on these matters, given the general deterioration over  a  40
    year period.  There were credible accounts of Hamas developing a rocket
    with a range to reach Tel Aviv and if it got such a weapon it would use
    it.  There was no prospect of the necessary general political  solution
    and no speedy resolution was likely.

29.   He was asked whether he had seen an improvement in the types of  goods
    allowed into Gaza, for example some loads of construction.  He said  he
    did not see a clear pattern.  Some were let in and then  not  and  then
    others were let in.  He was asked whether he accepted that  Israel  now
    let construction material in, and he said it  was  very  limited.   The
    Palestinian Red Crescent hospitals had been repaired, as referred to in
    his report.  He agreed that the Israeli view was that they were letting
    in humanitarian aid and  goods  since  Operation  Cast  Lead.   He  was
    referred to page 8 of bundle D concerning this and it was  put  to  him
    that that conformed to what the aid agency  said.   He  said  yes,  the
    Israelis were letting some goods in, but there was a gap between demand
    and supply and there was far too little for what was  needed.   He  was
    asked whether it was the view of the foreign  aid  agencies  concerning
    the reconstruction of Gaza rather than basic food and  shelter  and  he
    said not quite.   The  Red  Crescent  referred  to  shortages  of,  for
    example,  medical  equipment  and  it  was  not  just  a  question   of
    reconstruction of Gaza.  Dr Al-Khatib had said that they let in  enough
    to keep people alive.  It was put to him that this was exaggerated, for
    example  if  it  was  true  you  would  see  wide-ranging  famine   and
    malnutrition.  He said that you would see people eating enough to  stay
    alive.  Dr Al-Khatib's was a slightly colourful way of speaking, but it
    was very much a subsistence existence and there were problems  all  the
    way and no slack and it was minimal.  He was  asked  whether  what  was
    said at page 160 of bundle B, paragraph 3.3.6 was fair and he said yes,
    but it was necessary to exercise caution.  There had been a  change  in
    Palestinian diets with the siege.  There was a  shift  from  vegetables
    and meat to much cheaper carbohydrate based foods and this  caused  ill
    health and obesity.  He was asked whether there was any reason to doubt
    what Dr Al-Khatib said about access to Gaza via Rafah.  He  said  there
    was no reason  to  doubt  this  but  Dr  Al-Khatib  did  not  know  the
    procedures in detail and nor did Dr George.  It was put to him that the
    Egyptians did not confirm that they were constructing a tunnel  barrier
    and he said they denied it.  The balance of the reports and the  nature
    of the information in them suggested that this had a ring of truth  but
    time would tell.   He  was  asked  whether  he  was  surprised  at  the
    tunnellers' reaction that they would be able to get round  the  problem
    and he said no, but it would be necessary to see.

30.   There was no re-examination.

31.   The next witness was the appellant.  She identified her  signature  on
    her three statements and was happy to accept the contents  of  each  of
    them as her evidence today.  She was asked where she  had  been  living
    when she left Gaza in 2003 and she  said  it  was  with  her  husband's
    family in Shanti Jabalia.  She did not know where that was in  relation
    to Gaza City.  It was a camp.  She was referred to her reference to her
    siblings in Gaza in the most recent statement and she was  asked  where
    they were living.  She said they used to live in Sheikh Radwan, but now
    they lived close to her mother-in-law's address in Shanti Jabalia.   It
    was therefore the case that almost all of the family lived there.   She
    was asked if she could identify on the map at  page  152  of  bundle  B
    where she lived and she said that in Palestine she was a housewife  and
    did not go out a lot.  Her residence was in the Gaza area but she could
    not say what district.

32.   She was asked what the family in Jabalia  had  told  her  about  their
    experience of the war when she had been in touch with them and she said
    that they had suffered a lot.  Their windows were broken and  they  did
    not sleep at night to the extent that  the  children  were  bedwetting.
    When they had gone out they  had  found  that  her  husband's  family's
    neighbours' house had been bombarded and demolished by  a  plane.   The
    glass from the broken windows in her family's house was a result of the
    bombarding  and  attacks.   Since  the  war  the  situation  there  was
    deteriorating and the food was very expensive and there was very little
    of it and there was no importing.

33.   If she did not have six children, she said, she would go  back  today.
    She was asked whether if the  Israeli  blockade  stopped  tomorrow  and
    people could come and go and supplies could come in what would she  and
    the six children do then, and she said that  if  the  situation  became
    normal and natural she would  go  back,  but  of  course  after  Israel
    withdrew.  She was asked what her position with the children  would  be
    about returning in the future with the continuing blockade and she said
    that it would be so difficult and so much fear for them and  for  their
    education and health and schooling and their  mental  state.   She  was
    asked whether she knew what would happen in  the  future  in  terms  of
    returning and she said that the Arabs were threatened by the  Jews  and
    that at any time they could invade and cause war  as  before,  and  the
    Palestinians were threatened with dying as the Israelis were not aiming
    at Hamas and Fatah but were attacking  women  and  children.   She  was
    asked whether she would be able to earn a living in  Jabalia  with  her
    children and said of course not as she had not finished  her  education
    and was their mother and there was no-one else to take  care  of  them.
    She had no idea of how she would be  able  to  pay  for  accommodation,
    given that she could not stay with her relatives in Jabalia.   She  did
    not know where she might be able to live in Gaza, nor in what  kind  of
    accommodation.  She would have to go back to do so  but  the  situation
    was very difficult.

34.   She was asked about her daughter Saja and  whether  it  was  the  case
    that she had had no problems with epilepsy since she had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She said yes as she had had treatment for a period  of
    time and also she felt settled as she was  safe.   The  people  in  the
    schools with whom the appellant communicated were very good.   She  was
    referred to what she had said at paragraph 10 of  the  statement  about
    Saja having a fit in 2003 and she said yes that  was  because  she  had
    been exhausted on the route as they had left at 5 in  the  morning  and
    the car had taken them at 6 p.m.  and  the  car  which  would  normally
    accommodate seven people was in fact accommodating fourteen.  There was
    a delay because one of them had forgotten their passport and  they  had
    to wait for him to go back to get it.  As regards Saja's epilepsy,  she
    said that she used to get attacks when she experienced a long  walk  or
    upset or exhaustion, and she was mostly in fear for her and the baby.

35.   It was the case that when she left Gaza for  the  United  Kingdom  she
    had been given a stamp in her passport.  She was asked whether this was
    by the Palestinians or in conjunction with the Israeli authorities, and
    she said, possibly.  Since she had been in the United Kingdom  she  had
    not taken any steps to ensure  she  had  retained  her  status  on  the
    Israeli database in respect of Palestinian individuals, for example  by
    speaking to the Israeli Consulate.  She did not know because no-one had
    told her that she must.

36.   When cross-examined, the appellant said that she kept in contact  with
    the situation in Gaza by telephone and  that  was  every  two  to  four
    weeks.  She had spoken to her relatives in  Gaza  in  the  last  month.
    This had approximately always been the case since she had come  to  the
    United Kingdom.  She asked them about conditions in Gaza and they  told
    her.  She was asked whether it was the case then that in March 2008 she
    had known what the situation in Gaza was like and  she  said  that  was
    during the war.  It was put to her that the war was between the end  of
    2008 and the beginning of 2009, and she said that she tried to go  back
    during that period, March 2008, but the border  was  closed.   She  was
    asked whether she had known what the conditions in Gaza  were  like  in
    March 2008 when she tried to leave the United Kingdom and said yes, but
    at that time there was no war.  She agreed that she had tried to go  to
    Gaza with the children in March 2008 so her husband could complete  his
    studies but that she had wanted to go like those who went in  and  out.
    She agreed that she had claimed asylum as she could not get into  Rafah
    and said that afterwards, however, the war had begun and the  obstacles
    had increased.  It was put to her that the war had not begun  for  some
    further nine months and she said yes, but the  border  was  closed  for
    almost two years and was only opened if somebody was very upset or very
    important.  She agreed that it was the case that she had claimed asylum
    as the border was shut and said that afterwards, when the people  tried
    to cross the border, it happened  that  families  with  their  children
    tended to stay at the border area for about three  days  and  were  not
    allowed to cross the border.  She was asked when this was and said that
    it was always happening and it was since the border crossing  began  to
    shut and open.  She was asked whether she understood that to  get  into
    Gaza today it was the case that she would have to wait for three or  so
    days at the border and she said yes, probably, it depended,  and  there
    were people who went through who were on medication and people who were
    not allowed to cross.  She was asked whether today  her  relatives  had
    told her that the Rafah crossing was open every month to let people  in
    and she said perhaps it did open on various dates, but the situation in
    Gaza was deteriorating.  It was put to her that she had not been afraid
    of going back in March 2008 when she was eight  months'  pregnant,  and
    she said she had been fearful for herself and  her  children,  but  the
    fear had increased.  She was asked whether she had planned to have  the
    baby in Gaza and  said  maybe,  if  they  allowed  her  to  cross  then
    possibly.  She was asked whether, before she understood the border  was
    closed, she and her husband had intended that she would go to  Gaza  to
    have the baby, and she said, yes.  She was asked  whether  since  March
    2008 she had not applied to go back and she said they had  applied  and
    the Egyptian Embassy had refused the application and  they  had  stayed
    and applied for asylum.  It was put to her  that  that  was  not  quite
    right.  In fact they had asked a question of the Egyptian  Embassy  and
    she said she did not know but she knew her  husband  had  sent  to  the
    Egyptian Embassy for permission to travel and they had  not  given  it.
    She was asked whether they had not  applied  to  the  Egyptian  Embassy
    since then and she said, no.  She heard from people that they  did  not
    let them enter and made them suffer and it was not easy to  go  in  and
    out.  Her husband's father had died and he had not seen his  father  as
    he was frightened to go and should have the right to be able to  return
    and complete his studies.

37.   It was put to her that in 2008  she  had  said  that  if  the  killing
    stopped in Gaza she would be happy to go back and she  said  that  that
    was the case even now she said so.  If the situation changed completely
    and there was no war and there was food and  education  and  medication
    and water,  electricity  and  sewage  available  and  if  the  Israelis
    withdrew she would go back to Gaza.  It was put to her that earlier she
    had said she did not fear to return but feared for her  children.   She
    said yes, but if there was security and safety she would go  back  with
    them and if not she would not.  She was asked whether her relatives had
    told her that it was relatively calm in Gaza now and  she  said  to  an
    extent, but the Israelis were still there and could invade at any time.
     It was put to her that the Israelis were not in Gaza  but  they  could
    invade and she said they were on the borders.  She still  had  a  large
    family in Gaza.  They used to live with her father-in-law.  Her brother-
    in-law lived with the father-in-law.  His children were aged between  2
    and 6.  She was asked whether one had been born since 2003 and she said
    that was possible and she was not sure.  She was asked whether when she
    tried to go back she had intended to live with  her  father-in-law  and
    said no, there was no space, and when asked where, she said  she  would
    have had  to  be  accommodated  by  various  friends  until  she  found
    accommodation and until her husband returned.  At the present,  it  was
    very difficult to find accommodation to rent as the buildings had  been
    demolished.  She was asked whether her relatives had not told  her  the
    building situation today was better than at the time of  the  war:  she
    said, no.  She was asked when her husband would finish his studies  and
    said that it was perhaps in July next year.  She  agreed  that  ideally
    she would return with her husband and  the  children  if  the  security
    situation allowed.  She  agreed  that  Saja  no  longer  suffered  from
    epileptic fits and that was because she was settled and  had  no  fear.
    Mohammed had been born in Ireland in November 2003.   She  agreed  that
    the reason for this was she had wanted to secure nationality  for  him.
    She agreed that two months after she arrived in the United Kingdom  she
    had intended to obtain nationality for him and this was  because  their
    nationality and passports were not  useful,  and  various  friends  had
    advised them that he would be able to benefit  from  education  in  the
    future.  She had not always intended to claim protection in the  United
    Kingdom.

38.   There was no re-examination.

39.   The hearing resumed on 22 February 2010.  We  heard  further  evidence
    from Dr George, who had provided a third report dated 17 February 2010.
     Dr George had been to Rafah earlier this month, not having been  there
    before.  He said that he had not learned much, if anything,  new  about
    the situation there but that visits could have a  value,  although  not
    invariably.  He had met various people in Cairo who were  knowledgeable
    about the procedures for people returning to Gaza.  He emphasised  that
    there was great uncertainty  about  the  precise  procedures  involved.
    There was a lot of "ad hockery".

40.   He was asked about information that had been obtained  about  the  two
    youngest children of the appellant.  He had not been asked to deal with
    this issue prior to this third report but had now  done  so.   He  said
    that he could not see how someone like Muhammad who was  a  citizen  of
    Ireland could gain entry to Gaza.  For a child to be born outside  Gaza
    they had to be registered there.  If they were under 5 they could enter
    with their mother, having produced a birth  certificate,  but  children
    aged 5 to 16 had to have a visitor's permit in order to enter Gaza  and
    they had to be present in  Gaza  in  order  to  be  registered  on  the
    population register.  The Regulation as stated by him was correct as of
    yesterday  evening  when  he  had  last  checked  it.   Muhammad  would
    therefore need a visitor's permit and none were  being  issued,  so  Dr
    George did not see how he could enter Gaza, let alone get into Egypt.

41.   He was referred to documents put in on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State where there was reference to temporary passports and children  of
    Palestinian ethnicity in the United Kingdom and coming  and  travelling
    back.  Dr George said he had never come across this and had looked into
    it in respect of this case.  He said it could depend on what you  meant
    and it could be that that was what a child under 5  with  their  mother
    would be given.  The only passports  the  Palestinian  Authority  could
    issue under  the  Oslo  Accords  were  in  respect  of  people  on  the
    population register and they were issued by Israel, so he did  not  see
    how the Palestinian Authority would have the authority to allow in such
    a child who was not on the register.

42.   The measure was part of a very much wider Israeli policy to limit  the
    number of Palestinians in the Territories.  It was one of a  number  of
    such measures to prevent the Palestinians  returning  to  live  in  the
    Territories.

43.   With regard to the youngest child, he was asked  whether  it  was  the
    case that if he and his mother could get to the Gaza  crossing  with  a
    birth certificate, he would be able to enter  Egypt  where  he  had  no
    passport and no Palestinian ID  number.   Dr  George  said  he  had  no
    categorical view of this.  It could be that the Egyptians  would  issue
    some sort of travel document to him.  It would be extremely  difficult.
    The Egyptians were not particularly well disposed to  Palestinians  and
    the initial reaction of the Egyptians would be not to get involved.

44.   Palestinians had to apply for a visa but for  that  they  had  to  get
    Egyptian approval and he had been told this recently  by  the  Egyptian
    Consulate.  Even if they got a visa, they could be turned back at Cairo
    Airport and he gave an example of this happening at paragraph 34 of the
    latest report.  Even if such a person entered  Egypt  then  they  would
    have to get on a  list  of  approved  names  sent  by  the  Palestinian
    authorities to the Egyptians who would submit the list to the Israelis.

45.   He was asked how a person would get on the  list  and  he  said,  from
    what he had been told by the Palestinian Embassy in Cairo, this had  to
    be done via that Embassy, so the appellant could get to Cairo and go to
    the Palestinian Embassy there and through them try to get her  name  on
    the list and he gathered that the list was the  responsibility  of  the
    Egyptian Interior Ministry.  People did not learn if they were  on  the
    list until the last moment.

46.   He was asked how he would describe Rafah and he said  it  was  a  very
    small town which had been made worse recently by very bad flooding.  It
    was essentially a settlement dissected by the Gaza-Egyptian border with
    the Egyptian side  smaller  than  the  Palestinian  side.   There  were
    checkpoints every 200 metres.  He  had  been  in  Egypt  with  Egyptian
    friends and again found it a very ad hoc arrangement.

47.   He was asked about the wall, which he said had previously been  denied
    by the Egyptian government.  He had not seen it under construction  but
    saw this on CNN  over  Christmas.   The  Egyptians  now  confirmed  the
    existence of the wall.  It remained to be seen how effective  it  would
    be.  There were between 600 and 1200 tunnels and  the  tunnellers  were
    reasonably confident they would still be able to get under the wall.

48.   He was asked whether he wanted to add anything to  what  he  had  said
    last time.  With regard to the number of trucks entering Gaza, he  said
    that usually 2,500 a month went in, in  comparison  to  10,400  before.
    This came from an Israeli report.  There were  compelling  examples  of
    Israel explaining why they withdrew from Gaza, to  ensure  the  Israeli
    grip on the colonisation of the West Bank.

49.   With regard to colonisation, Dr George referred to  a  report  in  the
    Independent of 1 February of this year and a reference by Lord Phillips
    of Sudbury to the offer to Gaza of $4.5 billion dollars for  rebuilding
    where it was said that not one dollar had in fact been sent.

50.   He was referred to his responses to two cases in  which  comments  had
    been made on his evidence and he was happy to accept these as  part  of
    his evidence in these proceedings.  He said that the line of  questions
    last time addressed a lot of issues in relation to those cases and that
    was why he had said what he said, for example in  relation  to  remarks
    about sweeping generalisations.

51.   Dr George was then cross-examined by Mr Wastell who said  he  did  not
    want to debate matters that had been raised last time as  they  were  a
    matter of record.

52.   Dr George confirmed that  he  had  not  been  able  to  speak  to  the
    Egyptian authorities about Gaza  as  they  had  not  responded  to  his
    requests.  He was asked whether he would defer to information  obtained
    directly from them concerning points of procedure in this case  and  he
    said it would be necessary to  be  cautious  about  whether  they  were
    practised as they said.  It was the case that the  Egyptians  had  been
    known not to follow their procedures.

53.   As regards the first issue he said that only  those  on  the  register
    got Palestinian passports.

54.   The next issue concerned the two youngest children and  what  he  said
    in his report about them.  He agreed that it  was  the  case  that  you
    would only get a Palestinian passport if you were on the  register,  so
    if Muhammad, the fifth  child,  had  a  passport  he  must  be  on  the
    register.  He also agreed that if a person was on the register  with  a
    Palestinian passport, they should be able  to  enter,  subject  to  the
    Egyptian authorities.  He said that the Israelis issued a number  as  a
    starting point and a person would be a given a number  on  registering,
    and they could get an ID card from the Palestinians in respect of  that
    and also a passport.

55.   As regards the youngest child, he agreed that he  should  be  able  to
    get into Gaza because of his age, if he got through Egypt and if he was
    on the Egyptian approved list and with his mother.  He agreed  that  he
    was saying that a person had to be there in person and it  said  so  in
    the regulations.  He was  asked  whether  the  Palestinian  regulations
    related to how a person got into Gaza, given the child's  age,  and  he
    said as far as the website went.  There was detailed regulation and the
    person needed to be present as part of the Oslo process.  Paragraphs 17
    and 18 contained the reference.

56.   He was asked how it was that the child, Muhammad,  had  a  Palestinian
    passport, which he had obtained in April 2006 and it had on it a number
    given at a time when he was not present in Palestine.  Dr  George  said
    it was very curious and he would want to know how he had done that.  He
    was asked whether, given that Muhammad had the passport,  his  concerns
    did not apply and he said he could make no  comment  without  seeing  a
    detailed account of how he got the passport,  and  he  emphasised  that
    procedures in Palestine, as  well  as  in  Egypt,  were  very  ad  hoc.
    Contacts could help.  He agreed that he had  said  earlier  that  if  a
    person was Palestinian and on the register, they could enter Gaza.   It
    was put to him that therefore Muhammad could enter Gaza and he said  if
    he had a valid passport and was on the register then yes.

57.   Mr Wastell suggested that the reason why Dr George was wrong was  that
    the weblink he referred to did not refer to any regulations.  Reference
    was made to page 273 of the bundle, and it was said that his assumption
    was mistaken and it was seemingly based on a report.  He did  not  know
    when the report was written precisely but it was not the only  relevant
    report.  It was put to him that the references he referred to seemed to
    be at least three and a half to four years out of date, as  the  latest
    reference was in 2005, and there was no reference to  any  regulations.
    Dr George said the reference to the regulations was in the 2009 report.
     He had cited elsewhere in his report from paragraph 209,  at  his  own
    paragraphs 19 and 20, and he had checked  its  accuracy.   He  did  not
    agree that he was in error in saying that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    child to be physically present.

58.   Mr Wastell said this referred back to the Betselem report at page  206
    and the regulations were set out at page 207 and there was no reference
    to physical presence.  There was at pages 208 to 209  but  not  in  the
    regulations.  Dr George was asked whether there  was  any  more  recent
    information than that, and he said this  corroborated  his  report  and
    that it was necessary to be physically present.  He said he could  find
    the actual announcement so  it  could  be  decided  whether  it  was  a
    regulation.  The question was what the actual  practice  was.   He  had
    checked the matter with the Gisha NGO in Israel.  It  was  put  to  him
    that he did not know whether  they  took  their  information  from  the
    Betselem article or some other source and he said that was  right.   He
    said that what mattered was what happened.  He would be very interested
    if Mr Wastell had evidence  showing  that  it  could  be  done  without
    physical presence.  The child, Muhammad, could be a special case and he
    emphasised again the ad hoc nature of the system.

59.   Dr George was then asked again about the  need  for  children  between
    the ages of 5 to 16 to be present in order to enter Gaza.  It  was  put
    to Dr George that the Israelis had made an exception to their freeze on
    visiting permits for children aged  5  to  16.   Dr  George  questioned
    whether there was any evidence of that and he said he had not seen  any
    other than for VIPs such as Judge Goldstone.  He agreed that it was the
    case that there was a freeze after the Second Intifada in 2000.  It was
    put to him that that had not applied to humanitarian cases and  he  was
    asked about the criteria for the exceptions.  He  said  that  in  broad
    terms it was VIPs.  Palestinians themselves did not know and he was not
    sure that Israel had ever even stated to whom it would apply, any  more
    than what products were banned.  He was asked whether he did  not  know
    what the criteria were, and he said he did not think that anyone  knew.
    As to who got a visitor's permit, it was the people in need of  medical
    treatment or humanitarian cases and it was not a flood, whether  people
    were aged 5 to 16 or otherwise, and it  was  very  limited  numbers  of
    people who were getting in or out and the vast majority were  residents
    on the population register.

60.   He was referred to footnote 14 at page 217 of  the  new  bundle  which
    was from the Betselem report and it was put to him that it seemed  that
    the Israelis were thinking to let  children  or  Occupied  Territories'
    residents in.  Dr George said one had to be very careful with this sort
    of report.  It was an Israeli official making a statement  and  it  was
    said not to be the reality.  The general picture was what mattered  and
    it was very clear.  Visitor's permits were not available as a matter of
    course for entry into Gaza.  He did not rely  on  the  Betselem  report
    because it was a nice report, but because it corroborated the situation
    on the ground.  He was asked whether he had asked about the position of
    children between  5  and  16  when  he  was  there,  and  he  said  not
    specifically: he was asked about visitor's permits.

61.   He was then referred to the third issue in  his  report,  at  page  7,
    paragraph 44.  He agreed that it was the case that  the  Israelis  were
    not physically present at the  Rafah  crossing.   He  agreed  that  the
    Egyptians controlled them in theory, but  had  their  own  reasons  for
    keeping the crossing closed, for example to keep Hamas  out  of  Egypt.
    At paragraph 26 he had said that openings were sporadic and  it  seemed
    that on Thursdays and Fridays there were openings.  He said that he had
    heard this but it was too early to say if it was  a  pattern.   He  was
    asked whether there were any criteria in  the  Egyptians  deciding  who
    could cross and he said no and it was ad hoc.

62.   It was suggested to him that he had no reason to doubt what  was  said
    by Dr Al-Khatib that the Egyptians would do  what  they  could  to  get
    Palestinians across.  Dr George said, certainly, they did  not  want  a
    pool of Palestinians.  It was in their interests to allow them  across.
    He referred to the fact that he had not found  out  from  the  Egyptian
    authorities if they showed their list to the Israelis and  if  it  were
    the case it would be likely to be a matter of security concerns  as  to
    why the Israelis would like to see the list and he  said  the  Israelis
    invoked security broadly.  He agreed that it  would  be  likely  to  be
    under the guise  of  security.   In  respect  of  the  2009  report  at
    paragraph 27, it was unclear if there were  cases  of  refusal  by  the
    Israelis.

63.   In general, in relation to Rafah, he was  referred  to  the  AMA  (The
    Agreement on Movement and Access) and when that was discontinued.   The
    Israelis had offered a solution, which Hamas had rejected, to the issue
    of the exit of Palestinians from Gaza.  Dr George said that  there  had
    been a series of ad hoc arrangements and agreements and he referred  to
    the Gisha report which had a good history  of  that  period  after  the
    Hamas takeover with regard to movement in and out of Gaza.   He  agreed
    with what was said in the Gisha report in the new bundle  at  paragraph
    15 from page 135 in the  bundle.   The  shuttle  arrangement  concerned
    Palestinians exiting Gaza via crossing points and then being bussed  by
    the Israelis into Egypt.  This enabled the Israelis to control who  was
    coming out.  It was put to him that the Israeli influence  operated  to
    the extent that the Egyptians did not just open up Rafah, but responded
    by opening it up periodically to relieve the pressure of the Arab world
    on them.  Dr George agreed and said that the Egyptians were in  a  very
    difficult position as they were trying to play things both ways.  There
    were risks of Islamism and it  was  open  to  them  for  good  reasons,
    including mollifying the Israelis.  He was referred to suggestions that
    the Egyptians ignored Israeli requests to keep Rafah shut and  he  said
    he had seen reports that the Israelis were comfortable with the current
    situation and they understood Egypt's situation.

64.   With regard to Dr George's fourth point at page 8, he accepted it  was
    probable that the appellant and her  children  and  husband  would  get
    tourist visas for Egypt, if they  obtained  passports.   He  was  asked
    whether he had any idea of the Egyptian criteria in respect of  tourist
    visas.  He said that he had gone on his recent visit on  such  a  visa.
    The Palestinians were in a different category as they would need to get
    approval from the Egyptian authorities before they could  apply  for  a
    visa and the situation was, as already emphasised, very ad hoc.  He did
    not know what the position would be and it was very hard to  know.   It
    was random and unpredictable.

65.   Dr George was not aware of anything preventing multiple  applications.
     He agreed that when a Palestinian got to Rafah the Egyptians would  be
    content for them to get across.  With regard to the example that he had
    given at paragraph 34, he had no idea what  information  the  Egyptians
    had on this person.  It  was  put  to  him  that  journalists  were  of
    particular concern to the Egyptians and  he  said  yes  at  the  moment
    because of the recent events.  It was put to him that a journalist  was
    likely to be of more concern than a Gaza housewife.  Dr George said  it
    depended on the context  at  the  time.   He  did  not  know  how  many
    applications they got.  He was unaware of the information the  Egyptian
    authorities had.  The belief of the Palestinian officials in Cairo  was
    that the ad hoc nature of the system was random.

66.   With regard to  Dr  George's  fifth  point  concerning  conditions  at
    Rafah, he was asked whether he had seen a lot of  Palestinian  refugees
    there.  He said he had not and it was rather a  ghost  town  and  there
    were more police and residents, as a friend had commented to  him.   It
    was not an area where there were camps of people ready to cross.  As to
    whether was the case that the Red Crescent were helping Palestinians in
    Rafah in providing food and shelter  and  mattresses  he  said  it  had
    happened.

67.   In respect of the sixth point in his report, it was put  to  him  that
    the fifth child, Muhammad, had a Palestinian  passport  and  Dr  George
    said he would be fascinated to look into the circumstances about  that.
    In respect of temporary passports, he had never come across this notion
    and had seen no references to it.  He was asked  whether  he  concluded
    therefore that they were not issued and he said he could not  say  that
    they were never issued and again the point about the ad hoc  nature  of
    the system was made, and it  could  be  that  they  were  provided  for
    internally displaced persons (IDPs) etc.

68.   When re-examined by Mr Draycott, Dr George was referred to the  report
    at page 199 of the new bundle, and pages 208 to 209  to  which  he  had
    been taken by Mr Wastell,  and  the  reference  to  the  basis  of  the
    Betselem report which was said to be inaccurate.  He  was  referred  to
    page 207 at paragraph 2.3, and a reference to the bibliography at  page
    216 in the fourth entry.  He was asked whether he had seen that  report
    and said, no.  The  regulations  affecting  Palestinians  changed  very
    frequently, twenty times in the 1980s, and there  was  a  reference  to
    this somewhere.  He said that he tried to deal with the situation as it
    was, rather than the historical regulations  and  references.   He  was
    asked what he had gleaned from the  Palestinian  Authority  website  in
    this  regard,  and  he  said  he  sought  confirmation  to  ensure  the
    regulations  described  in  the  2009  report  about  the  re-entry  of
    children, the Khalil report, were still the same.  As he had  said,  he
    had checked the website yesterday.  His understanding was that  it  was
    as described by Khalil.  A child up to the age of 5 would have to  show
    a birth certificate and between 5 and 16 a  visitor's  permit  if  they
    were not on the register.  Again there was the problem of  the  ad  hoc
    nature of the system.

69.   He was asked whether he had any views on the  position  if  the  child
    Muhammad had a passport.  He said that he had been told to proceed on a
    certain basis in writing his third report.  This had been in respect of
    the general situation concerning Palestinian  children  born  overseas.
    Dr George referred to the process known as wasta which was a process of
    exchanging  favours  and  the  use  of  informal  channels  to   obtain
    objectives, including relevant documentation.  It was a Middle  Eastern
    matter, and he gave examples of this process.  It was a question of who
    you knew.  It was therefore not a surprise, in respect of the passport.
     The regulatory picture,  as  published,  was  a  general  picture  for
    country guidance purposes and you could not  routinely  sidestep  these
    procedures.

70.   He was referred to page 209 of  the  report  and  the  third  sentence
    beginning "According".  He said that it could mean  in  this  case,  in
    respect of the child  of  5,  that  family  contacts  had  enabled  the
    passport to be obtained, but there could be problems at the  border  if
    the Israelis did not recognise the number on his passport, if that  was
    correct.  There was a history of such  things  occurring.   There  were
    cases of Palestinians living for years in Cairo unable to get  back  to
    Gaza.  They were people who had been referred to as "present absentees"
    since 1948.  He was asked about the Hebrew announcement he had referred
    to and he said that if there was going to be a  concentrated  focus  on
    the Israeli regulations then it would be necessary to go  back  to  the
    original Hebrew to do a proper analysis.  He had exchanged emails  with
    the Gisha organisation on this.   He  had  sought  to  clarify  certain
    issues in their reports and they had referred in a report  in  2007  to
    Israel and issued ID cards and he had asked about  that  and  they  had
    said it was a matter of semantics and the Palestinian Authority  issued
    the card after the Israelis had approved it after entry on a population
    register.

71.   He was asked about his reference to meetings in  Egypt  in  connection
    with visitors' permits and whether  he  had  asked  specifically  about
    children between the ages of 5 to 16.  He said he had not  asked  about
    specific age groups as that would be redundant as  it  was  clear  from
    those in charge in Egypt that there was no flood of visit permits being
    issued so it would be absurd to ask about a particular group.  It was a
    blockade and hardly anyone got through.  Palestinian passports  had  to
    be on the approved list.

72.   He was asked about temporary passports and whether  it  could  not  be
    said that they were never provided.  He said it was an ad  hoc  system,
    but on a balance of probabilities they could be used.  Dr  George  said
    he did not think it was an issue.  Someone would have mentioned it.  It
    could not be ruled out categorically.

73.   He was referred to his evidence in respect  of  Rafah,  where  he  had
    said he saw no camps or queues, and he  was  asked  where  Palestinians
    waiting to cross would stay.  He said that if they were aware that  the
    border would be open in the next two or three days  they  would  be  in
    Rafah or in Elarish, which was 40 kms to the south.   People  who  were
    waiting on a longer term basis would be in Elarish or in Rafah, renting
    rooms in people's houses.  The border had been open for  two  or  three
    days before his visit, he thought on 3 to 5  February  but  was  closed
    when he went on 6 February.

74.   That concluded the proceedings on 22 February.

75.   On 23 February, Mr Draycott produced a four page addendum report  from
    Dr George addressing issues that had arisen the previous day concerning
    the passport and its status and  the  issue  of  temporary  Palestinian
    passports.  He raised three further issues.  Firstly the appellant  was
    not here today, which was unfortunate, due to  a  misunderstanding  via
    NASS about the amount of accommodation to be arranged and she  and  the
    family had gone home.

76.   A further concern in respect of their absence was, with reference  to,
    in particular, the note at page 215 of the Secretary of State's  bundle
    E the situation of the appellant's husband's  funding  and  ability  to
    survive if returned to Gaza.  Mr Draycott's difficulty was that he  had
    only seen this last weekend and had tried to get the husband to come to
    the hearing yesterday or today for the point to be put to him as to how
    it was funded.  It  was  clearly  quite  an  important  point  and  the
    appellant was disadvantaged by a lack of ability to deal with it as  it
    raised a number of issues.  The Presenting Officer's notes referred  to
    were not available.  The third point  concerned  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Justice in  Teixeira  which  had  now  been  produced  and  Mr
    Draycott understood from Mr Wastell that the  issue  of  the  right  to
    reside permanently was not dealt  with  by  the  Court  so  the  matter
    remained open and it was a question of the views of the Court of Appeal
    in McCarthy in contrast to what had been said by the  Advocate  General
    in Teixeira.

77.   Mr Wastell expressed concerns that he had  only  received  the  report
    from Dr George at twenty past  ten  last  night.   In  respect  of  the
    appellant's husband, Mr Wastell had indicated from the start  that  his
    credibility was in issue, it having been rejected from the outset,  and
    his application had been made previously to the Home Office about still
    receiving funding and that was in the original determination.   It  had
    been open to the appellant's advisors to call evidence to disturb  that
    finding and they had chosen not to do so.  He was due to  complete  his
    studies in July 2009, so with regard to the question of return to  Gaza
    it was a non-issue.  There was a note in connection  with  the  January
    2009 application for leave in respect of a relative providing  funding.
    The case would not turn on whether he could get funding or loans from a
    relative.  Mr Draycott had taken instructions and Mr Wastell  was  told
    that the appellant's husband said he could get loans  from  his  family
    and there would be no point in calling him to say that.

78.   A copy of Teixeira was put in and  also  other  case  law  on  the  EU
    point.  The argument on behalf of the Secretary of State was  that  the
    permanent right to reside deriving from residence, which did  not  have
    to be in accordance with the Regulations, was not  in  accordance  with
    what was said in McCarthy and  that  was  the  law  and  it  was  on  a
    reference at the moment.

79.   In respect of Dr George's report, if this were traditional  two  party
    civil litigation, he would strongly argue it was entirely inappropriate
    after cross-examination to produce such a report.  It was accepted that
    it was a country guidance case, however.  Mr Wastell suggested that the
    fourth report did not answer the two critical questions that needed  to
    be answered and should be treated with caution.  An expert had  a  duty
    to give opinions on matters within his knowledge or say when it was not
    within his knowledge  and  such  a  last  minute  report,  without  the
    Secretary of State having the  chance  to  consider  it,  was  entirely
    outside the  ordinary  rules  of  litigation.   He  did  not  have  the
    opportunity to go behind the points in it but it  conflicted  with  the
    Secretary of State's  evidence  that  the  Tribunal  would  hear.   The
    appellant needed to apply for permission to rely on it and the Tribunal
    was asked to note Mr Wastell's objections and to treat the report  with
    caution.

80.   By way of reply, Mr Draycott said that the nub of the report  and  the
    catalyst for it was a telephone call by Dr George  to  the  Palestinian
    Delegation in London and it mainly related to the child, Muhammad.   Dr
    George had been told that there were two types of  document:  a  travel
    document which was authentic and looked like a passport  and  could  be
    travelled on, but did not include the ID number allowing  a  person  to
    travel around the Occupied  Territories.   Dr  George  had  been  given
    precise information about what to look at on the passport.  These  were
    difficult issues and the evidence was not readily in the public domain.
     The concerns on behalf of the Secretary of State were understood,  but
    it was a complicated issue, and all the Secretary of State had said was
    that Muhammad had a passport.  The Karim report of  2009  might  settle
    it.

81.   By way of response, Mr Wastell said that it  was  a  country  guidance
    case and the point had been made very  early  on  concerning  temporary
    passports.  Dr George was not a passport expert.  The passport had been
    obtained when Muhammad was less than 5.  Dr George did  not  deal  with
    the point concerning visitor's permits and allowances being made by the
    Israeli authorities to Gaza residents' children being allowed  in.   Mr
    Wastell referred to paragraphs 5 and 6 of the report and the  reference
    to a  "travel  document"  which  was  like  a  passport  and  that  the
    representative had never heard of a temporary passport.   It  could  be
    that the culprit had now been found.  The Tribunal should look  at  the
    passport.  If it was not a point then it should not be  dealt  with  in
    this case.

82.   In response, Mr Draycott said that in his view the Secretary of  State
    was in difficulties over the ID issue.  The Secretary  of  State's  own
    evidence said that there would be no entry without  an  ID  number  and
    reference was made to the correspondence involving  Mr  Kemble  and  in
    Azam and Rabat at pages 243 and 244.  With no ID number, a person would
    not be allowed into the Occupied Territories.  As regards the temporary
    passport point, it could be a matter of  semantics  whether  it  was  a
    travel document or temporary passport, but the  report  said  passports
    had not been provided for eighteen months.   So  if  the  youngest  two
    children could not be allowed in, then this would  be  persecution  for
    discriminatory reasons and a strong Article 8 case.

83.   After consideration, we concluded that it would not be  necessary  for
    us to adjourn to take evidence from the appellant's husband.  It seemed
    to us that we had sufficient evidence concerning his  circumstances  so
    as not to necessitate hearing further evidence from  him.   We  granted
    permission for Dr George's fourth report to be put in and  for  him  to
    give further evidence in respect of that.

84.   The passport having been examined by both  sides,  Mr  Draycott  noted
    that the passport had an ID number on it but a different date of  birth
    from that recorded in Muhammad's Eire passport and, in comparison  with
    other Palestinian passports that the  appellant's  side  had  seen,  it
    appeared to be a different format and the numbers in other cases  began
    with a 9.  It was not contended that the passport would not  have  come
    from a civil delegation office run by Palestinians in Gaza or the  West
    Bank, but the question was  whether  the  ID  number  on  the  passport
    correlated with the Israeli registry number and the next  question  was
    what the Israeli requirements were for the provision of an  ID  number.
    On behalf of the appellant it was  said  that  the  objective  evidence
    answered that and that it must be  a  matter  of  residence,  but  that
    contrasted with the Secretary of State's view.

85.   Dr George gave further evidence, adopting  his  fourth  report.   With
    regard to the ID number on the passport, he said that he would raise  a
    question  about  the  format  of  the  number.   On  other  Palestinian
    passports he had seen, though he was not an expert, in some cases  they
    began with an I and then a space and then a  long  number  and  then  a
    space and then a final number.  In his opinion, given the weight of the
    evidence concerning the rules and the passports and the gaining  of  ID
    numbers, he could not see how the passport could be fully  genuine  and
    it was back to issues of contacts and wasta.  It might be that  strings
    had been pulled.  Israel was the key party.  He would want to know  the
    details of the circumstances in which the passport was issued.

86.   He made the further point that the report was  not  a  consequence  of
    deficiencies in the previous day's evidence  concerning  the  rules  of
    issuing passports.  The third report dealt with the situation as it now
    was and not the historical situation.  The fourth report dealt with  an
    essentially  historical   phenomenon.    The   Palestinian   Delegation
    officials said they did issue such documents,  but  these  ceased  some
    eighteen months ago.  He referred to evidence involving the Palestinian
    and Lebanese governments in respect  of  Palestinian-Lebanese  refugees
    and the issue of  Palestinian  passports  where  they  would  not  have
    residence rights,  but  he  was  not  aware  of  such  passports  being
    presently issued.  Only fully valid passports  were  presently  issued,
    but not in Gaza because of the Hamas dispute.

87.   This was a country guidance case and he was as satisfied as  he  could
    be that  his  evidence  concerning  the  circumstances  and  rules  and
    regulations about the issue of Palestinian passports and ID numbers  as
    they generally applied was accurate.  As he said, there were exceptions
    on the basis of favours and bribes, etc.  That  was  a  matter  on  the
    country guidance side and was the general picture.  It was hard to  see
    how one could establish the validity of the ID number on this passport,
    as only the Israelis could say.  The  Palestinian  Population  Registry
    was run by the Israeli Interior Ministry and it was inaccessible and it
    was unclear even if the Palestinian Authority had access to it and,  if
    so, whether it could be accessed by Ramallah or  an  NGO  on  the  West
    Bank.

88.   In cross-examination Mr Wastell asked Dr George  whether  it  was  the
    case that he did not know whether an ID number was real or not  and  he
    said only the Israelis could say.  The question was asked again and  he
    said it was only Israelis who could say and neither he nor anyone  else
    here could.  He was asked whether he accepted the possibility  that  it
    was wrong to say that a person needed to  be  present  in  Gaza  to  be
    registered on the Palestinian register was wrong.  He said it  was  not
    his premise but it was the published background evidence.

89.   He was asked about his expertise in passports and  the  fact  that  he
    had said he did not have comprehensive expertise  on  the  minutiae  of
    Palestinian passports and he agreed that that was the  case.   However,
    Dr George said that he assessed the likely  authenticity  of  documents
    from the Middle East as part of his work as an  expert  and  had  never
    differed from the conclusions of  the  National  Document  Fraud  Unit.
    There were some characteristics such as a  lack  of  a  number  or  the
    appearance of a document which did not demand a  particular  expertise,
    though it was the case that neither of those applied to this  passport,
    which appeared to be authentic and to have been  issued  by  a  genuine
    authority, except for the format of the ID number.  He had not done any
    infrared tests.  That he was not an expert did not mean that he  had  a
    zero claim to fame in respect of documents.

90.   It was put to him that he found  a  regulation  saying  that  children
    under 5 needed to be physically present in Gaza to be registered on the
    Palestinian register.  Dr George questioned what was meant by this  and
    repeated what he had said yesterday, that it was a matter  of  scrutiny
    in Hebrew issued by the Israelis and the sources stated in  his  report
    were derived from the Israeli regulations.  He was referred to the fact
    that there was a UK residence stamp in the passport and it was  put  to
    him on that basis it could be inferred  that  the  UK  authorities  had
    accepted that it was genuine.  Dr George said yes, but referred to  the
    recent case of the Dubai authorities accepting UK  passports.   It  was
    put to him that the documents were genuine and that was the  case  with
    this also but there was nothing obvious about this  passport.   It  was
    put to him that there was no reason to suspect the Egyptian authorities
    would not allow the document to be used  to  obtain  a  visit  visa  to
    Egypt.  Dr George said yes, but noted the fact that it was necessary to
    have Egyptian approval to apply for a visa and he  did  not  know  what
    checks they would make.  They could think that this was  a  Palestinian
    from Gaza who probably wished to  return  there  and  that  they  might
    decide to run it by the Israelis and see if the ID number was accepted.
     It could not be put any higher than that.  It could be the case and no-
    one could say.

91.   He was referred to his fourth report at paragraph  12  and  the  third
    paragraph on page 3 and was asked whether that was still the case.   Dr
    George said he did not know.  The Palestinian Delegation said  that  to
    get an ID number in order to get a passport the child would have to  go
    to Ramallah.  He was referred to paragraph 10 and it  was  put  to  him
    that that assumed that the person was not on the register and that  the
    Secretary of State disagreed about that.  Dr George said one could  not
    know and there was no way to establish it.  He did not see how Muhammad
    could be on the register and, if not,  he  would  have  had  to  go  to
    Ramallah to get a passport.  It was put to him that that  only  applied
    to children through the ages of 5 to 16 and  there  was  nothing  about
    children under 5 and he said no.  He agreed that Muhammad  had  applied
    for the passport in April 2006 when he was  under  5.   It  was  common
    ground that he would not have been able to be present in  the  Occupied
    Territories then as he had been in the United Kingdom.  He was referred
    to paragraph 13 and it was suggested that it indicated that now limited
    numbers of passports were received in Gaza and people  could  apply  to
    the West Bank.  Dr George said that people with ID  numbers  would  not
    have to be present, for example they could be issued by the  government
    in London.

92.   There was no re-examination.

93.   The next witness was Ms Holmes.  She identified  both  her  statements
    and her signature on them and said that they were both true to the best
    of her knowledge and belief.  She was asked about the source  for  what
    was said at paragraph 5 of the first statement and she said it  was  an
    email of 27 November  2009  from  a  colleague  who  had  obtained  the
    information from the Palestinian Delegation in the United Kingdom.  She
    had it with her but was somewhat reluctant to  produce  it  as  it  was
    restricted.

94.   In cross-examination, Mr Draycott asked Ms Holmes  whether  she  would
    agree that Palestinian ID  numbers  were  of  critical  importance  for
    returnees to the Palestinian Territory, and she said this was a  matter
    for the Tribunal and she was not an expert.  She had looked briefly  at
    the material produced by Geoffrey Campbell.  She was  referred  to  the
    letter at pages 243 and 244 at Secretary of State's bundle E  and  said
    she was not in a position to disagree with that and had  no  reason  to
    disbelieve any of it.  She was referred to Dr  George's  evidence  that
    the authorities in Gaza were not in a position to provide passports and
    everything had to come from Ramallah and she said that her recollection
    of Muhammad's passport was that it named Gaza as the  place  of  issue.
    It was put to her that the passport went back to 2006,  and  Dr  George
    had spoken about more recent occurrences of 2008 to  2009.   Ms  Holmes
    said that the general understanding the Home Office had was that  there
    would be no problem for  the  appellant  to  get  into  Gaza  with  her
    children.  It was put to her that Dr George said that they  would  have
    to go to Ramallah to get Palestinian passports if they were able to get
    into Gaza.  Ms Holmes said again that she was not an expert and did not
    feel that she could answer the question with any degree  of  authority.
    She was asked whether she could agree that the Israeli authorities  had
    responsibility  for  control  of  the  population  registry  concerning
    Palestinians.  Ms Holmes queried what the word control in this  context
    meant and it was suggested to her that they were the keepers of it  and
    logged the information concerning ID numbers or verified the  truth  of
    information given by the Palestinian Authority.  Ms  Holmes  said  yes,
    that was as she understood it, but she was not an expert.  It  was  put
    to her that she was putting forward contentions  concerning  access  to
    Gaza and that was an issue to be addressed.  Ms Holmes said  that  what
    she said was on the basis of the information that they had received and
    the appellant and the children had had passports in the past  and  that
    added weight to that belief.  She agreed that none of them had been  in
    the Palestinian Occupied  Territories  since  2003.   She  agreed  that
    evidence had been given that each child and the appellant would need  a
    visa in advance before entering Egypt and also given that five  of  the
    children had passports then if they got them  renewed  they  could  get
    travel documents except for the youngest child.  She was asked how  she
    envisaged the youngest child getting a travel document to  enter  Egypt
    and get to Rafah.  She said that  given  that  his  family  had  travel
    documents, she did not see why it would be difficult  for  him  to  get
    one.  She was asked whether this was an assumption on the part  of  the
    Secretary of State, and said that was not entirely the case  but  there
    was  no  evidence  about  children  being  prevented   from   entering,
    especially as the whole family were documented and it  seemed  unlikely
    that there had been no problem previously with  the  children.   Again,
    she reiterated that she was not an expert.  She was  referred  to  what
    the statement said about this and she said it was a matter of what  was
    in the statement and she referred to paragraphs 2 and 3.

95.   Ms Holmes was referred to the point made by Dr George about  temporary
    passports and there being two levels of Palestinian  travel  documents,
    the fully fledged passport and the travel document, and she  was  asked
    whether the temporary passport to which she referred was one of  those.
    Ms Holmes said that the statement at paragraph 5  was  the  information
    the Home Office had been given.  The email which was the basis of  this
    information was restricted.  It said that the Palestinian Delegation in
    the United Kingdom confirmed that a new passport via the use of a power
    of attorney could be obtained and be  done  on  an  application  for  a
    passport in the United Kingdom and a nominated person  could  apply  in
    the Palestinian Territory.  The child in the United Kingdom would get a
    temporary passport using the same procedure,  and  they  could  present
    that and a birth certificate and get an ID number.

96.   It was put to her that Dr George had said that if the  youngest  child
    got to Rafah with a birth certificate he would be allowed  in,  but  Mr
    Draycott was rather concerned about the earlier stage  as  to  how  the
    child would get  access  to  Egypt  to  get  a  visa  as  he  needed  a
    recognisable travel document.  Ms Holmes suggested that his ID document
    could suffice.

97.   With regard to paragraph 8 of her first statement, she said  that  her
    role was as a country guidance coordinator and others did the  specific
    job of obtaining information and evidence and  she  had  no  particular
    expertise in respect  of  the  Occupied  Territories.   She  was  asked
    whether there could be difficulties in obtaining the relevant visas and
    she said yes, as was set out in paragraph 8.  She could  not  shed  any
    further light on that.  It would be odd if only a small child  who  was
    not documented would cause trouble as he would  hardly  be  seen  as  a
    security threat.

98.   She was referred to paragraph  12  of  her  first  statement  and  the
    reference to there being no prospect of a forced  return  and  she  was
    asked whether it was the case that  the  situation  was  seen  as  very
    precarious in respect of people's abilities to cross the border and the
    appellant had six children.  Ms Holmes said that the appellant's appeal
    rights were not exhausted and she could go back voluntarily and it  was
    up to her.  The appeal would not be concluded today and it was  unclear
    what the situation would be when her appeal rights were exhausted.  She
    was not aware of any cases of forced returns, but  that  did  not  mean
    there had not been any.  She understood that there was  a  Home  Office
    policy in connection with unaccompanied children that they  would  only
    be returned if suitable reception conditions were  available.   It  was
    not the situation of the appellant who was not a single parent  and  it
    was not the same at all as the case of a child who was  on  their  own.
    Ms Holmes said she could only however give a personal opinion on  this.
    She was asked whether she was unaware of the case being  considered  on
    this basis and Ms Holmes made the point that the appellant was married.
     As to whether there was no guarantee that her husband would leave with
    her, given that he still had leave, she said that it was not up to  her
    and the question was unhelpful.  It was put to her that  the  test  was
    what would happen on the notional  return  of  the  appellant  and  her
    children, and Ms Holmes said that was a matter for the Tribunal and she
    could not  say  anything  helpful  and  these  matters  were  obviously
    considered seriously by the Secretary  of  State.   With  reference  to
    paragraph 12, it said "currently" and that the appellant could  return.
    The matter had been considered and analysed.  Mr Draycott said that  he
    was not saying that the Secretary of State accepted there had  been  an
    Article 3 violation but he argued that it was relevant  and  Ms  Holmes
    said it was a matter for the Tribunal.

99.   That concluded the evidence.  We asked Ms Holmes to take  instructions
    over the luncheon adjournment in respect of whether the email which was
    the basis of paragraph 5 of her  first  statement  could  be  disclosed
    since it was evidence that could clearly be helpful.

100.  After lunch, we were addressed by both representatives  who  indicated
    that it would assist them, given the time difficulties they were likely
    to  experience  today,  if  they  were  allowed  to  put   in   written
    submissions, a request to which we acceded, making the  point  that  in
    the immediate future the representatives should be able to identify the
    points of agreement and disagreement, given  the  complexities  of  the
    case.   Mr  Wastell  also  indicated  that  Ms  Holmes   would   obtain
    instructions as to whether the  email  could  be  released,  and  after
    discussion we agreed that it would not be necessary to reconvene if the
    email were released as the parties could make their submissions  on  it
    without there needing to be further evidence.  We  received  the  final
    written submissions from Mr Draycott on 10 June.

Whether the Appellant and Her Family Can Enter Egypt  and  Cross  the  Rafah
Border Crossing

101.  It is, we think, common ground, that the appellant would have  to  re-
    enter Gaza, if it were possible to do so, by means of entry into  Egypt
    and  then  access  to  the  Rafah  crossing  into  Gaza.    Alternative
    possibilities of entry from the northern border at Erez  in  Israel  or
    entry via Ben Gurion International Airport in Tel Aviv appear not to be
    feasible.  Dr Alan George, who has provided five reports on  behalf  of
    the appellant, says in  his  first  report,  dated  20  July  2009,  at
    paragraph 53 that until November 2005 entry to and exit from  the  Gaza
    Strip from Egypt were strictly controlled by the  Israelis.   Crossings
    were manned by officials of the Palestinian  National  Authority  (PNA)
    but Israeli officers were also present at the checkpoint and  had  full
    powers to veto the entry of Palestinian individuals who  were  required
    to present their documents at the Rafah checkpoint.  It  is  said  that
    Israel has maintained an influence over the Rafah crossing  even  after
    Israel's unilateral withdrawal from the Gaza Strip which was  completed
    in September 2005.  In the report Dr George  says  that  since  Hamas's
    takeover of the Gaza Strip in June 2007 its borders have been  all  but
    totally closed.  He quotes from an Amnesty International briefing paper
    of July 2008 entitled "Gaza Blockade - Collective  Punishment"  stating
    that Israel also continues to exercise a degree of control over  Gaza's
    border with Egypt, and Israeli officials have repeatedly made it  clear
    that the border can only be reopened within the framework  of  a  joint
    agreement.  Dr George says that Palestinians hoping to enter  the  Gaza
    Strip from Egypt must obtain visas to enter Egypt  and  these  are  not
    granted as a matter of course.

102.  In his second report of 30 November 2009 Dr George  says  that  Israel
    continues to permit only very small numbers of people to cross  to  and
    from the Strip and the Egyptian border is opened only  sporadically  by
    Egypt and  then  only  for  brief  periods  to  allow  the  passage  of
    "humanitarian cases" (mainly people in need of  medical  treatment  not
    available in the Gaza Strip) and students.  He refers to periods  since
    his previous report when the border had been opened, comprising 3 to  7
    August, 15 August (to allow Muslim pilgrims to cross), 26 to 27 August,
    15 and 17 September, 1 to 3 November and 6  to  8  November  (to  allow
    Muslim pilgrims to cross).

103.  In his third report, dated 17 February 2010, and  submitted  following
    a visit to Egypt between 2 and 10 February 2010,  including  travelling
    to Rafah, Dr George addresses, among other issues, the position of  the
    appellant's fifth and sixth children.  They are respectively  Mohammad,
    who was born in Antrim on 28 November 2003 and is a  citizen  of  Eire,
    and Abdurrahman who was  born  in  Liverpool  on  25  April  2008.   In
    particular he addresses the question  of  their  ability  to  obtain  a
    Palestinian identity card and passport and obtain  entry  upon  return.
    Dr George quotes from a  report  by  Gisha,  an  Israeli  human  rights
    organisation, entitled: "Rafah Crossing: Who Holds the Keys?" which was
    published in March 2009 (the Gisha report).  Dr George  says  that  for
    the registration of children born abroad of  parents  who  are  on  the
    population registry, the physical presence of those children within the
    Occupied Territories at the time of the application for registration is
    a requirement.  He notes however that the Rules  stipulate  that  young
    children of  Palestinians  with  residence  status  do  not  require  a
    visitor's permit and this appears to apply to children younger  than  5
    years of age and would therefore apply to Abdurrahman,  who  Dr  George
    considers would be able to enter the Gaza Strip on the strength of  his
    UK birth certificate.  He notes that Muhammad is a citizen of Eire  and
    to the best of his knowledge considers that this would not  hinder  his
    ability to be registered on the  Palestinian  Population  Registry  and
    obtain a Palestinian ID and passport.  He notes however that since 2000
    Israel has imposed a general freeze on the issue of  visitors'  permits
    and though Israel formally has had no direct control  over  who  enters
    the Gaza Strip from Egypt since the Hamas takeover of the Strip in June
    2007, he says that in practice Israel  exercises  a  veto  because  the
    Egyptian authorities submit to the Israelis lists of persons  who  wish
    to enter the territory from Egypt via the Rafah crossing.  He considers
    that in view of Israel's general  position  on  visitor's  permits  for
    Palestinians not resident in the  Occupied  Territories  it  is  highly
    unlikely that the appellant would be able to obtain permission from the
    Israeli authorities to enable Mohammad to enter Gaza.

104.  Dr George goes on to say that the Egyptians  have  largely  acquiesced
    in Israel's requirement that the Rafah border be closed.  He notes  the
    reasons for this, and says that Israel permits only  sporadic  openings
    of the crossing, generally lasting only two or three days and says that
    they are announced only a few days in advance,  severely  limiting  the
    ability of potential travellers to the territory to reach the border in
    time.  He says that only individuals whose names have been approved  by
    the Egyptians in advance are permitted to cross the border  into  Gaza.
    The consensus of the sources he has consulted, including sources at the
    Palestinian Embassy in Cairo, through which  the  lists  of  names  are
    submitted to the Egyptians, is, he says, that the Egyptian  authorities
    submit these names to the Israelis for vetting  in  advance  of  border
    openings, thereby implying that Israel  has  the  possibility  to  veto
    individuals.  He says however that he has been  unable  to  corroborate
    this with the Egyptian authorities as  they  did  not  respond  to  his
    request for a briefing from  them.   He  quotes  the  Gisha  report  in
    support of this view.  He quotes a report to the  US  Congress  by  the
    Congressional Research Service  dated  February  2008  as  showing  the
    efforts made by Israel to make US aid to Egypt conditional  on  Egypt's
    performance in maintaining the blockade.

105.  Dr George then goes on to consider whether the  Egyptians  will  grant
    the appellant a transit visa allowing her and  her  children  to  enter
    Gaza.  He telephoned the Egyptian Consulate in London  on  16  February
    2010 and was told that the Consulate did not issue  transit  visas  and
    that Palestinians holding Palestinian passports  who  wished  to  enter
    Egypt required tourist visas.  This required them first  to  apply  for
    clearance from the Egyptian authorities via the Consulate and  approval
    would take between two to six weeks.   If  approval  was  granted  they
    could then embark on the second stage of  the  process  which  was  the
    application for the tourist visa itself.  If  they  applied  in  person
    this took two days and if by post between five and ten days.   Once  in
    Egypt, a Palestinian wishing to travel on to  the  Gaza  Strip  had  to
    apply to the Egyptian authorities.  The Egyptian Consulate  was  unable
    to say to which official agency a  Palestinian  would  have  to  apply.
    From discussions during his recent visit to Cairo  and  from  published
    sources it seemed to Dr George highly likely that  this  would  be  the
    Interior Ministry and its main Security Agency.  On the assumption that
    the  appellant  and  all  the  children  possessed  valid   Palestinian
    passports it was probable that the Egyptian Consulate would issue  them
    with visas to enter Egypt.   Assuming  they  were  able  to  do  so  he
    considered  it  probable  that  they  might,  after  very  considerable
    bureaucratic wrangling and delay, be able to obtain Egyptian permission
    to  enter  the  Gaza  Strip.   He  considers  however  that  there  are
    significant problems in respect of the two youngest  children  for  the
    reasons set out earlier in his report.  He goes on also  to  note  that
    the procedures affecting Palestinian travel to and  through  Egypt  are
    not always rigorously applied and that  Egyptian  officials  often  act
    arbitrarily.  He refers to the example of a Palestinian journalist  who
    experienced problems in this regard.

106.  As we have set out above, in his oral evidence Dr George said that  he
    would be very surprised if the Israelis were  not  intimately  involved
    with border openings and closures.  He agreed with what had  been  said
    by Dr Al-Khatib in his report.  He reiterated the difficulties  he  saw
    as to how someone like Mohammad, who was a citizen of Eire, could  gain
    entry to Gaza.  He would need a visitor's permit and  none  were  being
    issued.  With regard to documents put in on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State containing reference  to  temporary  passports  and  children  of
    Palestinian ethnicity in the United Kingdom and coming  and  travelling
    back, he had never come across this and thought it might be a reference
    to what a child under 5 with their mother could be given.  He said that
    the only passports the Palestinian Authority could issue under the Oslo
    Accords were in respect of people on the population register  and  they
    were issued by Israel, so he did not see how the Palestinian  Authority
    would have the authority to let in such a child  who  was  not  on  the
    register.

107.  He also said in cross-examination that Palestinians had to  apply  for
    visas and get Egyptian approval in advance and even if they got a  visa
    they could be turned back at the airport in Cairo.   He  had  given  an
    example of this in his third report.  Even if they were able  to  enter
    Egypt they would have to be on a list of approved  names  sent  by  the
    Palestinian Authorities to the Egyptians who would submit the  list  to
    the  Israelis.   He  thought  that,  from  what  he  was  told  by  the
    Palestinian Embassy in Cairo, a person would get on the  list  via  the
    Palestinian Embassy so they could get to Cairo and go  to  the  Embassy
    and in that way try to get their name on  the  list.   They  would  not
    however learn that they were on the list until the last moment.

108.  In cross-examination he agreed that if it was the case that  a  person
    would only get a Palestinian passport if they were on the register then
    if Mohammad had a passport he must be on the register.  Such  a  person
    should be able to enter, subject to the Egyptian authorities.   He  did
    not understand how Mohammad had  obtained  a  Palestinian  passport  in
    April 2006.  He agreed that he had earlier said that if  a  person  was
    Palestinian and on the register they could enter Gaza and that Mohammad
    could enter Gaza if he had a valid passport and was  on  the  register.
    He thought that this could be a special case and he emphasised  the  ad
    hoc nature of the system.

109.  He agreed that the Israelis were not physically present at  the  Rafah
    crossing and that the Egyptians controlled the crossing in  theory  but
    had their own reasons for keeping the crossing closed, for  example  to
    keep Hamas out of Egypt.  He did not  think  there  were  any  criteria
    involved in the Egyptians deciding who could cross.  He agreed that  it
    was in the interests of the Egyptians to allow the Palestinians across.
     He had not found out from the Egyptian authorities whether they showed
    their list to the Israelis, though if it were  the  case  it  would  be
    likely to be in connection with matters  of  security.   The  Egyptians
    were in a very difficult position as they were trying  to  play  things
    both ways.  He thought the Israelis understood Egypt's situation.

110.  He accepted it was probable that the appellant and  her  children  and
    husband would get tourist visas for Egypt if they  obtained  passports.
    As to whether the appellant and her family would get tourist visas, the
    situation was random and unpredictable.  As regards the example he  had
    given of a journalist who had experienced difficulties, he had no  idea
    what information the Egyptians  had  on  her.   As  regards  Mohammad's
    passport, he had never come across the notion  of  temporary  passports
    and had seen no references to it.  He could not say that they were  not
    issued and again he referred to the ad hoc nature of  the  system.   It
    might be they were provided for IDPs.  He referred to the process known
    as "wasta" which was a process of exchanging favours, and surmised that
    this might be  the  basis  upon  which  Mohammad's  passport  had  been
    obtained.  He said that the regulatory picture,  as  published,  was  a
    general picture for country  guidance  purposes  and  these  procedures
    could not be routinely sidestepped.

111.  Dr George produced a fourth report overnight after the hearing  on  22
    February.  After the hearing he had had a telephone interview with  the
    Political Counsellor, Ms Shorafa, at the Palestinian General Delegation
    Office (PGDO) in London.  In his report he says  that  the  Palestinian
    Authority  issues  passports  only  to  Palestinians  in  the  Occupied
    Territories who are registered on the Palestinian  population  registry
    and who therefore  hold  Israeli  approved  ID  cards.   The  Political
    Counsellor had told him that until approximately  eighteen  months  ago
    the Palestinian Authority (PA) also issued  some  travel  documents  to
    Palestinians who were not on the population registry.  These  documents
    had the same appearance as a full passport but conferred  no  right  of
    entry to or right of residency in the Occupied Territories.   She  told
    him that these passports  and  travel  documents  both  carried  serial
    numbers but the full passports, as they were  described,  included  the
    number of the Israeli approved ID card held by  individuals  registered
    on the Palestinian population registry, whereas  the  travel  documents
    did  not  carry  these  numbers.   Dr  George  considered   that   this
    information chimed with information he  had  received  from  the  First
    Counsellor at the Palestinian Embassy in Cairo whom he had met  earlier
    in February 2010.

112.  Dr George then went on to refer to the notion of a temporary  passport
    referred to at paragraph 5  of  Ms  Holmes'  witness  statement  of  10
    December 2009.  He had found no  evidence  on  an  internet  search  to
    support this contention and the Political Counsellor had told him  that
    she had never encountered or heard of  such  a  thing  as  a  temporary
    Palestinian passport.  The Political Counsellor had told him  that  new
    Palestinian passports were not presently being  issued  from  the  Gaza
    Strip and that existing passports could be renewed via the PGDO office.
     New passports were being issued only in Ramallah (the location of  the
    PA's headquarters in the West  Bank).   She  said  that  a  child  born
    outside the Gaza Strip and aged between 5  and  16  who  had  not  been
    registered on the Palestinian population  registry  and  who  wanted  a
    Palestinian passport would have to apply in person in Ramallah.

113.  Dr George also gave some oral evidence in adopting his fourth  report.
     He thought that the ID number on  Mohammad's  passport  gave  rise  to
    questions.  He did not think it could be genuine, bearing in  mind  the
    evidence as a whole concerning the rules on Palestinian  passports  and
    how ID numbers were obtained.  He said  that  the  Israelis  could  say
    whether the ID number on the passport was real or not.

114.   Yet  further  evidence  was  provided  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    concerning the issue of Mohammad's  passport,  after  the  end  of  the
    hearing.  Reference is made to the Middle East Cancer Consortium (MECC)
    Manual of Coding and Staging Version 5.1 of July 2009.  At page  13  of
    the Manual there is information concerning patients' national  identity
    numbers for the Palestinian Authority (Gaza and West Bank).   There  is
    reference to nine numerical characters and it is  said  that  sometimes
    only eight digits are recorded.  It is said that in the  West  Bank  of
    the Palestinian Authority a national identity number was  initiated  in
    1967.  All ID numbers issued between 1967 and 1989 are  said  to  begin
    with the number 9.  All ID numbers issued between 1990  and  1994  were
    given the number 8.  All ID numbers issued from 1995 until the  present
    start with the number 4.  It is said on behalf of the  appellants  that
    all of the Palestinian IDs referred to were in the documentation before
    the Tribunal, with the obvious exception of Mohammad's,  tallying  with
    the above information.  It  is  argued  that  as  a  consequence  since
    Mohammad's passport does not commence with the number 4, which  is  the
    starting digit for the period 1995 to 2009, it will not  be  recognised
    by either the Israeli or the Egyptian authorities.   Beyond  that,  the
    issue is addressed on behalf of  the  appellants  of  whether  Mohammad
    would be granted a visitor's permit by the Israeli authorities to enter
    Gaza.

115.  In his submissions on the issues from the first day, Mr Wastell  asked
    that the appeal be dismissed.  There were  two  main  grounds,  firstly
    that the appellant would not be allowed to enter  Gaza  because  of  an
    intentionally discriminatory policy and hence she  would  be  stateless
    and therefore sought asylum and also for the appeal to be allowed under
    Articles 3 and 8.

116.  With regard to the first issue, the appellant was seeking to  open  up
    the law in this regard so it would be necessary  to  go  through  that.
    There was then the question of socio-economic conditions in  Gaza,  and
    it would be argued that there was a high threshold for  cases  where  a
    person asserted that general country conditions  led  to  a  breach  of
    Article 3.  There were cases from the European Court  on  Human  Rights
    and UK cases on that.

117.  It was also thought to be the case, and Mr Draycott confirmed that  it
    was,  that  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  was  not
    relevant.  It was not being argued that Gaza was  subject  to  internal
    armed conflict. Any  claims  for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    really amounted to a contention that Article 3 would be breached, since
    persecution involved a severe violation of a basic human right, a  non-
    derogable  right,  which  Article  3  was,  and  the  same  terminology
    essentially was used in Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive as
    in the terms of Article 3.  The Qualification Directive, that said, was
    not irrelevant, and it was significant to note how it was  mapped  out.
    Mr Wastell referred to recital 26.  If the appellant  was  correct,  as
    she did not seek to differentiate herself from others, there was a need
    for a finding in  respect  of  all  Palestinian  Arabs  from  Gaza  and
    potentially all Palestinian  Arabs.   There  was  simply  no  basis  to
    justify such an extraordinary finding.  Mr Wastell referred to pages  9
    and 10 of his speaking note and argued that the matter would have to be
    considered in the round.

118.  Mr Wastell then went on to address the evidence from Dr  George  which
    was also set out at paragraph 34 of his speaking note  onwards.   There
    was evidence from him as to  the  situation  in  March  2008  when  the
    conditions were those which the appellant would have faced at that time
    when she returned, intending to have her  child.   He  argued  that  Dr
    George's report in this regard was an irrelevance as it was  all  based
    on third party evidence and  was  of  little  value  and  contained  no
    comment or analysis.  Secondly it was argued that the evidence that  Dr
    George gave concerning what was said by Dr Al-Khatib  was  hearsay  and
    should be given less weight accordingly.  There had been no opportunity
    to cross-examine Dr Al-Khatib.  In oral  evidence  Dr  George  had  not
    known the detail of the third party reports, for example concerning the
    definition of "malnutrition" or the amounts of aid provided to Gaza and
    the West Bank.  Next, it was argued that Dr George did not add anything
    to the third party reports.  Fourthly, he had never been  to  Gaza  and
    had not seen the general conditions.  He had made an absurd point about
    how it was possible to look into Gaza.  He was obdurate and  would  not
    concede ground when he needed to.  With regard to  the  West  Bank,  he
    offered the opinion that there were no food or  water  supply  problems
    there, and he had been there and seen that  there  was  no  starvation.
    This reinforced Mr Wastell's point that there was little value  to  his
    views on Gaza.  He had only been to Israel and the  West  Bank  in  the
    last 30 years for a period of ten days and had never been to Rafah.  He
    could  not  give  detailed  evidence  about  the  situation   and   the
    circumstances there in comparison to what he  was  able  to  say  about
    Israel.  He had given startling evidence about Israel's attitude to all
    Palestinians, regarding them as terrorists, not least given how  little
    time he had spent in Israel.  The Tribunal would  note  what  had  been
    said about his evidence by the Tribunal  in  MA  and  the  point  about
    colonisation.  He had accepted that the term colonisation  referred  to
    both settlement and domination of Palestinians.  Bundle D, pages  8  to
    20, contained the other side of the story,  with  the  issues  set  out
    there, such as the arrest warrant in respect  of  the  Israeli  Defence
    Minister, Ms Livni, which had been revoked on Monday, and  the  Israeli
    response.  Dr George had not had the excuse that Judge Goldstone in his
    report had.  There was evidence of permission to export flowers and  an
    improvement and he had been unduly unwilling to accept that these  were
    positive signs.  Reference was made to page 161 at bundle B  concerning
    the West Bank.  The figures were not much lower than  those  for  Gaza.
    There were echoes of the evidence respecting Gaza.  In regard  to  page
    162 and pages 167 to 169, the evidence  was  set  out.   Therefore  one
    could not rely on Dr George concerning the humanitarian conditions.  He
    had said there was not a problem of starvation on the  West  Bank,  but
    the figures were not very different from Gaza.

119.  Mr Wastell went on to address the issue of  statelessness  in  greater
    detail.  That was separate from the issues of fact that would be  dealt
    with when the matter was returned to in February 2010.  He referred  to
    his speaking note at paragraphs 5 and 6.   It  was  not  accepted  that
    "arbitrary denial of entry by a sovereign state to one of its nationals
    or a previously habitual resident stateless  individual  did  or  could
    amount to persecution under the Refugee Convention".  The  decision  of
    the Tribunal in MA at paragraphs 57 and 58 was of relevance and was the
    starting point.  The Court of Appeal authorities in MA [2008] IAR  617,
    MT [2009] IAR 290 and SH  [2009]  IAR  306  bound  the  Tribunal.   The
    appellant relied on  establishing  persecution  or  Article  3  on  re-
    entering Gaza and it was not by way of refusal as it was the  Egyptians
    who controlled the entry to Rafah and  therefore  they  controlled  her
    destiny in that regard.  Dr George had not been to Rafah, but  accepted
    that there was no public control by the  Israelis.   The  Tribunal  was
    referred to pages 20 to 21 in bundle D.  The appellant would  no  doubt
    argue that the Court of Appeal authorities were not  binding  as  there
    was "something more" in this case, i.e. the blockade, but  that  failed
    as the appellant had to attribute motives to Egypt in respect of  that.
    The refusal of admission itself was not persecution or  conduct  giving
    rise to a breach of Article 3, but there was nothing else in  the  case
    and no motive.  Also the appellant had no fear of refusal but  referred
    to a  practical  difficulty,  and  critically,  no  evidence  had  been
    provided from her husband today.  The Immigration Judge had  found  him
    to lack credibility and that he would return with her and would support
    her.  There was no basis for disturbing that finding  and  it  had  not
    been pursued by the appellant and in any event the husband finished his
    studies next June.  That was all by way of scene-setting but Mr Wastell
    suggested it was hard to believe that  the  appellant  would  not  have
    known that the Rafah crossing was  closed  in  March  2008  before  she
    returned.

120.  With regard to the authorities, there was first the decision in MA  in
    the Court of Appeal.  The "of itself" question had been answered in the
    negative.  Reference was made to paragraphs 19 to 29 and 44  to  50  in
    particular.  These were West Bank cases.  There  was  the  question  of
    whether they were citizens or had been when they were rejected  by  the
    Jordanians.  It was unclear whether it would be argued that issue could
    be opened up, but it was argued that the Tribunal was bound  and  there
    were the ICCPR views on this case and the next two cases in the bundle.
     Mr Wastell was not relying on the definition of citizenship as heavily
    and it had been said by Scott  Baker  LJ  that  the  Palestinians  came
    between the status of citizenship and being stateless.

121.  The facts in  MT  had  been  very  similar.   Reference  was  made  to
    paragraphs 13, 16, 20, 25 and 39.  There was no reason  to  go  against
    the decision in MA.  It was said that MA and MT were indistinguishable.
     The appellant did not want to go back because  of  the  conditions  in
    Gaza and would only return in an ideal world.  Thereafter reference was
    made to paragraphs 41 to 47 and 50 and 53.  The rest was  overtaken  by
    the decision in SH where the "something more" was equated with  Article
    3 treatment, so there the facts that had been referred to earlier  were
    relevant.  It might be said that the blockade was that something  more.
    Reference was  made  to  the  distinction  between  discrimination  and
    persecution at paragraphs 21, 23 to  28  in  SH.   These  were  binding
    authorities.

122.  The academic article produced was interesting, but it was premised  on
    the  ICCPR  point.    There   it   was   sought   to   strengthen   the
    citizenship/statelessness gap.  In any event, there would  have  to  be
    Article 3 ill-treatment or refusal.  Mr Wastell referred to  paragraphs
    13 to 17 of his speaking note which would be amplified at  the  resumed
    hearing.  It was argued that if  the  appellant  could  not  leave  the
    country, then R (Khadir) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2005] UKHL 39 and GH applied.

123.  The Article 8 point made was a novel point.   Reference  was  made  to
    paragraph 48 of Mr Wastell's skeleton argument on this,  in  particular
    at vii and viii.  Again he would return to that.  He also  referred  to
    paragraph 20  of  the  speaking  note  and  the  skeleton  argument  at
    paragraph 49.  The appellant's evidence today was relevant  firstly  to
    what her fear was and secondly that she would go back if  she  did  not
    have  six  children,  and  that  was   relevant   to   the   Tribunal's
    consideration of conditions in Gaza.  She had said she would go back if
    the Israelis were gone, but they had withdrawn, being  on  the  border.
    She had said she would return if there was security and safety, and  Dr
    George had said it was relatively  calm  there  today  and  there  were
    references in the skeleton argument.  She  had  had  contact  with  her
    relatives every two to four weeks since she  left  so  she  would  have
    known about the March 2008 conditions when she left.

124.  There was reference in Dr George's first report  at  paragraph  37  to
    the conditions as of March 2008 and  that  was  relevant  to  potential
    difficulties today and it was argued that they were not such as to give
    rise to Article 3 breach today, and also the  appellant  did  not  fear
    poverty and, by western standards, deprivation.  Clearly the conditions
    in Gaza were poor and there was institutional poverty, food insecurity,
    and the threat of Israeli force, but that had been the case for a  long
    time, including in March 2008.  It was to be noted that the  structural
    problems had  mostly  pre-existed  before  Operation  Cast  Lead.   The
    appellant had accepted that she made her claim because of  the  closure
    of the crossing, and had  said  what  she  would  do  on  return.   The
    Tribunal was asked not  to  disturb  the  Immigration  Judge's  finding
    concerning her husband.  In any event, she had  previously  lived  with
    her husband's father and her brother-in-law's children were now 2 to  6
    and had been there in March 2008, albeit she had not been going to live
    with them.  She had been evasive in saying "possibly - not sure".   She
    had opportunities and there was substantial aid.

125.  As regards the relevant law against which to  assess  the  conditions,
    it was all a matter of Article 3.   Persecution  had  to  be  a  severe
    violation of a basic human right,  and  it  could  be  seen,  following
    through recitals 25 and 26 of the Qualification  Directive  to  Article
    15(b), that the definition of serious harm there equated  exactly  with
    the definition of Article 3.  There needed to be extreme circumstances.
     They had to be extreme in  the  context  of  other  dire  humanitarian
    situations such as, for example, in Mogadishu or Zimbabwe.  It would be
    a curious finding indeed to conclude that  the  general  conditions  of
    poverty and socio-economic conditions in  Gaza  would  enable  all  its
    occupants to succeed.  As to whether it could be said to  be  different
    as the Israelis were enforcing the situation, it was argued  that  that
    should not be the case.  There was a  high  threshold  with  regard  to
    general conditions and especially  in  connection  with  socio-economic
    circumstances and on this preamble 26 of  the  Qualification  Directive
    was referred to and also what was said in QD at paragraphs  14  and  24
    and paragraphs 37 and 38 in Elgafaji.  Paragraph Article 15(c) required
    an exceptional situation, and Article 15(b) required  individualisation
    as well.

126.  Mr Wastell referred to the decision in NA v United Kingdom  [2009]  48
    EHRR 15 which was at Tab 6, particularly  paragraphs  113  to  117  and
    paragraphs 119 to 122.  Mr Wastell referred to  his  skeleton  argument
    concerning this  and  argued  that  the  NA  principles  applied.   The
    decision in Limbuela v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] 3 WLR 1014 was in the appellant's authorities bundle at  Tab  14
    and the Tribunal's attention was drawn in particular to paragraphs 6 to
    9.  AH was referred to in the note and N v  United  Kingdom  [2008]  47
    EHRR 39-885 GC was relevant also to the high Article 3 threshold, which
    was higher for  medical  cases.   It  was  argued  that  similarly  the
    threshold was higher for socio-economic cases and was not  lower  where
    it was a matter of deliberate action, for example  the  blockade.   The
    situation referred to in NA was clearly deliberate.  Human rights could
    not be used in respect of disputes between  countries.   The  same  was
    relevant to socio-economic conditions, and paragraphs  29  to  31  were
    referred to.  Paragraph 32 was relevant to the issue of  socio-economic
    conditions and also paragraphs 42 to 45.  The principle was as set  out
    in paragraph 42 in N.

127.  It was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    situation in Gaza was poor, but the appellant said she feared  for  her
    children and there were  healthcare  and  education  and  accommodation
    issues.  If they were subject to expulsion  they  could  not  claim  in
    respect of improved housing and educational  circumstances  here.   The
    objective material showed hard  circumstances,  a  very  bad  war,  and
    expensive food and crumbling hospitals, but also a lot of international
    humanitarian protection and huge reliance  on  aid.   The  Israelis  in
    their own court had decided that they  had  to  help  to  supply  basic
    humanitarian goods and this was done.   In  the  Goldstone  report  the
    executive summary made the point that it was not a court and  paragraph
    25 of the summary was relevant to that.  It focused on the war and made
    mention of evidence of  war  crimes.   The  Israelis  disagreed.   With
    respect to the blockade, it was not a matter of looking at Article 3 or
    the effect of international humanitarian aid.  Goldstone had  not  been
    given the Israeli side, for legitimate reasons.  The report had focused
    on the Geneva  Convention  and  not  Article  3  which  was  much  more
    draconian, it was argued, and there should be  no  impediment  to  food
    supplies, which there had been.  Also there was the relevant  provision
    of Article 55 referred to in the appellant's skeleton.  There had  been
    no finding of a breach of Article 55 but it had just been  alluded  to.
    The medical point had no merit, as today's report showed.  Even  if  it
    would recur and there would be no treatment it would not  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3.

128.  In the submissions made on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  with
    regard to the issue of the ability of the appellant and her  family  to
    enter Egypt and cross into Gaza via the Rafah  crossing,  it  is  noted
    that Ms Holmes in her witness  statement  explained  that,  aside  from
    Abdurrahman, the appellant, her husband and  the  other  children  have
    passports and documentation required to enter  Gaza.   The  Palestinian
    General  Delegation  Office  in  London  had  confirmed  that  passport
    extensions could be obtained using a power of attorney.  Ms Holmes also
    set out that children born in the United Kingdom could get a  temporary
    passport which needed to be obtained by  power  of  attorney  and  this
    could be presented with the birth certificate at  the  border.   It  is
    noted that this information came directly from an official at the PGDO.
     From Ms Holmes'  further  statement  it  is  clear  that  a  temporary
    passport can be obtained and a birth  certificate  will  permit  entry.
    The point is further made that even if this evidence were in  some  way
    inaccurate, Dr George's opinion was that  the  fifth  child  (Mohammad)
    alone might have difficulties in getting documentation to  enter  Gaza.
    In his third report he had concluded that Abdurrahman, the sixth child,
    would be able to enter Gaza on the strength of his UK birth certificate
    as a child under the age of 5.  It was accepted that the information on
    the Palestinian Authority website was likely to say that a child  under
    5 would be able to enter Gaza with a birth certificate alone.

129.  With regard to Mohammad and  Dr  George's  view  that  it  was  highly
    unlikely that he would be able to obtain permission to enter Gaza  from
    the Israeli authorities, the point is made that there  is  no  evidence
    that Mohammad's Palestinian passport is a false passport and  this  was
    not part of the appellant's case.  Dr George said that he did not  know
    whether the identification number was valid  and  said  that  only  the
    Israelis would know.  The  point  is  made  that  there  is  no  cogent
    evidence that the  identification  number  is  false  and  that  it  is
    speculative to suggest otherwise.  The use of a 9 prefix to previous ID
    numbers is said to be neither here nor there and neither the  appellant
    nor Dr George know the system and it might be that 9 was a prefix  that
    had now been dropped or that it did  not  apply  to  children  and  the
    position was not clear.  Dr George's objectivity is challenged in  this
    regard, in that it is said  he  should  have  accepted  that  this  was
    outside his expertise and his willingness to  trespass  into  areas  of
    speculation meant that his evidence  should  be  treated  with  extreme
    caution.  It is argued that even if the passport  were  false,  it  had
    been accepted by the British authorities and there  was  no  suggestion
    that it would be rejected by the Egyptian authorities.  Dr  George  had
    been unable to  say  whether  the  Egyptians  would  verify  Mohammad's
    identification number  with  the  Israeli  authorities.  There  was  no
    evidence that the Israelis would reject a young boy with a  Palestinian
    passport, even if his ID number was not  in  the  correct  format.   Dr
    George had accepted in cross-examination that he had not been  able  to
    verify with the Egyptian authorities whether or not they  informed  the
    Israelis of those individuals seeking to cross  via  Rafah,  let  alone
    sought their approval.  The UKBA's evidence at bundle E, page  249  was
    that the Israeli government would not need to approve a return to Gaza.

130.  With regard to  the  physical  opening  of  the  Rafah  crossing,  the
    objective evidence was that it would be open, so the appellant and  her
    family could re-enter.  It was clear that in  practice  it  now  opened
    regularly, and patients, students, returning family members  and  those
    returning for humanitarian reasons were allowed back  in.   The  latest
    evidence was that it was now open  on  Thursdays  and  Fridays  to  let
    patients and students in and out.  There was no reason to think that as
    a returning student the appellant and  her  husband  and  young  family
    would be barred from entering.   Ms  Holmes  had  provided  information
    obtained by UKBA, who were in dialogue with the  Egyptian  authorities,
    that the appellant should be granted visas by the Egyptians  and  would
    be permitted to enter.  There was no evidence that the Egyptians  would
    refuse to provide visas to the family or that they would not  put  them
    on any list to  cross  through  Rafah  into  Gaza.   Indeed  Dr  George
    accepted that they would probably be able to obtain permission to enter
    Gaza.  Criticism is made of Dr  George's  comment  that  the  Egyptians
    might not always rigorously apply procedures.  The point is  made  that
    he has no idea of how many applications are refused  or  how  many  are
    granted and what reasons are given for refusal.  The example given of a
    female American  Palestinian  journalist  was  said  to  be  of  little
    relevance.  Nor was there any suggestion that prior  arbitrary  refusal
    of a visa was any bar to further applications.  Dr Al-Khatib  had  told
    Dr George that once a Palestinian had a visa, the Egyptians  "did  what
    they could to facilitate the person's return to  Gaza.   The  Egyptians
    did not want  build-ups  of  Palestinians  with  visas  languishing  in
    Egypt".

131.  It is said to be apparent that the appellant's family  would  be  able
    to get visas and would therefore be able to get to Rafah and into Gaza.
     As regards Abdurrahman, in respect of the suggestion that he might not
    be able to get an Egyptian visa without a passport,  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence was that he would be able to get a passport  like  his
    brother or temporary travel documents; the appellant  had  not  adduced
    evidence to suggest that if he could not get  travel  documentation  in
    the UK the Egyptian authorities would not allow  him  to  travel  on  a
    tourist visa alongside his mother, as is the ordinary case  with  young
    children; the appellant's evidence showed that children of a young  age
    were not subject to strict documentary requirements and  thus  a  birth
    certificate would suffice to enter the Palestinian Territories, and the
    appellant's evidence was that the Egyptians did  not  rigorously  apply
    rules.

132.  It is therefore the Secretary of State's position that  the  appellant
    and her family would be able to get tourist  visas  from  the  Egyptian
    authorities, travel to  Rafah  and  cross  into  Gaza.   There  was  no
    evidence of a build-up of Palestinians waiting to cross,  as  confirmed
    by Dr George's oral evidence, his reported  conversation  with  Dr  Al-
    Khatib and Ms Holmes' first statement.  The Gisha  report  is  said  to
    show that the  Egyptians  did  control  the  periodic  opening  of  the
    crossing and who crossed and the purported control  exerted  by  Israel
    was that it could veto the opening of the crossing to  regular  traffic
    but the Egyptians have their  own  reasons  to  restrict  openings,  in
    particular the desire to prevent the spread of Hamas and extremism into
    Egypt.  Dr George had confirmed in cross-examination that if there  was
    a valid passport, and the individual was on the  registry,  he  or  she
    could enter Gaza.  In his  report  he  said  that  Egypt  only  allowed
    passage to Palestinians registered  in  the  population  registry.   As
    regards the comment in the email from the  UKBA  officer  that  at  the
    moment it was almost impossible for any Palestinian to enter Gaza, this
    is said to lack a clear context  and  might  refer  to  it  being  very
    difficult for non-residents who were not abroad for legitimate  reasons
    or it might be off the cuff regarding the  prevailing  situation  which
    continued to change.  The point is emphasised that it is the conduct of
    the Egyptian authorities which is critical to the  appellant's  ability
    to re-enter.  Even if the hardest part was to get an  Egyptian  tourist
    visa, for which there was no evidence, the appellant would be  able  to
    submit repeated applications from the UK until one was granted.   There
    is no evidence of the Egyptian authorities preventing Palestinians from
    getting tourist visas and re-entering.

133.  As to the general position of children in the United  Kingdom  seeking
    documents to enter Gaza, the respondent's evidence was that  for  those
    born outside the OPT  it  would  be  possible  to  obtain  a  temporary
    passport.  This is strongly supported by the  fact  that  Mohammad  had
    obtained a passport while in the United Kingdom.  The point made by  Dr
    George that if the child was born abroad  then  physical  presence  was
    required  for  registration  and  that  the  requirement  for  physical
    presence was in "detailed regulations" is said to  be  refuted  by  the
    fact that there is in fact no such regulation.  A report relied upon by
    Dr George  referring  to  Israel  imposing  a  practical  condition  of
    requiring physical presence was at least three years out  of  date  and
    perhaps longer, contained no reference to the Hamas  takeover  and  the
    context referred to a freeze on  family  reunification  as  of  October
    2005.  It is said to be clear that there have been dramatic changes  in
    Israeli  policy  since  that  time,  for  example  changes  since  2005
    permitting certain registration.  There  had  been  substantial  family
    reunification since that report and Dr George admitted that it  changed
    "all the time".

134.   Further  criticisms  are  made  of  Dr  George's  claimed   lack   of
    objectivity in producing a further report after giving his evidence  on
    the first day.  The appropriateness of producing a fourth expert report
    limited to one afternoon's enquiry in response to having  his  evidence
    undermined in cross-examination is made.  The point is  made  that  the
    reference to the issuing of travel documents looking like passports but
    for people not on the population registry, made in the  fourth  report,
    may be based on an assumption that this is what Mohammad had but it was
    plain that he had in fact a full passport.  Nor was there any  evidence
    in any event that the Egyptians would  not  entitle  the  bearer  of  a
    temporary passport-like document to travel to Egypt.  The fourth report
    also deals with the issue of new Palestinian passports, saying a  child
    above 5 who wanted to get a passport would have to apply in  person  if
    they were not registered on the population registry, but does not  deal
    with whether or not physical  presence  is  required  in  order  to  be
    entered on the registry.  A further point made in Dr George's report is
    that although children  under  5  can  enter  on  a  birth  certificate
    according to the Palestinian website, those between 5  and  16  need  a
    visitor's permit.  It is argued with respect to Dr George's reliance on
    the 2006 report that Israel has imposed a general freeze on  the  issue
    of visitor's permits since 2000, that this information is out  of  date
    with respect to children and it would appear  that  the  Israelis  have
    made specific exceptions for children and that would  explain  why  the
    Palestinian Authorities continue to set out the criteria for  visitor's
    permits for children on their website.  In conclusion it is argued that
    children of Gazan residents born outside the Territory and not  yet  on
    the population registry will be able to get  a  passport  or  visitor's
    permit if needed and gain access to Gaza with their parents.

135.  As regards the issue of general conditions in Rafah, it is  said  that
    there is overwhelming evidence that once the appellant  gets  to  Egypt
    with the appropriate tourist visa she will be able to cross  into  Gaza
    with her family.  There is said to be no evidence of large  numbers  of
    Palestinians stranded in Egypt for prolonged periods and  the  evidence
    was that the Egyptians would let them through to release the  pressure.
    Nor was there evidence of harsh conditions or destitution facing people
    having to wait in Rafah.  The Secretary of State's  evidence  was  that
    there would be support from locals, other Palestinians and  NGOs,  such
    as the Red Crescent, and they would also be relatively free to work and
    live amongst the local populace and  there  had  been  no  build-up  of
    refugee camps.  It was also said to be apparent that the appellant  and
    her family have access to funds, and  the  appellant  was  prepared  to
    travel back to Gaza whilst heavily pregnant in March 2008.

136.  Further points are made in the  Secretary  of  State's  reply  to  the
    appellant's closing submissions.  The  point  is  made  that  the  MECC
    report was not an expert report on Palestinian ID numbers and does  not
    address the issue of the provision of passports or ID numbers to  young
    children by the Palestinian  Authorities.   Reference  is  made  to  Ms
    Holmes' fourth witness statement of 4 May 2010, in the light of contact
    by the  UKBA  via  the  FCO  with  the  Palestinian  Authorities  which
    determined that the ID number is genuine.  The passport is said to be a
    short term or temporary passport and confirms that Mohammad can  travel
    to Gaza on the passport and obtain entry.

137.  In his submissions on the issues set out at  paragraph  39  above,  Mr
    Draycott referred to his skeleton argument  and  what  was  said  there
    about the three Court of Appeal cases.  In MA it was a question  of  de
    facto statelessness so it was important to see how that had come about.
     There had been limited evidence in all three cases.  There had been no
    cogent evidence in any as to why the Israelis  would  refuse  entry  to
    those people.  The contention in each case was that it was  obvious  as
    the claimant in question was a  Palestinian  male,  but  there  was  an
    evidential vacuum in each case.  In  the  instant  case  there  was  an
    abundance of evidence as to why the Israelis were blockading  Gaza,  as
    could be seen from the Goldstone report and the reports  of  Dr  George
    and others.  It was bound up with the election of Hamas which,  by  its
    constitution, denied the legality of the  existence  of  the  state  of
    Israel, and within many of the Israeli authorities Hamas was seen as  a
    terrorist organisation, and it was assumed that the people of Gaza were
    Hamas supporters and were part of the terrorist infrastructure in Gaza.
     This had led to the blockade and the previous destruction of factories
    and houses as they had all been seen as linked to terrorism.  This  was
    entirely envisaged at paragraph 44 and paragraph 50 of MA.   It  was  a
    question of whether it was a case where the issues  referred  to  there
    should be considered.  Reference was made also to paragraph  47.   Gaza
    had never been annexed by another state but  was  part  of  a  notional
    Palestinian state in the eyes of the UN.  Either  all  Gazans  were  de
    facto  stateless  or  were  under  Egyptian  or   Israeli   occupation.
    Reference was made to paragraph 50.  These were  not  issues  that  had
    been raised before the AIT but were central to the current  proceedings
    and were referred to in the grounds and the skeleton  argument.   There
    was a lot of evidence as to the Israeli motivation for the blockade and
    there was a difference between Gaza and the West Bank.

138.  Mr Draycott referred to what had been said by Lawrence Collins  LJ  as
    quoted in his skeleton argument.  He relied on the article by  Kathleen
    Lawand and the conclusion that Israel could not abolish what  had  been
    established in law via unlawful  conduct.   This  point  had  not  been
    argued in MA.  It was an issue the Tribunal would have to address,  the
    question of Palestinian citizenship in international law today.  It was
    also relevant in each of the three cases in the Court of Appeal to  the
    question of risk on return and they  had  all  been  found  not  to  be
    credible and there was a claim  concerning  refusal  of  entry  at  the
    border, which was the basis of the Article 3  claim.   That  contrasted
    with the situation in these  cases.   Israeli  state  policy  had  been
    confirmed by the  evidence.   So  the  risks  to  which  the  appellant
    referred were tangible and even recognised by the  Secretary  of  State
    and it was agreed that there were serious problems in Gaza.  These were
    attributable to Israeli state policy.   It  was  a  further  reason  to
    tackle these issues.  The appellant would return but for  the  blockade
    and its consequences and that contrasted with the three Court of Appeal
    cases.  The evidential vacuum in SH was relevant to  this.   There  was
    the headnote in MT at Tab 2, paragraph 2.  There  had  been  little  to
    bite on there and they had had to say the reason was obvious, but there
    had been no evidential basis to back it up.

139.  Mr Draycott referred to the historical background.  There  was  a  lot
    in the skeleton at paragraph 5 and he referred to the decision in  R  v
    Ketter [1940]  14B  787  at  paragraph  6  of  the  skeleton  and  also
    paragraphs 7 to 8 referring to  ethnic  cleansing.   The  distinguished
    identity of the  academic's  thesis  supervisor  added  weight  to  the
    report.  There had been unlawful use of force in 1947 to 1948 which had
    led to UN Resolutions and it was an ongoing issue up to today.   Rights
    that had previously arisen could not be nullified.  Reference was  made
    to paragraph 9 of the skeleton and to Tab 6.   Palestinian  citizenship
    had been found to be abolished and it could not be  determined  by  the
    Israeli  courts.   Another  issue  was  the  events  of  1967  and  the
    International Court of Justice and the fourth Geneva Convention  having
    been engaged in respect of the West Bank, and it was engaged across the
    territory of each party.  The International Court of Justice said  that
    Israel then became an occupying power in respect of the West  Bank,  so
    there  were  duties  owed  to  the  population   in   accordance   with
    international humanitarian law.   The  Kuwait  Airways  Corpn  v  Iraqi
    Airways Co [2002] 2 WLR  1353  case  applied  what  had  been  said  in
    Trendtex Trading Corporation v Central Bank of Nigeria [1997] 1 QB  529
    at pages 553 and 554.  There was also what was said  in  Oppenheimer  v
    Cattermole [1976] AC 249 at pages 22, 26 and 29 and what had been  said
    by Lord Steyn at paragraphs 114 to 116.

140.  The historical background was critical to this case.  The three  Court
    of Appeal cases had just examined the situation at that time but  there
    had been no cognisance of what had gone before.  All the factors had to
    be considered cumulatively.  The current blockade could not be seen  in
    isolation from the past.  The academic article was useful in connection
    with this.  Reference was made to paragraph 17 onwards of the  skeleton
    argument.  EB was somewhat different.  It  concerned  an  Ethiopian  of
    Eritrean ethnicity whose documents had been  seized  by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities and so he could not return.  This case involved removal  of
    nationality 60 years ago and the state could not be allowed to  benefit
    from this and it was still illegal and the article dealt with this  and
    rights of  return  to  the  Palestinian  Territories.   There  was  the
    question of bonds still with the territory and whether  they  had  been
    weakened because the Palestinians had been kept out and could  not  get
    the benefit.  This was relevant to  the  question  of  persecution  and
    reference was made to Professor Hathaway's hierarchy of rights.   If  a
    person had a right to live in their homeland and be a citizen  and  had
    all the pressures there were in Gaza, then  there  was  a  very  potent
    argument to say that they were entitled to asylum.   The  Tribunal  was
    referred to Article 9 of the Qualification Directive and the definition
    of persecution, and the situation here amounted to that.

141.  Mr Wastell had argued there would  be  far-reaching  consequences  and
    referred to the situation in countries such  as  Sudan,  but  the  Gaza
    situation was one that was unique in the world  as  there  was  such  a
    defined state policy on the part of the Israelis and abundant  evidence
    as to the reasons and the harsh consequences,  even  more  so  than  in
    Zimbabwe.  Sudan was more open-ended and fluid and closer  to  EB  than
    the points  in  the  three  cases  about  stateless  individuals.   The
    position was somewhere between citizenship and statelessness,  but  the
    historical background had not been before the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
    three Court of Appeal cases said it was a question of fact and a matter
    of judgment whether refusal of entry amounted to asylum.  There was  no
    authority on the point and it was for the Tribunal to evaluate.

142.  Reference was made to the decision of the Federal Court of  Appeal  in
    Thabet v The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (1998) 4 CF 21FCA,
    which was also discussed at pages 10 to 11 of the skeleton.   It  could
    amount to persecution in appropriate circumstances.  As to whether  the
    consequence would be that all Palestinians in Gaza  could  succeed,  on
    that it was suggested that it could be the broad  effect  of  what  was
    being submitted but the Tribunal could also  consider  whether  in  the
    objective evidence women and children were  seen  as  a  separate  risk
    category.  The appellant had not finished her education and it would be
    very difficult for her.  Also in  Gaza  there  were  professionals  who
    would have stayed during the crisis.  The appellant's  family  were  in
    the north of Gaza.  She had referred to Jabalia, which was  subject  to
    Israeli attacks, and the destruction of her housing and  far  worse  in
    the north.  There was aid and people were living in tents and there was
    food  but  people  were  forced  out  of  the  accommodation  otherwise
    available, and this was a critical factor.  It  was  a  consequence  of
    deliberate state policy and there was an analogy with what was said  in
    Limbuela.  It was the same for people in camps in Gaza and in any event
    it was only one facet of all the other problems and deficiencies,  such
    as lack of water and housing and jobs.  Houses were  made  of  asbestos
    and the rubble of those had  an  environmental  impact.   Families  had
    moved.  The asylum claim was made out on this  basis,  it  was  argued.
    The skeleton referred to the relevance  of  international  humanitarian
    law and interpretative matters and international and EU provisions.

143.  Mr Draycott then referred to Article 3 and the  decision  in  Demir  v
    Turkey [2009] 48 EHRR 54 at Tab 13 of the bundle.  He  referred  to  Mr
    Wastell's argument that the matter should be seen as socio-economic and
    compared to cases  of  torture  and  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment
    attributable to physical acts.  N, at paragraph 31, was of relevance to
    this.  The blockade was an internationally inflicted act and a positive
    state policy and no different from the enactment of  s55  of  the  2002
    Act,  and  again  Limbuela  was  relevant.   Mr  Draycott  referred  to
    paragraph 43 of N.  One could not provide the  necessary  treatment  in
    contrast to the United Kingdom and there was no adverse motive and that
    was contrasted with N and international state policy containing  facets
    of discrimination.  Paragraph 43 was relevant.  Even  if  the  blockade
    was not an act, it  was  an  intentional  omission.   So  paragraph  43
    applied.  The case  was  analogous  to  an  allegation  of  torture  in
    contrast to N, where no state responsibility was engaged.

144.  Mr Draycott then referred to the decision in Moldovan  v  Romania  (No
    2) [2007] 44 EHRR at Tab 15.  The Article 3  claim  had  succeeded  and
    there was the issue of the manner of treatment by the  authorities  and
    living conditions after houses had been burned down.  Paragraphs 69  to
    70 and 100 to  101  showed  the  test.   Reference  was  also  made  to
    paragraphs 110 to 111 and 113.  That applied to this case.  It was  not
    vastly different from this  case  in  connection  with  people  on  the
    margins of society in Gaza.   There  had  been  similar  discriminatory
    remarks by officials and there was clearly a racial element.  Reference
    was made to paragraph 42 of the skeleton and Judge  Goldstone's  report
    which had said that actions on both sides had led to atrocities.  So if
    Moldovan showed how a human rights court  would  deal  with  the  case,
    Article 3 could be breached by systemic racial discrimination forcing a
    minority group to live in bad circumstances.  In Limbuela it  had  been
    said that all nationals are treated in the  same  way  so  it  was  not
    really discriminatory in contrast to Palestinians in Gaza.

145.  As regards the argument that return to a war zone was not  necessarily
    a matter giving rise to a breach of Article 3, paragraphs  114  to  115
    seemed  to  leave  the  door  ajar.   There  was  also  paragraph  116.
    Theoretically,  for  a  Gaza  resident  at  the  margins  of   society,
    especially a female or a child, if they had no family home, or most  of
    the housing had been destroyed in their family  area  then  that  would
    suffice even if there were quite a number of individuals in that group,
    for example the situation of the Ashraf in Somalia as considered by the
    Court of Human Rights in Saleh Sheekh v The Netherlands 1948/04  [2007]
    ECHR 36.  The size of the group should not negate Article 3 protection.
     Paragraph 117 was relevant.   The  principle  in  Moldovan  should  be
    applied here.  It was effectively genocide.

146.  The Article 8 issue was argued as set  out  in  the  skeleton.   There
    were other points there concerning international humanitarian  law  and
    the Wall case (Legal consequences of the construction of a wall in  the
    Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory  Opinion  [2004]  ICJ  Reports
    136).  Article 12 was not relied on as at the forefront but was another
    factor and an interpretative tool.  NA was flexible  depending  on  the
    facts and was applicable to this case and  it  was  a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal.

147.  As regards Dr George not having been to Gaza, there was  quite  a  lot
    of case law on this, including such cases as FK (Kenya), where the fact
    that an expert had not been to the country on which they  professed  to
    be an expert was not seen as being a problem as they could be very well
    informed by reading materials within their own country and  they  might
    be able to get more from people as they would speak  more  freely.   LP
    (Sri Lanka) was to similar effect.  The matter of who  was  responsible
    for the Rafah crossing would be returned to at the resumed hearing.  It
    might be necessary to come back to issues on Article 8  concerning  the
    order for reconsideration and what had been agreed and decided  at  the
    stage one reconsideration hearing.

148.  Returning to the three Court of Appeal cases, the point  concerning  a
    "mere denial without more" needed to be borne  in  mind.   This  was  a
    different case from Qadir and MS and the reason why the appellant could
    not be returned  was  because  of  Israeli  discriminatory  policy,  in
    contrast to those two cases.  The UK government  could  not  physically
    return them.  Reference was made to the  appellant's  history  in  this
    regard.  She had  made  an  attempt  to  enter  and  the  Tribunal  had
    jurisdiction to consider this matter, as had been argued yesterday.  It
    could  only  be  at  the  Rafah  border.    As   regards   the   socio-
    economic/humanitarian issue, Mr Wastell had argued  that  it  was  that
    rather than torture or violence, so he had said it  should  be  treated
    differently from torture cases but it should be questioned why that was
    so.  A contrast  should  be  made  between  such  cases  as  deliberate
    starvation and being forced to live in a toxic area and  there  was  no
    good reason to distinguish it.  AH (Sudan) was not really in point.  It
    was relevant to whether it was unduly harsh to  relocate  a  person  in
    Khartoum refugee camps and little  assistance  could  be  derived  from
    that.

149.  In  the  appellant's  submissions  on  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant and her family would be able to enter  Egypt  and  cross  the
    Rafah  crossing  into  Gaza,  it  is  argued  firstly  that  there   is
    overwhelming evidence before the Tribunal that an Israeli  approved  ID
    number is a prerequisite to enable an individual to enter the  Occupied
    Palestinian Territories.  The appellant quotes from a  letter  produced
    by the Secretary of  State  from  the  Palestinian  General  Delegation
    Office of 5 January 2007 which states that Palestinian travel documents
    must have ID numbers authorised by the Israeli  government.   Reference
    is also made to a witness  statement  provided  by  Geoffrey  Campbell,
    Inspector of Immigration in the UK Border Agency,  made  in  connection
    with the proceedings in  Rabah  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWHC 1044 (Admin) who was  reporting  on  information
    given to him by the PGDO.  Among other things he  refers  to  the  fact
    that any Palestinian living in the United Kingdom who wishes  to  apply
    for or renew a Palestine Authority travel document may do so  by  means
    of a power of attorney where the relevant nominee  currently  lives  in
    the Occupied Palestinian Territories.  This includes a  requirement  to
    provide the individual identity number.  The same requirement is  noted
    in the Gisha report and referred to above.  It is argued in respect  of
    Abdurrahman that he will not be able to obtain  a  travel  document  or
    temporary passport within the United Kingdom since ID numbers are  only
    granted to Palestinians physically present in the Occupied  Palestinian
    Territories.  It is argued that obtaining a  temporary  passport  using
    the power  of  attorney  procedure  described  by  Mr  Kemble  is  only
    available to Palestinians who already have an Israeli approved identity
    number, and there is no reference to the facility of  granting  foreign
    born children temporary passports within the PGDO's letter to Mr Kemble
    of 30 January 2007.  Reference is also made to  what  was  said  by  Ms
    Shorafa to Dr George noted above.  It is argued that the only reference
    to a temporary passport being granted to a foreign born child is to  be
    found in an anonymous email from the Chief Immigration Officer  to  the
    Treasury Solicitors on 27 November 2009.  This said:

         "For a child born in the United Kingdom, a temporary passport needs
         to be obtained using the same procedure as  above  and  he/she  can
         then travel with the parent to  Palestine,  present  this  and  the
         birth certificate in respect of crossing.  He/she will be given  an
         ID number on entry which can then be used  to  obtain  a  permanent
         passport."

      It is argued that this evidence is flawed  because,  firstly  it  does
    not engage with the facts that such a child should be able to  complete
    the "questionnaire to  Palestinians"  without  having  an  approved  ID
    number, and, secondly, does not refer to the  distinction  accepted  in
    these proceedings between the legal rules affecting children between  5
    and 16 and children aged up to 5, which it is said  suggests  that  the
    reference to children indicates  that  the  email  was  produced  in  a
    careless fashion.  Thirdly it is argued that the view  that  the  child
    would be immediately provided with an Israeli ID number "on  entry"  is
    entirely inconsistent  with  objective  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    confirming  that  even  residents  within  the   Occupied   Palestinian
    Territories have to wait years to receive  an  ID  number  regularising
    their position.  It is also noted that the email concerns the  Occupied
    Palestinian Territories generally rather than  being  focused  on  Gaza
    residents and there is also reference in the email  to  the  prevailing
    situation being such that it is almost impossible for  any  Palestinian
    to enter Gaza.  It is also argued that Abdurrahman would not be able to
    get a passport in the way in which Mohammad did, reference  being  made
    to Dr George's discussion  with  Ms  Shorafa,  with  reference  to  the
    issuing  until  approximately  eighteen  months  ago  of  some   travel
    documents for Palestinians who were not on the population registry.

150.  With regard to the ability of the appellant and her  family  to  enter
    Egypt for the purposes of crossing via Rafah into Gaza, it is argued on
    behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the   International   Air   Transport
    Association (IATA) website indicates that a person in the  position  of
    Abdurrahman would require a passport.  It is argued that  there  is  no
    evidence to support the Secretary  of  State's  view  that  Abdurrahman
    could be added as a child to the appellant's  passport.   Reference  is
    also made to a communication from a Mr  Mustafa  of  the  International
    Organisation for Migration (IOM)  that,  as  advised  by  the  Egyptian
    Embassy, tourist visas or business visas are  not  acceptable  for  the
    purpose of transiting to Gaza.  There is no reference to transit  visas
    being available  on  the  IATA  website.   This  was  linked  with  the
    information given to Dr George by the Egyptian Consulate in  London  on
    16 February 2010.

151.  In sum, it is argued that in  the  alternative  if  transit  visas  do
    exist there is no prospect of such a visa being granted as  the  border
    would never be open long enough for the appellant  and  her  family  to
    submit an application to the Egyptian Consulate, wait several days  for
    it to be processed, collect the visa, book tickets to Egypt, travel  to
    the airport, fly to Cairo, register  their  application  to  cross  the
    border with the Egyptian Interior Ministry, travel to Rafah  and  cross
    into Gaza.  There is  reference  to  an  email  sent  by  the  Egyptian
    Consulate to the appellant's husband on 18 March 2008 to transit  visas
    (allowing entry for up  to  72  hours)  being  issued  for  Palestinian
    nationals at the Palestinian Consulate when the Rafah border  is  open.
    The appellant cites remarks of Cranston J in R (Rabah,  Woldemichael  &
    Sadah) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWHC  1044
    (Admin), referring to the third  claimant,  a  Palestinian,  where  the
    following was said by the Egyptian Embassy in a letter of 20 April 2006
    to the claimant's previous solicitors:

         "Palestinian refugees, holders of Egyptian travel documents have no
         right to reside on a permanent basis in Egypt, nor to be granted an
         entry visa (unless  being  granted  a  residence  visa  in  another
         country) and can  only  be  issued  after  the  approved  competent
         authorities in Egypt."

      Cranston J commented that  on  its  face  that  seemed  to  mean  that
    someone like the claimant in that case was not removable to Egypt.   It
    is argued that this chimes with the remarks of the  Egyptian  Consulate
    in the email of 18 March 2008 that no  visa  will  be  granted  to  any
    Palestinian resident in Gaza unless there is guaranteed  onward  travel
    through Rafah within the duration of the transit visa.  The email  from
    Mr Mustafa to the appellant's solicitors of 23 March 2010  stated  that
    they had not had any Palestinian from Gaza return home in the past year
    and referred to the practical difficulties, such as the  difficulty  in
    obtaining travel authorisation from the Egyptian authorities.

152.  Thereafter the appellant's grounds refer to the issue of the  validity
    of Mohammad's passport/ID number, and conclude that the  number  cannot
    be valid, since it is common ground that he has never  been  physically
    present within the OPT since his birth, and a number of explanations as
    to how the passport would have come to be issued are canvassed.   These
    include Dr George's view that it may have been obtained  as  a  favour,
    and also evidence which  alleges  that  the  Palestinian  Authority  in
    Ramallah has improperly issued numerous duplicate or forged  passports,
    referring to an item on the Al-Qassam English Forum website of 28  July
    2009 and a press release from the Palestinian Ministry of  Interior  of
    the same date, and concluding that whichever of these  explanations  is
    correct, Mohammad's passport will not be recognised by the  Israeli  or
    Egyptian authorities in terms of either allowing him to enter Egypt  or
    to cross via Rafah into Gaza.  The argument is made further  about  the
    claimed invalidity of the ID number  on  Mohammad's  passport  for  the
    reasons set out above in reference to the background evidence,  and  it
    is also argued that the evidence  makes  it  clear  that  there  is  no
    reasonable likelihood of Mohammad being granted a visitor's  permit  by
    the Israeli authorities.  Although the Israelis have allowed a  limited
    category of applications for family reunification, it  is  argued  that
    there is no reason why Mohammad as a  foreign  born  child  seeking  to
    return to Hamas-run Gaza would fall  within  the  limited  category  of
    applications which have been allowed.

153.  Thereafter, it is argued that Israel continues to  exert  significant,
    substantial and indirect control over the Rafah crossing.  It  is  said
    in the Gisha report that Egypt closes the Rafah crossing as a result of
    pressure exerted on it by Israel and other  parties  and  in  order  to
    promote its own  interests.   It  is  said  that  Israel  continues  to
    exercise control through its  control  of  the  Palestinian  population
    registry which determines who is allowed to go  through  the  crossing.
    There is also reference in  the  report  of  the  United  Nations  Fact
    Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict A/HRC/12/48 of 25  September  2009
    (the Goldstone  report)  that  Israel  controls  the  border  crossings
    including to a significant degree  the  Rafah  crossing  in  Egypt  and
    decides who and what gets in or out of the Gaza Strip.

154.  In respect of openings of the Rafah crossing,  it  is  contended  that
    any opening is arbitrary, sporadic  and  unpredictable  with  only  two
    days' notice before the opening of the  crossing  being  provided,  and
    that anyone wishing to cross Rafah needs to  register  themselves  with
    the Egyptian authorities, which can take weeks  to  achieve,  and  once
    registered the individual must wait for a day on which  their  category
    of entrant will be allowed to cross by  the  Egyptian  authorities  and
    even then the entrants' ability to cross into  or  exit  from  Gaza  is
    haphazard and unreliable.  Reference is made to the Gisha  report,  the
    COIR of 7 December 2009, Ms Holmes' witness statement  of  17  February
    2010 and Dr George's report of 17 February 2010.  It is argued that any
    available accommodation, even at  the  lower  end  of  the  market,  is
    expensive and unsanitary and those unable to afford accommodation  will
    have to sleep rough and there is either extremely limited  humanitarian
    assistance available or none at all.

155.  The appellant also refers to potential problems if, while  waiting  to
    cross, the visa expires before they had been able to  cross,  which  is
    likely to be an especially acute  problem  if  the  appellant  and  her
    family are granted a 72 hour transit visa.  Ms Holmes' evidence on this
    in her  statement  of  17  February  2010  was  that  applications  for
    extensions of such visas are considered on a case by case basis by  the
    Egyptian authorities and there  was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    appellant and her family would not be granted  such  extensions  should
    that become necessary.  On behalf of the appellant it is argued that in
    such circumstances there would be a risk of  removal  by  the  Egyptian
    authorities.

Discussion

156.  It is clear from Ms Holmes' first witness  statement  at  paragraph  2
    that copies of passports issued by the Palestinian Authorities  are  on
    the UKBA's files for the appellant and the first five of her  children.
    All these passports were issued in Gaza.  The sixth child, Abdurrahman,
    was born in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  relevant  that  we  remind
    ourselves that we have  upheld  the  credibility  finding  against  the
    appellant's husband and therefore we adopt the original finding that he
    will travel to Gaza with the appellant and the children.  The passports
    of the appellant and all the children other than Abdurrahman expired on
    7 April 2009.  Ms Holmes' evidence was that it had  been  confirmed  to
    UKBA by the PGDO that if a passport has expired a new passport  has  to
    be obtained using a  power  of  attorney  application  which  the  PGDO
    facilitates.  This is done by application at the PGDO in London  which,
    having confirmed that the person is  Palestinian,  issues  a  power  of
    attorney form which is then sent to the  nominated  person,  usually  a
    family member, in the OPT who will then apply on the applicant's behalf
    at the relevant office in the OPT and the document once  issued,  which
    is understood will only take a couple of days, is then sent to  the  UK
    to the applicant or, if so directed, to the PGDO.

157.  In order to get to Gaza the appellant and her  family  first  have  to
    get to Egypt, and therefore it is necessary that we address that  issue
    first.  At paragraph 33 of his third report Dr George said that on  the
    assumption  that  the  appellant  and  her  children  possessed   valid
    Palestinian passports it was probable that the Egyptian Consulate would
    issue them with visas to  enter  Egypt.   It  does  not  appear  to  be
    contested that the appellant, her husband, and the first four children,
    have valid Palestinian passports, albeit that they  would  need  to  be
    renewed in accordance with the procedures set out  by  Ms  Holmes.   We
    deal first with the situation of Mohammad.  We are  satisfied  that  he
    has  a  valid  Palestinian  passport.   We  agree  with  Mr   Wastell's
    submission that there is no evidence to  show  that  this  is  a  false
    passport  and  nor  is  there  any   persuasive   evidence   that   the
    identification number is false.  Suggestions that it  is  are,  in  our
    view, speculative only.  The MECC report does not set out  to  consider
    the issue of ID numbers and does not purport  to  be  determinative  of
    that issue.  It does not, as Mr Wastell points out in his  submissions,
    address any distinction as to ID numbers issued to children as  opposed
    to adults or in particular to those born outside the territory  and  it
    does not distinguish between those issued by the Palestinian  Authority
    in Gaza as opposed to the West Bank.  It is also relevant  to  note  Ms
    Holmes' fourth witness statement,  to  which  is  annexed  firstly  the
    redacted email from the General  Director  of  passports  in  the  Gaza
    Ministry of the Interior and secondly a further  email  from  the  FCO.
    There is confirmation from  Mr  Wisam  Alramlawi  at  the  Ministry  of
    Interior that Mohammad's passport is  genuine  and  registered  on  the
    database.  The position  with  regard  to  ID  numbers  for  adults  is
    confirmed.  It is clear that a child with a document such as Mohammad's
    will be able to cross into Gaza.  Mohammad should therefore be  in  the
    same position as his parents and older siblings as  regards  access  to
    Egypt or Gaza.

158.  As regards Abdurrahman, we bear in  mind  the  point  at  footnote  4,
    paragraph 35(b)  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  closing  submissions,
    quoting from the Egyptian Consulate's website and showing that only one
    visa is required if a passport holder has children  under  16  who  are
    included on the parent's passport.  It has not  been  shown  that  this
    would not apply to Abdurrahman.  We see no reason to suppose that  this
    facility would not be offered by the Palestinian Authority  in  respect
    of a child such as  Abdurrahman  who  was  born  outside  the  Occupied
    Territories.  In any event we see no reason to suppose that Abdurrahman
    would not be able to get a passport as Mohammad was able to.  Mohammad,
    like Abdurrahman, was born outside the OPT, and yet he was clearly able
    to obtain a legitimate passport.  So, either  on  the  basis  of  being
    added to his mother's passport, or on the basis of a  passport  in  his
    own right being obtained from the Occupied Palestinian Territories,  we
    consider that Abdurrahman would be able to travel to  and  be  accepted
    into Egypt.

159.  We note from Ms Holmes' second witness statement, which  is  dated  17
    February 2010, that UKBA's  understanding  from  discussions  with  the
    Egyptian authorities is that Palestinians wishing to enter  Gaza  would
    need to acquire a visa from the Egyptian authorities  prior  to  travel
    and that UKBA understands the Egyptian authorities consider  such  visa
    applications on a case by case basis and that such a visa, if  or  when
    issued, would be valid  for  a  period  of  a  month.   The  UKBA  also
    understands that in the event that if the  crossing  is  closed  for  a
    longer period than the Egyptian visa allows,  Palestinians  wishing  to
    enter Gaza via Rafah would be able to apply for extensions of the  visa
    in Cairo and again applications for extensions  are  understood  to  be
    considered on a case by case basis and there is no  reason  to  believe
    that the appellant and her family would not be granted such  extensions
    should that become necessary.  This runs contrary to what was  said  by
    Mr Mustafa of the IOM in the email to the appellant's solicitors of  23
    March 2010.   Mr  Mustafa,  however,  does  refer  to  the  alternative
    situation of Palestinians from Gaza being supposed to submit "copies of
    documents (such as passport and  other)  and  written  request  stating
    their situation".  That would appear to  have  the  same  effect  as  a
    tourist visa or business visa, and in the end it may come  down  to  no
    more than a matter of nomenclature.  In any  event,  we  are  satisfied
    from the evidence that the appellant and her family would  be  able  to
    obtain visas from the Egyptian authorities to enter Egypt with  a  view
    to entering Gaza via the Rafah crossing.

160.  We also consider, on our assessment of the evidence as a  whole,  that
    it has not been shown that the  circumstances  the  appellant  and  her
    family would face in Egypt, and in particular in the  area  around  the
    Rafah crossing would be such as to give rise to  any  breach  of  their
    human rights or other rights.  We  accept  that  there  might  well  be
    difficulties and periods of delay that might necessitate the  obtaining
    of extensions from the authorities in Cairo, but we are satisfied  that
    the possibility of obtaining such extensions exists, and we  note,  for
    example from Dr George, the absence of any evidence to indicate a build
    up of Palestinians waiting to cross.  It is clear that the crossing  is
    opened periodically, indeed, it is in the interests of the Egyptians to
    do so, so as to prevent excessive build ups, and there is no reason  to
    suppose that the appellant,  as  part  of  the  family  of  a  student,
    together with her husband and the children,  would  not  be  among  the
    groups of people permitted to cross into Gaza via the  Rafah  crossing.
    Dr George confirmed in cross-examination that a  person  with  a  valid
    passport, being on the register, would be  able  to  enter  Gaza.   The
    comment referred to in the UKBA email of it being almost impossible for
    any Palestinian to enter Gaza appears to go contrary to the main thrust
    of the evidence.  It may refer to a particular period.  As  we  say  it
    appears to be out of kilter with the other evidence and accordingly  we
    do not consider that it shows a real difficulty in this regard.

161.  We do not consider there is evidence of harsh conditions  or  anything
    remotely resembling destitution  for  persons  awaiting  crossing  into
    Gaza.  We note the Secretary of State's evidence that there is  support
    available to returnees from locals and other Palestinians and NGOs such
    as the Red Crescent.  There is also  the  possibility  of  working  and
    living amongst the local populace.  It is perhaps of significance  that
    there has been no build up of refugee camps.  It is of  relevance  also
    to note, as argued on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    appellant was quite prepared to travel  back  to  Gaza  whilst  heavily
    pregnant, in March 2008, and there is evidence that she and her  family
    have access to funds, a matter to which we shall have to return in  due
    course.  Accordingly we do not consider that there will be  any  breach
    of the family's human rights while awaiting crossing into Gaza.

Jurisdiction to Consider Practical Difficulties of Return

162.  We must next address the  issue  of  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to
    consider practical matters concerning the appellant's return  to  Gaza.
    It is argued on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that  the  Tribunal
    lacks jurisdiction since no  removal  directions  have  been  set,  and
    reference is made to what was said by the Court of Appeal in GH  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 1182.  There it was held that there  was  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider the practical  difficulties  facing  a  failed  asylum  seeker
    travelling within Iraq to a safe location because no removal directions
    had been set.  It was held in AK [2006] EWCA Civ  1117  that  what  was
    said in GH regarding route and method of return did  not  bite  on  the
    question of refusal of re-entry upon which the claim of  the  appellant
    in that case was based.  It was argued on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State that that decision was on the basis that the Court of Appeal  saw
    no distinction between  ill-treatment  within  the  territory  and  the
    position at the border of the territory.  It is argued  therefore  that
    AK does not accept that there is jurisdiction to  consider  delays  and
    practical difficulties in  getting  to  the  border  if  the  appellant
    voluntarily returns.  It also  is  argued  that  it  does  not  include
    consideration of the conditions in Egypt if  the  appellant  is  turned
    away.  It is  thus  contended  that  whilst  treatment  at  the  border
    including  the  legal  effect  of  being  turned  away  is  within  the
    Tribunal's jurisdiction, the consequences while she waits in Egypt  are
    not.  This is not an issue for the Tribunal unless  and  until  removal
    directions are set for Gaza.

163.  On behalf of the appellant it is argued that it is important  to  bear
    in mind what was said by Scott Baker LJ in GH at paragraph 45:

         "There may be circumstances where the Secretary of State  adopts  a
         routine procedure for removal and return  so  that  the  method  or
         route of return is implicit within the decision to  remove.   There
         would  obviously  be  advantages  in  such  cases  for  all  issues
         including any arising out  of  the  proposed  route  or  method  of
         removal to be dealt with at one and the same time."

      Keene LJ, at paragraph 51, agreed, referring to cases where:

         "The Secretary of State has  committed  himself  through  a  policy
         statement or otherwise to a particular method and route of  return.
         In such a case, it may be implicit in the decision to  remove  from
         the United Kingdom that  a  particular  method  and  route  may  be
         adopted, and, if so, the safety of that method  and  route  may  be
         considered by the Appellate Tribunal as being part  and  parcel  of
         the 'immigration decision' under Section 82(1)."


    As an example of this,  reference  is  made  to  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in MA (Palestinian Arabs - Occupied Territories - risk) [2007]
    UKAIT 00017 where it was accepted  that  ethnic  Palestinians  forcibly
    returned to the West Bank would be denied entry, and consideration  was
    given as to whether they would face  persecution  or  denial  of  their
    human rights by being turned back into Jordan.  The point is made  that
    in respect of the instant proceedings the only way  the  appellant  and
    her children will currently be able to enter Gaza  is  by  obtaining  a
    visa to Egypt, travelling to Rafah and then crossing into Gaza  through
    that entry point.  It is argued that what is  referred  to  as  the  GH
    exception is thereby brought into play.  Reference is also made to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in HH (Somalia) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426,
    where it was said at paragraph 58:


         "We consider that, in any case for which it  can  be  shown  either
         directly  or  by  implication  what  future  method  of  return  is
         envisaged, the AIT is required by law to consider any determination
         and challenge to the safety of that route or method."

      It is relevant to note that HH was cited by the Supreme  Court  in  MS
    (Palestinian Territories) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 25, without disagreement.

164.  We consider the appellant is right on this point.  We  do  not  accept
    that our jurisdiction is limited to consideration of treatment  at  the
    border including the legal effect of being turned away, but we consider
    that it extends to assessing the consequences while the  appellant  and
    her family wait, if they have to, in Egypt.  This is, in  our  view,  a
    case where it is clear what route and method of  return  is  envisaged,
    and an argument has been raised that there may not be a safe  route  of
    return and hence that it is a matter, as was said at  paragraph  84  in
    HH, with which the Tribunal is required to deal.  We have set out above
    our views on the issues that would arise in this regard,  and  we  have
    concluded, as set out above, that there would be no real risk of breach
    of the appellant and her family's human rights or give rise to  a  real
    risk of persecution or real risk of a need for humanitarian protection.

Whether Mohammad Has a Permanent Right to Reside in the United Kingdom

165.  The next matter with which we  must  deal  is  the  argument  made  on
    behalf of the appellant that Mohammad has a permanent right  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom under the Citizens Directive.  (It was not argued
    that Mohammad,  and  through  him,  the  appellant,  could  succeed  in
    accordance with the principles elaborated  by  the  European  Court  of
    Justice in Chen and Others [2004] EUECJ  C-200/02  (19  October  2004),
    presumably on the basis that it could not be shown that he  is  covered
    by  appropriate  sickness  insurance  and  his  carer  has   sufficient
    resources for him not to become a burden on the public finances of  the
    United Kingdom.)  The main thrust of  the  appellant's  submissions  in
    this regard is that the Tribunal in  LG  and  CC  [2009]  UKAIT  00024,
    noting what had been said  previously  by  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  in  HR
    (Portugal) [2009] EWCA Civ 371 and by the Court of Appeal in McCarthy v
    SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 641, to the effect that mere physical presence  in
    the United Kingdom was not sufficient, but that the necessary five year
    period required in order to obtain permanent residence had  to  be  "in
    accordance with the Regulations", i.e. exercising a Treaty right  as  a
    "qualified person" within the  meaning  of  Regulation  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations (e.g. as a job seeker, worker or student) or as a  relevant
    family member of such a person (within the scope of  the  Regulations),
    had not had before it the decision in Kaczmarek and Secretary of  State
    for Work and Pensions [2009] 2 CMLR 85.  As a result  it  is  contended
    that LG and CC and HR are per incuriam on the point  and  it  is  noted
    that permission to appeal to the appellant in CC  (Portugal)  has  been
    granted by the Court of Appeal which, it  is  said,  clearly  therefore
    does not regard HR and LG and CC as the last word on the issue.

166.  In response it is argued on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that
    Kaczmarek does not even refer to Article 16 of the Citizens  Directive,
    and the necessary conditions which entitle an EEA national to reside in
    other Member States have not been fulfilled in the  case  of  Mohammad,
    who has only ever been in the United Kingdom by virtue of  his  non-EEA
    parents.

167.  Clearly on the face of it the point is answered by what  was  said  by
    the Tribunal in LG and CC and also in particular by what was said in HR
    and McCarthy.  It is necessary therefore for us to  consider  Kaczmarek
    to see whether that can properly be said to  make  a  real  difference.
    The appellant in Kaczmarek was a Polish national who had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom initially as a student, in April 2002, and later  worked
    in a nursing home  between  June  2003  and  July  2004.   She  was  on
    maternity leave  between  August  2004  and  February  2005.   She  had
    intended to return to work, but did not do so as her child  was  unwell
    and she could not afford a  childminder.   In  May  2005  she  applied,
    unsuccessfully, for income support.  She regained employment in October
    2006.  It was common ground that she was not entitled to income support
    under domestic legislation, which essentially restricted entitlement to
    EEA  nationals  who  were  economically  or  educationally  active   or
    otherwise self-sufficient.  She argued that she was entitled to  income
    support under Articles 12 and 18 of the EC Treaty.  With respect to the
    former, she asserted that she had  been  lawfully  resident  for  three
    years at the time of her claim and for most of that time she  had  been
    active as a student or an employee and had  demonstrated  the  kind  of
    social integration envisaged by the ECJ in Trojani when  propounding  a
    test of lawful residence "for a certain time".  In respect  of  Article
    18 she argued that it was disproportionate to deny a right of residence
    and thereby entitlement to income support to a person who was  lawfully
    resident and as substantially settled as she was.

168.  In regard to Article 18, the Court of Appeal held that  the  reference
    to lawful residence "for a certain time" was a  reference  to  specific
    qualifying periods which gave rise to an express  right  of  residence.
    It would be wholly undesirable if Article 12 were to give  rise  to  an
    open-textured temporal qualification.  In respect of Article 18, it was
    not disproportionate to  deny  the  appellant  a  right  of  residence.
    Maurice Kay LJ referred to Directive 2004/38, the  Citizens  Directive,
    which, he said, provided for a right of permanent residence after  five
    years' lawful residence which is not, once acquired, conditional on the
    claimant being economically active or self-sufficient.

169.  Even if it is right to argue, as the  appellant  does,  that  this  is
    part of the  ratio  of  Kaczmarek,  it  seems  to  us  to  refer  to  a
    significantly different situation from that of  Mohammad.   We  do  not
    read what was said by Maurice Kay LJ as supporting the notion  that  an
    EEA national, purely by dint of residence in another EEA state for five
    years thereby acquires the right of permanent residence.   His  remarks
    were in the context of there being no condition of the  claimant  being
    economically active or self-sufficient.  Maurice  Kay  LJ  went  on  to
    refer to a five year qualification as being proportionate and  that  in
    the light of that it was all the more difficult to argue  that  it  was
    disproportionate to exclude this appellant from income support when  at
    the time of her claim she had been in the country for three  years  and
    had become economically  inactive.   He  made  the  point  that  rights
    conferred by the Directive upon those whose  lawful  presence  is  less
    than five years are  conditional  upon,  amongst  other  things,  self-
    sufficiency.  We do not  read  this  passage  as  being  in  any  sense
    inconsistent with what was said by Stanley Burnton  LJ  in  HR  or  the
    Court of Appeal in McCarthy or the Tribunal  in  LG  and  CC.   (It  is
    relevant to note that, subsequent to the receipt of closing submissions
    in this case, the Court of Appeal in Carvalho v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 1406 upheld  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in LG and CC.)

170.  Also, the appellant emphasises  passages  from  the  decision  of  the
    Grand Chamber of the ECJ in Metock v Minister for Justice, Quality  and
    Law  Reform  [2008]  3  CMLR  39-1167.   The  following  quotation   is
    emphasised:

         "Where a Union citizen founds a family after  becoming  established
         in the host Member State, the  refusal  of  that  Member  State  to
         authorise his  family  members  who  are  nationals  of  non-member
         countries to join him there would be such as to discourage him from
         continuing to reside there and encourage him to leave in  order  to
         lead a family life in another  Member  State  or  in  a  non-member
         country."

171.  This seems to us a long way away from the situation of  Mohammad,  who
    is the only EU national in his family, and who cannot be said  to  have
    exercised Community rights while in the United Kingdom.

172.  Nor do we see force to the other arguments put forward  on  behalf  of
    the appellant in this regard.  It is argued for example in relation  to
    Teixeira and London Borough of Lambeth and Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department Case C-480/08, where it was concluded that if the child
    of a migrant worker takes up residence in a Member State  or  was  born
    there they are entitled to a right of access to  the  education  system
    under Article 12 of Regulation 16, 12/68, that if the child has such  a
    right then their primary carer must also have an associative right.  It
    does  not  say,  however,  that  Ms  Teixeira  obtained  rights  as   a
    consequence of spending five years in the United Kingdom not acting  in
    accordance with the exercise of rights and Community law.   Although  a
    passage from  paragraph  119  of  the  Advocate  General's  opinion  is
    emphasised, where it is said that furthermore consideration  should  be
    given to whether Ms Teixeira  was  not  in  this  case  entitled  under
    national law to remain in the United Kingdom  for  certain  periods  of
    time, independently of Community law,  since  under  Article  16(1)  of
    Directive 2004/38, a Union citizen must only have resided legally for a
    continuous period of five years in the host Member State  in  order  to
    acquire a right of permanent residence, that paragraph goes on  to  say
    that this applies primarily to Union citizens who have resided  in  the
    host Member State "in compliance with the conditions laid down in  this
    Directive" during a continuous period of five years.  The passage  goes
    on to state  that  nonetheless,  according  to  Article  37,  Directive
    2004/38 expressly does not affect any more favourable laws, Regulations
    or administrative provisions laid down by a Member State.  It is  worth
    recording that Ms Teixeira had accepted in the  main  proceedings  that
    she was not entitled to a right of permanent residence, albeit that the
    Advocate General regarded this as surprising.  In conclusion  on  this,
    we do not consider that the Advocate General's opinion can be  said  to
    support the submission that five years'  continuous  residence,  lawful
    under domestic law, gives rise to a right  to  permanent  residence  as
    such.  (Since the receipt of submissions in  this  case,  the  European
    Court of Justice has clarified, in its  decision  in  Lassal  (European
    Citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-162/09 (7 October  2010),  that  continuous
    periods  of  five  years'  residence  completed  before  the  date   of
    transportation of Directive 2004/38 ("the Citizens' Directive"), namely
    30  April  2006,  in  accordance  with  earlier  European   Union   law
    instruments, must be  taken  into  account  for  the  purposes  of  the
    acquisition of the right of permanent residence pursuant to Article 16.
     The claimant had been a worker for the  purposes  of  EU  law  between
    January 1999 and February 2005, and after a ten month visit to  France,
    was in receipt of Job Seeker's Allowance between January  and  November
    2006.  We do not see this decision as requiring a different approach or
    conclusion from those we have adopted.)  In light  of  the  authorities
    that we  have  considered  above,  we  do  not  agree  that  it  is  an
    appropriate matter for reference since we regard the law as being "acte
    clair".

Whether Refusal of Re-Entry to Gaza Amounts to Persecution

173.  An alternative submission on behalf of the Secretary of State is  that
    even if the appellant were to be refused re-entry to Gaza,  this  would
    not amount to persecution or ill-treatment.  The starting point in this
    regard must be the decision of the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Palestinian
    Territories) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  IAR
    617.  The claimant in that case was a stateless Palestinian  Arab  from
    the northern part of the West Bank.  The issue, as identified  by  Lord
    Justice Maurice  Kay  at  paragraph  1,  was  the  question  whether  a
    stateless person whom the Secretary of State wished to  return  to  his
    habitual place of  residence  was  entitled  to  protection  under  the
    Refugee Convention or the European Convention on Human Rights if  there
    was a reasonable likelihood  that  on  such  return  he  would  not  be
    permitted entry by the authorities in that country.

174.  Maurice Kay LJ noted the definition of the term "refugee"  in  Article
    1A of the Refugee Convention  and  also  that  it  was  axiomatic  that
    nationality was not a condition of protection under the ECHR.  He noted
    the distinction drawn by Richards LJ in LK v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1117,  at  paragraph  47,  as  to  the
    difference between a state's denial of entry to one of its own citizens
    and denial of entry to a stateless person who, unlike a citizen, had no
    right of entry into the country.  He clearly doubted that,  as  regards
    the latter, this could be said to be a denial  of  his  third  category
    rights of sufficient severity to amount to persecution.

175.  Maurice Kay LJ noted authorities such as Altawil  v  Canada  (Minister
    of Citizenship and Immigration) [1996] 114 FTR 211; Thabet  v  Minister
    of Citizenship and Immigration [1998] 4 FC 21 and Refugee Appeal Number
    73861, 30 June 2005 (New Zealand  Refugee  Status  Appeals  Authority),
    which he considered at their highest to go no  further  than  accepting
    that in some circumstances, to deny a stateless person  re-entry  might
    amount to persecution.  He noted also Article 9  of  the  Qualification
    Directive which states at Article 9(2) that  acts  of  persecution  can
    take the form of:

         "(b)     Legal, administrative,  police  and/or  judicial  measures
             which  are  in  themselves   discriminatory   or   which   are
             implemented in a discriminatory manner."

176.  He noted the transposition of the Directive into domestic law  by  the
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006.  He did not consider, however, in the  absence  of  a
    serious violation of human rights, that the Directive  and  Regulations
    took the matter any further.  The case  was  not  comparable  with  the
    discriminatory treatment of the national in EB (Ethiopia)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 809.

177.  Maurice  Kay  LJ  went  on  to  say  that  in  principle  it  was  not
    persecutory without more, to deny a stateless person re-entry  to  "the
    country of his former  habitual  residence".   He  drew  a  distinction
    between the impact on the rights of a stateless person and those  of  a
    national.  He stated that there was a fundamental  distinction  between
    nationals and stateless persons in that respect.  It was one  thing  to
    protect a stateless person from persecutory return to  the  country  of
    his former habitual residence, as done by the Refugee  Convention,  but
    it would be quite another thing to characterise a denial of re-entry as
    persecution.  He noted that the Convention relating to  the  Status  of
    Stateless Persons (1954) had not been incorporated into  domestic  law,
    though the United Kingdom was a party to that Convention,  and  it  had
    not been suggested that it protected the appellant in the instant case.

178.  Maurice Kay LJ went on  to  consider  the  International  Covenant  on
    Civil and Political Rights, Article 12(4) of which states:

         "No-one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter his own
         country."

      He did not consider that this, nor points made in commentaries on  the
    Covenant, advanced the appellant's case under the  Refugee  Convention,
    nor did it provide a right enforceable by itself in the AIT.   Even  if
    the suggested broader construction of "his own country" was correct  it
    was difficult to see how it could avail someone who had eschewed "close
    and enduring connections" and "special ties".   He  noted  comments  by
    Keith J, sitting in the High Court of Hong Kong,  in  Expatriate  Civil
    Servants of Hong Kong v Secretary for the Civil Service [1995] 5  HKPLR
    490 that "his own country" in Article 12(4) "can only be the country of
    which he is a citizen as defined by that country's nationality".

179.  In MT (Palestinian Territories) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] IAR 290,  essentially  the  same  issue  fell  to  be
    considered by the Court of Appeal, which at the same time in a slightly
    different constitution had to consider the appeal  in  SH  (Palestinian
    Territories) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 1150, to which we shall come  shortly.   In  essence  the  argument
    before the Court of Appeal in MT was that all that MA had  decided  was
    that a stateless person returning to his  country  of  former  habitual
    residence  was  not,  for  that  reason  of  itself,  entitled  to  the
    protection of the Convention, and had not decided whether  a  stateless
    person, excluded from returning to their  country  of  former  habitual
    residence where the exclusion was on grounds  of  race,  was  for  that
    reason entitled to protection under the Convention.

180.  Scott Baker LJ, who  delivered  the  leading  judgment,  concluded  at
    paragraph  39  that  the  cases  of  MA   and   MT   appeared   to   be
    indistinguishable on the facts.  In addition  to  such  authorities  as
    Thabet and Altawil, to which we have referred  above,  Scott  Baker  LJ
    also considered what had been said in Revenko v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2001] QB 601, which he considered went no  further
    than to establish that mere statelessness was insufficient in itself to
    confer refugee status and left open what, if any,  additional  features
    might be sufficient to tip the scales.  On behalf of the appellant,  as
    we have seen, there was argued to  be  an  additional  feature  in  the
    instant case, i.e. exclusion on the ground of race.  It was  argued  on
    behalf of the appellant that the all-important reason why the appellant
    would be refused re-entry was because he was  a  stateless  Palestinian
    Arab and had a well-founded fear of being persecuted for  a  Convention
    reason, namely race,  because,  as  a  Palestinian,  he  would  not  be
    readmitted to the West Bank.

181.  Although Scott Baker LJ  admitted  the  force  of  this  argument,  he
    questioned why, if this was so in the present case, was it  not  so  in
    MA.  It seemed to him inconceivable that the Court in MA did  not  have
    clearly in mind that the appellant was a Palestinian  Arab.   He  noted
    the International Covenant on Civil and  Political  Rights  (ICCPR)  of
    1996, to which we have referred above in the context of MA, and also to
    a report submitted by the  Human  Rights  Committee  established  under
    Article 28 of the ICCPR.  He noted also that the court in MA was  aware
    of the ICCPR point.  It had been dealt with, as we have seen above,  by
    Maurice Kay LJ.

182.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it was argued that the  "something
    more" was ill-treatment that would engage Article  3  of  the  ECHR  or
    something akin to it of a physical nature.  Scott Baker LJ did not wish
    to express a view on  what  factors  might  constitute  the  additional
    circumstances envisaged by the court in MA.   The  "additional  factor"
    relied upon by the appellant in MT was that the reason for the  refusal
    of re-entry would be that the appellant was a Palestinian, but that was
    the same for the appellant in MA and in the court's view the  ratio  of
    MA covered stateless Palestinians being returned to the West  Bank  and
    the present case was indistinguishable.  Without up-to-date evidence as
    to what would be likely  to  happen  at  the  King  Hussein  Bridge  to
    stateless Palestinians who were forcibly  returned  and  full  argument
    from the Secretary of State he did not wish to express  an  opinion  on
    the validity of the arguments in that regard.

183.  In SH (Palestinian Territories) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] IAR 306, heard at almost the same time as MT, it  was
    concluded that, for the reasons given in MT, MA  was  indistinguishable
    from the present case and was binding authority.  Scott Baker  LJ  also
    delivered the leading judgment with which his colleagues  agreed.   The
    relevant "something more" as noted above, was  severe  violation  of  a
    basic human right, in that case that enshrined in Article 3.   Not  all
    violations of basic human rights were categorised as persecution within
    the meaning of Regulation 5 of the 2006 Regulations; they were required
    to be severe  violations.   Thus,  even  if  refusal  of  re-entry  was
    discriminatory, it would not  be  persecutory  unless  it  amounted  to
    persecution within the meaning of Regulation 5(1).

184.  The court went on to consider whether it made any  difference  if  the
    appellant wanted to return to the West Bank.  It noted paragraph 33  in
    MA where Maurice Kay LJ said he was content to assume  that  there  was
    something in the argument on the part of MA that there was  no  finding
    by the Tribunal in that case that the claimant would not wish to return
    to the West Bank if the alternative were not remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom but  turning  back  into  Jordan.   The  court  concluded  that
    accordingly, even were there a finding by the AIT that the appellant in
    SH positively wanted to enter the West Bank, it would  not  avail  her.
    The court would still be bound by the decision in MA.

185.  We are clearly bound by these authorities.  It has not  been  asserted
    on behalf of the appellant that she would suffer a severe violation  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR at the Gaza border.  We  therefore  conclude,  in
    line with what was said by the Court of Appeal in MA, MT and  SH,  that
    denial of return to a stateless  person  to  their  country  of  former
    habitual residence does not of itself give rise  to  recognition  as  a
    refugee under the 1951 Convention.  We note that  human  rights  issues
    were also part of the reasoning of the Court of Appeal  in  MA  and  we
    therefore conclude that it would not give rise to an arguable breach of
    the appellant's human rights either.  We see no merit to  any  argument
    in this regard in respect of Article 8 either.   The  "something  more"
    required to make refusal of re-entry persecutory does not exist in this
    case.  Therefore, even if we  were  wrong  in  our  assessment  of  the
    practical issues of return set out above, we consider as  a  matter  of
    law that it would not be persecutory or in breach  of  the  appellant's
    human rights for her and her family to be refused re-entry to Gaza.

Whether Conditions in Gaza Are Such  that  to  Return  the  Appellant  There
Would Breach Her Refugee Convention or Other Rights

186.  The next issue is whether, if the appellant is able to gain access  to
    Gaza, the humanitarian conditions there are now  so  serious  that  she
    should  succeed  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  in  a  claim  for
    humanitarian protection or under Article 3 or Article 8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.  On behalf of the appellants it is argued that their
    claims in this regard are strengthened by the fact that the policies of
    the Israeli authorities and their conduct of Operation  Cast  Lead  are
    clearly in breach of accepted  principles  of  customary  international
    law.  In the alternative it is argued that the  appellant  succeeds  on
    the facts of her case because she and her family will have no means  of
    sustenance or accommodation on their return to Gaza, as  the  remaining
    members of their respective families live in Jabalyia,  which  was  the
    scene of some of the greatest destruction of civilian  property  during
    Operation Cast Lead and the humanitarian situation  will  be  extremely
    detrimental to the welfare of the six children.

187.  A specific issue raised  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  is  that  the
    Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the  appellant's  arguments  that
    Israel has acted in breach of customary international law in respect of
    its  treatment  of  Palestinians  within   the   Occupied   Palestinian
    Territories.  It is argued that it is an accepted  point  of  law  that
    international criminal law (ICL)  and  international  humanitarian  law
    (IHL) amount to customary international law, and reference is  made  to
    the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in the
    Legal Consequences of the  Construction  of  a  Wall  in  the  Occupied
    Palestinian Territories of 9 July 2004.  In addition, it is argued that
    the prohibition against the unlawful  use  of  force  also  amounts  to
    customary international law, and in this regard reference  is  made  to
    Kuwait Airways Corporation v Iraqi Airways Co (Numbers 4 and 5)  [2002]
    2 WLR 1353.

188.   Reference  is  made  to  the  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Oppenheimer v Cattermole [1976] AC 249, in support of  the  proposition
    that where a sovereign state  has  acted  in  flagrant  breach  of  its
    international  obligations,  there  is  a  common  law  public   policy
    exception which allows UK courts and tribunals to uphold  the  relevant
    international  obligations  when  determining   a   set   of   domestic
    proceedings which either directly or indirectly involve  the  sovereign
    state's conduct.  In Oppenheimer the claimant was a German Jew who  had
    fled Nazi Germany in 1939.  In November 1941 he  was  stripped  of  his
    German nationality of grounds of his race and because he was abroad  at
    the date that the decree was implemented.  As  a  result  the  taxation
    commission had held that he was not entitled to relief under the Double
    Taxation Relief Order because he had ceased to be  a  German  national.
    The House of Lords held that a law of this sort (i.e. the stripping  of
    German nationality) constituted  so  grave  an  infringement  of  human
    rights that the courts  of  the  United  Kingdom  ought  to  refuse  to
    recognise it as a law at all.

189.  It is also argued that principles of customary  international  law  in
    appropriate cases can be adopted as principles of domestic  common  law
    as is the case with the prohibition on torture and the admissibility of
    evidence obtained by way of torture under  the  UN  Convention  against
    Torture of 1984.  Reference is made to the decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in A and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Number 2) [2005] 3  WLR  1249.   It  is  noted  that  in  the  present
    proceedings the unlawfulness of  the  Israeli  seizure  of  Palestinian
    territory was expressly recognised in UNSC Resolution 242 [1967] of  22
    November 1967, as noted by the ICJ in its advisory  opinion.   Reliance
    is also placed upon the UNGA Resolution 2949 of 8 December  1972  which
    was express recognition of a flagrant  breach  of  the  UN  Charter  by
    Israel in respect of  its  continuing  occupation  of  the  Palestinian
    territory.  Reference is made to numerous  other  such  resolutions  of
    similar effect since that time, most recently that of  8  January  2009
    when the UNSC Resolution 1860, which recalled Resolution 242, expressly
    criticised the continuing Israeli blockade of Gaza.  It is argued that,
    in respect of Israel's conduct towards  the  Palestinian  people  since
    1948, there is no reason for the Upper Tribunal  to  take  a  different
    approach from that of the House of Lords in Oppenheimer in view of  the
    abolition  of  Palestinian  citizenship,  the   ethnic   cleansing   of
    Palestinians from the territory under Israeli control and  the  Israeli
    seizure of the Palestinians' lands, homes and  assets.   It  is  argued
    that it was clearly intended by Lawrence Collins LJ  in  MA  that  this
    would need to be done in an appropriate case.

190.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it is argued that one of the  aims
    behind the appellant asking the Tribunal to adjudicate  on  matters  of
    international law arising  in  the  conflict  between  Israel  and  the
    Palestinian Territories is to assert that Palestinians are not in  fact
    stateless.  It is argued that these issues are not justiciable  in  the
    domestic courts.  Reference is made to the decision of  the  Divisional
    Court in Al-Haq v Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Affairs [2009] EWHC 1910 (Admin), that  arguments  as  to  breaches  of
    international law by the Israelis in relation to their actions in  Gaza
    during Operation Cast Lead were  not  justiciable  and  should  not  be
    determined by the English courts.  The court rejected the argument that
    the Kuwait Airways case applied such that the  court  could  rule  upon
    Israeli actions which allegedly violated international  law.   It  held
    that to decide whether  Israel  was  in  breach  of  its  international
    obligations was beyond the court's competence and it  was,  unlike  the
    Kuwait Airways case, not a case where the breach of  international  law
    was plain and acknowledged the way it was clear to the court.   It  was
    also pointed out by Cranston J that the state of Israel  has  sovereign
    immunity and unless that is waived it would not be  obliged  to  appear
    before the court.  He said that it was not  without  significance  that
    the International Court  of  Justice  would  have  no  jurisdiction  to
    resolve a dispute concerning Israel's actions in Gaza without  Israel's
    consent.  He also held that the application failed because it  was  not
    even arguably justiciable.

191.  On behalf of the appellant it is argued that the Secretary of  State's
    reliance upon the judgment in Al-Haq is  misconceived.   The  point  is
    made that Al-Haq concerned a challenge to the UK  Government's  foreign
    policy in respect of the Palestinian issue rather than  concerning,  as
    in  the  instant  proceedings,  the  Tribunal's  determination  of  the
    appellant's statutory appeal as to whether  the  1951  Convention,  the
    Qualification Directive or the ECHR would be violated upon  her  return
    to the Occupied Palestinian Territories.   The  appellant  quotes  from
    paragraph 45 of Al-Haq in the judgment of Pill LJ:

         "This case  is  readily  distinguishable  from  those  in  which  a
         claimant is asserting a readily identifiable right, such as a right
         in certain circumstances to claim asylum,"


    And at paragraph 54 it was said by Cranston J that:


         "The claimant advances asylum claims to justify its contention that
         these matters are justiciable, but there courts make findings about
         matters such as a well-founded fear of persecution in other  states
         because they are authorised to do so under domestic legislation."

192.  We note the points made on behalf  of  the  appellant  concerning  the
    different context in the  instant  proceedings  from  that  before  the
    Divisional Court in Al-Haq.  Certainly, taken in isolation, the remarks
    of Pill LJ at paragraph 45  of  Al-Haq  and  to  an  extent  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 54 in Cranston J's judgment lend support  to  the
    argument that there is a real distinction, but these matters have to be
    seen in context.  There is a world of difference between  the  everyday
    jurisdiction of this Tribunal to adjudicate on claims that persons  are
    at risk of persecution  by  their  state  of  nationality  or  habitual
    residence and the suggested jurisdiction to determine whether  a  state
    has  acted  in  breach  of  customary  international  law  towards  the
    nationals of that state.  In paragraph 45, Pill LJ went on to say  that
    the claimant purported to assert a right, but  in  deciding  whether  a
    right existed it was relevant to consider what exercise  of  the  right
    would  entail.   He  went   on   to   note   at   paragraph   46   that
    constitutionally, the conduct of foreign affairs is exclusively  within
    the sphere of the Executive and that while there might exceptionally be
    situations in which the court would intervene in foreign policy issues,
    this case was far from being one of them.  Certainly one of the  issues
    he considered to be of relevance was the  fact  that  it  was  a  claim
    against the government rather than the situation in the  instant  case,
    and he was also concerned with the issue of standing which is of course
    not a matter before us.

193.  Cranston J went on, at paragraph 56 of his judgment, to state that  if
    the matter were to proceed,  Israel's  obligations  would  need  to  be
    defined and then breaches identified and proved on the basis of  events
    occurring  outside  the  jurisdiction.   Were  Israel  to  appear,  any
    justification it advanced, such as proportionality, would  need  to  be
    explored.  Once this was done, the claimant's case  would  turn  on  an
    enquiry into breaches by the United Kingdom of its obligations and they
    would need to be defined and breaches would need to be proved through a
    close examination of the conduct of United Kingdom foreign policy.  All
    of this, he noted, would entail determinations  of  law  and  fact  and
    would be against the backdrop of possibly the most serious,  protracted
    and controversial dispute in international affairs today.  It was not a
    case where the issue was purely one of law and there were  no  disputed
    issues of fact and nor was it a case like Kuwait Airways where breaches
    of international law were plain.  He went on to  note  the  absence  of
    what had been described by Lord Wilberforce in Buttes Gas and Oil Co  v
    Hammer [1982] AC 888 of 938B "judicial or  manageable"  standards.   He
    noted that the advisory opinion of the International Court  of  Justice
    in the Wall case was directly applicable to Gaza and that much  of  the
    ground the claimant sought to have the court  traverse  would  be  more
    appropriately entrusted to a Committee of Enquiry,  with  expertise  in
    diplomacy and international law.

194.  These points seem to us to identify insuperable  practical  and  legal
    difficulties to the suggestion that the Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to
    consider Israel's claimed violation of the Prohibition on the  Unlawful
    Use  of  Force  within  the  UN  Charter  and   the   requirements   of
    International Criminal Law (ICL)  and  International  Humanitarian  Law
    (IHL).  We bear in mind the argument  made  at  paragraph  127  of  the
    appellant's closing submissions that principles  of  international  law
    are of the utmost importance in the application and construction of the
    provisions of the UN Convention and the EU Directives and the ECHR.  In
    particular the argument is made that if Israel's  conduct  towards  the
    Palestinians violates ICL, IHL or the UN Charter that it makes it  more
    likely that the same amounts to persecution,  serious  harm,  degrading
    treatment or a flagrant violation of the  appellant  and  her  family's
    Article 8 rights.  The evidence in this regard  is  clearly  important,
    and requires to be taken into consideration in our assessment of  these
    issues.  That evidence will be given full and careful consideration  in
    due course.  But we decline jurisdiction to adjudicate on the issue  as
    such of the legality in customary international law of the treatment by
    Israel of Palestinians within the Occupied Palestinian Territories.

195.  The next matter we need to consider is  whether  the  conditions  that
    the appellant and her family would experience on  return  to  Gaza  are
    such as to amount to persecution or breach of  their  human  rights  or
    such as  to  place  them  in  need  of  humanitarian  protection.   The
    appellants rely on a number of  pieces  of  evidence  in  this  regard.
    Firstly there is the report of the United Nations Fact Finding  Mission
    on the Gaza Conflict A/HRC/12/48 of 25 September  2009  (the  Goldstone
    Report).   It  is  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  that  the
    conclusions within the report are not equivalent to judicial  findings,
    but it is argued that it is akin to a report produced  as  part  of  an
    extremely detailed criminal investigation and, bearing in mind the  low
    standard of proof in the current proceedings,  the  Goldstone  Report's
    findings are said to be clearly of the utmost  importance.   Since  the
    publication of the report, on 16  October  2009  the  UN  Human  Rights
    Council passed a Resolution endorsing the report.  On 5  November  2009
    the UN General Assembly passed Resolution 64/10 endorsing the  findings
    reached in the Goldstone Report, and providing  Israel  and  the  Hamas
    regime with a period of three months to conduct "independent,  credible
    investigations"  into   the   serious   violations   of   international
    humanitarian and human  rights  law  that  were  committed  during  the
    conflict in Gaza that broke out in late December  2008".   A  follow-up
    report was issued on 4 February  2010  by  the  UN  Secretary  General,
    recording  the  various  investigations  conducted   by   the   Israeli
    authorities into the findings in the Goldstone Report that IHL and  ICL
    were violated during Operation Cast Lead.  However a further Resolution
    was passed by the UN General Assembly on 25  February  2010  describing
    the Secretary General's  report  as  "inconclusive"  and  requesting  a
    further report in five months' time.  On 25 March  2010  the  UN  Human
    Rights Council passed a Resolution reiterating  the  UNGA's  Resolution
    that independent, credible investigations must be carried out into  the
    findings of the Goldstone Report.

196.  In its conclusions the Goldstone Report at paragraph  1877  makes  the
    point that the Israeli military operation in Gaza between  27  December
    2008 and 18 January  2009  and  its  impact  cannot  be  understood  or
    assessed in isolation from developments prior and subsequent to it.  It
    is said that the operation fits into a continuum of policies  aimed  at
    pursuing Israel's political objectives with  regard  to  Gaza  and  the
    Occupied Palestinian Territories as a whole.  It goes on  to  say  that
    many  such  policies  are  based  on  or  result   in   violations   of
    international human  rights  and  humanitarian  law.   It  is  said  at
    paragraph 1878 that the continuum is evident most immediately with  the
    policy of blockade  that  preceded  the  operations  and  that  in  the
    mission's view amounts to collective punishment intentionally inflicted
    by the government of Israel on the people of the  Gaza  Strip.   It  is
    said that when the operations began, the Gaza Strip had  been  under  a
    severe regime of closures and restrictions on the movements of  people,
    goods and  services  for  almost  three  years.   This  included  basic
    necessities of life, such as food and medical  supplies,  and  products
    required for the conduct of daily  life,  such  as  fuel,  electricity,
    school items and repair and construction material.  The  measures  were
    said to have been imposed by Israel purportedly to isolate  and  weaken
    Hamas after its electoral victory in view of the  perceived  continuing
    threat to Israel's security that it represented and the effect of  this
    was compounded by the withholding of financial and other assistance  by
    some donors  on  similar  grounds.   Adding  hardship  to  the  already
    difficult situation in the Gaza Strip, the  effects  of  the  prolonged
    blockade did not spare any aspect of the life of Gazans.  Prior to  the
    military operation, the Gaza economy  had  been  depleted,  the  health
    sector  beleaguered,  the  population  had  been  made   dependent   on
    humanitarian assistance for survival and the conduct of daily  life  of
    men, women and children was psychologically suffering from longstanding
    poverty, insecurity and violence, and enforced confinement in a heavily
    overcrowded area.  The dignity of the people of Gaza had been  severely
    eroded.  The effect of the military operations in Operation  Cast  Lead
    and the manner in which they were  conducted  considerably  exacerbated
    the aforementioned effects of the blockade and the  result  in  a  very
    short time was unprecedented long term damage, both to the  people  and
    to their development and recovery prospects.

197.  It was said to the Mission by both  Palestinians  and  Israelis  that,
    despite the hard conditions that had been long prevailing in  the  Gaza
    Strip, victims and long time observers stated that the operations  were
    unprecedented in their severity and that their  consequences  would  be
    long lasting.  When the mission first visited the Gaza Strip  in  early
    June 2009 it considered that the devastating effects of the  operations
    on the population were unequivocally  manifest.   In  addition  to  the
    visible destruction of houses, factories,  wells,  schools,  hospitals,
    police stations and other public  buildings,  the  sight  of  families,
    including the elderly and children, still living in the rubble of their
    former dwellings, of which no reconstruction was possible  due  to  the
    continuing blockade, was evidence  of  the  protracted  impact  of  the
    operations on the living conditions of the Gaza population.  Reports of
    the  trauma  suffered  during  the  attacks,  the  stress  due  to  the
    uncertainty about the future, the hardship of  life  and  the  fear  of
    further attacks pointed to less tangible but not less  real  long  term
    effects.  It was said at paragraph 1882 that  women  were  affected  in
    significant ways and their situation required specific attention in any
    effort to address the consequences of the blockade, of  the  continuing
    occupation and of the latest Israeli military operations.

198.  The operation was said to have  been  in  furtherance  of  an  overall
    policy aimed at punishing the Gaza population for  its  resilience  and
    for its apparent support for Hamas, and possibly  with  the  intent  of
    forcing a change in such support.  The mission considered this position
    to be firmly based in fact, bearing in mind what it saw  and  heard  on
    the ground and what it read also from,  for  example,  former  military
    officers and political leaders.  More than 1,400 people were killed  in
    just  three  weeks.   The  mission  recognised  that  not  all   deaths
    constituted violations  of  international  humanitarian  law,  but  the
    Israeli actions indicated a deliberate policy of disproportionate force
    aimed not at the enemy but at the "supporting infrastructure" which  in
    practice appeared to have meant the civilian population.  It is said at
    paragraph  1189  that  the  repeated  failure  to  distinguish  between
    combatants and civilians appeared to  the  mission  to  have  been  the
    result of deliberate guidance issued to soldiers, as described by  some
    of them, and not the result of occasional lapses.  It  was  said  that,
    allied to the systematic destruction of the economic  capacity  of  the
    Gaza Strip, there appeared also to have been an assault on the  dignity
    of the people, seen not only in the use of human shields  and  unlawful
    detentions sometimes  in  unacceptable  conditions,  but  also  in  the
    vandalising of houses when occupied and the way in  which  people  were
    treated when their houses were emptied.  At paragraph 1895 it  is  said
    that, whatever  violations  of  international  humanitarian  and  human
    rights law may have  been  committed,  the  systematic  and  deliberate
    nature of the activities described in the report left the mission in no
    doubt that responsibility  lay  in  the  first  place  with  those  who
    designed, planned, ordered and oversaw the operations.

199.  In its summary of legal findings  from  paragraph  1918  onwards,  the
    Mission found that in a number of cases Israel failed to take  feasible
    precautions required by customary law reflected in Article 57(2)(a)(ii)
    of Additional Protocol 1  to  avoid  or  minimise  incidental  loss  of
    civilian life, injuries to civilians and damage  to  civilian  objects.
    The Mission found that the different kinds of warnings issued by Israel
    in Gaza could not  be  considered  as  sufficiently  effective  in  the
    circumstances to comply with customary  laws  reflected  in  Additional
    Protocol 1, Article 57(2)(c).  The Mission found numerous instances  of
    deliberate attacks on  civilians  and  civilian  objects  (individuals,
    whole families,  houses,  mosques)  in  violation  of  the  fundamental
    international humanitarian law principle of distinction,  resulting  in
    deaths and serious injuries.  In these cases the Mission found that the
    protected status of civilians was not respected and  that  the  attacks
    were intentional, in clear violation of  customary  law,  reflected  in
    Article 51(2) and 75 of Additional Protocol 1, Article 57  of  the  4th
    Geneva Convention and Articles 6 and 7 of the International Covenant on
    Civil and Political Rights.  In some  cases  the  Mission  additionally
    concluded that the attack was  also  launched  with  the  intention  of
    spreading terror among the civilian population.  The  Mission  found  a
    violation of the right to life (ICCPR, Article 6)  in  respect  of  the
    policemen who were killed in  deliberate  attacks  on  police  stations
    where the policemen were not members of the Palestinian  armed  groups.
    Further adverse findings were made in respect of such  matters  as  the
    use of human shields,  detention  and  destruction  of  property.   The
    blockade policies implemented by Israel against  the  Gaza  Strip  were
    found to amount to a violation of Israel's obligations as an  occupying
    power under the 4th Geneva Convention and the Mission found a number of
    grave breaches of the 4th Geneva Convention committed  by  the  Israeli
    armed forces in Gaza, including  wilful  killing,  torture  or  inhuman
    treatment.  Acts depriving the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip of  their
    means of subsistence, employment, housing and water and  denying  their
    freedom of movement and access to a  court  of  law  and  an  effective
    remedy could  lead  a  competent  court  to  find  that  the  crime  of
    persecution, a crime against humanity, had been committed.

200.   The  appellant  also  relies  on  the  Amnesty  International  Report
    "Israel/Gaza: Operation Cast Lead: 22 Days of Death and Destruction" of
    2 July 2009.  This also refers to wanton destruction, attacks violating
    fundamental provisions of international humanitarian law,  notably  the
    prohibition on direct attacks on civilians and civilians' objects,  the
    prohibition on indiscriminate  or  disproportionate  attacks,  and  the
    prohibition on collective punishment.  The report considered  that  the
    actions  of  the  Israeli  forces  in  action  demonstrated  that  they
    considered all individuals and institutions associated with Hamas to be
    legitimate targets.  There were also references to  Israel  not  having
    fulfilled its duties as an occupying power  in  relation  to  the  Gaza
    Strip and that many  of  the  fundamental  Rights  of  the  Child  were
    blatantly violated during this crisis.  It was also said that Israel is
    in continuing violation of Article 39 of the  Convention  in  that,  by
    actively preventing reconstruction efforts,  it  does  not  fulfil  its
    obligations to "take all appropriate measures to promote  physical  and
    psychological recovery and social integration of  a  child  victims  of
    armed conflicts.  Such recovery and reintegration shall take  place  in
    an environment which fosters the health, self-respect  and  dignity  of
    the child."

201.  It is said, at paragraph 142 of the appellant's  closing  submissions,
    that the background evidence shows that the fiercest fighting  and  the
    greatest destruction of civilian targets took place in  northern  Gaza,
    where the appellant's family and her husband's family live.   Reference
    is made to the ICG's report "Gaza's Unfinished Business"  of  23  April
    2009 and the Amnesty International Report of 2 July 2009  to  which  we
    have   referred   above.    Specific   references   to   the   civilian
    infrastructure being destroyed in Jabalyia itself are also found in the
    Amnesty Report and the Goldstone Report among others.

202.  As regards the general humanitarian  situation  in  the  aftermath  of
    Operation Cast Lead,  the  ICRC's  report  "Gaza:  1.5  Million  People
    Trapped in Despair"  of  29  June  2009  states  that  six  months  on,
    restrictions on imports are making it impossible for Gazans to  rebuild
    their lives and that the quantities of goods  now  entering  Gaza  fall
    well short of what is required to meet  the  population's  needs.   For
    example, in May 2009, only 2,662 truckloads entered Gaza from Israel, a
    decrease of almost 80% on the 11,392 truckloads allowed in during April
    2007, before Hamas took over  the  territory.   It  is  said  that  the
    increase in poverty is taking a heavy toll on  the  population's  diet,
    and for tens of thousands of children this has led to  deficiencies  in
    iron, vitamin A and vitamin D.  It is said that  those  worst  affected
    are likely to be children,  who  make  up  more  than  half  of  Gaza's
    population.  It is also said that Gaza's alarming poverty  is  directly
    linked to the tight closure imposed on  the  territory,  and  that  the
    crisis has become so severe and entrenched that even if  all  crossings
    were to open tomorrow, it would take years for the economy to  recover.
    Comments to similar effect are to be found in the International  Crisis
    Group (ICG) report "Gaza's Unfinished Business" dated  23  April  2009.
    The UNOCHA's Report of August 2009 entitled "Locked In" refers  to  the
    degradation of the living conditions of the population, caused  by  the
    erosion of livelihoods and the gradual decline  in  the  state  of  the
    infrastructure and the quality  of  vital  services  in  the  areas  of
    health, water and sanitation and education.  It is said that  over  the
    last three months Israel has allowed entry into Gaza of a small  number
    of  truckloads  carrying  goods  previously  prevented  from  entering,
    including  limited  construction,  water,  sanitation   and   education
    materials and that while these are welcome steps, their  actual  impact
    is negligible when compared to the current level of needs in Gaza.   It
    is said that many people report  a  growing  sense  of  being  trapped,
    physically, intellectually and emotionally, and that  the  blockade  is
    collectively punishing the entire Gaza population.  Dr  George  in  his
    report of 10 July 2009 and the Human Rights Watch Report of 18 February
    2009 are to similar effect.

203.  In a joint agency report entitled "Failing Gaza" of 22 December  2009,
    it is said that a year  after  Israel  launched  Operation  Cast  Lead,
    little  of   the   extensive   damage   caused   to   homes,   civilian
    infrastructure,  public  services,  farms  and  businesses   has   been
    repaired.  Reference is made to over  US$4  billion  being  pledged  in
    March 2009 by the international community to assist  reconstruction  in
    Gaza and to support the Palestinian economy, but it is said that little
    of this committed money has been spent, goods and  equipment  earmarked
    for rebuilding languish in storage outside Gaza and much of  Gaza  lies
    in ruin.  Since Operation Cast Lead, only 41 truckloads of construction
    materials for all purposes have been permitted into Gaza, and thousands
    of truckloads are required to rebuild all the houses  destroyed.   This
    is said to  be  quite  apart  from  all  the  remaining  reconstruction
    desperately needed for schools, hospitals and other buildings  and  the
    water network.  It is said that in the period before the  blockade,  an
    average of 70 truckloads of exports left Gaza a day and 583  truckloads
    of goods and humanitarian supplies came in.  In the first two years  of
    the blockade, an average of just 112 truckloads per  day  were  allowed
    into Gaza and exports have been entirely banned with the  exception  of
    several small  shipments  for  the  Dutch  market.   It  is  said  that
    currently Israel only regularly allows about  35  categories  of  items
    entering into Gaza and there is no published list  of  permitted  items
    and there appears to be no consistency in what is,  and  what  is  not,
    permitted.  Humanitarian goods that are in theory let in are subject to
    unpredictable  delays  and  restrictions,  for  example  shelter   kits
    (average delay 85 days), health and paediatric kits (average  delay  68
    days) and household items such as bedding and kitchen utensils (average
    delay 39 days).  It is said that despite efforts by  the  international
    community, after months  of  negotiations  and  Israeli  foot  dragging
    almost nothing has  been  allowed  into  Gaza  under  a  specific  plan
    formulated by the UN in May 2009 to deliver construction materials  for
    a package of stalled UN projects for the shelter, health and  education
    sectors, worth US$77 million.

204.  The problems are further illustrated in the Gisha report to  which  we
    have referred above and in the UNOCHA  Report  "Locked  In"  of  August
    2009, among others.  In the latter report there  is  reference  to  the
    fact that some 10,000 people in northern Gaza still do not have  access
    to running water due to a  lack  of  available  building  materials  to
    maintain and upgrade the water network, and 80 million  litres  of  raw
    and partially treated  sewage  are  being  discharged  daily  into  the
    environment which has led to further  pollution  of  the  sea  and  the
    underground aquifer, creating serious health concerns.  An IRIN article
    "Analysis: Looming Water Crisis in Gaza" of 15 September 2009 says that
    unless urgent action is taken, the supply of water fit for human use in
    the Gaza Strip will be depleted in five to ten years.  It is said  that
    Israel has constructed some 37 trap wells inside  Israel  along  Gaza's
    eastern political border which siphon water supplies from  the  aquifer
    before they reach Gaza.

205.  There is also evidence of rising food insecurity set out at  paragraph
    157 onwards in the appellant's closing submissions.  A PCHR report  "23
    Days of War, 928 Days of Closure" of January 2010 states that 60.5%  of
    Gazans are considered to be food insecure and a  further  16.2%  to  be
    vulnerable to food insecurity.  The Goldstone Report  referred  to  the
    destruction of the El Bader flour mill, the effect of which was greatly
    to diminish the capacity of Gaza to  produce  milled  flour,  the  most
    basic staple ingredient of the  local  diet  and  it  appeared  to  the
    Mission that the  strikes  on  the  flour  mill  were  intentional  and
    precise.

206.   It  is  also  argued  that  the  steel  wall  being  built   on   the
    Gaza/Egyptian border  will  worsen  the  humanitarian  situation.   The
    UNOCHA Protection of Civilians Report of 27 January to 2 February 2010,
    among other pieces of evidence, refers to this.

207.  The UNOCHA Report in the context of the Gazan economy states  that  in
    the first quarter of 2009, according to the Palestinian Central  Bureau
    of Statistics, over 140,000 Gazans, willing  and  able  to  work,  were
    unemployed, constituting 41.5% of Gaza's workforce, up  from  32.3%  in
    the second quarter of 2007.  It is thought that the actual rates  might
    be even higher as the bureau records workers not formerly laid off  but
    not working and not receiving salaries  as  being  "temporarily  absent
    employees" rather than as "unemployed".  The Deputy  Secretary  General
    of  the  Palestinian  Federation  of  Industries,  Mr  Amr  Hamad,  was
    interviewed  by  the  Goldstone  mission  and  he  indicated  that  324
    factories had been destroyed during the Israeli military operations  at
    a cost of 40,000 jobs.

208.  The Amnesty  International  Report  of  2  July  2009  refers  to  the
    destruction of vast  areas  of  cultivated  land,  such  as  farms  and
    orchards, as causing a devastating amount of that year's harvest to  be
    lost and to have left even more people food insecure.  There is also  a
    reference,  at  paragraph  168  of  the  closing  submissions,  to  the
    imposition by the Israeli authorities of a 300 metre buffer zone within
    Gaza, which has a severely detrimental  effect  upon  the  agricultural
    sector.  90% of the people of Gaza suffer power cuts of four  to  eight
    hours a day, according to the joint agency report of 22 September 2009,
    while the rest  have  no  power  at  all.   There  had  been  a  slight
    improvement by the end of the reporting period considered by the UNOCHA
    Report of 27 January 2010 to 2 February 2010, as a result of which  the
    scheduled blackouts were reduced to six to eight  hours  four  to  five
    days a  week  throughout  Gaza,  though  some  40,000  people  remained
    completely  without  electricity.   Electricity  cuts   were   directly
    affecting refrigerated food and water  pumping  and  the  provision  of
    essential basic services, including water supply,  sewage  removal  and
    treatment and medical treatment.  There was a decline in  the  quantity
    of cooking gas to a significant extent.  All these matters had impacted
    adversely on the provision  of  education  to  the  children  of  Gaza.
    During the 2008 to 2009 academic year, 14,000  students  (or  6.76%  of
    students in all UNRWA schools in  Gaza)  failed  all  subjects  of  the
    standardised tests.

209.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it is argued that  the  "findings"
    of the Goldstone Report are not in fact findings  and  that  there  has
    been  outspoken  criticism  of  the  report,  for   example   by   Alan
    Derschowitz,  and  also  referring  to  an  article   regarding   Judge
    Goldstone's interview with the Jewish Daily Chronicle in which he  said
    that nothing had been proven and it was a roadmap for investigators and
    contained no actual evidence of wrongdoing.  It is said that  from  the
    Israeli point of view, as of  March  2009,  the  government  of  Israel
    instructed bodies dealing with the matter to allow  food  stuffs  entry
    without restriction and that cooking and heating gas was not subject to
    limitation.   The  Israelis  had  published  the  weekly   summary   of
    humanitarian supplies in a summary of humanitarian activity in 2009  to
    international  organisations,  where  the  Gaza  Coordination   Liaison
    Administration confirmed the supply of food and medicine  to  meet  the
    needs of the Palestinian population in Gaza.  The interim responses  of
    the Israelis and Palestinians to the requirement of the  UN  that  both
    parties respond to the Goldstone mission's report  by  explaining  what
    investigations they were carrying out into the matters contained within
    the report, have now been  received  and  these  are  set  out  in  the
    Secretary of State's evidence.

210.  It is further argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that,  though
    the situation facing the appellant is  poor,  in  the  context  of  the
    reduced levels of violence that now exist in Gaza  there  the  evidence
    suggests that there are significant levels  of  aid  and  international
    support, and that though there are shortages of supplies of some  basic
    goods, people  are  fulfilling  their  basic  needs  and  there  is  no
    malnutrition,  widespread  displacement  or  lack  of   basic   medical
    treatment.  Thus, from the Country of Origin Information Report  (COIR)
    of 6 August 2009, at paragraph 2.3 the  United  Nations  Conference  on
    Trade and Development (UNCTAD) Report of July 2008  reported  that  for
    the Occupied Palestinian Territories in 2007 the unemployment rate  was
    29% as compared with 21% in 1999 and unemployment was  much  higher  in
    the Gaza Strip and was likely to deteriorate further.  According to the
    World Health  Organisation  Country  Profile  of  September  2009,  the
    average life expectancy was 71.5.  The point is made in the  COIR  that
    in  contrast  to  the  West  Bank  there  are  no  longer  any  Israeli
    settlements or military establishments in  Gaza.   The  UNRWA  provides
    education, health, relief and social services to  eligible  Palestinian
    refugees, including in the Gaza Strip, with eight camps  in  Gaza,  and
    provides support to many Palestinian families who are  unable  to  meet
    their own basic needs.   The  Jane's  Information  Group  in  its  2009
    country  assessment,  updated  on  26  November  2008,  and  quoted  at
    paragraph 23.03 of the COIR, says that despite being severely short  of
    funds, the standard of healthcare remains  inadequate,  although  child
    immunisation programmes have suffered from restrictions on movement and
    people have been unable to access a number  of  specialist  treatments.
    It is said that this is especially true in the case of the Gaza  Strip,
    where border closures had restricted access to hospitals in  Israel  or
    Egypt and electricity cuts have seen hospitals run on  emergency  power
    for a majority of the 24 hour cycle.  It also says that the  continuing
    closure and sanctions on the Gaza Strip  have  hit  the  health  sector
    hard, with no new clinics being constructed  and  a  poorly  maintained
    sewage system threatening the outbreak of more diseases and  that  this
    was exacerbated by the Israeli campaign in late  2008  and  early  2009
    that saw hospitals damaged and  medical  supplies  seriously  depleted.
    Aid agencies warned that despite massive donations and assistance,  the
    situation is critical with an estimated 90,000 people having been  left
    homeless.

211.  At paragraph 24.01 of the COIR, there is a quotation from  the  ECOSOC
    report "Economic and Social Repercussions of the Israeli Occupation  on
    the Living Conditions of the Palestinian  People"  dated  7  May  2009.
    This refers to the consequences of the occupation  of  the  Palestinian
    Territory and the use of arbitrary detention, the disproportionate  use
    of force, house demolitions,  severe  mobility  restrictions,  lack  of
    building permits and closure policies as continuing  to  intensify  the
    economic and social  hardship  of  the  Palestinian  residents  of  the
    Occupied Palestinian Territories.  Reference is also made  to  internal
    Palestinian conflict as causing problems in this regard.   Despite  the
    constraints that are  identified,  it  is  said  that  the  Palestinian
    Authority managed to make some progress  in  areas  such  as  security,
    public financial management, local public infrastructure and health and
    education services, not least because it was able to pay civil servants
    fully every month.  The report goes on to state that Israeli settlement
    and outpost expansion, land confiscation  and  the  construction  of  a
    barrier in  the  Occupied  Palestinian  Territories,  contrary  to  the
    roadmap of the Geneva Convention and other norms of international  law,
    isolate Occupied East Jerusalem, severely intrude into  the  West  Bank
    and curtail economic and social life.  The same  report  is  quoted  at
    paragraph 25.08 as stating that Gaza's crossings  remained  closed  for
    most of 2008, and smuggling through the tunnels  played  an  increasing
    role in the economy.  Some humanitarian assistance was allowed to enter
    Gaza, including the bulk entry of wheat grain,  medicines  and  limited
    amounts of educational materials, but it proved to be very difficult to
    import other humanitarian goods, such as cement  and  generators.   The
    Rafah  crossing  remained  officially  closed,  and   a   few   hundred
    Palestinians,  mainly  persons  seeking  medical  care,  students   and
    pilgrims, were able to cross each month for specific purposes.  This is
    from the UNECOSOC Report "Assistance to the Palestinian  People"  of  7
    May 2009.

212.  The Secretary of State also quotes from the OCHA in a report  of  2009
    entitled "Occupied Palestinian Territory  Mid  Year  Review"  published
    under the auspices of the United Nations.  It is said that  during  the
    first five months of the year, the overall  humanitarian  situation  in
    the Occupied Palestinian Territories continued to deteriorate.   As  of
    June 2009 the 2009 consolidated appeal  for  the  Occupied  Palestinian
    Territories had received  US$412  million  of  aid,  51%  of  its  2009
    requirement.  It can be  seen  from  the  table  at  page  143  of  the
    Secretary of State's bundle B, that more than US$312 million  worth  of
    aid had gone to  Gaza  for  a  variety  of  projects,  including  those
    concerning  agriculture,  cash  for  work,  education,  health,   water
    sanitation and hygiene and shelter.  This is as of 19 June 2009.  About
    75% of Gaza's 1.5 million residents require some  form  of  assistance.
    It is said at page 150 of the bundle,  page  11  of  the  report,  that
    humanitarian assistance has  been  impartially  provided  to  the  most
    vulnerable populations.  A  number  of  examples  of  this  are  given,
    including 1,365,000 Palestinians in Gaza receiving food assistance from
    the World Food Programme and  other  organisations,  access  to  health
    being maintained for 125,000 marginalised people living in Gaza, 85,000
    litres of water being distributed for domestic use and drinking in Gaza
    and 500,000 beneficiaries in Gaza receiving NFIs  (hygiene  kits,  baby
    kits, water kits, household tanks).  It is said in the  conclusions  at
    page 30 of the report that the humanitarian community in  the  Occupied
    Palestinian Territories reacted quickly when the worst case scenario as
    the COP2009 unfolded at the beginning of the year with a combination of
    fighting  in  Gaza  and  a  continued   interfactional   rift   between
    Palestinian parties.  They promptly assessed changing needs, readjusted
    its  response  plans  and  priorities  and  channelled  the   necessary
    resources into  Gaza  to  address  the  humanitarian  situation.   This
    continues.

213.  In August 2009 OCHA noted that over the past three months  Israel  had
    allowed entry into Gaza of a small number of truckloads carrying  goods
    previously prevented  from  entering,  including  construction,  water,
    sanitation and education materials.  In October  2009  the  OCHA  noted
    that the Israeli authorities  had  continued  to  allow  the  entry  of
    limited supplies for water and  sanitation  repair  and  rehabilitation
    projects, including eleven truckloads during October,  although  delays
    in the approval of additional supplies, as well as  other  coordination
    difficulties, had significantly slowed down the implementation of these
    highly needed projects.  A total of 2,364 truckloads of  goods  entered
    Gaza in the month of October, with food supplies and cleaning materials
    making up 92% of this and the remainder consisting  of  food  supplies,
    including cooking gas but excluding industrial fuel delivered to Gaza's
    power plant (3%), agricultural raw materials (3%) and other items (2%).
     The monthly average of humanitarian truckloads since the beginning  of
    the decline in those numbers (July to October 2009) was 78% higher than
    the 2008 monthly average.  It is said that in other  words  the  recent
    decrease is relative to  the  high  levels  of  humanitarian  aid  that
    entered Gaza in the first six months of the year,  during  and  in  the
    aftermath of the Cast Lead offensive.

214.  In July 2009 the World Health Organisation provided an  assessment  of
    Gaza's health needs and concluded that although the health  sector  had
    been severely affected by the prolonged closure of Gaza's  borders  and
    by Operation Cast Lead,  most  health  services  had  been  functioning
    normally.  An estimated 4,600 tonnes of donated  medical  supplies  and
    equipment entered the Gaza  Strip  during  and  immediately  after  the
    conflict, creating enormous logistical challenges for the  Ministry  of
    Health and Central Drugstore.  The referral of patients out of Gaza had
    been severely disrupted, albeit that  significant  numbers  were  still
    referred abroad and into Israel (with emergency referrals  even  during
    Operation Cast Lead).  By August 2009, the  World  Health  Organisation
    found that almost 30% of patients who applied for permits to cross Erez
    into Israel were delayed, lost their hospital appointments and  had  to
    restart the whole process.  The UNRWA continues to provide  substantial
    support and large  scale  emergency  assistance  programmes  which  has
    expanded since the Hamas assumption of power, and UNICEF are  providing
    assistance to the population and are developing twenty  family  centres
    in severely affected areas of Gaza with the aim of enabling  vulnerable
    families to meet basic needs and live in dignity.

215.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, it is argued that, in so  far  as
    there is an issue concerning the epilepsy of the appellant's  daughter,
    it was held in the appeal in October 2008 that she  no  longer  suffers
    from fits, and that it seems continues to be the  case.   There  is  no
    medical evidence to support the contention that her fits  could  return
    if she were living in Gaza, but it is argued  that  in  any  event  the
    evidence shows that medical facilities have continued to be  available,
    although there have been shortages of some medical  supplies  including
    anti-convulsion drugs at one time.

216.  That is, in essence, the evidence concerning the conditions  that  the
    appellants would face on return to Gaza.  It is necessary now for us to
    consider the relevant legal tests that apply and then go on to consider
    the evidence and make findings on it in the context of the legal tests.

217.  It is argued on behalf of the appellants that to return  them  to  the
    conditions they would face in Gaza is persecutory and/or in  breach  of
    their rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights and gives rise to a need for humanitarian  protection.   Dealing
    first with the Refugee Convention, the point is made in the appellant's
    amended skeleton argument that, in line  with  what  was  said  by  the
    Tribunal in Gashi and Nikshiqi and Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (UNHCR intervening) [1997] INLR 96,  any  interpretation  of
    the term "persecution" should be approached with the  basic  principles
    of  an  internationally  shared   surrogate   protection,   rooted   in
    fundamental human rights.  It was said also that the  term  persecution
    included a failure to protect  firstly  those  rights  that  were  non-
    derogable, even in times of national emergency, secondly  those  rights
    which are derogable during an  officially  recognised  life-threatening
    public emergency, thirdly some aspects of those  rights  which  require
    states to take steps to the maximum of  their  available  resources  to
    progressively realise rights in a non-discriminatory manner (the  right
    to earn a livelihood; the right to a basic education; a right to  food,
    housing and  medical  care).   It  is  also  said  that  in  order  for
    deprivation of welfare benefits to be classified as persecution,  there
    must  exist  an  element  of  discrimination.    Article   9   of   the
    Qualification Directive defines acts of persecution as follows:

         "1.      Acts of persecution within the meaning of  Article  1A  of
             the Geneva Convention must:


             (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


             (b)  be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).


         2. Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can inter  alia
             take the form of:


             (a) acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;


             (b) legal, administrative,  police  and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory manner..."

218.  As regards Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention, expulsion  of  an
    individual by a contracting state to the Convention may give rise to an
    issue under Article 3 and thus engage the State's responsibility  under
    the Convention where substantial grounds have been shown for  believing
    that the person concerned, if removed,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being
    subject to treatment contrary to Article 3 which prohibits in  absolute
    terms removal for a person who  would  face  inhuman  and/or  degrading
    treatment or punishment.

219.  It was made clear by the Court of Human Rights in NA v United  Kingdom
    (Application No. 25904/07) [2009] 48 EHRR 15,  that  the  ill-treatment
    the applicant alleges he or she will  face  on  return  must  attain  a
    minimal level of severity which will depend upon all the  circumstances
    of the case.  It is also necessary to show that the authorities of  the
    receiving  state  are  not  able  to  obviate  the  risk  by  providing
    appropriate protection.  A  general  situation  of  violence  will  not
    normally in itself entail a violation of Article 3 in the event  of  an
    expulsion.  The example is given at paragraph 114 in NA in the case  of
    Muslim v Turkey [2006] 42  EHRR  16  where  the  Court  considered  the
    expulsion of an Iraqi national of  Turkmen  origin  to  Iraq  that  the
    possibility of ill-treatment because of the unstable situation  in  the
    country at the material time would not in itself amount to a breach  of
    Article 3.  The Court would only be likely to find a breach of  Article
    3 in the most extreme cases of general violence  where  it  was  argued
    that the situation  in  the  country  of  destination  would  be  of  a
    sufficient degree of intensity as to involve breach of the  Article  3.
    There would have to be shown to be a real risk of ill-treatment  simply
    by virtue of an individual being exposed to such  violence  on  return.
    However exceptionally, in cases where an appellant  alleges  that  they
    are a member of a group systematically exposed to a  practice  of  ill-
    treatment, the Court has considered that the protection  of  Article  3
    enters into play where the  applicant  shows  that  there  are  serious
    reasons to believe in the existence of the practice in question and his
    or her membership of the group concerned.

220.  On behalf of the appellants it is argued that a violation  of  Article
    3 can occur if a sovereign state deliberately singles  out  a  sizeable
    minority group for degrading and discriminatory treatment on the ground
    of their race  or  some  other  immutable  characteristic,  citing  the
    decision in Salah Sheekh v The Netherlands [2007] 45 EHRR 50 where  the
    Court accepted that all members of the minority  Ashraf  clan  faced  a
    real risk of violation of their Article 3 rights upon being returned to
    Somalia.  In such a  case  the  applicant  could  not  be  required  to
    establish the existence  of  further  special  distinguishing  features
    concerning them  personally  in  order  to  show  that  they  were  and
    continued to be personally at risk.  Reference  is  also  made  to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in RS (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 839, where the Court of  Appeal
    allowed the appellant's appeal and remitted the issue  of  whether  the
    Mugabe regime's denial of food and medical care to those  suspected  of
    opposition activities would amount to  a  violation  of  Article  3  in
    itself.  In this regard, however, it is relevant to mention the  recent
    decision of the Tribunal in RS, EC and BR  [2010]  UKUT  000  (IAC)  in
    which the  Tribunal  held  that,  though  there  is  some  evidence  of
    discrimination in access to AIDS medication and food in Zimbabwe, it is
    not such as to show any  real  risk  of  such  discrimination.   It  is
    relevant also to note the decision in N in the case  involving  an  HIV
    sufferer from Uganda,  where  it  was  held  that  there  would  be  no
    infringement even where the effect of removal was to preclude treatment
    which would lead in a very short time to a  revival  of  symptoms  from
    which the patient was originally suffering, and thereafter to an  early
    death.

221.  We do not see any material difference in this case between  the  level
    of risk and the nature of the risk to which the appellants are  exposed
    in respect of asylum and Article 3 claims.  We  note  that  it  is  not
    argued that Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive is  applicable
    in this case.

222.  Our assessment of the background evidence is that it clearly  shows  a
    harsh state of affairs in Gaza which reflects  a  deterioration  beyond
    the situation prior  to  the  Operation  Cast  Lead  hostilities.   The
    infrastructure  of  Gaza  is  significantly  depleted,  and  there  are
    problems of access to electricity and clean water and there are  limits
    on the amount of products that are brought into the territory.   We  do
    not seek to undervalue the level of difficulty that the  appellants  in
    this case, and indeed other residents of Gaza, face in  the  territory.
    But we consider that the tests set out in  the  Refugee  Convention  as
    applied in the case law and under Article 3 are set at a level of  risk
    which is higher than that which would be experienced by  the  appellant
    and her family in this case on return.

223.  We do not consider it can be said that the appellant  and  her  family
    are at risk of such a high level of indiscriminate violence that  there
    are substantial grounds for believing that they would face a real  risk
    threatening their life or person solely by being present there and  nor
    is this an exceptional case coming within the ambit of the exception in
    NA.  The risk in  terms  of  actual  violence  is  minimal,  since  the
    ceasefire declared on 18 and 19 January 2009 between Israel and  Hamas,
    and  the  existence  of  only  limited  clashes  and  intra-Palestinian
    violence subsequently.  We note that the United Nations Office for  the
    Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in its mid-year  review  of
    July 2009 reported that since the cessation of hostilities violence has
    dropped to relatively low levels, although  rockets  and  mortars  have
    continued to be fired from Gaza into Israel and  Israel  has  responded
    with a number of airstrikes in Gaza.

224.  As regards the general socio-economic and  humanitarian  situation  in
    Gaza, there is on the whole common ground in the evidence  provided  by
    both sides, although some of the evidence on the part of the  Secretary
    of State indicates some small level of improvement in various respects.
     There has to be shown to  be  a  severe  deprivation  with  denial  of
    shelter, food and the most basic necessities of life for the appeal  to
    succeed.  It is relevant to note the conclusion of the AIT in AM  &  AM
    (Armed conflict - risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT  00091  that
    to succeed in a claim for protection based on  poor  socio-economic  or
    dire humanitarian  living  conditions  under  the  Refugee  Convention,
    Article  15  of  the  Qualification  Directive  or   Article   3,   the
    circumstances would have to be extremely unusual (see e.g.  para  157).
    The Secretary of State draws an analogy with decisions of the  Tribunal
    concerning Zimbabwe, Somalia and Sudan, and in particular  there  is  a
    reference to AH and Others (Sudan) [2008]  1  AC  678,  concerning  the
    settlements in Khartoum.  Both Lord Bingham and Lord Brown refer to the
    high threshold to be met in cases of persecution and Article 3, and  it
    was said that the Refugee Convention was far  from  being  designed  to
    meet all humanitarian needs given  the  countless  millions  who  would
    otherwise be entitled to its benefits.  The appellant  and  her  family
    have relatives in Gaza, and, even if they  are  unable  to  accommodate
    them, they have friends also, and there is a good deal of  humanitarian
    aid.  Saja, the appellant's daughter, no longer suffers from  epileptic
    fits and, even if the fits recurred, there is medical support available
    in Gaza.  It is necessary  to  bear  in  mind  the  reduced  levels  of
    violence, and the fact that basic goods are, to a limited extent, being
    imported into Gaza whether with Israeli assistance or as a  consequence
    of being brought in through the tunnels, and though the situation is  a
    serious one, we do not consider  that  it  crosses  the  Article  3  or
    Refugee Convention threshold.

225.  We summarise our conclusions on the general  issues  arising  in  this
    case as follows:

    (1)    The Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to  consider  practical  issues
         concerning the return of a Palestinian family to Gaza.   GH  [2005]
         EWCA Civ 1182 and HH (Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ 426 applied.


    (2)    Palestinians from Gaza with passports (expired passports can  be
         renewed via a straightforward procedure) are unlikely to experience
         problems in obtaining and,  if  necessary  getting  extensions  of,
         visas from the Egyptian authorities to enter Egypt and  cross  into
         Gaza via the Rafah crossing.


    (3)    The conditions likely to be experienced by Palestinians in Egypt
         while awaiting crossing into Gaza are not such as to give  rise  to
         breach of their human rights.


    (4)    On the basis of the authorities: MA [2008] Imm AR 617; MT [2009]
         Imm AR 290 and SH [2009] Imm AR 306, it would not be persecutory or
         in breach of their human rights  for  Palestinians  to  be  refused
         entry to Gaza.


    (5)    The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to decide whether Israel
         has acted in breach of customary international law  in  respect  of
         its treatment  of  Palestinians  within  the  Occupied  Palestinian
         Territories.


    (6)    The conditions in Gaza are not such as to amount to  persecution
         or breach of the human rights of returnees or place them in need of
         international protection.



    Article 8

226.  As regards family life, the family would return together,  bearing  in
    mind the  credibility  finding  made  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    husband, and the absence of any sustainable Community right in  respect
    of Muhammad,  and  hence  there  would  be  no  interference  with  the
    appellant's family life if she were  to  be  returned  to  Gaza.   With
    regard to private life, it is argued on behalf of the appellant, citing
    the decision of the European Convention on Human Rights in  Sisojeva  v
    Latvia [2006] 43 EHRR 33,  that  there  may  be  an  interference  with
    Article 8 rights in particular  where  the  persons  concerned  possess
    strong personal or family ties in the host country which are liable  to
    be seriously affected by an expulsion order.  The three  applicants  in
    that case, who were of Soviet ethnicity (the third applicant  had  been
    born in Latvia and lived all her life there), were  denied  a  resident
    permit by the Latvian authorities  as  the  first  two  applicants  had
    obtained passports from the former USSR.  No formal  deportation  order
    was  issued  against  them,  but  they  were  reminded  by  the   state
    authorities of their obligation to leave Latvia.  It was held that this
    amounted to a disproportionate interference with their right to private
    life.

227.  However, as we have concluded above,  the  appellant  and  her  family
    will be able to re-enter Gaza.  She has not been  refused  re-entry  to
    Gaza nor at any time while living there has she  been  told  to  leave.
    The existence of practical difficulties in returning does not amount to
    a breach of her or her family's right  to  respect  for  their  private
    life.  Clearly there may be circumstances, such as in  Sisojeva,  where
    the links a non-national has to a state may be such as  to  make  their
    removal disproportionate, but that is far removed from the situation in
    this case, given our findings above.   Nor  do  we  consider  that  the
    amount of time the appellant and her family have spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the private life they have developed during that time would
    make their removal disproportionate.   It  is  not  a  matter  that  Mr
    Draycott emphasised, and we have little evidence  of  activities  going
    beyond the spending of time in the United Kingdom.

228.  The appeal is dismissed.





Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Allen,
Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                 APPENDIX: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED



|     |Document                                       |Date            |
|Item |                                               |                |
|1    |The Independent, "Israel admits soldiers were  |1 February 2010 |
|     |wrong to shell UN site"                        |                |
|2    |United Nations Office for the Coordination of  |2 February 2010 |
|     |Humanitarian Affairs, "Protection of Civilians,|                |
|     |27 January - 2 February 2010"                  |                |
|3    |UN Secretary-General, "Follow-up to the report |4 February 2010 |
|     |of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on  |                |
|     |the Gaza Conflict (A/64/651)"                  |                |
|4    |Palestinian Centre for  Human Rights, "23 Days |                |
|     |of War, 928 Days of Closure: Life One Year     |23 December 2009|
|     |after Israel's Latest Offensive on the Gaza    |                |
|     |Strip, 27 December 2008 - 18 January 2009"     |                |
|5    |Amnesty International UK et al., "Failing Gaza:|22 December 2009|
|     |No rebuilding, no recovery, no more excuses: A |                |
|     |report one year after Operation Cast Lead"     |                |
|6    |Chief Immigration Officer, anonymous email to  |27 November 2009|
|     |Treasury Solicitors                            |                |
|7    |World Health Organisation, "Country Profile:   |September 2009  |
|     |Palestine"                                     |                |
|8    |United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza|25 September    |
|     |Conflict, "Human Rights in Palestine and Other |2009            |
|     |Occupied Arab Territories: Report of the United|                |
|     |Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza       |                |
|     |Conflict (A/HRC/12/48)"                        |                |
|9    |IRIN, "Analysis: Looming water crisis in Gaza" |15 September    |
|     |                                               |2009            |
|10   |United Nations Office for the Coordination of  |August 2009     |
|     |Humanitarian Affairs, "Locked In: The          |                |
|     |Humanitarian Impact of Two Years of Blockade on|                |
|     |the Gaza Strip"                                |                |
|11   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin           |6 August 2009   |
|     |Information Report: Occupied Palestinian       |                |
|     |Territories"                                   |                |
|12   |Middle East Cancer Consortium, "Manual of      |July 2009       |
|     |Coding and Staging: Version 5.1"               |                |
|13   |World Health Organisation, "Gaza Health        |July 2009       |
|     |Assessment"                                    |                |
|14   |Palestinian Ministry of the Interior press     |28 July 2009    |
|     |release                                        |                |
|15   |United Nations Office for the Coordination of  |21 July 2009    |
|     |Humanitarian Affairs, "Occupied Palestinian    |                |
|     |Territory: 2009 Consolidated Appeal: Mid-Year  |                |
|     |Review"                                        |                |
|16   |Amnesty International, "Israel/Gaza: Operation |2 July 2009     |
|     |'Cast Lead': 22 days of death and destruction" |                |
|17   |International Committee of the Red Cross,      |29 June 2009    |
|     |"Gaza: 1.5 million people trapped in despair"  |                |
|18   |Defence for Children International / Palestine |11 June 2009    |
|     |Section, "Palestinian Child Prisoners: The     |                |
|     |systematic and institutionalised ill-treatment |                |
|     |and torture of Palestinian children by Israeli |                |
|     |authorities"                                   |                |
|19   |International Crisis Group, "Gaza's Unfinished |23 April 2009   |
|     |Business"                                      |                |
|20   |Gisha - Legal Center for Freedom of Movement   |25 March 2009   |
|     |and Physicians for Human Rights - Israel,      |                |
|     |"Rafah Crossing: Who holds the keys?"          |                |
|21   |Amnesty International, "Gaza blockade -        |4 July 2008     |
|     |collective punishment"                         |                |
|22   |Congressional Research Service report to the US|February 2008   |
|     |Congress                                       |                |
|23   |Kathleen Lawand, "The Right to Return of       |1996            |
|     |Palestinians in International Law",            |                |
|     |International Journal of Refugee Law, Vol 8, No|                |
|     |4                                              |                |





