

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00126 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18-19 October, 28-30 November 2011 and     |                             |
|09 February 2012                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     mk

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Switalskis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

 (1)   Since the lack of documentation relating to identity in the  form  of
    the Civil Status ID (CSID), Iraqi  Nationality  Certificate  (INC)  and
    Public Distribution  System  (PDS)  card  (food  ration  card)  is  not
    ordinarily an insuperable problem, it is not a factor  likely  to  make
    return to any part of Iraq unsafe or unreasonable.


      a) The CSID is an important document, both in its own right and  as  a
         gateway to obtaining other significant documents such the  INC  and
         the PDS.   An inability to replace the CSID  is  likely  to  entail
         inability to access the INC and PDS.


         (b) Although the general position is that a person  who  wishes  to
         replace a lost CSID is required to return to  their  home  area  in
         order  to  do  so,  there  are  procedures  as  described  in  this
         determination available which  make  it  possible  (i)  for  Iraqis
         abroad to secure the issue of  a  new  CSID  to  them  through  the
         offices of the local Iraqi Embassy; (ii)  for  Iraqis  returned  to
         Iraq without a CSID to obtain one  without  necessarily  having  to
         travel to their home area.  Such procedures permit  family  members
         to  obtain  such  documentation  from  their  home  areas   on   an
         applicant's behalf or allow for a person to be  given  a  power  of
         attorney to obtain the same. Those who are  unable  immediately  to
         establish their identity can  ordinarily  obtain  documentation  by
         being presented before a judge from the Civil Status Court,  so  as
         to facilitate return to their place of origin.


    (2)  (a) Entry into and residence in the KRG can  be  effected  by  any
        Iraqi national with a CSID, INC and PDS,  after  registration  with
        the Asayish (local security office).  An Arab may need a sponsor; a
        Kurd will not.


         (b) Living conditions in the KRG for a  person  who  has  relocated
         there are not without difficulties, but there are jobs,  and  there
         is  access  to  free  health  care  facilities,  education,  rented
         accommodation and financial and other support from UNHCR.

    (3)    Despite bureaucratic  difficulties  with  registration  and  the
         difficulties faced by IDPs, it is wrong to say that  there  is,  in
         general, no internal flight alternative in Iraq, bearing in mind in
         particular the levels of governmental and NGO support available.

    (4)    Whilst the situation for women in Iraq is, in general, not  such
         as to give rise to a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm,
         there may be particular problems affecting female headed households
         where family support is lacking and jobs and other means of support
         may be harder to come by.  Careful examination  of  the  particular
         circumstances  of  the  individual's  case   will   be   especially
         important.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    All three members of the panel have contributed significantly  to  the
    writing of the determination.  We received detailed  oral  and  written
    evidence from the experts, Dr Fatah and Dr George.  We have set  out  a
    synthesis of their evidence in appendices to this determination.  It is
    appropriate to state at the outset that we accept the expertise of both
    witnesses, and are grateful for the assistance they have been  able  to
    give us. We have identified the points on which we have not  been  able
    to accept aspects of their evidence.

2.    This is the re-hearing of the appeal of MK, a  citizen  of  Iraq,  now
    aged 52.  The dependants in the appeal are her sons Ba,  now  aged  19,
    and Be, now aged 18, and her daughter S, now aged  9.   The  appeal  is
    against the Secretary of State's decision of  6  March  2009  to  issue
    directions for the appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom.    A
    previous appeal before an Immigration Judge, heard on 1  May  2009,  at
    North Shields, was dismissed, but subsequently, following a hearing  on
    9 October 2009, it was found that the judge had erred in law and  there
    required to be a rehearing.  It was common ground that the  credibility
    findings should stand.

The Judge's Findings

3.    It is important therefore that we set out  what  those  findings  are.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 February 2009,  having
    travelled overland for  twenty  days  with  the  three  children.   She
    claimed that her husband had obtained employment as an interpreter  for
    the US forces in Iraq.  He had been  asked  to  interpret  when  eleven
    terrorists were arrested.  At least one of  the  terrorists  asked  her
    husband to assist them in escaping  but  he  refused  to  do  so.   The
    terrorists escaped and then targeted the  appellant's  husband.   There
    was a grenade attack on the house as a result of which security  guards
    were deployed there.  However, almost a year later her husband and  one
    of the sons were killed when their car was bombed when he  was  on  his
    way to work one day, and two months  later  another  of  her  sons  was
    kidnapped from his school and has not been seen since.   The  appellant
    fled to her brother's house in Kirkuk where she stayed for  two  and  a
    half months and  then  left  Iraq  with  her  remaining  sons  and  her
    daughter, travelling overland to the United Kingdom.

4.    The judge heard evidence from the appellant and her  eldest  son.   He
    accepted that the appellant's husband worked for the  Americans  as  an
    interpreter. Although  he  expressed  concerns  about  the  appellant's
    evidence in respect of the claimed grenade attack and the  incident  in
    which her husband and eldest son were  killed,  he  accepted  that  the
    appellant had lost her husband and oldest son in a violent  attack  and
    also that her second oldest son had disappeared.  Despite the  concerns
    expressed at paragraph 15(i) of the determination  about  the  evidence
    concerning the claimed grenade attack, the judge appears  at  paragraph
    15(m) to have accepted that the attack  occurred.   However  the  judge
    went on  in  that  sub-paragraph  to  say  that  the  problem  for  the
    appellant was that she could not discharge  the  burden  of  proving  a
    causal nexus between a grenade attack on her house, the  death  of  her
    husband and oldest son almost  a  year  later  and  the  kidnapping  of
    another child some time after that.  He commented  that  the  appellant
    could not reliably say that the same person or group  was  behind  each
    such attack.  The background materials  quite  clearly  disclosed  that
    Iraq was a troubled country visited by violence every day and there was
    therefore force in the respondent's  submission  that  the  appellant's
    family had been the unfortunate victims of  random  acts  of  violence.
    The appellant had not led any evidence that she had  been  specifically
    targeted by a person or group.  There was an absence in her evidence of
    any mention of warnings, threats or declarations of responsibility  for
    any of the attacks.  Nor had there been any request for  a  ransom  for
    her son who had been kidnapped.  Given her  inability  to  identify  an
    agent of persecution responsible for the acts which the judge  accepted
    had happened, and without  having  given  evidence  of  being  specific
    targets for that persecution, the appellant had not shown that she  had
    a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.  The  judge
    went on to dismiss the appeal in respect of humanitarian protection and
    human  rights  issues.   Further  relevant  points  to  note  are   the
    appellant's response at question 121 at interview when  she  was  asked
    where her brother to whom she fled for a  period  of  some  two  months
    after the kidnapping lived, and she said it was in  Hasiraka  and  this
    was two streets away from her home. Hasiraka is an area of Kirkuk.   It
    is also relevant to note that in the screening interview the  appellant
    said that the agent was arranged by her brother and she  did  not  know
    how much was paid and she refers to the brother Hasan Salih as being  a
    very wealthy businessman in Iraq who had arranged everything.   Further
    relevant aspects of her evidence are that the appellant is  illiterate;
    her back was injured in the grenade attack; she arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom with no documents, she has had contact with her  brother  since
    she came to the United Kingdom, in that he  sent,  to  the  address  at
    which she still lives, photographs, but she says she is no longer  able
    to contact him on the number that she had for  him  and  either  it  no
    longer works or he has left; she cannot say where  he  is;  she  has  a
    sister in Iraq, but has had no contact with her sister since  she  came
    to the  United  Kingdom.  The  Senior  Immigration  Judge  who  ordered
    reconsideration in 2009 commented that  the  events  described  by  the
    appellant were capable of a finding of specific targeting  and  it  was
    contended that the judge had erred in finding  that  they  were  random
    acts of violence in the circumstances and it was perhaps unnecessary in
    those circumstances to identify the precise identity of  the  agent  of
    persecution.  In any event it was agreed  that  there  were  errors  in
    respect of the judge's findings on Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

Country Guidance

5.    It was subsequently decided that this would  be  an  appropriate  case
    for country guidance and it was directed on 30 September 2011 that  the
    case would provide country guidance on  the  issue  of  relocation  for
    women with children in Iraq, and whether an individual was required  to
    return to his/her home area in order to transfer/obtain  documents  and
    food rations.  In the event, due to the volume of evidence provided and
    the ways in which argument before  us  developed,  we  have,  with  the
    agreement of the representatives, found it possible to provide guidance
    on several other issues (see paragraph 88 below).

The Relevant Documents

6.    In many respects this case is concerned with documents: how to  obtain
    them, how to renew them, what use can be made of them. It is  important
    therefore at the outset that we identify the relevant  documents  which
    are of importance in Iraq.  They are conveniently listed in both of the
    experts' reports.  The first is the Civil Status Identity Card  (CSID).
    The second is the Iraqi Nationality Certificate (Shahdat al-Jinsiya al-
    Iraqiya) (INC), the third is the Public Distribution System (PDS)  card
    (food ration card).  In addition the information card is a  significant
    document, but, since it is used in  the  KRG  only,  it  is  considered
    separately when we come on to examine the evidence  pertaining  to  the
    KRG.  Dr Fatah in his report of 18 November 2011 has helpfully provided
    examples of each of these documents.

The Appellant's Submissions

7.    In his submissions Mr Hussain argued that the pivotal document for  an
    Iraqi was the CSID, followed by the INC and the PDS card.  Without CSID
    it was not possible to access any  of  the  other  documents,  and  the
    ability to  move  around  or  relocate,  enjoy  socio-economic  rights,
    housing and food rations/aid and address humanitarian needs inside Iraq
    could not be done without  considerable  difficulty  and  arguably  was
    impossible.  He quoted from Dr George's report of 15 November 2011  and
    Dr Fatah's report of 18 November 2011.  He argued  that  the  procedure
    for obtaining a replacement CSID card was  clear  as  set  out  in  the
    experts' evidence and by the UNHCR.   It was necessary  to  go  to  the
    place  of  origin  (place  of  birth)  to  obtain  a   CSID.    Without
    identification documents it was not possible to relocate  within  Iraq.
    It was not possible for an undocumented returnee to avoid returning  to
    their home area in order to obtain a replacement  CSID  card  and/or  a
    nationality certificate.  The suggestion that there were exceptions  as
    set out in the British Embassy letter of  22  January  2012  should  be
    treated with caution, as indeed the letter made clear.  This  view  was
    supported by Dr George in his report of 28 January 2012.  The nature of
    the procedures was confirmed by Professor Jawad in his  interview  with
    Dr George.

8.    It was also argued that there was no facility whereby an  undocumented
    returnee could obtain a replacement CSID card and/or INC  from  outside
    Iraq.  In this regard the evidence of both experts was cited  and  also
    the UNHCR in their note of 3 November 2011 made it clear that an  Iraqi
    identity card could only be issued inside Iraq.  It was accepted that a
    person who was documented or partially documented could  instigate  the
    process of obtaining replacement CSID but they would need, for example,
    a copy of their CSID or INC and then make use of a lawyer  in  Iraq  or
    relatives could attend to obtain replacement  documents.   Dr  George's
    evidence was that the appellant, having been returned  to  Iraq,  would
    not have the necessary contacts and influence to obtain a new  ID  card
    without having to go to Kirkuk.

9.    As regards the PDS card, it was Dr Fatah's  evidence  that  most  IDPs
    like many other Iraqis relied on the public distribution  system  (PDS)
    for basic food  but  faced  considerable  obstacles  in  accessing  the
    system.  A PDS card according to Dr George, quoting from the UNHCR, had
    to be renewed in the area of residence and required  the  CSID  of  all
    family members, a housing card, written statement by the head of family
    confirming the accuracy of the information and documents submitted  and
    in the KRG a letter from the mukhtar was  also  required.   Dr  Fatah's
    evidence was that  the  PDS  was  customarily  renewed  every  year  in
    December and had to be renewed at the branch of the Ministry  of  Trade
    in the area of origin. It was not possible, according to Dr  Fatah,  to
    transfer a PDS card from southern Iraq to the KRG.  It  could  only  be
    transferred within GoI territory.  Even within the GoI the bureaucratic
    procedures required were lengthy.

10.   As regards processing  and  exiting  from  the  Baghdad  International
    Airport (BIAP), it was not accepted there was a civil status  court  at
    BIAP. The evidence of the experts was that it was a one  off  procedure
    set up for the charter flights described in HM and ors (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC).  The evidence  was  as  set  out  in  Dr
    George's report of 15 November 2011 and the UNHCR Note at paragraph  73
    to 77.  The British Embassy letter confirmed that an EU letter was  not
    acceptable, but there was no suggestion that the screening  process  at
    BIAP had been dispensed with. The UNHCR memorandum of 3  November  2011
    made it clear that that  process  was  still  in  place  and  a  forced
    returnee without documentation confirming identity  would  be  detained
    until this was identified by  either  the  provision  of  documents  by
    relatives or presentation before a judge.

11.   Reliance was placed on the evidence of both  experts  with  regard  to
    travelling and relocating within GoI territory including  Kirkuk.  This
    was clearly, in the words of Dr Fatah, a challenging  experience.   The
    Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) report of December  2010
    set out the difficulties for IDPs.  There were particular  difficulties
    for female headed households, as set out in Dr George's  report  of  15
    November 2011.  As a Sunni the appellant would face risk  in  the  Shia
    dominated south and in mixed Sunni/Shia communities  in  central  Iraq.
    State assistance would be limited due to her having  left  the  country
    voluntarily.    It  was  also  argued  that  there  was  accepted  past
    persecution and reliance was placed on what was  said  at  the  hearing
    where error of law was found.  The appellant would be at risk on return
    to Kirkuk.   She would have to return there in order to obtain  renewal
    of her CSID.  The fact that she has sons aged 18 and 19  would  not  of
    itself deter potential attackers, and it would  be  difficult  for  her
    sons to find employment without an extended family/clan  network.   She
    could not be expected to pay a bribe to obtain a fake CSID card as this
    would be illegal, and she could not  be  expected  to  live  a  lie  by
    pretending to be someone else.

12.   As  regards  relocation,  this  had  to  be  reasonable.   As  regards
    relocation to the KRG, reliance was  placed  on  the  evidence  of  the
    experts as to the procedures.  The evidence appeared  to  show  that  a
    sponsor was required for anyone wishing to move to reside  in  the  KRG
    from the GoI.  It was necessary to have official identity documents  to
    begin the process and without this it would not be possible.  The UNHCR
    argued strongly against the ability of returnees  to  relocate  safely.
    Issue was taken with the conclusions of the Danish Immigration  Service
    Report of April 2010 as going contrary to points  made  in  the  expert
    evidence and evidence from the  UNHCR.   The  evidence  showed  that  a
    returnee would not be able to relocate internally to  the  KRG.   There
    were serious protection concerns in the KRG for people not  originating
    from that area.  The appellant and her family would face almost certain
    destitution due to her complete lack of pivotal  documentation  and  an
    inability to obtain replacements which could  amount  to  a  breach  of
    Article 3.

13.   The Convention reasons in the case were imputed political opinion  and
    membership of a particular social group. The former was on the basis of
    the family viewed as collaborators and the latter  on  the  basis  that
    women in Iraq could form  a  particular  social  group.   The  evidence
    concerning women showed that Iraqi women  were  subject  to  direct  or
    indirect threats to life, dignity, social relations and their status in
    the family or local community.  Reliance was placed on the evidence  of
    both experts in this regard.  Weight should be attached  to  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines.

14.   As regards Article 8, the removal of the older sons would be a  breach
    of Article 8 as they had entered the United Kingdom as children and  as
    a family unit, and they had  remained  as  a  family  unit  throughout.
    Separating the children would  be  disproportionate.   The  appellant's
    daughter S was  aged  9  and  therefore  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  applied.   Her  best  interests
    required to be given significant weight.

15.   Weight should not be attached to the submissions  made  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State. Reliance could not be placed on HM in light  of
    the decision of the Court of Appeal on 13 September 2011  ([2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1536).  The evidence in the letter of 11 November 2011 from the COI
    Service lacked weight. The unnamed individual was no longer in post and
    was unable to be tendered to be cross-examined.   The  letter  did  not
    state its source and was not signed or even initialled. It was  unclear
    what position in the British Embassy in Baghdad the  author  held.   It
    was clear that if a returnee had been out of Iraq  for  any  reasonable
    period of time they would be unlikely to be on  the  biometric  capture
    data base. Reference was made to Dr  George's  fourth  report  in  this
    regard. There was  no  indication  that  the  appellant  had  ever  had
    occasion for  her  biometric  details  to  be  recorded  on  any  Iraqi
    database.

16.   In a brief  supplementary  submission  Mr  Hussain  also  made  points
    concerning findings by the Tribunal in EA (Sunni/Shi'a mixed marriages)
    Iraq CG [2011] UKUT  342  (IAC)  concerning  whether  or  not  personal
    information relating to an individual's  religious  identity  would  be
    disclosed on identification documents currently used in Iraq.   It  was
    argued that in fact the religion of a person was displayed on the  CSID
    card and documentary evidence concerning that was provided.

The Respondent's Submissions

17.   In his submissions Mr Hopkin made  some  general  comments  about  the
    nature of country guidance cases and summarised also the extant country
    guidance as regards Iraq.  He placed reliance on the FCO letter  of  27
    July 2011 in respect of  documentation.   He  argued  that  there  were
    support mechanisms in place to assist those lacking  documentation  and
    that it was not necessary to return to the currently  registered  place
    of residence in order to transfer registration. There was no  longer  a
    requirement to have a sponsor on entry to the KRG.  He placed  reliance
    on the COIR of August 2011.  It was  accepted  that  several  documents
    were required for an Iraqi national to live and move including internal
    relocation within Iraq, and administrative processes existed to  permit
    the issuing of those documents to those who were entitled to  them  but
    lacked them.  Support from the authorities and other  groups  would  be
    forthcoming for those who were waiting to have  them  issued.    Issues
    respecting transferring PDS cards to the  KRG  were  matters  of  delay
    rather than prohibition.  There was support from the IOM and  UNHCR  in
    operating two national registration centres in Baghdad.  On return from
    the  UK,  Iraqi  nationals  might  have  access  to   assistance   with
    documentation, health care needs, employment, housing registration  and
    social welfare.  The Ministry of Displacement and Migration (MoDM) were
    registering up to 1,700 displaced families every  week.   The  Ministry
    was currently functioning to a fair standard at  the  very  least.   It
    closely cooperated with the  IOM.  There  was  also  support  from  the
    International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC). The evidence from the
    IDMC report suggested that most governorates had no entry  requirements
    although several  had  requirements  for  registration.   The  evidence
    relied on by the Secretary of State was both accurate and  independent.
     There was no requirement for returnees or IDPs  to  visit  their  home
    area or previously registered residence to obtain  new  or  replacement
    documents.  The sponsorship requirement  for  KRG  entry  or  stay  was
    largely nominal.

18.   As regards the issue of internal relocation for women  with  children,
    the data suggested that the majority of Iraqi women still  lived  in  a
    household headed by a man but significant numbers  of  women  had  been
    living without husbands in Iraq and there had been and continued to  be
    very significant population movement.  A small but sizeable  proportion
    of Iraqi citizens was not currently living in their  home  area.   Iraq
    was a conservative society in its views on women's  rights,  and  there
    was evidence to suggest that Iraqi  cultural  norms  circumscribed  the
    roles women might play.  Only a relatively small proportion of women in
    Iraq were in paid  employment  and  significant  resources  were  being
    applied to  help  women  in  female-  headed  households  overcome  the
    challenges facing them in Iraq.  The ICRC had indicated that grants had
    been awarded to the disabled and to women to start small businesses and
    become  economically   self-sufficient   again.    The   IOM   rendered
    significant assistance to both female heads  of  households  and  their
    dependent  minor  children.  The  US  Department  of  State   sponsored
    programmes to assist war widows.

19.   On the issue of the risks in  travelling  around  Iraq,  reliance  was
    placed on what had been said by the Tribunal in HM  at  paragraphs  278
    and 284 to 292.  Returning families headed by  women  who  were  failed
    refugees might suffer from straightened circumstances but were unlikely
    to be destitute, even with dependent children.

20.   As regards the experts, Dr Fatah was most  persuasive  when  he  spoke
    from  personal  knowledge  and  understanding  but  there  was  limited
    collection of evidence by him from those living and  working  in  Iraq.
    He speculated as to the possibility of detention by women and  children
    and entry to  the  KRG  if  not  in  possession  of  certain  essential
    documents and had no evidence to support this claim.  His sources  from
    the KRG were based upon "normal circumstances" and he did not refer  to
    the National Registration Centres in any of his reports.  He said  that
    the requirement to obtain a new document in the home area was  a  legal
    requirement but provided no foundation for this. He was persuasive with
    regard to the support that would be available from the  adult  sons  of
    the appellant and where he said that it was difficult to consider  that
    women were per se targets for the insurgents.  The sons would take  the
    responsibility for their mother.  His evidence in cross-examination was
    that  women  were  generally  able  to  relocate  internally  to  avoid
    sectarian difficulties.  He could not provide any reason why  a  female
    headed household might not fall within the protection network  provided
    by the IOM and/or the ICRC.  He said it was possible,  for  example  if
    the appellant knew someone influential, that she would be able to enter
    the KRG without any documents at all.  In respect of entry to  the  KRG
    his evidence was that no sponsor was required to  facilitate  this  for
    ethnic Kurds.  He agreed that relatives of returnees might be  able  to
    attend the airport to collect such a person and would be able to  vouch
    for the identity of the returnee to the authorities.  People collecting
    returnees with their own ID might be required to obtain a copy  of  the
    returnee's CSID to substantiate their identity.

21.   As regards Dr George, he had failed to differentiate at times  between
    known facts and assumptions. He had not  interviewed  anyone  from  the
    Ministry of Migration and Displacement but he had spoken to the head of
    the equivalent bureau within the KRG.   He agreed that the location  of
    one of the national registration centres was in east Baghdad and was of
    the view that  such  centres  existed  to  help  mainly  with  property
    restitution.  He had not accepted that the appellant's  sons  might  be
    considered as adults or that they might be able to protect and  support
    the appellant.  He was not able to substantiate the contention that  it
    was a legal requirement for a returnee to the home area  to  be  issued
    with documentation.  In conclusion the evidence did not show it was not
    possible for a person at risk in their home area to live  without  risk
    of  persecution  or  harm  in  the  absence  of  the  normal  suite  of
    identification documents.  Nor did the evidence show they would have to
    return to their home area to obtain the documents.   The  evidence  did
    not show that female- headed households had significant difficulties in
    travelling around Iraq.   Internal  relocation  was  possible  and  not
    unduly harsh.

Civil Status ID Card (CSID): how it is obtained, renewed

22.   It is common ground that the most  important  document  is  the  CSID.
    The evidence of the experts and UNHCR is that without the CSID card  it
    is impossible to access any of the other documents  listed  above,  and
    this has a clear impact on ability to move  around  Iraq,  to  relocate
    within Iraq and  to  enjoy  socio-economic  rights,  housing  and  food
    rations and to access aid and humanitarian support.

23.   Clearly therefore we must start with the CSID and consider how  it  is
    obtained.  As we shall  see,  this  has  implications  for  a  person's
    ability to return to Iraq as well  as  their  ability  to  move  around
    within the country.

24.   It is clear from Dr Fatah's report of 18 November  2011  at  paragraph
    87 and his oral evidence that when a child is born his  or  her  parent
    will often obtain their CSID at the same time as  registering  them  at
    the Civil Registry, where their birth is recorded on the Personal Civil
    Court Record page of the family. If the child is born  in  a  hospital,
    the hospital will provide the parents with two birth certificates, both
    of which are  taken  to  the  Office  of  Births  and  Deaths  in  that
    governorate, and stamped.  One certificate is then taken to  the  Civil
    Registry, and the birth is recorded in the Personal Civil Court  Record
    page for the family.  The Office of Official Registration will keep one
    copy of the birth certificate, the family the other. If a child is  not
    born in a hospital, both parents will go to the civil courts  and  fill
    in a form to record the child's birth, which is then  endorsed  by  the
    court, which will then issue two Proof of  Birth  certificates  to  the
    parents, who will then follow the procedure set out above.  Dr Fatah in
    his report of 18 November 2011 states that an individual who  does  not
    have a CSID has to go personally to their place of origin to obtain the
    document since each city and region has its own  official  registration
    records and issuing capacity and there is no central government  agency
    that holds all the records.  He describes  the  CSID  as  the  physical
    manifestation of the official registration record.  Dr Fatah said  that
    the CSID cannot be transferred to  any  other  governorate,  except  on
    marriage, when a woman will transfer to her husband's family's personal
    civil status ID page.

25.   Dr George  quotes  from  the  UNHCR's  Basrah  Governorate  Assessment
    Report of  August 2006 to the effect that a person seeking to  renew  a
    CSID would have to do so at any of the six  Civil  Affairs  Offices/MOI
    (Ministry of Interior) in the Basrah Governorate,  bringing  with  them
    their Iraqi birth certificate, an official letter from the Civil status
    Office of the applicant's home town, listing the members of the family,
    their PDS card, a letter from the Municipal  Council  confirming  their
    residency, their father's, uncle's or  grandfather's  citizenship  card
    (if none of these documents is  available,  different  procedures  will
    apply, involving the Baghdad ID and Nationality  Office,  two  personal
    photographs and a small fee).

26.   Dr Fatah also states that the Iraqi  Embassy  in  London  is  able  to
    issue a CSID provided the individual has with them  their  Iraqi  birth
    certificate, their father's Iraqi CSID (uncle's and grandfather's  CSID
    is also accepted) and an application form and a small fee.  As  regards
    the birth certificate, if the  person  does  not  have  this  in  their
    possession then it could be obtained from other family members in  Iraq
    from the Iraqi family registration office.  Once it had been issued  it
    would have to be approved (legalised) by the Iraqi Ministry of  Foreign
    Affairs and the  original  document,  approved  by  the  Iraqi  Foreign
    Ministry, would then have to be sent  to  the   individual  seeking  to
    obtain an Iraqi CSID to take it to the Iraqi Embassy in London.   If  a
    person has lost their CSID then they would have to take their  relevant
    documents plus the reference number of the lost ID  in  order  for  the
    Iraqi Embassy in London to issue a replacement.  If the person has lost
    the ID and does not know the reference number then they  cannot  obtain
    it from the Iraqi Embassy in London but would have to go personally  to
    their local office of family registration to  obtain  their  references
    and apply for a CSID in Iraq.

27.   However, when Dr Fatah conducted his own research into obtaining  CSID
    (and Nationality Certificates) from the Iraqi  Embassy  in  London,  he
    found that they were unable to issue them.  It is unclear whether  this
    is a temporary or permanent change from the situation  he  set  out  at
    paragraphs 71 and 72 of his report.  In any event,  he  says  that  the
    Embassy can take the required documents and post them to  the  relevant
    authorities in Iraq.  The Embassy advises  that  a  lawyer  in  Baghdad
    should be hired or relatives in Baghdad  instructed  to  follow  up  on
    obtaining the CSID or Nationality Certificate  after  the  Embassy  has
    sent the documents to Iraq.  To an extent this  is  borne  out  by  the
    evidence of Hassanain Hadi Fadhil, Second  Secretary,  Embassy  of  the
    Republic of Iraq, provided to a researcher of the   Country  of  Origin
    Information Service of the UKBA at an interview on 5 January 2012, that
    the Embassy would, in effect, act as an  intermediary  in  sending  the
    application for a lost CSID to the Ministry of Interior in Iraq, which,
    if satisfied with the application, would issue a new CSID card and send
    it to the  Embassy in London for collection.

28.   In the British Embassy, Baghdad, letter  of  22  January  2012  it  is
    confirmed that if an Iraqi citizen needed to renew their CSID card they
    would generally be required to visit the civil ID  office  where  their
    record is held.  They would have to present a copy of their  civil  ID,
    copy of a PDS card, copy of  their  nationality  certificate  residence
    card from the local council and two coloured photographs.  It  is  said
    however that it would  be  possible  for  close  relatives  from  their
    father's side to visit the civil ID  Office  or  Directorate  on  their
    behalf to obtain the reissue of an ID or a power of attorney  could  be
    granted to someone to do it on a person's behalf.  If the ID  was  lost
    then in addition to the above they  would  be  required  to  produce  a
    written statement declaring the circumstances of the loss  which  would
    be seen by an investigation court.  They would also have  to  place  an
    announcement in the local newspaper.  This  is  described  as  being  a
    simple and straightforward process.

29.   This letter goes on to state exceptions to the requirement  to  return
    to the place of origin to re-acquire the CSID card.  These include  the
    situation where  a person does not feel safe, in which  case  they  can
    report this to the Ministry of Displacement and Migration who would  be
    able to support the transfer of the records to the area they  now  wish
    to live in (contrary to Dr Fatah's evidence set out above, unless  this
    is a reference to transfer within a governorate), and  the  possibility
    if they were abroad of  enlisting the assistance of the  Iraqi  Embassy
    in the country they are in which would involve  the  completion  of  an
    application form by the head  of  the  family  (male  or  female),  the
    applicant or a guardian or lawyer with a power  of  attorney.   If  the
    request is for a lost ID, a copy of the lost ID should be  provided  or
    that of a close relative such as the applicant's brother or  father  or
    another relative.  It is said  that  because  the  "book  page"  record
    number of Iraqis remains the same for their  life  and  the  pages  are
    closely linked to their relatives (evidence which chimes very much with
    that of Dr George and Dr Fatah), (see e.g. paragraph 9 above), if their
    own ID or a copy is not available  it  is  usually  straightforward  to
    identify the citizen from the records of other relatives.

30.   Dr George in his report of 15 November  2011  refers  to  a  telephone
    interview he had with Professor Saad Jawad who  is  a  Senior  Visiting
    Fellow of the Middle East Centre at the London School of Economics  and
    Political Science.  At paragraph 72  Dr  George  notes  that  Professor
    Jawad  said  that  for  people  who   had   lost   original   documents
    (specifically CSID and nationality certificate) but who had copies  and
    who had relatives in Iraq, it was much easier to ask relatives in  Iraq
    to obtain replacement documents from the relevant offices than  it  was
    to attempt this via the Embassy, as  the  Embassy  would  want  to  see
    original documents.  Dr George had earlier referred to the  information
    on the Iraqi Foreign Ministry website of  procedures  to  be  taken  by
    Iraqi Embassies to obtain replacements  for  lost  documents  including
    CSIDs, and saw Dr Jawad's comments as according with the information on
    the website.

31.   Dr George, like Dr Fatah, is clear that a person needing to  obtain  a
    replacement ID card, having lost their original, would have  to  go  to
    their home area.  He did not see any supporting evidence elsewhere  for
    the suggestion in the British Embassy Baghdad letter of 22 January 2012
    that the MoDM would support a transfer of a person's records to an area
    they would wish to live in now if they did not feel safe.  (This letter
    was provided as a consequence of enquiries made by the embassy to staff
    at the MoDM in Baghdad,  the  Ministry  of  Interior  in  Baghdad,  the
    International Organisation for Migration (IDM) in Baghdad and in  Erbil
    (KRG) and the International Rescue Committee in  Erbil  (including  its
    legal adviser)).  In this regard, it is relevant to note  the  evidence
    of Mr Fadhil, referred to above, to the effect that  there  might  have
    been such cases up to 2007 perhaps, but thereafter the  improvement  in
    the security situation meant there need be no fear of  returning  to  a
    particular area of Iraq to re-obtain CSID.  Nor did  Dr  George  accept
    the suggestion also to be found in that letter that a refugee or failed
    asylum seeker returning to Iraq on their passport, expired passport  or
    laissez passer travel document without a civil ID card would be able to
    pass through security checks  on  the  road  to  their  home  or  to  a
    temporary hotel or relatives or friends, being required only to present
    their passport.

32.   In cross-examination, Mr Hopkin referred Dr George to Article  6.1  of
    the Civil Status Act Number 65, 1972 (amended by Act 9 of 1974).   This
    states as follows:

         "The General Directorate [defined  in  Article  1,  the  definition
         section, as 'the Nationality and Civil Status General Directorate']
         shall keep in its office the  First Original Copy of parts  of  the
         Civil Register ['The Principle (sic) Register containing the  Civil
         Status Registration  of  Iraqis']  in  which  events  and  entries,
         detailed explanations, additions and crossing out/highlighting  are
         fixed, and which are decided to be added in the Second Copy that is
         distributed  to   the   Civil   Status   Departments   across   the
         Administrative Units, in accordance with  official  documents  that
         are clearly specified in accordance with  the  provisions  of  this
         Act."

33.   Dr George saw no support in practice for  the  argument  that  Article
    6.1 provided for the existence of a master copy of a person's  records.
    Dr George's comment was that  the  law  said  what  it  said,  but  his
    understanding of the actual situation was what he  had  described.   He
    pointed to the absence of any reference to this in any other  piece  of
    evidence before the Tribunal.

34.   Paragraph 30.06 of the COIR of August 2011 refers to information  that
    the MoDM has processes in place to help IDPs and returnees  obtain  any
    missing documentation, both in southern/central Iraq and in the KRG.  A
    representative of the MoDM  was  quoted  as  saying  that  it  was  not
    necessary for an individual to return  to  their  registered  place  of
    residence to transfer documents to  a new area of Iraq, and that it  is
    possible for instance to apply at a registration office in  Baghdad  to
    have documents transferred from elsewhere in Iraq, though  in  practice
    (echoing Mr Fadhil) this did not  happen as it was now safe enough  for
    someone to return to their registered place of residence to arrange  to
    transfer documents.  Mr Hopkin  raised  the  issue  of  redocumentation
    centres with Dr Fatah.  He saw no reason why they would not assist.  He
    was  referred  to  paragraph  265  of  HM  [2010]   UKUT   331   (IAC),
               which mentions UK returnees  being  signposted  to  relevant
    agencies that assist with documentation problems.   Dr  Fatah  was  not
    aware of the function of such centres, though  he  surmised  that  they
    were set up to help people  obtain  documentation  through  the  proper
    channels.  He reiterated that it was not possible for a person to renew
    their CSID other than from the place where they  were  registered.   He
    was not aware  of  the  existence  of  Protection  Assessment  Centres,
    referred to in an FCO letter of 7 June 2010, where individuals are said
    to be able to access legal advice and support with re-documentation and
    relocation, nor of the reference by an MoDM official, referred to in at
    the  British Embassy, Baghdad letter  of   19  September  2011  to  the
    possibility of applying  for  instance  at  a  registration  office  in
    Baghdad to have documents transferred from elsewhere in Iraq (the  COIR
    point above), but he held to his view that documentation  can  only  be
    obtained from the place of residence.

35.   We sought and ultimately received submissions and evidence  concerning
    the legal basis for the contention that a person is required to  obtain
    a Civil Status ID card by  attendance  in  person  in  their  place  of
    origin.  Dr George helpfully obtained evidence from two UNHCR officials
    based in Iraq (source A and source B) whose identity we were content to
    be kept confidential.  It would seem from their evidence that the legal
    basis for this is an  internal  instruction  by  the  Ministry  of  the
    Interior. As Dr George points out at paragraph 16 of his report  of  29
    January 2012, Article 59 of Civil Status Law  Number  65  of  1972,  as
    amended by Act 9 of 1974, states:

         "It  is  permitted  to  issue  regulations  and   instructions   to
         facilitate the implementation of the provisions of this Act."

      Dr George's source B informed him on 15 December 2011  that  a  lawyer
    can represent a client through a power of attorney at the  CSID  office
    to obtain a copy of a family book only but not the CSID.  (We  take  it
    that this means that they obtain a copy of the Personal Civil ID record
    of the individual). If a person were  outside  Iraq  then  a  power  of
    attorney to the lawyer would be accepted and an approach would have  to
    be made to the Iraqi Embassy in the country they were in,  which  would
    have to be accompanied by a photograph of the lawyer to be appointed in
    Iraq and a copy of his or her Bar Association ID, a copy of the lost or
    damaged CSID of the individual or their family book.  If they were  not
    available then a copy  of  the  CSID  family  book  of  their  parents,
    brother, sister, uncle, spouse,  father-in-law,  any  relatives  within
    their family.  If none of those were available then the  record  number
    or page number of their or any relative's family book or CSID.  In  the
    absence of any of these relatives then it was said by  an  official  in
    charge of the CSID office in Kirkuk that it would be nearly  impossible
    to  start  the  process,  as  the  records  were  not  computerised  or
    electronic and they would not be able to look manually through all  the
    family records.  If any of the  above  conditions  were  met  then  the
    application would be sent to Baghdad  and  the  assigned  lawyer  could
    follow it up.  It was emphasised by the UNHCR officials repeatedly that
    the  rules,  regulations  and  practices  vary   considerably   between
    different parts of Iraq and over time without any obvious or  at  least
    publically  available  reasons.   This  is  a  matter  that  has   been
    emphasised by Dr George and Dr Fatah throughout their evidence  and  in
    particular, as Dr George points out at paragraph 11 of his report of 29
    January 2012, entry/residence procedures in the KRG  vary  between  the
    three KRG governorates and are not  based  on  written  regulations  or
    least none that have been made public.  He  also  emphasises  generally
    the significance of "wasta" in Iraq, the widespread use of personal and
    family contacts  to  obtain  desired  outcomes  which  may  enable  the
    circumvention of regulations and laws.  Dr George considers  it  likely
    that a person within Iraq with sufficiently good contacts and influence
    would be able to obtain an ID card without having to attend  in  person
    in their home area but saw no evidence that the appellant  was  such  a
    person.

Documentation required for Returnees

36.   The 22 January 2012 letter  raises  the  issue  of  the  documentation
    required for a returnee.  In a letter dated 26 October 2011, the Second
    Secretary (Migration)  (Migration  Delivery  Officer)  of  the  British
    Embassy, Baghdad, describes the process for UK returnees.  It  is  said
    that there is no specific list of documents required to secure entry at
    Baghdad International Airport (BIAP), but in  the  past  the  escorting
    officers have presented CSIDs, Nationality  Certificates,  military  ID
    cards and driving licences.  Copies of these documents  are  passed  to
    the British Embassy by UKBA, and are subsequently presented to the Head
    of Immigration  at  BIAP  when  permission  is  sought  to  remove  the
    individual to Iraq.  There is also  reference  to  an  accompanying  EU
    letter.  It is said that alternatively some returnees may have been pre-
    cleared for removal to Baghdad on the basis of interviews  carried  out
    in the UK by officers of the Iraqi Immigration Service.

37.   The letter goes on to say that a returnee will be interviewed  briefly
    with a view to confirming his identity  and  nationality,  and  if  the
    Iraqi Immigration Service are satisfied that he holds Iraqi nationality
    and has sufficient Iraqi documentation, he will be  taken  forward  for
    further processing. If they are not satisfied, he will be  returned  to
    the United Kingdom.  If he proceeds, biometric details will be captured
    and compared to  existing  details  on  the  immigration  and  security
    database.  If these show no outstanding police warrants or  alerts  for
    possible terrorist-related incidents, his details will be logged and he
    will be allowed to depart.  If they do, he will be  passed  on  to  the
    Iraqi police and/or the Iraqi Intelligence Service.  If  in  possession
    of his CSID he will be free to return home.  If he  arrives  simply  on
    the strength of an EU letter (i.e. without copies of  Iraqi  documents)
    he will be detained at the BIAP police station until either  family  or
    friends produce evidence  of  identity  or  the  courts  determine  his
    nationality and identity.  This is said to have been the  case  with  a
    number of returnees from the UK on charter flights in  2010  (no  month
    stated).  There was evidence from Dr Fatah and Dr George of an  ad  hoc
    (as they regarded it)  court  set  up  to  deal  with  cases  involving
    returnees.

38.   In the British Embassy letter of 22 January  2012,  it  is  said  that
    currently EU letters are  not  acceptable  for  enforced  or  voluntary
    returns to Baghdad. This chimes with information received by Dr George,
    and referred to in his report of January  2012,  that  Iraqis  forcibly
    deported by EU states will  not  be  accepted  by  the  authorities  in
    Baghdad, and that Iraqi embassies will not assist with the provision of
    documentation for such returnees.  It is  unclear  from  either  source
    whether this is a temporary or permanent measure.  In the letter it  is
    said that: "A valid passport, expired passport or laissez passer travel
    document is required which was introduced by the  Iraqi  Government  in
    October 2011".  It is unclear what is meant by a laissez passer  travel
    document.  Mr Hopkin was unable to assist on the  point.   However,  in
    the UNHCR response of 3 November 2011 to a request from Dr  George  for
    further information, it is said that persons who enter BIAP with only a
    laissez passer or travel document will  be  held  at  the  BIAP  police
    station until their identity  is  established.   If  a  person  has  no
    identification  documents,  and  no  family  members  who  could  bring
    documentation to the airport,  presentation  before  a  judge  will  be
    required. It is further said that no documentation would be  issued  at
    the  airport,   but  a  letter  would  be  issued  to  facilitate   the
    individual's movement back to their place of origin/relocation.

39.   In light of this, if the change referred to in the Embassy  letter  of
    22 January is temporary, we accept what is said in  the  letter  of  26
    October 2011 about the process. If it is permanent, we accept  what  is
    said in the UNHCR response of 3 November  2011.   The  implications  of
    these alternatives for the appellant will be considered when we turn to
    specific consideration of her case.

40.   Bringing this evidence together, we accept that the general  position,
    as set out in an instruction by the Ministry of the Interior, is that a
    person has to go to their home  area  to  replace  a  lost  CSID.   The
    absence of any mention in any of  the  background  evidence  concerning
    Article 6.1 of the law of 1972 persuades us that, although it is on the
    statute book, there is nothing to show that it is, or perhaps ever  has
    been, the case that a central register in Baghdad has been  kept.   Nor
    do we accept that the role of the National Documentation Centres or any
    of the NGOs goes beyond the provision of  assistance  to  returnees  in
    obtaining documents and ancillary matters such as property restitution.
     We understand the system to be one of record keeping in the local area
    where the details of the family are kept in one of a  series  of  books
    and added to as the family members are born or join the family  through
    marriage.  Equally a woman will become part  of  her  husband's  family
    page on marriage and the record in respect of  her  family  page  would
    show her move to her husband's family page at the time of marriage.

41.   Equally, it is clear that this is not an absolute rule, and  a  person
    who is abroad may be able to make use of the process we have  described
    above through the offices of the Iraqi Embassy in the country they  are
    in, if the procedures we have set out above as described in the British
    Embassy letter of 22 January 2012 can be satisfied (Dr George's  fourth
    report at paragraph 10 4d).  In the normal course of events in the case
    of a person outside Iraq we can see no  reason  why  it  would  not  be
    possible by use of family members and/or a lawyer in their  home  area,
    to get the necessary information to the local Embassy  and  enable  the
    issue of a new CSID.  Given the importance of the CSID, we consider  it
    is most unlikely that a person would not have memorised the  number  of
    their card or the book number and page number of the family  record  in
    the local office, and would hence be able  to  access  the  information
    that would enable a new card to  be  issued.   These  conclusions  have
    clear implications for the ability of a person to renew their  INC  and
    PDS, discussed below.  In any event, it seems from the  UNHCR  evidence
    that following an  appearance  before  a  judge  at  the  airport,  the
    returnee would be issued with a letter to facilitate  their  return  to
    their place of origin.

Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC)

42.   According to Dr Fatah the Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC)  can  be
    obtained  from  an  office   of   the   Directorate   of   Travel   and
    Nationality/Ministry of Interior, except in the KRG (we shall  use  the
    acronym KRG (Kurdish Regional Government) to denote the Kurdish  region
    of Iraq as, though there are other acronyms for the region e.g. IKR, it
    remains, at least for now, the one most commonly used) where  they  are
    issued by the Directorate of Nationality and Civil  Status/Ministry  of
    the Interior or the Directorate of Nationality and Civil Identification
    documents.  The nationality certificate must be collected in person due
    to the unreliability of the postal service.  There has to be  submitted
    to the relevant directorate an application  form  with  two  500  dinar
    stamps, a copy of the father's,  brother's,  grandfather's  or  uncle's
    nationality certificate, PDS card, a housing card or supporting  letter
    from the local council to confirm the applicant's residence in the  KRG
    (only there must be a recommendation letter from the mukhtar to confirm
    residence) and two photographs of the applicant  (four  photographs  in
    the KRG).  The KRG, according to Dr Fatah, does not allow the  transfer
    of INCs to the KRG region from within Iraq or vice  versa,  or  between
    governorates in the GoI territory.

43.   Dr  George's  evidence  concerning  the  obtaining  of  a  nationality
    certificate  which  he  takes  from  the  UNHCR's   Basra   governorate
    assessment report of August 2006, states that the  following  documents
    are required: a civil ID card, food ration  card,  an  official  letter
    from the civil status office in the applicant's home town  listing  the
    members of the family, a letter from the municipal  council  confirming
    the applicant's residency and two person's photographs.  There is  also
    a fee to be paid.  Subsequently in his report of 15  November  2011  Dr
    George refers to the written guidance for the  voluntary  repatriations
    of Iraqis, issued by UNHCR in May 2011, which  is  entirely  consistent
    with Dr Fatah's evidence.  Accordingly it seems  preferable  to  regard
    the document of 2006 referred to by  Dr  George  as  outdated,  and  we
    accept that the documents required for the obtaining of the INC are  as
    set out by Dr Fatah at paragraph 81 of his 18 November 2011 report  and
    confirmed by Dr George at paragraph 27 of his  report  of  15  November
    2011 though, in light of the importance attached to the CSID, we  think
    it very likely that it also has to be produced.

PDS Card

44.   Dr George goes on at paragraph 28 of the same report to refer  to  the
    documents required for the renewal of the PDS card.   The  card,  which
    represents the entitlement each Iraqi has to a monthly food basket,  at
    nominal cost, may be renewed in Iraq at the Ministry of Trading  Branch
    in the area of residence and the documents required for renewal are the
    CSID of all members of the family, personal civil  ID  record,  housing
    card (or supporting letter from the local  council  to  prove  area  of
    residence) written statements by the head of the family confirming  the
    accuracy of the information and documents submitted and in  the  KRG  a
    letter from the mukhtar is also required.  Dr Fatah says that the  card
    may only be transferred in GoI territory and it cannot  be  transferred
    to the KRG.

Entry into and Residence in the KRG

45.   In his report of 15 November 2011 Dr George  quotes  extensively  from
    and agrees with the Danish Immigration Service Report "Entry Procedures
    and  Residence  in  the  Kurdistan  Region  of  Iraq  (KRG)  for  Iraqi
    Nationals" of April 2010.  It is the case that at paragraph 160 of  his
    second report he took issue with the report in that its  contents  were
    sometimes contradictory and unclear, but he agrees with the element  of
    it referred to in this part of his report.   He  also  spoke  to  UNHCR
    officials in Erbil on 7 April 2011 and his report in  this  respect  is
    largely an amalgam of the fruits of his own researches on that day  and
    the  content,  where  relevant,  of  the  Danish  report.   Dr   George
    emphasises  again  the  absence  of  any  written  formal   rules   and
    regulations  governing  entry  to  the  KRG  and,  as  a   consequence,
    inconsistencies   between   different   governorates   and    different
    checkpoints.  He reminded us that it is the case that the KRG will  not
    accept individuals forcibly returned to the KRG from abroad although in
    principle they would accept individuals forcibly returned to  Iraq  via
    Baghdad Airport. His understanding is that it is not possible to  apply
    formally for entry to the KRG in advance of arrival.

Information Card

46.   As regards the position on arrival at the KRG,  UNHCR  officials  told
    Dr George that there are  three  types  of  entry  card  which  can  be
    requested on arrival, a tourist card which may be valid for between one
    and thirty days, a work card which can be valid  for  between  ten  and
    fifteen days, although in respect of which the applicant must present a
    letter from his employer in the KRG, and  an  information  card  (which
    used to be called a  residence  card)  which  is  for  the  purpose  of
    residence.  Dr George  describes  the  information  card  as  being  of
    unknown validity, which we take to mean that no period is specified for
    the duration of its validity.  A range of information must be  provided
    in order to obtain a  card  and  the  details  will  be  registered  on
    computer systems and applicants will  be  photographed  electronically.
    The key documents to be presented on arrival at a  KRG  checkpoint  are
    the CSID card and the Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC).

47.   It seems, depending on the checkpoint, that where  a  person  seeks  a
    residence/ information card, they  may  be  asked  to  have  a  sponsor
    present or to provide a letter from the sponsor, notarised by a  court.
    Either a person or institution may be a sponsor.   Where  a  person  or
    family wishes to reside and has been issued with an information card on
    entry, they must register at a local office of  the  internal  security
    agency (the Asayish) within ten days of arrival.  Registration involves
    the presentation of the CSID card and the INC, the ration card, a  copy
    of the rental or house purchase agreement, a letter  of  recommendation
    from the mukhtar of the location where they intend to live and a letter
    from   the   sponsor/guarantor,   notarised   by    a    court.     The
    sponsor/guarantor does not need to be present and such a person is  not
    required where  the  applicant  can  produce  a  letter  from  a  well-
    established or well-known employer such as a  KRG  agency.   The  local
    Asayish office, having collated the required information, will transfer
    the file to the governorate Asayish headquarters office where the  file
    will be reviewed and the information card approved.  In the  Erbil  and
    Dohuk governorates the information card is valid for a year and can  be
    extended on a yearly basis, whereas in the Suleymaniya governorate  the
    cards have unlimited validity.

48.   An employee of a KRG agency is permitted to own a house in  their  own
    name.  Non- KRG Iraqis who are not  employed  by  the  KRG  cannot  own
    property in their own names although they may rent a property or own it
    via an existing KRG resident.  Once a person has secured  a  residence,
    whether owned or rented, they must  obtain  a  letter  from  the  local
    Asayish office to take to the governorate administration who will issue
    formal permission for a person if  they  so  wish  to  bring  household
    effects into the KRG.  It is also said that a  non-KRG  Iraqi  who  has
    lived in the KRG may apply for the transfer  of  his  former  residence
    registration from his place of origin to his new address  in  the  KRG,
    although few people take up this option in practice as the registration
    transfer process is lengthy and bureaucratically complex.

49.   With regard to the transfer of PDS cards, it  is  said  that  although
    there  was  a  period  between  2007  and  2009  when  cards  could  be
    transferred,  that  is  no  longer  the  case.  There  are,  it  seems,
    exceptions in the case of certain persons,  whose  characteristics  are
    not described, but even in such cases the bureaucratic  procedures  are
    lengthy.

50.   Dr Fatah's evidence on relocation to the  KRG  is  broadly  consistent
    with that of Dr George.  He expresses criticisms  of  the  Danish  Fact
    Finding Mission of 2011, on the basis that it relied heavily on two KDP
    officers, who are part of the secret security service of the  KDP,  and
    the Director General of  Yezidi  Affairs  who  collectively,  he  says,
    cannot be regarded as being totally  impartial,  since  they  all  hold
    political positions.  He makes the  point  that  UNHCR  withdrew  their
    support  for  the  Danish  Report  of  2011,  re-asserting  their  2009
    guidelines.  The Danish Report of 2011 contends that even by early 2010
    elements of the UNHCR 2009 guidelines  were  outdated.   Dr  Fatah  was
    unable to make effective contact with UNHCR.

51.   We do not consider that Dr Fatah's criticism made of the  2011  Danish
    Report is made out, in that it seems to us that a wider range of people
    provided information that was relied on than the KDP officers  who,  Dr
    Fatah said, provided most of the information.  We understand the  point
    Dr Fatah  makes  that  information  from  sources  who  have  political
    appointments may have to be taken with a pinch of salt, and accordingly
    most of the evidence we set out below from the 2011 report  comes  from
    other entities who may be thought to have a more objective view.

52.   Dr Fatah emphasised differences in the position for  Arabs  and  Kurds
    seeking to enter the KRG.  He said that an Arab would require to have a
    KRG born and resident  sponsor  and/or  an  acquaintance  in  order  to
    legalise their stay and the need to establish either political links to
    the region or provide evidence that the person  in  question  had  fled
    violence or persecution.  He said that these procedures were  in  force
    even for an individual seeking to visit rather than relocate.

53.   He said that the position for Kurds was different  in  that  they  did
    not need a guarantor or what was locally known  as  "kafil".   He  said
    however that both Kurds and Arabs would  not  be  allowed  to  transfer
    their food ration cards from outside the KRG  into  the  KRG.   Such  a
    person would therefore have to collect their monthly rations  in  their
    town or city of origin although they had relocated to the KRG.  He  did
    not agree with what had been  said  by  KRG  officials  to  the  Danish
    reporters in 2010 concerning the sponsorship system having been lifted,
    as he said this applies only to people who wished to visit the KRG, and
    families and individuals wishing to live there were still  required  to
    provide a sponsor/guarantor (the kafil).

54.   The Danish Mission in March 2010 was  told  that  any  Iraqi  national
    with an Iraqi ID was free to enter the KRG and  free  to  reside  there
    after registration at a local Asayish office.  The report  also  states
    that there is no demand for a sponsor or guarantor to be present at KRG
    checkpoints in order for an Iraqi national to be allowed entry into the
    KRG.  The report also noted  that  there  were  no  accounts  of  Iraqi
    nationals, irrespective of religious or ethnic background, or place  of
    origin in Iraq, being discriminated against at KRG  checkpoints  or  in
    the KRG, nor of any such people having been deported from  the  KRG  to
    elsewhere in Iraq, including the disputed areas.  Nor  were  there  any
    records of Iraqi  nationals  having  been  deported  from  the  KRG  to
    elsewhere in Iraq, including the  disputed  areas,  for  not  having  a
    sponsor/ guarantor and, although such a person was legally  responsible
    for the person they were sponsoring, there  were  no  accounts  of  any
    sponsor/guarantor having been arrested or detained by KRG authorities.

55.   Dr Fatah goes on to make the point, also remarked upon by  Dr  George,
    that there is no consistent policy across the borders of  the  KRG  but
    there are short term policies determined by  the  particular  situation
    and they change frequently without the public being informed.  This  is
    a point also made by UNHCR in a report of 10 January 2011.  The  Danish
    Report of 2011 however states that this is not the case  and  according
    to their sources all KRG checkpoints  abide  by  a  unified  procedure,
    albeit a procedure built on rules and regulations not laid down in  law
    and not available to the public. The Danish  Report  also  acknowledges
    that while the entry procedures are fixed, in times of heightened risk,
    security precautions are tightened arbitrarily and officers are free to
    use their experiences and "judgment", both of which can cause delays at
    checkpoints.

56.   Dr Fatah's comment on this is that the Danish Report  of  2011  cannot
    state with absolute certainty that KRG officials execute the  procedure
    without inconsistency on the basis that  it  is  impossible  to  verify
    orthodoxy where there is a procedure that is not laid down in  law  and
    is based upon the orders of senior officials which can  be  subject  to
    change at any time.

Moving to the KRG

57.   Drawing this evidence together, we accept that, though there may be  a
    unified procedure in theory at all KRG checkpoints, it  is  subject  to
    variations and change from time to time, especially at times of  actual
    or perceived heightened risk.   We also accept the generally consistent
    evidence as to  the  three  types  of  entry  card  (tourist  work  and
    information), and the fact that a Kurd wishing to enter  the  KRG  will
    not need a guarantor or sponsor (kafil), though an Arab may.  There  is
    a requirement of registration with the Asayish, at which time the CSID,
    the INC, the PDS card, a copy of a rental or house purchase  agreement,
    a letter of recommendation from the mukhtar of  the  area  of  proposed
    residence and, perhaps  a  letter  from  a  sponsor  will  have  to  be
    provided.

Living in the KRG

58.   Assuming that relocation to the KRG can be effected,  we  move  on  to
    consider the evidence relevant to a person's ability  to  live  in  the
    KRG.  The Danish Immigration Service Report of 2011 contains a  section
    on IDPs' access to housing, health care, education and employment.  The
    Danish reporters consulted a number of sources, including several NGOs,
    and three international organisations, who were  identified,  at  their
    request, only by letters of the alphabet.  The  Harikar  NGO/Protection
    and Assistance Centre (PAC) in Dohuk said that IDPs in the KRG have the
    same rights as all other residents there and have access  to  the  same
    public services, such as health care  and  education  as  well  as  the
    labour market.  This was confirmed by Bahroz Quashany, the governor  of
    the Sulemaniya governorate among others.  It is said by the Public  Aid
    Organisation (PAO)/Protection and Assistance Centre  (PAC)  Erbil  that
    there had been no change  in  the  procedure  for  renting  housing  or
    apartments since the Danish Immigration Service's  previous  report  on
    the KRG in early 2010.  According  to  paragraph  7.4  of  the  earlier
    report, the majority of the IDPs interviewed  by  the  delegation  said
    that they lived in rented accommodation.  A number of people  in  Dohuk
    and Erbil were interviewed in 2010 and  they  do  not  appear  to  have
    experienced difficulty in finding rented accommodation.   Returning  to
    the 2011 report, it was said by  international  organisation  (B)  that
    Iraqi Arabs in contrast to other Iraqi citizens of  the  KRG  were  not
    entitled to purchase immobile property in contrast to the  other  parts
    of the country.   It  was  said  that  they  required  permission  from
    security agencies as well as the Directorate of Property and  it  would
    generally   be   granted    to    highly    qualified    professionals,
    parliamentarians, ministers and people who brought in investment  of  a
    certain amount.  In the case of any IDP it  was  explained  by  PAO/PAC
    that there were long and tiresome procedures for anyone who  wished  to
    buy a house or a plot of land.  For a person wishing to rent a house or
    an apartment they would have to approach the local mukhtar in the  area
    where they intended to reside and the mukhtar would then  register  the
    owner of the house or apartment  and  the  lodger  would  also  need  a
    security clearance from the local Asayish office and in some cases  the
    lodger would need to provide a reference.

59.   As regards access to health care, according to PAO/PAC, all IDPs  have
    access to the public services like everyone else in the  KRG  and  that
    treatment in public hospitals and clinics is free of charge.

60.   With regard to education, international  organisation  (B)  said  that
    there were only four Arabic schools in the city of Erbil and they  were
    all overcrowded.  The  organisation  said  that  there  was  a  general
    shortage of Arabic schools in the KRG and many Arabic  speaking  people
    had difficulty when they attended the schools.  Language was said to be
    a big issue.  PAO/PAC however said that there were many Arabic  schools
    in the KRG and even Kurdish schools had compulsory courses  in  Arabic.
    In contrast to what was said by international organisation (B), PAO/PAC
    said that there were eleven Arabic as well as two Assyrian  schools  in
    Erbil city although it confirmed that most of the Arabic  schools  were
    overcrowded.  PAO/PAC went on to say that IDPs have free access to  all
    public schools in the KRG but  that  in  practice  only  1,000  out  of
    approximately 3,000 IDP students in Erbil governorate  have  access  to
    education as the majority of IDPs are living in the relatively poor and
    remote areas of the governorate where there is a  lack  of  educational
    faculties.  It was explained by Mr Hamo, Director of the Directorate of
    Displacement and Migration in Dohuk that IDPs put some pressure on  the
    capacity of the educational system in the Dohuk governorate  and  there
    is a lack of capacity to absorb the many IDP children in Dohuk  primary
    and secondary schools.  All children have access  to  schools  and  the
    option of attending school,  but  there  are  children  living  the  in
    countryside who have a long way to travel to school, and transportation
    is a problem.

61.   On the question of access  to  the  labour  market,  it  was  said  by
    international organisation (B) that language is an important issue  and
    anyone who does not speak Kurdish will not be able to take up a  "white
    collar job" within the  governorate.  Qualified  IDPs  who  speak  only
    Arabic would not have access to qualified jobs in  the  KRG  and  would
    only be able to take up ordinary labour.  Mr Hamo denied that an Arabic
    speaking IDP would find it difficult to find a job because of  language
    barriers,  but  accepted  that  IDPs  who  are  not  well  educated  or
    integrated might  find  it  rather  difficult  to  find  a  stable  job
    immediately, and IDPs with no particular skills might put some pressure
    on the local community where they lived.  There was no economic support
    for unemployed people, but some NGOs and charity organisations provided
    some assistance for those in need, for example food, but there  was  no
    financial support.  Unemployment is high in the KRG and  that  affected
    the local population as well as IDPs.   It  was  difficult  for  Iraqis
    coming to the KRG to have their PDS card transferred from  their  place
    of origin and therefore it was common for IDPs from outside the KRG  to
    go back to the place where their PDS card is valid in order to  collect
    their food rations every month.  This tallies with the evidence  of  Dr
    Fatah.

62.   According to PAO/PAC there is a lack of skilled labour in the KRG  and
    it is easy for IDPs with  skills  to  get  employment  in  the  private
    sector.  The organisation said that ethnicity or religious  orientation
    has no influence whatever on employment possibilities for  those  IDPs,
    and companies sometimes even look for Arabic speaking labour. IDPs  all
    had free access to the labour market and they were in demand. Access to
    casual labour was very unstable, and whether or not  an  unskilled  IDP
    would be hired depended on the day  to  day  situation  in  the  labour
    market, and normally unskilled IDPs would  seek  casual  employment  by
    waiting at the local market  place  for  employers  to  show  up.   The
    organisation also said that the majority of those seeking employment in
    the KRG are not IDPs but people living in the disputed areas who go  to
    the KRG on a daily basis looking for casual jobs.

63.   On the question of the significance of social  networks,  the  Harikar
    NGO/PAC said that if a person had a job, he or she should  be  able  to
    get by in society even though  they  were  on  their  own  and  without
    relatives or family.  It was also said that single women were often  in
    a better position to get a job than single men due  to  the  perception
    that women were more reliable and did not pose a security threat to the
    same extent as a single man might.

64.    On  the  question  of  risk  of   deportation   from   the   KRG   to
    southern/central Iraq, international organisation (C) had  never  heard
    of any Kurd from the disputed areas being denied entry to  the  KRG  at
    any KRG checkpoint and nor had it ever heard of any Kurd being deported
    from the KRG back to his or  her  home  area  in  the  disputed  areas.
    PAO/PAC said that according to a survey it had carried out, one  family
    of Arab origin from Mosul had been ordered to leave the  KRG  but  they
    did not know why.  Harikar NGO/PAC had  no  records  of  the  KRG  ever
    deporting a person from the area to other parts  of  Iraq  although  it
    added that a person who was not a resident of the KRG could be required
    to leave the area if he or she had broken the law.

65.   The final point from this report concerns security procedures  at  the
    arrival hall at Erbil  International  Airport.  According  to  PAO/PAC,
    airline flight passengers from Baghdad enter the KRG much  more  easily
    than travellers through the border checkpoints,  as  flight  passengers
    are not considered by the authorities to be a security risk to the same
    extent as overland travellers could be. They may be seen  as  wealthier
    than overland travellers and thus less susceptible to  exploitation  by
    terrorists.

66.   As regards the numbers involved, the 2010 Danish  Report  records  the
    numbers of  families  registered  with  the  Bureau  of  Migration  and
    Displacement (BMD) within the KRG region as 87,5000.  According to  one
    of Dr Fatah's sources, Shoki Yaseen, only 36,000  families  have  moved
    from the government of Iraq region to the KRG, including families  from
    the disputed areas.  He refers also to 26,000 families having  returned
    from Iran after 1991 and 7,238 families are said in the  Danish  Report
    of 2010 to have returned from  Turkey.   General  Tawfeq,  the  general
    manager of the KRG's checkpoints, told the  Danish  officials  in  2010
    that at least 10,000  people  crossed  the  KRG  checkpoints  from  the
    government of Iraq area to the KRG everyday.  Dr Fatah surmises that if
    this is correct the annual influx of IDPs into  the  KRG  would  be  at
    least 3.65 million people, but we think that fails to take  account  of
    the point we have noted earlier concerning the  number  of  people  who
    come in and out of the region on a daily basis looking  for  work.   It
    may be supposed that many of those will  return  back  to  their  homes
    outside the KRG at the end of the day if not earlier, if  they  do  not
    find work. It is clear that  significant  numbers  of  Christians  have
    moved into the KRG.  The number according to the  Danish  Fact  Finding
    Mission of 2011 is 10,183 families, and  according  to  another  of  Dr
    Fatah's sources, Khararai Boznai, based  on  the  PDS  card  there  are
    5000,000 Yezidis living in Iraq, approximately 97% of whom have fled to
    the KRG since 2003.  Dr Fatah says that this perhaps rather  surprising
    number may be explained by the shifting borders  of  the  KRG  and  the
    incorporation of Mosul into the region.

The Situation for IDPs

67.   Dr Fatah notes  that  according  to  KRG  officials,  Iraqi  nationals
    including IDPs in the KRG have access to housing and  employment,  free
    public health and schooling and are free to move throughout the KRG  if
    they register with  the  Asayish.   This  contrasts  somewhat  with  Dr
    Fatah's paragraph 74 where he says that an individual cannot access any
    services, attend school, university, rent or  buy  a  house,  obtain  a
    driver's licence or  be  eligible  for  employment  by  the  government
    without transferring their civil status ID to the KRG and this  is  not
    allowed by the KRG.  He goes on to note the evidence of the director of
    the KRG Ministry of Displacement  and  Migration  in  Dohuk,  that  IDP
    families are receiving no  financial  assistance.   Although  they  are
    eligible to receive 150,000 Iraqi dinars (approximately US$150 a month)
    the government of Iraq has not provided this support and  there  is  an
    ongoing dialogue with the KRG government regarding this issue.  This is
    evidence taken from the Danish Report of 2011.   Dr  Fatah  says  that,
    although the UNHCR's Protection and Assistance Centres (PAC) and mobile
    teams claim to provide legal counselling and  assistance  in  obtaining
    civil status documents and counselling referrals, returnees interviewed
    by Dr Fatah between 2 and 9 November 2011 said  they  had  received  no
    such assistance from the UNHCR, the Iraqi government or any other  NGO.
    It appears in any event that UNHCR have been told that assistance  from
    the government of Iraq is only for those returnees  eligible  according
    to the criteria firstly of those who fled between 1 January 2006  to  1
    January 2008, being displaced for not less than  eight  months  outside
    Iraq; those who fled Iraq for one  year  prior  to  9  April  2003  and
    returned after 9 April 2003 and  those  formerly  internally  displaced
    returnees who fled their place of origin within Iraq  after  1  January
    2008 and re-signed with the MoDM in the location of displacement.

68.   Dr Fatah was unable to get in touch  with  International  Organisation
    for Migration (IOM) staff in Iraq, but an IOM official  in  Amman  told
    him that IOM had not helped returned asylum seekers  who  were  lacking
    identification to obtain identification documents  such  as  CSID  when
    they arrived at Baghdad Airport.  She said that the IOM did assist IDPs
    and returnees in all Iraqi governorates with obtaining  statements  and
    documentation  to  enable  them  to  access  basic  services  such   as
    education.  She referred also to a number of programmes and initiatives
    currently run by the  IOM  in  Iraq  which  had  been  implemented  and
    developed in coordination with the Iraqi government and  in  particular
    with the MoDM.  An example  of  this     was  the  Human  Security  and
    Stabilisation programmes operated in partnership with  the  MoDM  which
    help  IDPs  and  returnees  to  settle  permanently  in  their  current
    governorate of residence by offering them training, apprenticeship  and
    grants depending on the  circumstances  of  the  individual.   She  was
    unable to provide the numbers involved.  Dr Fatah also makes the  point
    that it is important to note that since many humanitarian organisations
    adopt a  low  profile  in  Iraq  and  work  through  local  groups  and
    authorities  due  to  security  considerations,   the   visibility   of
    international assistance is diminished and therefore Iraqi IDPs  cannot
    be aware of  the  real  portion  of  assistance  originating  from  the
    humanitarian aid  community  (with  the  exception  of  the  Iraqi  Red
    Crescent Society).  He also notes that the ability of NGOs  to  provide
    assistance is affected by security restrictions in various locations.

69.   From this evidence we conclude that a person (we  will  address  below
    more particularly the situation of women) who has  relocated  from  the
    GoI area to live in the KRG  has  access  to  free  healthcare,  rental
    accommodation and education, albeit  that  there  is  pressure  on  the
    availability of access to schools in some areas, especially for  Arabs;
    jobs are not easy to come by, but there is financial support  available
    from UNHCR by way of grants to people on repatriation, and other  forms
    of support such as  assistance  in  obtaining  documents  from  UNHCR's
    Protection and Assistance Centres.

The Situation of Women in Iraq

70.   In this section we address evidence concerning women  throughout  Iraq
    (i.e. including the KRG).   Dr  Fatah  refers  to  a  report  of  COSIT
    (Central Organisation for Statistics in Iraq) entitled "Iraq:  National
    Report on the Status of Human Development 2008" which states  that  the
    Ministry for Women claims to have officially recorded 206,082 widows in
    Iraq.  Dr Fatah says that in general terms Iraqi women are  subject  to
    direct or indirect threats to life, dignity, social relations and their
    status in the family or local community and their security has cultural
    and social as well as physical dimensions. As regards  women  who  have
    been killed, hundreds have been targeted by armed groups either because
    of their professions (political figures or their employees, journalists
    or others in the media and in translation enterprises)  or  as  revenge
    against their male relatives.  There is an increasing trend of  killing
    women for political reasons.  Iraqi women  are  said  to  suffer  abuse
    routinely at the hands of their fathers, brothers  and  husbands.   The
    2010 report by the Iraqi Human Rights Ministry stated that 21% of Iraqi
    women surveyed were subject to bodily harm and the incidence was higher
    among married women. A further problem for Iraqi women is the issue  of
    absorbing the burden of family care when  social  services  falter  and
    public institutions cease to function.

71.   Female-headed households are widespread throughout Iraq but appear  in
    higher numbers in the central governorates of Baghdad and  Diyala  than
    in the KRG.  These are households  where  the  women  referred  to  are
    mostly widows.  Between November 2010 and September 2011, IOM  monitors
    identified the locations of 36,959 female headed households  throughout
    Iraq.  It is difficult to  determine  exact  numbers  with  many  women
    unregistered with the Ministry of Displacement and Migration and living
    in  isolated  areas,  but  figures  indicate  that  one  in  ten  Iraqi
    households is headed by a woman.  From the figures obtained by the IOM,
    21% of the displaced women who gave reasons for leaving their  original
    areas said that they had fled due to displacement by  force  or  threat
    with a further 20% citing generalised violence, and  ethnic,  religious
    and political discrimination and armed conflict  were  also  frequently
    cited reasons for disablement.

72.   Dr Fatah's report goes on to say that in addition to dealing with  the
    problems of existence in a  violent  environment,  most  female  headed
    households are unable to find employment to support their families.  Of
    the female households interviewed by the IOM, only 2% were employed  at
    a steady salary. A further 6% were employed doing odd jobs and did  not
    have a regular  income,  which  left  them  in  a  continuing  unstable
    situation.

73.   Dr Fatah also refers to the importance of family  and  social  support
    for individuals  in  Iraq,  given  the  paucity  or  absence  of  state
    infrastructure or support available for Iraqis.   There  is  no  social
    welfare or security to help  returnees  or  IDPs  to  find  shelter  or
    employment.  If an individual has no family to return to  in  Iraq  the
    risk of homelessness and unemployment would be very real.  He says that
    women have no option but to seek refuge with their relatives or move to
    neighbouring countries.  Although  this  will  provide  the  means  for
    protection, on the other hand it means that  these  single  women  have
    lost their freedom to earn and live within their  own  family  if  they
    move to live with relatives.

74.   Dr George's evidence in his report of  15  November  2011  essentially
    mirrors that of Dr Fatah.  It quotes  the  survey  on  widows  in  Iraq
    issued by  the  Relief  International  Justice  and  Protection  Centre
    Network  in  November  2010  as  describing  widowhood  in  Iraq  as  a
    catastrophic social condition  due  to  the  violent  policies  of  the
    previous regime, the continuous wars in Iraq, the violence following  9
    April 2003 and sectarian policy making.   It  is  said  that  for  many
    Iraqis the sight of widows  living  in  desperation  is  a  feature  of
    everyday life.  The Iraqi Ministry of  Labour  and  Social  Affairs  is
    concerned with the  condition  of  widows  through  its  Department  of
    Women's Care. The latest statistics indicate that only  120,000  widows
    receive governmental pensions, just 8% of the total number of widows in
    Iraq. The pensions range between US$40 to US$90 a  month.   It  is  too
    small to meet their needs especially since many are  advanced  in  age.
    Relief International estimated that the number of widows  in  Iraq  was
    1,593,457 or 9.81% of Iraqi women.  This is a very much  larger  figure
    than that identified by Dr Fatah from the information provided  by  the
    Ministry for Women.

75.   The Home Office in the Country of Origin Information Report of  August
    2011 at paragraph 25.34 quotes from the International Committee of  the
    Red Cross Operational Update entitled "Iraq:  Women  Struggle  To  Make
    Ends Meet" published on 30 March 2011, which states that  according  to
    ICRS estimates, between 1,000,000  and  2,000,000  households  in  Iraq
    today are headed by women.  This report also echoes the somewhat dismal
    state of affairs that is set out in Dr George and Dr Fatah's reports.

76.   There are large numbers of widows, whose best hope is to find  support
    and shelter from the family, if they have one.  There is a  significant
    number of female-headed households, which suggests that by no means all
    are able or wish to become part of  a  relative's  household.   Clearly
    women struggle to find employment, where  family  reasons  enable  that
    possibility to exist, and the lack of or paucity of  an  infrastructure
    of state support further weakens their position. To sum up,  while  the
    situation for women in Iraq is, in general, not such as to give rise to
    a real risk of persecution or serious harm,  there  may  be  particular
    problems affecting female-headed households  where  family  support  is
    lacking and jobs and other means of support may be harder to come by.

Relocation to Iraqi Territory under GOI Authority, and IDPs

77.   Dr Fatah says it is difficult to take a broad  approach  in  analysing
    relocation to Iraqi governorates other than the KRG as  it  depends  on
    where the relocation is to and the ethnicity or religion of the  person
    relocating.  He says that, for example, it would be highly  problematic
    for a Sunni to relocate to  a  southern  Shi'ite  governorate  or  vice
    versa.  He also says that due to sectarian segregation and violence  in
    different Iraqi governorates it is not possible to generalise  in  this
    regard.  He says that, however, if a Sunni were to relocate to Mosul or
    Al Anbar they might face fewer challenges  and  be  able  to  establish
    themselves in that region and similarly for a Shi'ite to relocate to  a
    southern governorate under Shi'ite majority control the situation would
    be likely to similar.

78.   Dr Fatah quotes from the UNHCR's 2009 analysis of internal  relocation
    in which it was concluded that in light of the ongoing violence,  human
    rights  violations  and  difficulties  in  accessing  basic   services,
    internal  relocation  alternatives  should  not  be  considered  to  be
    available in those areas.  Nevertheless,  the  governments  of  Norway,
    Sweden  and  Denmark  subsequently  reached  an  agreement   with   the
    government of Iraq  to  send  failed  asylum  seekers  back  and  other
    European countries also do so.

79.   In its report of 8 June 2010 the  UNHCR  repeated  its  view  that  no
    internal flight alternative existed in Iraq because of  the  continuing
    levels of violence in Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Nineveh and Salah-ad-Din
    and in view  of  access  and  residency  and  restrictions  in  various
    governorates as well as the hardship faced  by  returnees  in  ensuring
    even survival in areas of relocation.  In its 2011  Country  Operations
    Profile the UNHCR noted that some returnees and IDPs remained  in  dire
    circumstances, requiring urgent humanitarian intervention.  It observed
    that while some 350,000 IDPs and nearly 60,000  refugees  had  returned
    spontaneously in 2008 and 2009, returns had slowed in the first half of
    2010.   Returnees  faced  challenges  including   lack   of   security,
    livelihood prospects and social services.  According to the 9  February
    2011 report of the Representative of the UN Security General  on  Human
    Rights of Internally Displaced Persons, Walter Kalin, most governorates
    allowed IDPs to enter  but  obstacles  to  registration  limited  their
    access to services and capacity to rent or purchase property.  He  also
    noted that freedom of  movement  for  IDPs  in  Iraq  continued  to  be
    affected by a number of security measures,  especially  in  and  around
    Baghdad, as well as  checks  at  governorate  borders,  and  that  most
    returnees returned to neighbourhoods controlled by members of their own
    communities.

80.   Dr George also cites the UNHCR's April  2009  eligibility  guidelines.
    These refer in detail to the restrictions in governorates on the  entry
    and residence of IDPs and/or their locations  of  settlement.   Central
    government issued a directive in 2007  ordering  governorates  to  lift
    restrictions on IDPs' entry and there was also an overall  decrease  in
    new displacement occurring and  hence  restrictions  had  largely  been
    eased. However in Al-Anbar governorate IDPs were  required  to  have  a
    sponsor guaranteeing the person did not pose a security risk as well as
    the need to provide evidence that the IDP originated from a "hot area".
     It was also  said  that  in  Kirkuk  Arab  IDPs  might  reportedly  be
    discriminated against on the basis  of  their  ethnicity.   Also,  most
    central and southern governorates required that IDPs coming from  other
    governorates obtained prior approval from the local authorities in  the
    intended place of relocation to bring along their furniture.

81.   The guidelines state  that  in  addition  registration  processes  are
    often bureaucratic for IDPs as they are required to produce a range  of
    documents including PDS card, nationality certificate and photograph of
    the head of household, CSID for all family members, housing  card  from
    the place of origin and a letter of approval from the   local  mukhtar,
    the city council and/or the police.  There also may be difficulties for
    some IDPs in remote areas who may not be able for lack of resources  or
    security physically to approach the MoDM which has its offices  in  the
    urban centres.  Protection monitoring undertaken by UNHCR revealed that
    three-quarters or  more  of  the  IDPs  in  the  central  and  southern
    governorates had registered with the MoDM or other  local  authorities.
    However recently the MoDM in Baghdad had informally ordered its  branch
    offices to halt IDP registration, and several governorates stopped  the
    registration process for newly arriving IDPs or IDPs who had  not  been
    registered at the time in late 2008/early 2009.  On  19  February  2009
    the Council of Ministers official instructed all MoDM officers to  halt
    registration of IDPs.   This, it is said,  puts  unregistered  IDPs  at
    risk of harassment by the police and the local authorities and  hampers
    access to assistance and basic services.

82.   Dr George also quotes from the  March  2010  IDMC/NRC  report,  itself
    quoting  from  an  IOM  report  from  20  June  2008,  and  refers   to
    restrictions on IDP entry and registration in a number of  governorates
    due to security, economic and even demographic  concerns.   The  report
    refers to a great deal of bureaucracy which IDPs  are  required  to  go
    through to register, sometimes travelling to  five  different  offices.
    Dr Fatah  quotes  from  the  UNHCR  "Return  Guide  for  the  Voluntary
    Repatriation of Iraqis" May 2011 who claim,  through  their  protection
    and assistance  centres  (PAC)  and  mobile  teams,  to  provide  legal
    counselling and assistance in obtaining CSID  as  well  as  counselling
    referrals, though returnees he interviewed on 2-9  November  2011  said
    they had received no  such  assistance  from  the  UNHCR  ,  the  Iraqi
    government or any NGO.

83.   The IDMC in the same report of March 2010 says that as Iraq is in  the
    grip of a humanitarian crisis, daily life for all Iraqis is precarious.
     Public health,  electricity,  water  and  sanitation  services  remain
    inadequate.  It says that the rate of displacement has fallen with only
    isolated instances of new displacement.  Iraqi society  remains  deeply
    divided, and the neighbourhoods of Baghdad which were most affected  by
    the displacement are now more ethnically or religiously homogenous than
    at any time in Iraq's history and tensions  are  high  in  many  areas,
    particularly in  the  northern  governorates  of  Kirkuk  and  Nineveh.
    Although the Iraqi government has taken steps to address  displacement,
    it has proved unable to meet the needs  of  IDPs  or  to  dedicate  the
    resources needed for them to be  able  to  achieve  durable  solutions.
    IDPs have inadequate access to basic  services  and  face  considerable
    obstacles  to  enjoyment  of  their  rights.  The  United  Nations  has
    increased its presence but its role remains limited.  In  a  survey  in
    the second half of 2009, 11% of those IDPs displaced since 2006 and 28%
    of returned IDPs reported being targeted due  to  their  religious  and
    political affiliation, 6% reported having been targeted simply  because
    they were IDPs (UNHCR, December 2009) and 30% of IDPs surveyed reported
    that family  members,  including  children,  were  absent  after  being
    kidnapped, abducted or detained (UNHCR, December  2009).   Many  Iraqis
    have been forced to flee to areas where employment and  basic  services
    are  limited,  overstretched   or   non-existent.    Host   communities
    increasingly found it a burden to share limited resources.  Over 70% of
    IDPs were women and children, and displaced female heads of  household,
    households headed by  older  people,  widows,  divorced  people,  women
    without  male  relatives,   and   orphans   are   acutely   vulnerable.
    Checkpoints, curfews, permission  requirements  and  security  barriers
    continue to restrict the movement of both displaced  and  non-displaced
    Iraqis, especially in and around  Baghdad.  Although  most  governorate
    authorities  allow  IDPs  to  enter,  there  have  been  obstacles   to
    registering.  Although in 2009, (the point we have referred to  above),
    the government issued an order halting further  registration  of  IDPs,
    there were reports of  continuing  registration  in  some  governorates
    (IOM, May 2009).  The reasons for non-registration include bureaucratic
    delays, lack of documentation, perceived lack of benefit,  or  fear  of
    being identified by the authorities.  Unregistered IDPs are  unable  to
    rent or purchase property, vote, obtain land title and access  services
    specific to IDPs.  Each governorate has different requirements for IDPs
    trying to register which may include  a  requirement  for  an  original
    information card, which is the card needed to access  the  PDS  system,
    the CSID or a letter of approval  from  municipal  councils,  mukhtars,
    local police or the MoDM, and registration has been tightly  restricted
    in areas with high level of sectarian  violence  such  as  Kirkuk.   In
    later 2008  IDPs  were  also  reportedly  denied  registration  due  to
    sectarian, ethnicity or  tribal  bias  (UNHCR,  September  2008)  which
    continues to be observed on  a  small  scale  (UNHCR,  December  2009).
    According to an IDCM interview in January 2010,  some  newly  displaced
    people are reportedly not being registered.  It is said that most IDPs,
    particularly women, cannot find work, and over 60% of IDP families have
    no members employed (ILM, May 2009: IDPWG, June 2008).  Most IDPs, like
    many  other  Iraqis,  rely  on  the  PDS  for  basic  food,  but   face
    considerable obstacles in  accessing  the  system.   A  third  of  IDPs
    interviewed in late 2009 did  not  have  a  PDS  card  valid  in  their
    governorate of residence, and only 15% of  those  with  one  reportedly
    received  their  full  monthly  entitlement  (UNHCR,  December   2009).
    Although over 90% of IDPs assessed by UNHCR in December  2009  reported
    being able to obtain health care, a quarter  could  not  afford  health
    care fees.  A general comment that may be made  is  that  much  of  the
    above evidence is somewhat  older  than  we  would  have  preferred  or
    expected, but we have not been shown evidence indicative of more recent
    significant change.

84.   With regard to assistance for IDPs  and  refugees,  the  UNHCR  Annual
    Report for 2011 stated that they aimed to assist 702,180  refugees  and
    IDPs within Iraq out of a total of 1,728,430 in January and 549,150 out
    of 1,323,250 refugees and IDPs in December 2011.  These are said to  be
    projected figures rather than the actual number of people that UNHCR is
    currently able to help in Iraq.  UNHCR's return guidance  of  May  2011
    states  that  the  organisation  assists  people  who  are  voluntarily
    repatriated in the country of asylum and prior to departure  with  $100
    per  adult,  $50  per  child  and  $500  per  family,  and   additional
    transportation grants may be  obtained  depending  on  the  country  of
    asylum.  Although Dr Fatah confirms this, he said that people  whom  he
    had spoken to said they had not received any  further  assistance  from
    the UNHCR such as help with finding  employment,  housing  and  medical
    treatment.  Returnees from the UK are given $100 for  incidental  needs
    and a further $100 for onward travel to their home. Voluntary returnees
    are given a cash grant of $500.  The Iraqi  government  has  sought  to
    encourage and support IDPs wishing to return to their place of  origin.
    In mid-2008 the MoDM opened two centres in Baghdad  to  help  returnees
    register, receive assistance and resolve property issues.  A third  was
    reportedly established in Diyala in mid-2009, and branch offices opened
    in Anbar and Salah-ad-Din. As of 2008, returnees could  receive  US$850
    after returning to their place of origin and formally renouncing  their
    IDP status.  Registered IDPs in Baghdad who agreed to  vacate  premises
    of returnees that they had illegally occupied could  apply  for  rental
    assistance worth around US$250 per month for six  months.   In  Baghdad
    and  Diyala,  returnees  were  also  reportedly   provided   additional
    protection  by  local  authorities.   In  September  2009   the   Iraqi
    government extended measures adopted in Baghdad to Diyala, one  of  the
    governorates worst affected by sectarian violence.  It  allocated  some
    US$78,000,000 for reconstruction, facilitation and sustainable  returns
    to 27,500 families (UNHCR, October 2009).  There were plans  to  expand
    the Diyala model in late  2010  to  three  key  areas  in  Baghdad  and
    subsequently to the governorates  of  Salah-ad-Din  and  Anbar  (UNHCR,
    October 2009).  Government initiatives to promote or facilitate returns
    had had mixed results and were limited  to  registered  IDPs  displaced
    between 2006 and  January  2008,  thus  excluding  many  from  minority
    communities.   Returnees  were  concerned  about  lack  of  protection,
    inadequate state support, bureaucratic procedures and  sectarian  bias.
    By the end of 2009, only 40% of returnees  interviewed  had  registered
    and applied for a grant, and only 30% of those who applied had actually
    received one.  70% of returnees who were interviewed in 2009 said  they
    had  not  received  any  government  assistance  (IOM  November  2009).
    Although in 2009 there were only a few reported incidents of  returning
    families being specifically targeted, these cases had  had  a  powerful
    deterrent impact on would be returnees.  An  IOM  survey  of  returnees
    (November 2009) found that 38% reported not always feeling safe.

85.   A relevant associated issue is that of travel within Iraq.   This  may
    be a matter of flying to other cities such as Erbil  or  travelling  by
    bus or taxi.  Dr Fatah says that the returnee might need  to  use  more
    than one mode of transport; for example travelling by bus to  a  nearby
    region or city and then hiring a taxi or private car to take  them  the
    rest of the way.  It is said that the roads are in poor  condition  and
    most regions are connected to the main cities by dirt roads.  There are
    no regular bus services.  A bus or taxi will only leave the station  to
    start its journey if it has "enough" passengers,  and  the  concept  of
    "enough" can mean anything from one-third to full capacity.  Clearly to
    the larger cities such as Baghdad or Erbil, bus journeys would be  more
    frequent than those to Iraq's smaller regions.

86.   Dr Fatah also says that Kurdish civilians are usually quite afraid  to
    make the journey between Baghdad and Kirkuk which Kurds have  taken  to
    describing as "the road of death".  He gives examples of this from 2005
    including an attack on convoys of Iraqi President Talabani's guards  on
    the road, five of them being killed.  President Talabani is a Kurd.  Dr
    Fatah says that militants stalk  the  road,  ambushing  and  kidnapping
    Kurds.  This may be done for financial motives as Kurds are believed to
    be wealthier than Arabs, or it may be carried out by  remnants  of  the
    Ba'ath regime who have long regarded the Kurds  as  their  enemies,  or
    Islamic groups who accuse the Kurds of  collaborating  and  cooperating
    with American troops.  However, the reference to this is 2006,  and  he
    does not cite more recent evidence.  Civilians also risk  being  caught
    up in  insurgent  actions  including  roadside  bombs,  car  bombs  and
    assassinations which  may  be  wild  and  indiscriminate  as  to  their
    victims.  Dr Fatah quotes from the UKBA Operational  Guidance  note  on
    Iraq of October 2010, noting improvements in the security situation  in
    Iraq in 2009 and stating that travel by road  within  the  central  and
    southern governorates has become fairly safe in  many  areas,  but  the
    rural roads remain potentially dangerous.   There  are  daily  roadside
    bombings on the main routes from Baghdad to the north.   In  the  south
    there is a high risk of attacks on most routes in the  governorates  of
    Babel and Wassit, especially in the districts lying closest to Baghdad.
     Movement may further be limited by curfews and vehicle bans, which can
    be enforced at short notice.  Travel by air from Baghdad  International
    Airport has relatively improved.  There have been no recent attacks  on
    civilian aircraft but potential threats still exist.

87.   We bear in mind Dr Fatah's warning, set out  at  paragraph  77  above,
    concerning  the  difficulty  of  a  broad  approach  to  the  issue  of
    relocation to/within the GoI governorates.  We  note  the  bureaucratic
    nature of the registration processes which, as Mr Hussain points out at
    paragraph 58 of his closing submissions, seem increasingly aligned with
    those in the KRG.  The very significant number of  IDPs  (estimated  by
    the IDMC in March 2010 at 2.8 million) face the kind of difficulties we
    have set out above, and it may be (IDM May  2009)  that  IDPs  are  not
    being registered in all governorates.  However, the types of difficulty
    we have identified are not such, in our view, as either to entail  that
    there is no internal flight alternative in Iraq, or that relocation is,
    in  general,  unreasonable.   The  levels  of  support  that  we   have
    identified, from the UNHCR and  the  Iraqi  government  in  particular,
    including the fact that two-thirds of IDPs appear  to  have  PDS  cards
    valid in their governorate of  residence,  support  us  in  this  view.
    Where an IDP is unregistered, and hence is unlikely to have a PDS card,
    and is unable to access family, governmental or NGO support, it may  be
    that relocation would be unreasonable, in  particular,  of  course,  if
    they faced a real risk of significant harm in their home area and could
    not therefore be expected to return there to renew their PDS card.  The
    particular circumstances of a returnee may therefore be such as to make
    relocation unreasonable.

General Conclusions

88.   (1) Since the lack of documentation relating to identity in  the  form
    of the Civil Status ID  (CSID), Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC) and
    Public Distribution  System  (PDS)  card  (food  ration  card)  is  not
    ordinarily an insuperable problem, it is not a factor  likely  to  make
    return to any part of Iraq unsafe or unreasonable.


         (a) The CSID is an important document, both in its own right and as
         a gateway to obtaining other significant documents such the INC and
         the PDS.  An inability to replace the  CSID  is  likely  to  entail
         inability to access the INC and  PDS.


         (b) Although the general position is that a person  who  wishes  to
         replace a lost CSID is required to return to  their  home  area  in
         order  to  do  so,  there  are  procedures  as  described  in  this
         determination available which  make  it  possible  (i)  for  Iraqis
         abroad to secure the issue of  a  new  CSID  to  them  through  the
         offices of the local Iraqi Embassy; (ii)  for  Iraqis  returned  to
         Iraq without a CSID to obtain one  without  necessarily  having  to
         travel to their home area.  Such procedures permit  family  members
         to  obtain  such  documentation  from  their  home  areas   on   an
         applicant's behalf or allow for a person to be  given  a  power  of
         attorney to obtain the same. Those who are  unable  immediately  to
         establish their identity can ordinarily obtain  such  documentation
         by being presented before a judge from the Civil Status  Court,  so
         as to facilitate return to their place of origin.


    (2)    Relocation to the KRG is in general reasonable

         (a) Entry into and residence in the KRG  can  be  effected  by  any
         Iraqi national with a CSID, INC and PDS,  after  registration  with
         the Asayish (local security office).  An Arab may need a sponsor; a
         Kurd will not.


         (b) Living conditions in the KRG for a  person  who  has  relocated
         there are not without difficulties, but there are jobs,  and  there
         is  access  to  free  health  care  facilities,  education,  rented
         accommodation and financial and other support from UNHCR.

    (3)    Despite bureaucratic  difficulties  with  registration  and  the
         difficulties faced by IDPs, it is wrong to say that  there  is,  in
         general, no internal flight alternative in Iraq, bearing in mind in
         particular the levels of governmental and NGO support available.

    (4)    Whilst the situation for women in Iraq is, in general, not  such
         as to give rise to a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm,
         there may be particular problems affecting female headed households
         where family support is lacking and jobs and other means of support
         may be harder to come by.  Careful examination  of  the  particular
         circumstances  of  the  individual's  case   will   be   especially
         important.

The Appellant's Claim

89.   We now apply our findings on the issues above to  the  specific  facts
    of the appellant's case. We have set  out  the  details  of  her  claim
    earlier on in the determination.  References to the appellant should be
    taken include references to her children,  who  are  dependent  on  her
    claim, unless the contrary is specified.

Ability to Return to Iraq

90.   It would seem, from the evidence we have set  out  above,  that  given
    that, as we accept, that the appellant  has  no  documents,  she  would
    either have to obtain CSID via the processes we have identified  above,
    or on the basis of return with a laissez passer document.

91.   It seems to us that on either basis the appellant should  be  able  to
    effect return to Baghdad.  We do not find it credible that any  healthy
    adolescent or adult Iraqi would fail to have  memorised  or  would  not
    have kept a note of or have access to a note of the book and  page  and
    volume number of the location of their family record.  We  do  not  see
    the appellant's illiteracy as a bar to this in  any  way.   She  should
    therefore be able to initiate procedures to enable this information  to
    be obtained by family or  friends  in  Kirkuk  and,  by  means  of  the
    procedures set out above, enable a new CSID to be issued.   If  we  are
    wrong about her recollection of the location of the family  record,  we
    do not accept that she is unable to  contact  her  brother  in  Kirkuk.
    Even if it is the case that  she  can  no  longer  obtain  him  on  the
    telephone number she had for him, she knows where he lives and she also
    has a sister in Iraq.  We do not accept that it would not  be  possible
    for the appellant to contact one or other of her  siblings  and  obtain
    the necessary information to enable a CSID in her  and  her  children's
    names to be reissued.  (It may be in  the  children's  case  that  they
    never had cards in which case cards  could  be  issued  for  the  first
    time).  This could be done either personally by her relatives  in  Iraq
    or by use of a lawyer with a power of attorney.  Alternatively, she has
    the option of contacting friends or neighbours in  her  home  area  who
    could assist in locating the brother and sister.

92.   Alternatively we consider that the process identified by the UNHCR  in
    the response to Dr George could  be  employed.   It  seems  from  their
    evidence that the appellant if she did not return  with  a  CSID  would
    return with a laissez passer (though it remains  unclear  what  exactly
    this is) which would enable her to enter Iraq.   On  the  evidence  she
    would be held at the airport until her identity was established,  which
    we consider she would be able to do as set out above by  contact  being
    made with her family members in Kirkuk.

93.   If the above process was not available (perhaps because  she  did  not
    have a laissez passer), UNHCR's evidence, which we accept, is that  she
    would have to be presented before a judge and we see no reason why  she
    should not be able to have herself identified, to  the  extent  that  a
    letter would be issued in accordance with what was said by  the  UNHCR,
    to facilitate her move back to Kirkuk.

Travel to the Home Area

94.   We accept that there are difficulties  for  those  wishing  to  travel
    from Baghdad to Kirkuk.  It is a journey not without  its  dangers,  as
    the evidence we have set  out  above  shows,  though  the  evidence  is
    relatively elderly (2005-6).  Nevertheless people do  travel  regularly
    along that road, and as a woman with children albeit two  of  them  are
    very young adults, the appellant would not in our view stand out  as  a
    person who would be of adverse interest.   That does not rule  out  the
    risk of generalised violence, but we do not assess the risk to her  and
    her family in travelling between Baghdad and Kirkuk to be  such  as  to
    place her at a real risk of harm.

Risk in Home Area

95.   We remind ourselves of the findings of the judge  on  the  appellant's
    history.  We note the point made by Mr Hussain concerning  the  comment
    by the Senior Immigration Judge at the error of law  hearing  that,  in
    effect, the event the appellant described was such as  being  incapable
    of giving rise to a finding of  specific  targeting  while  noting  the
    contention that the judge erred in finding that these were random  acts
    of violence in the circumstances and that it was perhaps unnecessary to
    identify the precise agent of persecution.

96.   This does not, in our view, amount to  a  conclusion  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that the appellant could not show a link  between  the
    grenade attack, the death  of  her  husband  and  eldest  son  and  the
    kidnapping of the other son.  Nor does it amount to a finding that  the
    judge erred in finding that the appellant had not shown  that  she  was
    specifically targeted by a person or  group.   The  Senior  Immigration
    Judge's remarks in this regard are tentative.  The judge seems to  have
    adopted joint submissions before him that there were material errors of
    law in the approach taken by the Immigration Judge, relating in part to
    the approach to Article 15(c) of Directive 2004/83/EC,  and  concluding
    that reconsideration was properly to be ordered.

97.   There is therefore,  as  can  be  seen,  some  difficulty  with  these
    findings, but it is our view, as expressed  above,  that  they  do  not
    amount to a finding that the judge erred in  his  conclusion  that,  in
    effect, the appellant and her family had been  the  victims  of  random
    violence and had not been able to identify an agent of persecution.  As
    part of remaking the decision we conclude that  the  appellant  on  the
    evidence taken as a whole, has not shown that she and her  family  were
    the victims of specific targeting and has not shown anything other than
    random violence.

98.   This has clear significance to risk on return in  Kirkuk.   We  accept
    that Kirkuk is a hazardous place. There is  a  good  deal  of  evidence
    before us about random and targeted violence in  that  city.   However,
    given the profile the appellant has, it is our view that she  would  be
    able to return there if necessary  in  order  to  obtain,  if  it  were
    required, a new CSID or, in the alternative, if she  had  obtained  one
    through the procedures we have set out  above,  to  continue  with  the
    process of obtaining the other necessary documents such as the INC  and
    the PDS which she and her family require.  There is no evidence to show
    that her brother is  no  longer  living  at  the  house  he  previously
    occupied some two streets away from her, and where she was able to live
    with her children and with him for some two and a half months, nor that
    her sister has moved away.  She has therefore not  shown  that  she  is
    without a base in Kirkuk, nor that she would be unable to stay with her
    family members either temporarily or permanently.   She  would  not  be
    effecting relocation, but would be returning to her home area and would
    therefore not be in a position of an IDP with the  problems  that  that
    can entail.

Entry to and Living in the KRG

99.   If we are wrong in the above  then  we  consider  the  alternative  of
    relocation for the appellant and her family to the KRG.   We  have  set
    out above the evidence in  this regard. We consider  on  that  evidence
    that it is shown that the appellant would be able to enter  and  reside
    in the KRG.  We accept the difficulties that there would  be,  but  her
    two sons, now aged 19 and 18, are of an  age  where  they  can,  as  Dr
    George in his evidence  accepted,  offer  a  degree  of  protection  if
    necessary, and are also of an age where they are able to  work.   There
    is employment in the KRG, albeit it is not always easy to come by,  but
    their situation as a family there would be no different from  the  many
    others who manage to cope with the difficulties of life  there.   There
    are schools which the appellant's daughter could attend and  there  are
    health care facilities which they could access.  For  the  reasons  set
    out above we consider they  would  be  able  to  obtain  the  necessary
    documentation and it would not be unreasonable to expect them to do  so
    if they could not live in Kirkuk.  We accept that the PDS card once  it
    was reissued would not be usable in the KRG as they  are  from  Kirkuk,
    but Dr Fatah in his  evidence  accepted  that  it  would  be  no  great
    inconvenience to have to return to  Kirkuk  on  the  necessary  regular
    basis to make use of the card, and thus enabling all the family members
    to obtain their food rations.

Relocation Elsewhere in Iraq

100.  Otherwise, we consider it would not be unsafe or unreasonable for  the
    appellant and her family to relocate elsewhere in the GoI.  We bear  in
    mind Dr Fatah's warning that it is necessary to consider  the  relevant
    area and clearly it would be most  appropriate  for  the  appellant  to
    identify an area where there is a Kurdish community.  Clearly there are
    such communities, for example in Baghdad, and although we have set  out
    above the  difficulties  of  life  for  IDPs,  which  there  would  be,
    including problems of obtaining work, problems of insecurity and random
    violence, and health care and lack of social support issues, they would
    at least have the support of some funding from the UNHCR and assistance
    from that agency in getting back on  their  feet.   Again,  we  do  not
    consider relocation would be unreasonable.

Article 15(c)

101.  When we began to hear this appeal, there was extant  country  guidance
    on Article 15(c) risk in Iraq (HM  &  Others  (Article  15(c)  Iraq  CG
    [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC).  On 17 December 2011 that decision was set aside
    by the Court of Appeal in its entirety ([2011] EWCA 1536).  It was made
    clear by the Court of Appeal that the Tribunal would rehear HM.  In the
    circumstances, Article 15(c) was not argued before us as, prior  to  13
    December, HM  represented  the  country  guidance  on  the  point,  and
    thereafter it was clear that the issue would be re-litigated soon after
    this appeal was concluded. The only reference to Article  15(c)  in  Mr
    Hussain's submissions is at paragraph  13(B)  where  he  says  that  he
    simply relies on the assessment of the Upper Tribunal in  AMM  and  ors
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    445 (IAC) paragraphs 328-363.  We are happy to adopt the  statement  of
    the law set out at paragraphs 328-337 of AMM.  The remaining paragraphs
    referred to by Mr  Hussain  (paragraphs  338-363)  are  concerned  with
    evidence relating to Somalia,  and  to  Mogadishu  in  particular,  and
    clearly have no relevance to the instant appeal.  No evidence  as  been
    cited to us to  show  that  the  appellant  faces  Article  15(c)  risk
    anywhere in Iraq, and we therefore find that she does not face  such  a
    risk.

Article 8

102.  The appellant and her dependants would return together.  There  is  no
    issue therefore of  the  family  being  broken  up.   We  have  limited
    evidence of their private life in the United Kingdom, where  they  have
    been for some three years.  We must of course  take  into  account  the
    best interests of the appellant's daughter, now aged 9,  as  a  primary
    consideration.  She has spent the majority of her years  in  Iraq  with
    her family, there is no evidence of her integration into  life  in  the
    United Kingdom away from her family, and we see no  reason  to  suppose
    that she would not be able to fit back into Iraqi society together with
    the rest of her family.  It is in our view in  her  best  interests  to
    remain with her family who will return to Iraq, and accordingly we find
    there would be no breach of  her  or  their  Article  8  rights  to  be
    returned, or that  if  there  were  such  a  breach  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to the  clear  interests  of  the  United  Kingdom  in
    maintaining a firm and balanced immigration policy.

103.  This appeal is therefore dismissed on all grounds.





Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
Immigration and Asylum Chamber






















                            APPENDIX A
                                        EVIDENCE OF DR ALAN GEORGE


In total four reports have been  prepared.  These  are  dated  27  September
2010, 11 November 2011, 15 November 2011 and 29  January  2012.  The  second
report replaces the first but reliance was placed mainly on  the  third  and
fourth reports.

The third report seeks to address the following issues:

    . The number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
    . the proportion of IDPs lacking documentation
    . the documentation procedures  and  requirements  for  an  undocumented
      returnee
    . procedures for internal relocation
    . the role of the Iraqi embassy in obtaining documentation
    . facilities  and  procedures  for  undocumented  returnees  at  Baghdad
      airport
    . the services available from government and other  returnee  assistance
      centres in Iraq
    . the situation of widows
    . the information contained in the letter dated 11  November  2011  from
      the  British  Embassy  in  Baghdad  to  the  UKBA  Country  of  Origin
      Information Service

Appended to the report is a UNHCR memorandum  to  which  frequent  reference
has been made.

The fourth report aims to meet the following tasks

    . To identify any provision of Iraqi law which stipulates that the  only
      way in which a person can obtain a civil status ID card is by personal
      attendance in their place of origin
    . To clarify the legal status of the provision of Iraqi law establishing
      this requirement, if such exists
    . To establish the wider cautions about  the  nature  of  procedures  in
      Iraq, i.e. the extent to which factors such as influence,  connections
      (WASTA) or helpful officials apply in bypassing requirements.

The oral evidence consisted of clarification on these two reports.

General and introductory points

The absence of published, written procedures makes it  difficult  to  obtain
definitive  information.  UNHCR  officials  relied  on   their   belief   or
understanding rather than  certain  knowledge.  Application  procedures  may
vary from one governorate to another and even within the  same  governorate.
Dr. George identified differences between the GOI and KRG  with  the  former
having local councils set up by the Americans  and  the  latter  having  the
Asayish the closest parallel is the KRG being the police.  He  also  pointed
out that the role of the mukhtar differs slightly between the  areas.  There
is not a great body of data on procedures for returnees  due  to  the  small
number of individuals who have returned to Iraq. Dr. George  only  spoke  to
one source regarding returnees and he did not want to be  identified.  There
is no disagreement with Dr. Fatah's evidence although  some  differences  in
emphasis were acknowledged. Dr George has never interviewed anyone from  the
MoDM although he had spoken to the KRG equivalent. Dr. George had  not  been
in Baghdad or any GOI area since the 1980s. He had not been to Kirkuk.

Some information was obtained by telephone from Prof Jawad of the  LSE.  Dr.
George was not aware when he last visited Iraq and as far as  he  was  aware
the professor was not a lawyer. He had worked in a university  in  Iraq  and
so could be said to be a government  employee  but  had  never  examined  or
issued documents.

Caution had to be exercised when conducting research  in  the  Middle  East.
One had to carefully define questions asked and understand  the  answers  as
people would say what they thought  you  wanted  to  hear.  The  interviewer
therefore had to be very careful and had  to  constantly  check  and  double
check the veracity of what he had been told.

One's connections continue to have influence.  Ordinary  Iraqis  could  have
such connections and strings could be pulled.

Documentation procedures

Whilst there are general procedures that apply  across  the  country,  there
are certain differences between those that apply in the  KRG  and  those  in
the rest of the country. Dr. George relies on the UNHCR  assessment  reports
for the various Iraqi provinces; these  set  out  the  steps  to  be  taken.
Obtaining or renewing official documents such as passports, birth and  death
certificates, marriage certificates  and  food  ration  cards  is  generally
possible  within  a  few  days  and  at  a  reasonable  cost   however   for
undocumented   returnees   the   procedure   could   be   lengthy    because
investigations into records must be carried out to prove  entitlement.  Such
a person should have some documentation to assist to prove citizenship:  for
example, civil ID cards, nationality certificates, military service  guards,
property documents or certificates of  relatives  even  if  outdated.  Those
with old documents are able to renew them easily.

S series passports  can  be  applied  for  at  the  Passport  and  Residence
Office/Directorate of Passports. Applications usually  take  about  1  to  3
weeks and passports are valid for two years. They can be processed within  a
day if required urgently. The following documents are required:

    . civil ID card
    . nationality certificate
    . food ration card
    . letter from the municipal council confirming the applicant's residency
    . four photographs

G series passports are issued centrally  in  Baghdad  and  usually  take  at
least three months. They  are  issued  to  certain  categories  of  persons;
government officials, persons with valid entry visa for the USA,  Europe  or
other countries requiring a G passport and patients  travelling  abroad  for
medical treatment. Women below the age of 40 need to have the approval of  a
male family member in order to obtain a  G  passport.  Applicants  need  not
themselves attend the passport directorate in Baghdad. They can  apply  from
another location within the country.  The  UNHCR  had  set  out  a  list  of
documents needed in order to obtain an ID card. However  there  were  always
variations not just because people had connections,  but  because  different
officials undertook the procedure differently.

Civil ID cards, used to obtain  most  official  documents,  can  be  renewed
within a few days at any of the Civil Affairs Offices  of  the  Ministry  of
the Interior. The following documents are required:

    . Iraqi birth certificate
    . an official letter from the civil status  office  in  the  applicant's
      hometown, listing the members of the family
    . food ration card
    . letter from the municipal council confirming the applicant's residency
    . father's, uncle's or grandfather's citizenship card. If none of  these
      are available different procedures will apply involving the Baghdad ID
      and nationality office
    . two photographs.

The issuance of the civil status card is regulated by the Civil  Status  Law
number 65 of 1972 as amended by law number 9 of 1974 and  the  Civil  Status
regulation number 32 of 1974.

Nationality  certificates,  needed  for  most  official  purposes,  can   be
obtained from the directorate of nationality  and  travel  and  the  process
normally takes a few days. If original records have been lost  or  destroyed
then delays of several weeks or months can occur as  the  application  needs
to be referred to the headquarters in Baghdad. According to the  UNHCR,  the
following documents are required:

    . an official letter from the civil status  office  in  the  applicant's
      hometown, listing the members of the family
    . food ration card
    . letter from the municipal council confirming the applicant's residency
    . civil ID card
    . two photographs

A different UNHCR report from August 2008, however, adds a further  document
to the list, i.e. the nationality certificate for  the  applicant's  father,
brother, paternal grandfather or uncle. Where this is absent, the  testimony
and confirmation of the applicant's clan members is  recorded.  Yet  another
UNHCR report from May 2011 notes that  a  completed  application  form  must
also be submitted and that a housing card  instead  of  a  letter  from  the
local council may be presented. In the KRG a recommendation letter from  the
mukhtar confirming residency is required (it is not  clear  if  this  is  in
place of the council letter) and four photographs.

Applicants seeking to obtain the civil service  identification  card  and/or
the nationality certificate must show up in person as it  is  not  permitted
by law to a point  of  third  party  even  if  they  were  issued  power  of
attorney. The Home Office country policy bulletin attributes  the  need  for
an application in person to the lack of a reliable postal service.

There is no common electronic database or registry for civil  ID  documents,
nationality certificates or other basic documents such  as  birth,  marriage
or  death  certificates.  Only  manual  records  are  kept  which  makes  it
difficult to obtain information  when  registering  in  another  area.  Many
records are incomplete or damaged.

The issuance of the  nationality  certificate  is  regulated  by  the  Iraqi
Nationality Law number 27 of 2006.

Ration or PDS cards are renewed at the Ministry of Trade branch in the  area
of residence. The following documents are required for renewal:

    . civil status ID for all members of the family
    . personal civil ID record
    . housing card  or  supporting  letter  from  local  council  confirming
      residency
    . written statement by the head of the family confirming the accuracy of
      the information and documents submitted
    . in the KRG a letter from the Mukhtar.

Obtaining an ID card (CSID)

Iraqis outside  Iraq  with  no  documents,  no  relatives  in  Iraq  and  no
knowledge of the page or record number  of  their  family's  details  cannot
apply for CSID abroad.

CSID cards are issued  by  local  offices  of  the  Nationality  and  Travel
Directorate and applicants must generally attend  these  offices  to  obtain
them.

This general requirement is established and well known  procedure  emanating
from an internal instruction issued by the MOI. Those instructions  are  not
publicly available.

An ID card is issued by the civil status office  in  the  place  of  origin.
Where returnees went before a judge, he could take steps to  obtain  a  copy
of the registration file. This could be a fax or photocopy of the page  from
the file which was a big book. But as this happens so rarely, there  is  not
a large amount of  information  about  it.  There  is  not  even  a  regular
template for the document or letter that judge issues. A document  from  the
UNHCR would allow someone through checkpoints but Dr George  was  not  aware
of what it might say; he speculated it identified the holder and asked  that
he be permitted to travel to a certain place. Bribes could also be paid  but
if one met the wrong officer on the wrong day the individual  could  end  up
in detention.

The UNHCR report makes no reference to having to  get  evidence  from  one's
home area but Dr. George did not consider that report to be  perfect  as  it
did not deal with all scenarios. He disagreed with Mr.  Hopkins'  suggestion
that as the report  made  no  reference  to  the  requirement  of  obtaining
evidence from a mukhtar no such  requirement  was  necessary.  In  his  view
there was no distinction between a  resident  who  loses  ID  and  returnees
without ID. He was not aware that they were treated any differently.

IDPs had to return to their home area to get  replacement  ID.  It  was  not
possible for a person to go to an office which did not hold his records  and
obtain ID.

The evidence from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was that ID cards are  not
issued outside Iraq. Any application made at an embassy  would  be  sent  to
the authorities in Iraq for processing. It was possible  for  an  individual
with a damaged ID card to obtain a replacement card here but a  person  with
no documentation at all would have to return to his home area. There  was  a
general procedure for the vast majority of Iraqis, a separate procedure  for
denaturalised Kurds who had to apply in Baghdad and then the possibility  of
pulling strings if one had contacts. There was no special system  for  IDPs.
If there was he would have expected to have come across it.

Dr George disagreed with the Country of Origin Information Report about  not
necessarily having to return to the  place  of  residence.  He  treated  the
report with caution. He  did  not  understand  what  it  meant  to  transfer
documents. If the suggestion was that an ID card could be  obtained  outside
the home area, that was wrong.

In oral evidence Dr George initially stated that people  applied  in  person
not because there was no  postal  service,  but  because  it  was  the  law.
However he later said that they went themselves because of the absence of  a
postal system. It happened that records could  be  damaged  or  missing.  In
that case a person would have to resort to using neighbours as witnesses.

Before the preparation of the last report Dr. George had not been  aware  of
the actual legal provision which required ID to  be  obtained  in  the  home
area. As all his contacts had said that was the law  he  did  not  think  it
necessary to research it.

He had never seen the instructions from the Ministry of the Interior but  he
did not believe that any  instructions  would  be  issued  without  a  legal
basis.

A lawyer could attend in the place of an applicant in order to  get  a  copy
of the record although he did not know what  conditions  they  may  have  to
meet. All records were held in local areas. He did not know if a copy  could
be sent to Baghdad or by e-mail. He questioned the  existence  of  a  master
copy because if there had been one records could have  been  replaced  after
their destruction in 2003. It  was  however  not  possible  to  provide  any
evidence that the master copy did not exist.

Dr George considered it unlikely for an ordinary Iraqi to  forget  the  page
number of their records; he  considered  most  would  know  it.  It  may  be
plausible for a housewife to forget  and  rely  on  her  husband.  It  would
depend on the education of a woman and her personality.  An  older  teenager
living in Iraq should be aware of it. Literacy rates used to be  quite  high
but less since 2003. It was plausible that women in villages would not  know
the number although he was not saying that they would not know.

Dr George questioned the assistance said to be offered by  the  Ministry  of
Displacement in respect of the transfer of  records.  Family  records  could
only be transferred  once  they  had  been  identified.  As  they  were  not
computerised, nothing could be done if an appellant did not  have  the  page
number of the record. If there was such a  procedure  it  was  not  credible
that so many people would be without documents. When a  person  relocated  a
note was made in the place of departure and a new record made  in  the  area
of relocation.

Dr George did not know what a laissez passer was or whether it was the  same
as an EU travel document. However  even  if  a  person  had  a  document  to
facilitate travel and get through the airport, it did not absolve  him  from
having to establish identity as an Iraqi. An expired  passport  would  carry
some weight.

Source A indicated by email  that  the  only  legal  basis  is  an  internal
instructions by the Ministry  of  Interior  which  is  not  shared.  However
Iraqis are well aware that civil ID cards can only be issued in one's  place
of origin. Each governorate has one civil registration directorate.

Source B's email related information received from the officer in charge  of
the CSID office in Kirkuk who confirmed that an Iraqi who wishes  to  obtain
a CSID must go to the Directorate in Kirkuk to follow  up  his  application.
Lawyers with power of attorney can represent applicants at  the  office  and
obtain a copy of the family book but not to obtain the ID  card.  Procedures
are based on classified instructions from  the  MOI.   If  an  applicant  is
outside the country then power of attorney to a  lawyer  is  acceptable.  An
application form can be obtained from  the  Iraqi  Embassy/Consulate  abroad
and should be submitted along with a photograph of the appointed lawyer  and
a copy of his Bar Association ID and copy of the lost or damaged  CSID  card
or family book of the applicant. If neither the card nor book is  available,
then a copy of the CSID card or  family  book  (or  record  number  or  page
number) of any  relative  will  assist.  If  the  conditions  are  met,  the
application will be sent to Baghdad and the lawyer can follow it up. If  the
documents are not available then it would be "nearly impossible" to  proceed
as  records  are  not  computerised   and   records   cannot   be   manually
checked. Source B also stated that procedures are not static or constant.

There is a widespread use of wasta (connections) to obtain desired  outcomes
and circumvent regulations and laws. A person with  good  connections  would
be able to obtain an ID card without having  to  attend  the  home  area  in
person.

The issue of CSID cards is governed by the Civil Status Law 65  of  1972  as
amended by Act 9 of 1974, Civil Status Regulation 32 of 1974,  Civil  Status
Directive No. 1 of 1975 as amended by Directive No. 1 of 1976.

Article 3 of the first  law  stipulates  that  the  General  Director  shall
define the formats of  the  registers,  forms  and  official  documents  and
define the instructions and guidance as to how they are  used.  Articles  59
of  the  same  Code  and  Article   49   of   Regulation   32   state   that
regulations/instructions/directives may be issued to facilitate the Act.

Other key laws are said to be the Passport Law 32 of 1999  as  amended,  the
Residency Law 18 of 1978 as amended, the Organisation of Places of  Domicile
and Residence Law 95 of 1978 as amended (but no information about  relevance
or applicability given).

A confidential and well placed source  stated  that  there  is  an  internal
instruction from the MOI from at least November 2011  that  Iraqis  deported
by EU states will not be accepted by the authorities  in  Baghdad  and  that
embassies abroad will not assist with the  provision  of  documentation  for
such returnees. The date of issue was not known, nor the extent to which  it
had been implemented, whether it had been implemented and if so  whether  it
was implemented consistently. No further information was  obtained  on  this
instruction although Dr George understands it was in relation  to  a  flight
from the Netherlands on 15 November 2011. The  KRG  has  refused  to  accept
forcible returns since mid 2010.

The statements from the MoDM and MOI referred  to  in  the  British  Embassy
letter of 22.1.12 may be alluding to this instruction.

The reports from the Iraqi Embassy in London  and  the  British  Embassy  in
Baghdad confirm that the general  position  is  that  Iraqis  in  Iraq  must
attend in person in their home districts to obtain their ID cards.

Whilst the Iraqi Embassy notes there may have been other arrangements  until
2007, there was now no need as the  security  situation  had  improved.  The
British Embassy letter noted there were exceptions  to  the  requirement  of
return to the home area. If a person did not feel safe, the  MoDM  would  be
able to support a transfer of the record to the new area of residence.  Both
these statements should be treated with caution. The second  suggests  there
are still exceptions whereas the  first  indicates  they  no  longer  exist.
Full details of the questions asked of officials  and  their  positions  and
replies would need to be seen before the information in the  Embassy  letter
could be properly  assessed.  However  the  process  by  which  it  is  said
personal  status  records  can  be  transferred  to  another   district   is
contradicted by information received from the  Kirkuk  Civil  Status  Office
which suggests that it is almost impossible to identify a  person's  records
without supporting evidence because records are not  computerised.  On  this
basis Dr George rejects the process of transfer  described  in  the  Embassy
letter. Nevertheless he maintains the view that there can be  exceptions  to
general positions.

Admission to the KRG

The Danish immigration service report of September 2010 cites the  UNHCR  in
Baghdad as having said that stateless people are  at  risk  as  they  cannot
move without documents and access their rights including  food  rations  and
that politically there is a reluctance to see a change of the demography  of
Iraq.

Many governorates, including the KRG, imposed restrictions on the entry  and
residence of IDPs but these restrictions  were  lifted  as  a  result  of  a
central government directive in 2007. The exception is  Al-Anbar  (Fallujah)
governorate which requires IDPs to have a sponsor  and  a  special  ID  card
issued by the ISF. In Kirkuk, Arab IDPs may be discriminated against on  the
basis of their ethnicity.

Those wishing to stay more than 10 days in the KRG are required  to  request
permission from  security.  Visitors  have  information  cards  rather  than
residence permits. Ordinary Iraqis  wishing  to  settle  in  the  area  will
receive a card upon entering and will be instructed to  approach  the  local
Asayish office where they intend to reside. At  that  office  the  applicant
must present an ID card, PDS card, a recommendation letter from the  Mukhtar
of the neighbourhood confirming the address and  a  letter  from  a  sponsor
resident in the governorate (the sponsor does not need to be  present).  The
sponsor's letter is a  form  available  at  any  local  Asayish  office  and
confirms that the  sponsor  will  take  responsibility  for  the  applicant.
Details of the sponsor are included in the letter. The  sponsor  requirement
is for security reasons. Once an information card is issued, the holder  can
move freely throughout the KRG without having to fill out  any  other  forms
for entry in other governorates. The information card is used in  government
offices as ID throughout the  KRG.  They  are  renewed  annually  except  in
Suleymaniyah where there is no expiry date. If the applicant  has  a  letter
from a well-established employer then he does not need to  have  a  personal
sponsor. In Dahuk an information card is not issued and  the  individual  is
required to report to the Asayish instead.

Information from UNHCR  officials  in  Erbil  is  somewhat  different;  they
indicated that Iraqis could enter the KRG as tourists  for  up  to  30  days
using a card issued at the checkpoint of entry.

Dr. George stresses that no written, former rules and regulations  governing
entry  to  the  KRG  are  known  to  exist  and  therefore  procedures   are
inconsistent  between  different  checkpoints,  the   same   checkpoint   at
different times and between different governorates. He is not aware  of  any
procedure whereby an application for  entry  to  the  KRG  can  be  made  in
advance of arrival. He was informed by the UNHCR and KRG officials that  the
KRG would  not  accept  individuals  forcibly  returned  there  from  abroad
although  they  would  accept  individuals  returned  to  Iraq  via  Baghdad
airport.

On arrival at the border point of the KRG, a person can request  a  tourist,
work or residence entry card. The first is valid  for  between  one  and  30
days, the second between 10 and 15 days and an  employer's  letter  must  be
produced, and the third  is  of  unknown  validity.  Information  about  the
applicant's origins and purpose of visit must be provided and these  details
are  registered  on  a  computer  system.  Applicants   are   electronically
photographed although married women travelling with their husbands are  not.
Procedures at checkpoints are very efficient and are completed in  about  15
minutes.  Key  documents  that  must  be  presented  are  an  ID  card   and
nationality certificate. If seeking a residence card, it  is  possible  that
the applicant has to have his sponsor present or has  to  present  a  letter
from the  sponsor  notarised  by  a  court.  A  sponsor  can  be  either  an
individual or an institution.

Having obtained an information card on entry, the individual  must  register
at the local office of internal security (the Asayish) within 10 days.  This
file is then transferred to the headquarters office  where  it  is  reviewed
and the information card approved. Most people coming to reside in  the  day
are the initially enter as to wrists and then apply to the local office  for
an information card. Christians wishing  to  reside  there  benefit  from  a
series of  committees  that  ease  the  process  of  registration  with  the
authorities.

The transfer of PDS cards to the KRG is difficult.  A  system  of  temporary
transfer was introduced  in  2007  but  rescinded  two  years  later.  Cards
obtained prior to  mid  2009  remain  in  use  but  new  transfers  are  not
authorised. In  principle  they  may  be  permanently  transferred  but  the
bureaucratic  procedures  required  is   lengthy   and   normally   involved
sponsorship  by  a  ministry  which  requires  particular  skills  from  the
individual. A partial and temporary solution was put in  place  until  March
2010 by the WFB which provided people lacking a PDS  card  with  three  food
items (flour, white beans and cooking oil).

Official permission is required for an Iraqi to bring household  items  into
the KRG. The first step was for residence to be obtained. If  the  applicant
was an employee of a KRG agency, he could own property.  If  not,  he  would
have to rent it via an existing resident. Having  secured  accommodation  he
had to apply to the local office and then to the governorate  Administration
which would issue formal permission to import the household effects.  A  new
resident may apply for the transfer of  his  former  residence  registration
from his place of origin to his new  address  but  in  practice  few  people
bothered given the lengthy and bureaucratic procedure.

It is reported that the Kurdish authorities limit the entry of  Iraqis  from
outside the KRG by hindering the transfer of documentation.

Dr George went to the KRG  in  April  and  interviewed  the  UNHCR  and  the
Asayish but received contradictory evidence from the two  regarding  whether
a sponsor for permanent residence was needed in the  area.  He  acknowledged
that he had just asked about IDPs. It was his view that  the  vast  majority
of those coming into the KRG had been internally displaced. He said  he  was
told by the UNHCR that someone coming for work would need  an  employer  and
would obtain a visa for 10 to 15 days which was renewable every  two  weeks.
A  tourist  visa  was  valid  for  between  one  and  30  days.  There  were
computerised records at the checkpoints although he did not know the  nature
of these records. A residence permit was for an unknown period of  validity.
He was not aware of any  procedure  for  notifying  a  checkpoint  of  one's
arrival in advance. He described sponsorship as being  'shadowy',  i.e.  not
clearly defined with no written rules. Kurds had an easier time  than  Arabs
who, even if seeking to enter as tourists, may  be  required  to  produce  a
sponsor at the checkpoint.

With regard to the possibility of the appellant entering the KRG  to  reside
permanently, he stated that was not automatic.  For  political  reasons  the
KRG may wish Kurds from the disputed areas to remain  there  in  case  of  a
referendum.

The definition of a resident of the KRG was someone born there. So  even  if
a person had lived in Baghdad his whole life he could still be treated as  a
resident of the KRG. If a person had a contact in the  KRG  and  could  pull
strings, then entry could be sorted in that way.

A person who wanted to move  there  would  need  a  letter  from  his  local
council and it was possible that this letter could be  obtained  by  someone
else. It was also possible that the UNHCR could apply  for  this  letter  on
behalf of someone. Councils were corrupt as they  were  self  appointed.  It
was possible that they would be impressed by a letter  from  the  UNHCR  and
that they would respond. He envisaged that the applicant would go in  person
with a letter from the UNHCR.

Procedure at airport

Documents issued at the airport would not be the Iraqi ID card but rather  a
letter to facilitate movement back to the place of origin or  relocation.  A
court could direct an office to produce ID. When asked why that  should  not
apply to the airport court, he stated that he was not  aware  of  the  power
held by the judge. Further, the judge would  not  have  access  to  all  the
information that a local office had and would not be able to issue an  order
to  a  civil  status  office.  He  clarified  that  this  applied  to  those
individuals who had no relatives to vouch for them. Where an individual  did
have a relative with ID who turned up at the airport, he was unsure  of  the
process. Although he did not believe that the judge  at  the  airport  could
issue an order to the civil status office in the home area to issue  an  ID,
he did not dismiss that possibility.

Even if a person was able to enter the country  from  the  airport,  with  a
document bearing an entry stamp, that did not mean that  another  department
would not stop him if he did not have ID.

There was no evidence to contradict the UNHCR claim that returnees were  not
ill treated.

There were detention facilities at the airport. Dr George had  spoken  to  a
judge who last witnessed these facilities a  year  ago.  Dr  George  had  no
information as to how long people were  normally  detained  or  whether  the
facilities were in frequent use. Food facilities were not  mentioned  either
but the conditions were bad. Dr. George did not ask for  collaboration.  The
judge had experience of detention facilities in Iraq and  the  Middle  East.
There was no information about what kind of person would  be  detained.  The
information he had was that  there  was  a  room  for  women  and  children.
Sometimes up to 12 men were held in  one  room.  If  someone  did  not  have
documents they were likely to be detained.

Dr George pointed out that in his earlier report he had emphasised that  the
use of biometric details had never been and was not  a  routine  feature  of
the process of obtaining standard documents  except  for  the  G  series  of
passport begun to be issued in 2007. Those Iraqis who had been  detained  by
the US forces in Iraq would have had their biometric  details  recorded.  It
was possible that that information would have been  made  available  to  the
Iraqi immigration service. He acknowledged  in  his  last  report,  however,
that the capture  of  biometric  details  was  in  fact  significantly  more
widespread than he had realised  and  he  amended  the  information  earlier
given that the presence of biometric capture material  at  the  airport  was
only relevant to a tiny fraction  of  returnees.  Information  from  the  NY
Times indicated that data had been gathered on roughly  2.2  million  Iraqis
or one in 14 civilians; the equivalent to 1 in 4 males of fighting  age.  It
was said that a citizen in Iraq would almost have to spend every  minute  in
the home village and never seek government services to avoid  ever  crossing
paths with a biometric system. This meant the government could scan  through
millions of digital files in seconds even at  remote  checkpoints  by  using
hand  held  devices.   He  maintained  his  conclusion,  however,  that  the
appellant has never had occasion for her details to have been  biometrically
recorded on any Iraqi database.

Document centres

Governmental and UNHCR assistance  centres  in  Baghdad  cannot  issue  CSID
cards. Assistance with regard to obtaining  documents  may  be  provided  to
IDPs and returnees by the Protection and Assistance Centre in  Sulaymaniyah.
UNHCR document centres can provide information about where  to  go  and  can
offer legal advice.

Neither the lawyer not the professor to whom Dr George  spoke,  referred  to
the two centres in Baghdad mentioned  in  the  Foreign  Office  letter.  Dr.
George was aware of the centres and agreed that  returnees  could  get  help
there; for example, about reclaiming their  properties.  He  said  they  may
provide advice but did not issue ID cards. Their  services  were  restricted
to certain  categories  of  returnees  whereas  the  UNHCR  centres  had  no
eligibility criteria and were not just limited to IDPs. Their services  were
available to anyone who needed them.

Position of women/treatment of son

Dr. George accepted that the sponsor would not be seen as a  lone  woman  as
she was part of a family unit, however he pointed out that she would not  be
seen in the same way as a woman with a husband. A young man, such as her 19-
year-old son,  would  not  carry  the  same  weight  in  dealings  with  the
authorities as an older man would. It was possible however that his role  as
the head of a household would enhance his position. This  was  clarified  in
oral evidence when Dr George explained that his  remarks  pertained  to  the
context of entry to the KRG. He said that if the  appellant's  son  went  to
the officials regarding documentation he would be treated in  the  same  way
as an older person.

A person who was a member of an extended family or a tribe was  less  likely
to be attacked than someone without such  protection.  In  urban  areas  the
tribal connection was less clear. In his view it was impossible to say  what
will happen to this family  group  has  depended  on  varied  circumstances.
Widows were at a disadvantage in the male  oriented  society  however  there
were variations  of  widows.  Nevertheless,  making  a  living  would  be  a
challenge as none of the appellants had any specific skills. About  half  of
the available employment in Iraq was from the state but  there  was  also  a
black market and it was possible to survive on charity. There  were  serious
security threats in the south.

Dr George afreed that more  than  half  the  Iraqi  widows  had  lost  their
husbands to disease. Although the evidence suggested that many  lived  in  a
house or other accommodation he urged caution as a house or flat could  mean
a half finished building. Potentially there were multiple  sources  of  help
for widows but in practice it was  something  different.  Only  8%  received
pensions and 46% did not receive any government support. 42% of widows  felt
that no one cared. This was a reflection of  the  breakdown  of  the  social
structure.

IDPs

According to the UNHCR (April 2009,  eligibility  guidelines  for  assessing
the international protection needs of the Iraqi asylum  seekers)  there  are
"nearly 1.6  million  post  2006  IDPs  displaced  and  2  million  refugees
displaced to mainly neighbouring countries after  the  fall  of  the  former
regime". Similar UNHCR figures are cited in the 30  January  2011  quarterly
report and semi annual report to the US Congress of  the  special  Inspector
General for Iraq Reconstruction:  as  of  November  2010  1.5  million  were
estimated as being displaced outside Iraq and 197,  996  refugees  had  been
registered in neighbouring countries although it was  estimated  that  there
may be as many as 1.8 million refugees. Tens of thousands have  returned  to
their places of origin but the flow of returnees measured at 9500 to  15,000
per month before the March 2010 elections had slowed down to  about  7500  a
month. The UN office for the coordination of humanitarian  affairs  (OC  HA)
maintains that this was due to a lack of security, reliable  basic  services
and livelihood  opportunities.  The  UNHCR  monthly  statistical  update  on
return from March 2011 show that 37,090  Iraqis  had  returned  from  abroad
during 2009 and  26,410  had  returned  in  2010.  The  August  2011  update
reported that 101,100 IDPs and 39,010 refugees returned between January  and
August 2011.

A briefing paper by the internal displacement monitoring centre  (IDMC)  and
the Norwegian  refugee  Council  (NRC)  of  June  2011  (reissued  as  Iraq:
Response still centred on return despite increasing IDP  demands  for  local
integration: a profile  of  the  internal  displacement  situation,  October
2011) cautions about the reliability of  the  figures  cited  above,  noting
that UNHCR figures for those displaced between 2006 and  January  2011  were
some 300,000 fewer than  reported  by  the  International  organisation  for
migration (IOM).

The  Iraqi  Ministry  of  displacement  and  migration   (MoDM)   registered
displaced people in 15 central and southern  governorates  and  KRG  in  the
three northern governance of Dohuk, Irbil and Sulaymaniyah. It  is  reported
in  the  briefing  paper  that  registration  has  remained  voluntary   and
contingent on documentation which IDPs may lack. Estimates  of  IDPs  before
2003 are reported as being out dated particularly  in  northern  Iraq  where
they have been subject to  manipulation  according  to  interested  parties'
claims over disputed territories. The briefing paper estimates that  Baghdad
hosts 40% of IDPs, that about half of  the  post-2006  displaced  population
was in Baghdad or Diyala and that nearly 60% of them were  Shia,  30%  Sunni
and the rest from minorities. IDPs overwhelmingly fled to areas where  their
own ethnic or sectarian group was dominant.

The vast majority of returnees have civil status  ID.  Dr  George  suggested
this was because when they left their home area they would have taken  their
documents with them. He disagreed with the deduction that some people  would
renew their cards outside their home area, even though  there  was  a  large
turnover with cards  which  had  to  be  replaced  as  people's  appearances
changed. He could not explain why they needed to be renewed given that  they
had no expiry date. He conceded that if a photograph wanted  to  be  changed
it was possible for that to be done elsewhere.

He agreed that in 2009 vast majority received ration distribution cards  but
pointed out that in 2011 85% did not receive their full rations and  31%  of
IDPs did not have ration cards.

Between April and June 2010 registration of IDPs was  permitted  for  census
purposes.

IDPs without documentation

Most IDPs, like many Iraqis, rely on the public  distribution  system  (PDS)
for basic food but a third interview in late 2009 did not have  a  PDS  card
valid in their place of residence. The  Secretary  General's  report  of  16
February 2011 emphasises  the  essential  nature  of  documentation  to  the
exercise of key rights in Iraq including the ability to register as  an  IDP
or returnee, to access basic services  and  financial  assistance,  rent  or
purchase land, vote or  obtain  land  titles,  obtain  pensions,  education,
employment, driver's licenses,  car  registration  and  medical  assistance.
IDPs have complained about the  inconsistent  implementation  of  government
registration procedures and the lack of their own  resources  to  travel  to
registration points.  Some  have  been  reluctant  to  register  because  of
security concerns, bureaucratic delays or a lack of documentation.  In  2009
registration was  stopped  and  reopened  temporarily  for  census  purposes
between April and June 2010 but assurances  were  given  by  the  government
that the procedure would be reopened for all IDPs. It is reported  that  due
to the difficulties IDPs face in obtaining or  renewing  documents  such  as
the  civil  status  identification  card,  they   often   need   specialised
assistance. Some were in fear of the consequences of registration.

In December 2009 the UNHCR provided the following figures:

lack of civil identification: 20% IDPs, 45% IDP returnees, 35%  in  returnee
refugees
lack of  PDS  ration  cards:  31%  IDPs,  12%  IDP  returnees,  24%  refugee
returnees
civil ID: 25% IDPs, 18% IDP returnees, 22% refugee returnees
nationality  certificates:  22%  IDPs,  11%  IDP  returnees,   29%   refugee
returnees
passports: 21% IDPs, 9% IDP returnees, 15% refugee returnees.

About 61% IDPs stated they needed to register with the authorities in  their
current location but only 55% were registered.

However in January 2007 the IOM reported that 97% of the  IDP  community  is
held  nationality  certificates,  97%  had  identification  cards,  74%   of
families failed marriage documents, 47% had birth certificates and  18%  had
death certificates. The UNHCR reported that returnees faced difficulties  in
obtaining documentation  despite  the  existence  of  legal  advice  centres
because of the costs related to transportation and  application  fees.  Some
were unaware of the process.

                       APPENDIX B
                       EVIDENCE OF DR FATAH

Dr Fatah

A first report was produced  dated  8th  November  2010  which  specifically
addressed the issue of obtaining protection from the  state,  relocation  to
another part of Iraq and the situation for women in Iraq.

A second report dated 10th October 2011 similarly covered issues for  family
members of insurgents but this was not at issue in this appeal.

A third report dated 18th November 2011 was produced in response to  queries
that arose during the hearing and in order to comment upon  a  letter  dated
17th November 2011 from 2nd secretary migration, British Embassy in  Baghdad
to the Country of Origin Information Service, UKBA.

Dr Fatah also produced a Civil Status ID, a Nationality  Certificate  and  a
copy of the family page in the record book.

Other issues covered by the reports but not  of  relevance  to  this  appeal
have not summarised  eg  UNHCR's  position  that  Iraqis  from  central  and
southern governate were still in need of international protection  and  that
the UNHCR did not support the DFFM 2011 report.

The issues addressed were as follows:

    . Is Kirkuk administered by the KRG or the Governate of Iraq ("GOI")?

    . What is the possibility of relocation to Kirkuk?

    .  What  is  the  possibility  of  relocation  to  KRG   including   the
      requirements and procedures?

    . In general  what  is  the  position  for  lone  women/women  heads  of
      households on return to Iraq?

    . Can food rations be transferred elsewhere in Iraq?

    . Is it necessary to return to the home area before  relocation  or  can
      relocation take place directly elsewhere?

    . What are the general difficulties that may be faced on  relocating  in
      terms of security, humanitarian issues, food, housing, and integration
      into a new community?

    . Relevant regulations for KRG and GoI for re-entry.

    . What medical treatment is available?



Is Kirkuk administered by the KRG or the Governate of Iraq ("GOI")?


   Kirkuk is in the Governate of Kirkuk. It is not in the KRG  and  lies  in
   what are called 'disputed territories'. It is Kurdish populated.


   The KRG is not a monolithic polity but run  by  two  different  political
   parties, each in control of two different areas.

Returnees from European Countries

Dr Fatah obtained personal information direct from returnees.

To KRG

KRG does not permit direct re-entry; all returnees are via Baghdad.

To Baghdad

Returnees require a guarantor who can confirm  their  identity  before  they
are permitted to leave the airport.  Until  satisfactorily  identified  they
are detained at the airport prison. They are not allowed to leave to  go  to
another area of Iraq (GoI or KRG) to find  their  guarantor.  The  guarantor
must attend the airport. Returnees without a guarantor  have  been  detained
up to 15 days.

Some returnees have their Civil Status ID or personal Civil ID  record  with
them and this means they can confirm their identity.

Identity can be proved by a close relative - father, uncle, sibling - to  go
to airport and act as guarantor.

If there is  no  guarantor  or  relative  to  confirm  identity  the  courts
determine nationality and identity. The returnee will be  brought  before  a
judge who orders the returnees civil record status file from  the  returnees
place of birth. Otherwise an individual with no form of identification  must
provide two witnesses who must confirm the identity of  that  individual  in
front of a judge under oath. "This then enables the court to issue a Civil

Status ID to that previously "unidentified" individual".

Once Iraqi officials are satisfied as to identity the returnee  is  released
to find their own way back. Those who are unable to  satisfy  the  officials
are returned to the country from which they  have  come.  Returnees  are  no
longer questioned over terrorist  links  unless  biometric  details  require
otherwise.

In some circumstances the guarantor has been able to convince the  officials
at the  Baghdad  airport  to  transfer  the  returnee  to  Erbil  where  the
guarantor's family are able to produce his Civil Status ID and  confirm  his
identity.

If the guarantor is not present to confirm identity the returnee would  have
great difficulty travelling out of Baghdad without Civil Status  ID  because
of the checkpoints which require production of Civil Status ID.

Dr Fatah said that in practice some returnees paid bribes at checkpoints  if
they did not have their Civil Status ID. He said  that  returnees  had  told
him that they had to pay bribes at almost every checkpoint in order to  pass
on.

Travel out of and away from Baghdad

The transport infrastructure in Iraq is poor with most areas linked only  by
dirt roads. There are no regular bus services;  communal  taxis  leave  when
they are "full". The road  connecting  Baghdad  to  Kirkuk  (Uzem  road)  is
developing a reputation as one of the most dangerous thoroughfares in  Iraq;
the danger is  from  insurgents,  IEDs,  militants  and  criminal  gangs  in
addition to Islamic groups who accuse Kurds of collaborating  with  the  US.
Kurdish civilians call it the Road of Death. The OGN October 2010 refers  to
roads becoming safer but all roads remain potentially  dangerous;  the  main
routes north from Baghdad see daily roadside  bombings.  There  are  flights
between Baghdad and for example Erbil; there have been no recent attacks  on
civilian aircraft but the potential threat remains. The  road  from  Baghdad
to Kirkuk goes through the Sunni triangle. Thousands travel on the road  but
it is difficult to say how  many  men,  women  or  families.  Women  usually
travel with a man, especially on long distances.

To check into a hotel in GoI or KRG Iraqi civil Status ID must be  produced.
If a couple, a marriage certificate must also be produced.

Documentation

Civil Status ID

The Iraqi Civil Status Identification Card (al Bitaqat al  Shikhsiya  or  al
Bitakqa al Shakhsya,) is issued  by  the  Nationality  and  Personal  Status
Directorate of the Ministry of the Interior in KRG and  by  the  Directorate
of Nationality in GOI in accordance  with  Article  65  of  the  1972  Iraqi
Nationality Status Law; it is a photographic ID and is treated like a  birth
certificate; it is a very important document and is required to be  able  to
access  any  private  or  public  services,  vote,  access  income/financial
assistance, education, housing and so on.

To obtain, an individual must go personally to their place  of  birth.  Each
region and city has their own official registration  records.  There  is  no
central government agency that holds all the records.

Dr Fatah was told by practitioners in KRG that a person who needs to  obtain
a Civil Status ID who has  never  held  a  Civil  Status  ID  also  requires
certification from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Documents  required  to
obtain a Civil Status ID are: Application form, birth certificate  or  proof
of birth in case of a child, housing card or supporting  letter  from  local
council confirming residence, recommendation from the Mukhtar, PDS  card,  2
photos.  If a person has no ID from her  file,  she  would  need  to  go  to
someone who can identify her; she cannot go to the office herself. Dr  Fatah
was of the view that there must be someone who would recognise a person;  he
could not believe that everyone who knew an individual would  disappear.  He
confirmed that community was important  and  that  by  making  enquires  and
establishing links her presence would become known.

The Iraqi Embassy in London is  able  to  issue  a  first  Civil  Status  ID
provided the individual produces:  Iraqi  birth  certificate  (this  can  be
obtained from family members in Iraq and, once issued, approved  (legalised)
by  the  Iraqi  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs),  Father's  (or  uncle's  or
grandfather's) Civil Status ID, application form from the Embassy.

The Embassy can issue a replacement Civil Status ID  on  production  of  the
above documents and the reference number of the lost  Civil  Status  ID.  If
the number of the lost Civil Status ID is not known, the  Embassy  will  not
issue a replacement and the individual must go  personally  to  their  local
office of family registration and obtain their references and apply.

The  Iraqi  Embassy  is  not  able  to  issue  Civil  Status  IDs  or  Iraqi
Nationality Certificates in London but can take the necessary documents  and
post them to the relevant authorities in  Iraq.  The  Embassy  advises  that
relatives or a lawyer in Iraq  should  be  asked  to  follow  up  after  the
Embassy has sent the relevant documents to Iraq.

In normal circumstances Personal Status ID cards are  issued  by  the  Civil
Status Court of which there is one in  each  area.  The  court  directs  the
issue of a persona Status ID card, the person then goes  to  the  town  hall
and is given the plastic card. A special civil status court was  set  up  at
the airport which dealt with returned failed asylum seekers but that  was  a
special court. Dr Fatah said it may have had special  procedures,  of  which
he was unaware, for the issue of ID.

A professional person would be able to transfer their ID  card  without  too
much difficulty but would not be given a PDS card. Within  GOI,  individuals
can move within an area and keep their Civil Status ID registered  in  their
original area. The exception is the KRG which is acting  like  a  state  and
make it difficult to move. They do not allow people from Kirkuk or Mosul  to
move into their area - they hope at some stage that their area  will  expand
into those areas.

Iraqi Nationality Certificate

The Nationality Certificate is one of two essential documents; the other  is
the Civil Status  ID.  It  is  central  to  the  exercise  of  civic  rights
including registration as an IDP or returnee. It can be  obtained  from  the
Office of the Directorate of Travel and Nationality/Ministry of Interior  in
GOI  and  in  KRG  from   the   Directorate   of   Nationality   and   Civil
Status/Ministry of Interior or the  Directorate  of  Nationality  and  Civil
Identification Documents.  It  must  be  collected  in  person  due  to  the
unreliability of the postal service.

Documents  required  in  order  to  obtain  the   nationality   certificate:
Application   form;  copy  of  father's  brother's,  uncle's,  grandfather's
Nationality certificate; PDS; housing card or supporting letter  from  local
council confirming residency; in KRG letter from Mukhtar; photos.

Personal Civil ID Record

This is the official record of registration in  Iraq.  It  is  kept  in  the
equivalent of the town hall. A person must be registered on  the  Record  to
be able to obtain a Civil Status ID.

If born in hospital, the hospital will provide the parents  with  two  birth
certificates both of which are taken to the Office of Births and  Deaths  in
that governate and stamped. One is then taken to the Civil Registry and  the
birth is recorded on the Personal Civil ID Record page of  the  family.  One
birth certificate is retained by the Office  of  Official  Registration  and
the other by the parents.

If a child is not born in hospital both parents  go  to  the  civil  courts,
fill in a form to record the child's birth which is  then  endorsed  by  the
court which then issues two Proof of Birth certificates to the  parents  who
then follow the above procedure.

There is no time limit within which registration must  occur.  Civil  Status
ID may be obtained at the same time - it is the  physical  manifestation  of
the Personal Civil ID Record - but it is not compulsory. A civil  status  ID
can be obtained for a child at any time.

Personal Civil ID cannot be transferred to any  other  governate  except  on
marriage when a woman will transfer on to her  husband's  family's  personal
Civil ID Record page. To transfer, the marriage certificate  must  be  taken
to the Civil Registry and a request for transfer made.  The  Civil  Registry
will draw a line over the woman's name in the Personal Civil ID  Record  and
state that it has been transferred to her husband's family page and  stating
the reference number of the marriage certificate and the  new  page  number.
The woman then can obtain her new Civil  Status  ID  which  states  her  new
marital status.

A person can move from one governate to another  and  has  to  register  but
unless there are very special reasons (or a woman marries)  records  ie  the
physical changing of the page is not transferred.

If the reference number for the Personal Civil ID card has been lost it  can
be obtained by taking a sibling's father's or uncle's  Civil  Status  ID  to
find out the page of their Personal Civil  ID  Record  and  from  there  the
reference number can be found and used to obtain a Civil Status ID. This  is
routine.

These cards may have to be renewed  but  there  is  no  specific  period  of
validity. In oral evidence Dr Fatah thought maybe after  10  years  or  when
there was a significant change although this was a guess.

Without this card an individual would not be able to register  at  a  hotel;
it would be required at checkpoints. If a person was unable  to  produce  ID
at a checkpoint the usual procedure would be detention  until  a  member  of
the family brought the card although the guards may be more  sympathetic  to
a woman.

Information Card

This  replaces  a  residence  permit,  is  obtained  from  the  KRG  Asayish
(Security service) and is required for those wishing to stay for  more  than
10 days. It must be produced whenever demanded. According to the  DFFM  2010
report referred to by Dr Fatah, ordinary Iraqis seeking to stay  and  settle
are given a card on entering and told to report to the local Asayish  office
with personal documents such as Civil Status ID,  PDS  (they  ceased  to  be
issued  in  2009)  a  letter  from  the  Mukhtar,  marriage  certificate,  a
guarantee letter signed by a Kafil - resident of the  governate.  The  Kafil
does not have  to  attend  personally  at  the  Asayish  office  but  it  is
recommended that if the Iraqi is not  a  Kurd  then  h/she  should  bring  a
Kurdish speaker to the office. According to the  DFFM  2010  an  information
card will not be issued without a  Kafil  (sponsor).  The  Kafil  letter  no
longer has to be issued by the court according to  the  DFFM  2010  but  the
same report also says that it does. The Information Card  enables  residence
for one year and then has to be renewed.

Issuance of information cards can vary  between  governates;  the  ethnicity
and faith of individuals can  influence  issuance.  Non-Kurds  face  greater
difficulty entering KRG.

Public Distribution Cards

This is the food ration card; all Iraqis are  entitled  to  a  monthly  food
basket. Transfer of PDS is only possible in GOI; it  cannot  be  transferred
to KRG. IDPs who re-locate to the KRG will have to return to their  previous
location to get their monthly food ration.

A third of IDPs interviewed in a late-2009 UNHCR survey did not have  a  PDS
card valid in their Governate of residence,  only  15%  of  those  with  one
reported receiving their full monthly allowance.

The PDS is renewed annually, usually in December,  and  is  renewed  at  the
branch of Ministry of Trade in the area  of  origin.  It  has  12  tear  off
stamps. Documents required to renew include Civil Status ID of  all  members
of the family, Personal Civil ID Records, housing card, letter from  Mukhtar
(in KRG only).

Heads of household are able to get the ration for the rest  of  the  family;
any registered member of the family can collect the  monthly  ration.  There
is no requirement to utilise the PDS ration and  more  wealthy  families  do
not.  There  is  discussion  at  present  to  limit  availability.  Food  is
available in the market.

The conditions of the roads and the security situation in Kirkuk 'will  make
it very challenging for Ms K to  make  the  monthly  journey  to  Kirkuk  to
collect the food ration'. This would not  be  difficult,  "just  a  hassle";
there are continuous taxi rides between Sulemaniyeh and Kirkuk.

General

Through their protection and assistance centres (PAC) and mobile  teams  the
UNHCR claims to provide legal counselling and assistance in obtaining  Civil
Status documents. Returnees interviewed by Dr Fatah in  November  2011  said
they received no such assistance from the UNHCR,  the  Iraqi  Government  or
any other NGO.  The  UNHCR  states  that  it  only  provides  assistance  to
returnees who fled between 01/01/2006 and 01/01/2008 and were displaced  for
less than 8months; who fled in the year prior  to  09/04/2003  and  returned
after 09/04/2003, those formerly internally  displaced  returnees  who  fled
their place of origin within Iraq after 01/01/2008 and  re-signed  with  the
MoDM in the location of displacement. Ms K left in 2009.  According  to  the
interviewees who were returnees from European  countries  they  received  no
assistance, were detained on arrival, beaten up, had to  pay  for  food  and
water during their detention, had to  pay  bribes,  had  to  pay  their  own
travel from  Baghdad  and  all  those  returned  in  June  2010  were  still
unemployed in November 2011 and relied upon family members for support.

According to a conversation (November  2011)  Dr  Fatah  had  with  the  IOM
Capacity Building programme assistant in Amman (all information  about  IOMs
activities in Iraq is given through  the  Amman  Office)  the  IOM  had  not
helped returned asylum seekers who were  lacking  identification  to  obtain
identification  documents  when  the  asylum  seekers  arrived  at   Baghdad
airport. She informed  Dr  Fatah  that  the  usual  procedure  was  for  the
Interior Ministry of the country that was returning  the  asylum  seeker  to
work with the Iraqi embassy in that country to provide the returnee  with  a
temporary  Iraqi  passport  -  this  temporary  Iraqi  passport   would   be
sufficient to allow the returnee to leave the airport. She  also  said  that
the IOM assists IDPs and returnees in all Iraqi  governates  with  obtaining
statements and documentation to enable them to access  basic  services  like
education and gave as an example an IDP without formal documents who  wished
to attend school would register with  the  IOM  who  would  then  refer  the
individual to the governate office  of  the  Ministry  of  Displacement  and
Migration who would then provide the individual with a written statement  to
the Ministry of Education in that Governate stating that the  individual  is
resident and should have access to education. She also said that there  were
a number of programmes developed with the Iraqi Government and the  MoDM  to
assist returnees to settle in their current governate by offering  training,
apprenticeships and grants but she did not have the numbers  assisted  under
the various programmes. Dr Fatah refers to the low profile of engagement  by
NGOs and therefore not  many  returnees  or  IDPs  would  be  aware  of  the
services offered or available. Curfews, checkpoints and fighting would  also
reduce access.

The UNHCR regional offices are not a substitute for returning to  home  area
to obtain documentation.

In oral evidence Dr Fatah said that a European Travel  Document  may  be  of
assistance provided it was a  properly  issued  document  approved  by  both
governments. He did not think it could be used as a substitute for Iraqi  ID
documents but it may be of assistance in enabling entry to Iraq  and  onward
travel to place of origin in order to obtain Iraqi documents, provided  that
it was accepted by the Iraqi authorities. He  stressed  that  although  this
may be of assistance in leaving the airport and  possibly  Baghdad,  outside
of these places the checkpoint guards may not be aware of  such  a  document
and cause difficulties. If travelling without ID documents there is  a  risk
of detention.

If one member of the family has ID it will be much easier for other  members
of the family to obtain ID because all family members will be  on  the  same
page.

The record system in Iraq has existed  since  Ottoman  times.  Many  records
were destroyed in 1991 and 2003 although not in Kurdistan which was  a  safe
haven. The records in Kirkuk were much damaged.  Children  born  after  2003
would have records. If records were destroyed or damaged  then  existing  ID
would be used to create new records.

In subsequent oral evidence Dr Fatah  said  that  if  a  person  arrived  at
Baghdad airport on a
laissez pass and a relative arrived with ID that  relative  can  vouch  for
the individual. For some a judge was able to obtain access to civil  records
to confirm identity in about 15 days during which time  the  individual  was
in detention at the airport. He stressed this was a special  system  set  up
for these people ie returned asylum seekers. He guessed that in these  cases
the individual would still have to return to  his  home  area  in  order  to
obtain other documents that are required, other than personal status ID  but
that would  not  be  difficult  because  the  person  would  have  the  most
important document. He accepted that  the  UNHCR  may  give  assistance  but
would not be able to issue documents.

He does not accept that it is possible  to  obtain  documents  from  Baghdad
unless the civil status record is in Baghdad. It is necessary to  return  to
an individual's place of origin where the personal civil ID record is.

78% of returning refugees have their Civil Status  IDs.  In  some  cases  of
mass displacement eg Christians to Mosul it may be that the  UNHCR  assisted
individuals in obtaining their ID but  this  was  not  the  case  in  normal
circumstances.

The process for obtaining documents is basically the  same  whether  in  the
KRG or the GOI; there may be slight differences for example  in  the  number
of photos required, in GOI may require confirmation from  the  neighbourhood
committee whereas in KRG it is from the Mukhtar.

What is the possibility of relocation to Kirkuk? Is it necessary  to  return
to the home area first or can relocation take place directly elsewhere?

Iraq is a collective as oppose to  an  individualistic  society.  There  has
been ethnic cleansing  in  many  areas  such  that  previously  diverse  and
cosmopolitan areas have become mono ethnic. Integration into  Iraqi  society
relies upon family, neighbours, community. Iraq is now  more  divided  along
stronger communal fault lines thus  a  person  relocating  away  from  their
place of original residence would lack access to resources or protection.

The Internal Displacement Monitoring  Centre  (December  2010)  states  that
while the security situation in  Iraq  has  improved,  government  functions
have stalled and the government has  proved  unable  to  provide  access  to
basic services to internally displaced  people,  most  of  whom  are  either
single women, children or elderly [7.3, 63]. The same report refers  to  the
difficulties faced by unregistered  IDPs:  such  individuals  cannot  access
services.  The  reasons  given  for  no   registration   include   lack   of
documentation, each  Governate  uses  different  requirements  for  enabling
registration and that registration has  been  tightly  restricted  in  areas
such as Kirkuk which has been  the  subject  of  high  levels  of  sectarian
violence.  In 2009 the Kirkuk Governate issued  an  order  stopping  further
registration. A 2009 UNHCR survey showed that 1/3 of IDPs  did  not  have  a
Public Distribution System (PDS) (food vouchers) valid  in  their  Governate
of residence.

Identification documents are required to relocate  and  such  documents  can
only be obtained from the place of origin.

The Danish Fact Finding Mission ("DFFM") Entry Procedures and  Residence  in
KRI for Iraqi Nationals April  2010  report  states  that  'persons  without
personal  documents  faced  difficulties   in   obtaining   their   original
documents...person is required to go to  his  place  of  origin  to  acquire
these. In addition the GOI does not readily support the integration of  IDPs
in KRI with reference to the fact that the GOI  is  not  always  willing  to
forward relevant documents to the IDPs'.

If Ms K arrives in Kirkuk (place of origin) where she has siblings from  her
father's bloodline the siblings can produce their  ID  and  the  process  of
acquisition of ID can commence  for  Ms  K.  She  will  need  the  Mukhtar's
support and for this she requires a residential address because the  Mukhtar
can only represent a specific neighbourhood. She would  be  able  to  obtain
the Mukhtar's  support  once  her  elatives  attend  with  her,  'presumably
stating that she is staying with them. Under normal circumstances a  mukhtar
does not provide a supporting letter without production  of  a  PDS,  ID  or
Information card.
If Ms K does not have any siblings in  Kirkuk,  the  process  is  apparently
very complex and may take months, she would need a lawyer and it would  cost
a lot of money - but the process is unspecified.

If the family are detained in Baghdad awaiting approval of  their  identity,
the two above processes can be undertaken but the family would rely  on  the
'authorities conduct[ing] the procedure formally'.  'The  authorities  might
help if she could  provide  details  of  her  siblings  ID.  To  obtain  her
Nationality  Certificate  she  would  need  her  Personal  Status   ID   and
Nationality Certificate.

If permitted entry Ms K and her family must return to  Kirkuk  in  order  to
follow necessary procedures to produce identification documents.

Possibility of relocation to KRG. Can PDS be transferred?

There is no written procedure; the DFFM 2010  report  and  the  UNHCR  state
that they are unable to find any  laws  or  regulations  that  can  document
entry and residence procedure in any of the three Governates. The DFFM  2010
can be regarded as the official stance of the KRG.

The DFFM 2011 report information has come mainly from 2  KDP  officers:  the
head of the Political Department, General Security Office, Asayish  and  the
General  Manager,  Kurdistan   checkpoints   Kurdistan   Regional   Security
Protection Agency, Security General Directorate, KRG Ministry  of  Interior.
They also refer to  the  Director  of  Yezidi  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Awqaf
(endowments) & Religious  Affairs.  The  first  and  third  individuals  are
political appointments. Although there are no official guidelines the  UNHCR
issued guidelines  in  2009  and  states  that  there  are  strict  security
measures at checkpoints.
Officially on entry any individual is required to  produce  an  Iraqi  Civil
Status ID, a Nationality Card or an Iraqi passport. With  documentation,  it
is extremely unlikely that Ms K would not be able to enter KRG.

Officially (according to the DFFM) entry and residence procedures  are  laid
down by the Asayish (Kurdish Security Forces). On entry each  individual  is
identified and photographed electronically and issued with  a  card  stating
reason for entering and period of stay - work, tourism, and  information.  A
woman would only be  photographed  if  arriving  on  her  own,  without  her
family.

The sponsorship requirement has not been completely waived such that  anyone
wishing to live/relocate to the KRG is required to provide an KRG- born-and-
resident sponsor and/or an acquaintance. Dr Fatah  says  these  requirements
are enforced even where an individual is just trying  to  visit  the  region
but the DFFM 2010 says this requirement has been lifted  for  those  seeking
only  to  visit.  Dr  Fatah  also  states  that  Kurds  do  not  require   a
Kafil/guarantor.

DFFM 2010 also states that any Iraqi national with an Iraqi ID  is  free  to
enter and reside after registration at a local Asayish, that  there  are  no
reports of Iraqi nationals being discriminated against at checkpoints or  of
people being deported from KRG to GoI  or  the  disputed  areas.  The  UNHCR
states (January 2011) that  entry  procedures  lack  uniformity  and  change
frequently without the public being informed  whereas  the  DFFM  2011(which
the UNHCR does not support) states that is not the case and  that  there  is
a unified procedure albeit built on rules and regulations not laid  down  in
law and not publicly available. Dr Fatah relates inconsistencies within  the
DFFM 2011 report for example that no  sponsor/  guarantor  is  required  but
also that Arabs who wish to enter are required to have a sponsor and may  be
refused if they do not. The report refers to the lack of detention but  also
to large numbers of Arabs arrested and detained.

Neither Kurds nor Arabs are able, on relocation, to transfer their PDS.

It is not possible to access any services, attend school/university/ buy  or
rent a house, be eligible for employment without transfer  of  Civil  Status
ID to the KRG.
The KRG does not permit any transfer of ID or  Nationality  Certificates  to
the KRG from any part of Iraq and in  particular  Kirkuk,  in  keeping  with
Article 140.

IDP relocation (as of October 2011)

According to the UNHCR and DFFM 2011  reports  access  to  KRG  by  IDPs  is
complex with variations in process. IDPs  are  required  to  register  at  a
checkpoint although it seems that  has  not  been  fully  implemented  (DFFM
2011). A non Kurdish Iraqi is required to have a contact in the KRG  but  in
any event approval  or  denial  is  not  systematic  because  there  are  no
official rules. There is a 'blacklist' of those who are potential  or  known
insurgents who will be arrested. The list is made up based on court  orders,
Interpol Notices and names from the US.

A Kurdish IDP does not need a  contact  person  but  ration  cards  are  not
transferred to the new location; the IDP must return to their town  or  city
of origin to collect their monthly rations.

To transfer administrative  zones  within  Iraq  including  to  the  KRG  an
individual must have a  Civil  Status  Identification  Card  issued  by  the
General Directorate of Citizenship in accordance with Iraqi Civil number  65
(1972) and the Iraqi Nationality Certificate.
KRG ceased registering IDPs at the end of  2008.  Residency  cards  are  not
issued to Iraqi Citizens, only to foreigners.

According to the UKBA (15 Aug 2008) food ration cards  are  widely  accepted
as ID.

Without  the  Civil  Status  Identification   Card   and   the   Nationality
Certificate Ms K would not be able to enter KRG; she would not  be  able  to
transfer her PDS.

There have in the past been arrangements made for transfer of  IDPs  to  the
KRG; when this occurred eg when there was a huge influx into Dohuk and  then
arrangements may  be  made  for  transfer  of  PDS  but  those  are  special
arrangements. For the general person PDS cannot be transferred.

Relocation to areas under GoI control

This depends on where the relocation is to and  ethnicity  and  religion  of
the person relocating. For example it would  be  highly  problematic  for  a
Sunni to relocate to a Southern  Shi'ite  governate  or  for  a  Shi'ite  to
relocate to a heavily Sunni central Iraq Governate. But  a  Sunni  may  face
fewer challenges and be able to establish themselves in Mosul  or  Al  Anbar
and similarly a Shi'ite may be able to  relocate  to  a  southern  governate
under Shi'ite control. Also post 2003 sectarian divide it is the  policy  of
the Iraqi Government not to allow transfer  of  ID  from  one  governate  to
another; a governate of one sectarian/ethnic majority would not  be  willing
to allow the transfer for fear of changing the political demographic.
In general what is the position for lone women/women heads of households  on
return to Iraq? What are the general  difficulties  that  may  be  faced  on
relocating in terms of security, humanitarian issues, food, housing?

The current ration of women to men is  thought  to  be  in  the  region  3:1
although possibly inflated. 1-2 million women have been widowed and have  no
access to social benefits according to the overseas  representative  of  the
Organisation of Women's Freedom in Iraq (15 April 2010). The high ratio  has
led to an increase in polygamy  and  the  revival  of  'temporary  marriage'
which is leading to political divisions. The  Institute  of  War  and  Peace
Reporting 23 September 2010 reported that opponents of polygamy argued  that
money set aside would be better used  to  equip  vulnerable  women  but  the
scheme also receives support from local charities and prominent clerics.

Dr Fatah's report states that 'objective evidence illustrates that women  in
Iraq today are  particularly  vulnerable  without  access  to  these  social
structures' - no  social  benefits,  reliance  on  family  tribal  and  clan
structures breaking down, loss of  ability  to  earn  and  live  within  own
family, increasing social  conservatism.  There  has  been  an  increase  in
pressure for women to wear hijab but this is discrimination; women  are  not
killed for failing to wear hijab. There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that
female lone heads of household are targeted more  than  any  other  type  of
women.

Women have not been killed in the past other  than  for  honour  crimes  and
domestic violence but  there  has  been  an  increasing  trend  towards  the
killing of women for political reasons. A  number  of  examples  are  given,
some where it could be described as collateral damage  and  some  as  murder
for no given reason.

The Shi'ite influence  in  central  and  south  Iraq  has  made  freedom  of
movement increasingly difficult  with  consequences  on  women's  access  to
employment and general participation in society.

Reports quoted by the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  (March  2011),  the
OECDs Social Institutions and Gender Index (2009) United Nations  Assistance
Mission to Iraq (December 2010), Human Rights  Watch  (April  2011),  Inter-
Agency  Information  and  Analysis  Unit  (IAU)  report  Iraq  Labour  Force
Analysis 2003-2008 dated January 2009, International Committee  of  the  Red
Cross 'Iraq: women struggle to make ends meet'  (30  March  2011),  Minority
Rights Group International (July 2011) refer to reduced literacy, 83%  women
remain outside the labour force, the rise  in  Islamic  influence,  and  the
security situation disproportionately  affecting  women's  ability  to  work
outside the home. Relief International refers to the difficulty widows  have
accessing water and health care and 55% of  women  surveyed  reported  being
the victims of violence. A 2010 Iraqi Human Rights report records  that  21%
of Iraqi women surveyed were subject to bodily  harm  and  this  figure  was
higher amongst married women (23% of women  aged  30-34).  Women  living  in
rural areas of central and southern Iraq face  23%  more  bodily  harm  than
women living in urban areas. These reports contrast the greater  freedom  of
movement, ability to work outside the home and ability to obtain a  passport
without the consent of a male relative in KRG.
An ICRC report (24th August 2011) refers  to  around  70%  of  women  headed
households spend more  than  they  earn  and  have  to  borrow  money,  sell
belongings and go without health care or schooling for their children.

Female headed household are widespread  but  appear  in  higher  numbers  in
Baghdad, Diyala and KRG. The actual figures are difficult to obtain but  the
IOM estimate that 1 in 10 households are headed by a woman.

Most female headed households are  unable  to  find  employment  to  support
their families.  According to the  IOM  only  2%  had  a  steady  salary;  a
further 6% were employed doing odd jobs. The unemployment rate in  2008  for
young people (aged 15 - 24) was around 30% compared to a total  unemployment
rate of 18%.

There is little or no state support structure; family and social support  is
essential. With no family the risk of homelessness and unemployment is  very
real.

There is a considerable amount of building in KRG.

Whilst awaiting the issue of ID Dr Fatah was of the view that a  lone  woman
and a woman with children would be unlikely to  be  suspected  of  being  an
insurgent; that most people would be sympathetic and it  was  unlikely  that
the family would be subjected to abuse.

The number of IDPs pre 2003 was estimated at 1,200,000  and  since  2003  at
1,600,000. Of these the number of families registered  with  the  Bureau  of
Migration and Displacement as being  in  the  IKE  stands  at  87,500  (DFFM
2010). Figures for displacement recorded by other  organisations  present  a
confusing and unreliable picture. Roughly 300,000  IDPs  and  nearly  80,000
refugees returned to Iraq in 2008 and 2009; returns have decreased in  early
2010 with only 60,000 IDPs and 16,000 refugee returning.

The UNHCR 2011 report set out the assistance for refugees and  IDPs  it  has
provided  as  against  the  number  of  refugees  and  IDPs.  Although   not
considered totally accurate it records about 2/3 of returning  refugees  and
about 1/3 IDPs assisted.

According to personal research by  Dr  Fatah  individuals  assisted  by  the
UNHCR under the voluntary repatriation  scheme  have  received  the  sum  of
money  allocated  but  have  not  received  any  other  assistance  such  as
employment, housing and medical treatment.

In a fatherless household, older  sons  would  take  on  the  role  of  male
protector of a family although a young man would not carry  as  much  weight
as an older man.

The expectation within the family would be for the sons to work  to  support
the family.
Many people live in for example Mosul and travel to Dohuk (in  the  KRG)  to
work.

What medical treatment is available?

According to the proceedings of the Iraq Health  Symposium  May  2008,  Iraq
has  one  of  the  poorest  health  systems  in  the  region.  The  national
healthcare system collapsed after the

UN imposed sanctions in 1991. Medical services  are  neither  regulated  nor
monitored, even for wealthy Iraqis. Corruption is rife.  In  July  2010  the
ICRC  referred  to  insufficient  numbers  of  medical  personnel,   reduced
availability of medical services in rural and remote areas,  have  'made  it
very challenging to provide health care in Iraq'. A  UNHCR  report  December
2009 refers to a survey that of over 90% of IDPS who reported being able  to
obtain health care; a quarter could not afford the fees.

The cost of basic health care  in  KRG  is  small  and  basic  services  are
provided. Pharmaceutical supplies were abundant but poorly sourced,  A  2009
Foreign and Commonwealth Office report (2009) said that  healthcare  in  the
KRG was not in good shape. Dr Fatah says medication is  expensive  but  this
is not a sourced reference.
































                                 APPENDIX C
                        DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


|1    |"Current activities in Iraq 2011", Medecins Sans   |2011              |
|     |Frontiers                                          |                  |
|2    |"2 US soldiers killed as Iraqi opens fire at base",|12 September 2011 |
|     |News Mild.com                                      |                  |
|3    |"US Soldiers killed in Iraq gun fight", ABC News   |9 September 2011  |
|4    |"Advice for Iraq", Foreign Office Travel           |5 September 2011  |
|5    |"Report of Information gathering visit to Kurdistan|30 August 2011    |
|     |region of Iraq", Foreign and Commonwealth Office   |                  |
|6    |"Iraqi deaths", iCasualties database               |July 2011         |
|7    |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |27 July 2011      |
|8    |"Travel State Government Special Immigrant Visas   |20 July 2011      |
|     |(SIVs) for Iraqi and Afghan                        |                  |
|     |Translators/Interpreters", US State Department     |                  |
|9    |"Iraq Body Count" accessed 18 July 2011            |18 July 2011      |
|10   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |17 July 2011      |
|11   |"Issue: Treatment of Interpreters working for the  |13 July 2011      |
|     |US government/US Forces", Foreign Commonwealth     |                  |
|     |Office letter                                      |                  |
|12   |"US Secretary General ban - Ki-Moon's report of the|7 July 2011       |
|     |Secretary General pursuant to paragraph 6 of       |                  |
|     |resolution 1936 (2010)                             |                  |
|13   |"Iraq: Internal Travel", Foreign and Commonwealth  |7 June 2011       |
|     |Office letter                                      |                  |
|14   |"Iraqi Refugee Processing Factsheet", US           |3 June 2011       |
|     |Citizenship and Immigration Services               |                  |
|15   |"Iraq Index: Tracking variables of reconstruction  |29 May 2011       |
|     |and security in Post-Saddam Iraq", Brookings       |                  |
|     |Institute                                          |                  |
|16   |"Sadr followers send message to US: Don't try to   |27 May 2011       |
|     |stay",  Roy Gutman, Sahar Issa, McClatchy          |                  |
|     |Newspapers, Christian Science Monitor              |                  |
|17   |"Foreign Contractors/risk to western collaborators |24 May 2011       |
|     |in Baghdad and iraq", ECS COI request, Country     |                  |
|     |Information Unit, Swedish Migration Board          |                  |
|18   |"Travel Report: Iraq", Canadian Foreign Affairs and|20 May 2011       |
|     |International Trade Canada                         |                  |
|19   |"Strengthening Iraq: Fact Sheet", US State         |19 May 2011       |
|     |Department                                         |                  |
|20   |"The State of the World's Human Rights", Amnesty   |13 May 2011       |
|     |International Annual Report 2011                   |                  |
|21   |"Mixed Sunni/Shia marriages", Foreign and          |9 May 2011        |
|     |Commonwealth Office Letter                         |                  |
|22   |"No Country for oil smugglers", Iraq Oil Report,   |6 May 2011        |
|     |Ben Lando, accessed via Iraq Energy News           |                  |
|     |"Quarterly Report to the Unites States Congress",  |30 April 2011     |
|23   |Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction  |                  |
|     |(SIGIR)                                            |                  |
|24   |"Security Update", Iraq Business News Weekly       |28 April 2010     |
|25   |"Violence in Iraq Down, but killing                |26 April 2011     |
|     |indiscriminate", NRP                               |                  |
|26   |"US State Department Travel Warning"               |12 April 2011     |
|27   |"Iraqi scientists and doctors targeted", Al-Arabiya|9 April 2011      |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|28   |"2010 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices,   |8 April 2011      |
|     |Iraq" US State Department                          |                  |
|29   |"The Gulf States - Iraq Security", Jane Sentinel's |March 2011        |
|     |Security Assessment                                |                  |
|30   |"Human Rights and Democracy 2010", Foreign and     |March 2011        |
|     |Commonwealth Office                                |                  |
|31   |"IAGCI Review of COI Service Iraq report", Nadje   |March 2011        |
|     |Al-Ali, SOAS, University of London Review of March |                  |
|     |2011 report                                        |                  |
|32   |"Second Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to|31 March 2011     |
|     |paragraph 6 of resolution 1936 (2010)" UN Security |                  |
|     |Council                                            |                  |
|33   |"Iraq", COI Service Report                         |25 March 2011     |
|34   |"The Gulf States - Iraq Non State Armed Group",    |21 March 2011     |
|     |Jane Sentinel's Security Assessment                |                  |
|35   |"Update on entry procedures at Kurdistan regional  |3 March 2011      |
|     |government check points and resistance and KRG"    |                  |
|     |Danish Immigration Service                         |                  |
|36   |"Review of displacement and return in Iraq",       |February 2011     |
|     |International Organisation for Migration           |                  |
|37   |"Protesters killed in Iraq - day of rage", BBC     |25 February 2011  |
|     |Report                                             |                  |
|38   |"New Study: Analysis by perpetrator, weapon, time  |16 February 2011  |
|     |and location (2003-2008)", Iraq Body Count         |                  |
|39   |"Violent deaths of Iraqi Civilians (2003-2008):    |15 February 2011  |
|     |Analysis by perpetrator, weapon, time and          |                  |
|     |location", Public Library of Service               |                  |
|40   |"Response still centred on return despite          |5 October 2011    |
|     |increasing IDP demands for the local integration", |                  |
|     |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre            |                  |
|41   |"Hard times for Iraqis fleeing unrest elsewhere",  |30 August 2011    |
|     |Institute for War and Peace Reporting UK           |                  |
|42   |"A suicide bomber has killed at least 28 people",  |28 August 2011    |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|43   |"Iraq helping women in their struggle to feed their|24 August 2011    |
|     |family", ICRC                                      |                  |
|44   |"At least 13 people have been killed in a series of|25 August 2011    |
|     |attacks across Iraq", BBC News                     |                  |
|45   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |17 August 2011    |
|46   |"Series of bomb attacks has hit several Iraqi      |15 August 2011    |
|     |cities", BBC News                                  |                  |
|47   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |11 August 2011    |
|48   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |8 August 2011     |
|49   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |7 August 2011     |
|50   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |6 August 2011     |
|51   |"Two bombs that exploded in quick succession", BBC |3 August 2011     |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|52   |"Iraq - COI Report", UKBA                          |1 August 2011     |
|53   |"Iraq less safe than a year ago", BBC News         |30 July 2011      |
|54   |"At least 12 people have been killed and 28        |28 July 2011      |
|     |injured", BBC News                                 |                  |
|55   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |27 July 2011      |
|56   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |17 July 2011      |
|57   |"State of the world's minorities indigenous people |6 July 2011       |
|     |2011: Iraq", Minority Rights Group International   |                  |
|58   |"A double bomb attack", BBC News                   |5 July 2011       |
|59   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |30 June 201       |
|60   |"Passport misery highlights Iraqi women's plight", |29 June 2011      |
|     |Institute for War and Peace Reporting              |                  |
|61   |"At least 23 people have died in three explosions",|23 June 2011      |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|62   |"At least 22 people have been killed in bombings in|21 June 2011      |
|     |Diwaniya", BBC News                                |                  |
|63   |"At least 16 people have been killed and dozens    |3 June 2011       |
|     |injured in a bomb", BBC News                       |                  |
|64   |"At least 16 people have been killed in Iraq", BBC |22 May 2011       |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|65   |"Three bombs targeting security forces in the      |19 May 2011       |
|     |northern Iraqi city", BBC News                     |                  |
|66   |"17 Killed in Iraqi prison incident", Al-Sumaria   |9 May 2011        |
|67   |"A suicide bomb attack in Iraq has killed at least |5 May 2011        |
|     |16 people", BBC News                               |                  |
|68   |"At least nine people have killed and more than 27 |3 May 2011        |
|     |injured", BBC News                                 |                  |
|69   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |30 April 2011     |
|70   |"A suicide bomber has blown himself up", BBC News  |28 April 2011     |
|71   |"At least four people have been injured after a    |24 April 2011     |
|     |bomb", BBC News                                    |                  |
|72   |"Suicide car bombs have exploded in the Iraqi      |18 April 2011     |
|     |capital", BBC News                                 |                  |
|73   |"2010 Human Rights Report: Iraq", US Department of |8 April 2011      |
|     |State                                              |                  |
|74   |"Sunni militants linked to Al-Qaeda were           |30 March 2011     |
|     |responsible for bloody siege", BBC News            |                  |
|75   |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |19 March 2011     |
|76   |"A suicide bomber has targeted a bank in the       |3 March 2011      |
|     |northern Iraqi town", BBC News                     |                  |
|77   |"An early morning gun and bomb attack has shut down|26 February 2011  |
|     |Iraq's", BBC News                                  |                  |
|78   |"Day of protesters killed", BBC News               |25 February 2011  |
|79   |"Car bomb detonated by a suicide attacker in the   |21 February 2011  |
|     |central Iraqi city", BBC News                      |                  |
|80   |"13 people have been killed in a car bomb attack", |17 February 2011  |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|81   |"A suicide bomber in Iraq has killed at least 27   |12 February 2011  |
|     |people", BBC News                                  |                  |
|82   |"Iraq: Patterns of Violence, Casualty Trends and   |9 February 2011   |
|     |Emerging Security Threats", Centre for Strategic   |                  |
|     |and International Studies                          |                  |
|83   |"Three bombs have exploded in the northern Iraqi", |9 February 2011   |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|84   |"Quarterly Report to the Unites States Congress",  |                  |
|     |Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction  |30 January 2011   |
|     |(SIGIR)                                            |                  |
|85   |"Bombs at Baghdad", BBC News                       |27 January 2011   |
|86   |"Two separate car bomb attacks targeting Shia      |24 January 2011   |
|     |pilgrims", BBC News                                |                  |
|87   |"A series of car bombings across Baghdad has killed|23 January 2011   |
|     |at least four", BBC News                           |                  |
|88   |"Two bomb attacks near the Iraqi city of Karbala", |20 January 2011   |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|89   |"Suicide bombers have used an ambulance to attack a|19 January 2011   |
|     |police compound", BBC News                         |                  |
|90   |"A suicide bomber has killed at least 50 people    |18 January 2011   |
|     |outside a police recruitment centre", BBC News     |                  |
|91   |"Iraq - six militants after jail breakout", BBC    |14 January 2011   |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|92   |"What Sadr's Return Means for Iraq", Council on    |6 January 2011    |
|     |Foreign Relations                                  |                  |
|93   |"Iraq's coming national challenges: The course of  |5 January 2011    |
|     |the fighting and continuing security threats",     |                  |
|     |Centre for Strategic and International Studies     |                  |
|94   |"More than 2000 Iraqi army officers killed in the  |5 January 2011    |
|     |past few months", Azzaman                          |                  |
|95   |"The Iraq Partners Forum", The Iraq Briefing Book  |2010              |
|     |2010                                               |                  |
|96   |Iraq Mission, Movement and Migration Programme,    |2010              |
|     |International Organisation for Migration           |                  |
|97   |"Iraq's deaths from violence 2010", IBC            |2010              |
|98   |"Return from abroad to Iraq: 2010 Report", UNHCR   |2010              |
|99   |"Corruption Perceptions Index", Transparency       |2010              |
|     |International                                      |                  |
|100  |"An economic analysis of the financial records of  |2010              |
|     |Al-Qa'ida in Iraq", RAND Corp                      |                  |
|101  |"The Failed States Index", Foreign Policy          |2010              |
|102  |"Human Rights Report January to December 2010",    |2010              |
|     |UNAMI                                              |                  |
|103  |"Iraqi deaths from violence in 2010: Analysis of   |30 December 2010  |
|     |the years civilian death toll from Iraq", Iraq Body|                  |
|     |Count                                              |                  |
|104  |"Two people have died and 14 injured in a series of|30 December 2010  |
|     |attacks", BBC News                                 |                  |
|105  |"Two suicide bombers have attacked a police        |29 December 2010  |
|     |command", BBC News                                 |                  |
|106  |                                                   |                  |
|     |"Interview: Promise, Peril for Iraq's new          |27 December 2010  |
|     |Government", Council on Foreign Relations          |                  |
|107  |"Suicide bombers have killed at 14 people", BBC    |27 December 2010  |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|108  |"Iraq political wrangling leaves around 2.8 million|14 December 2010  |
|     |displaced Iraqis with no durable solutions in      |                  |
|     |sight", Norwegian Refugee Council, Internal        |                  |
|     |Displacement Monitoring Centre                     |                  |
|109  |" Series of bombings across Baghdad", BBC News     |4 December 2010   |
|110  |"Iraq - Health System in Kurdistan Region",        |30 November 2010  |
|     |Conflict and Health                                |                  |
|111  |"Medical professional's perspectives on challenges |30 November 2010  |                   |
|     |and priorities for improvement", Conflict and      |                  |                   |
|     |Health Journal                                     |                  |                   |
|112  |"Army's Iraqi interpreters face hardship over      |                  |
|     |fleeing to UK", The Observer                       |7 November 2010   |
|113  |"The Kurds in central Iraq remain at risk",        |29 October 2010   |
|     |Associated Press Report                            |                  |
|114  |"It is not accidental that women were murdered",   |6 November 2011   |
|     |Rudaw.net                                          |                  |
|115  |"Series of bombings and mortar attacks targeting   |10 November 2010  |
|     |Christian areas", BBC News                         |                  |
|116  |"An explosion in the southern Iraqi city of Basra",|8 November 2010   |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|117  |"A series of apparently co-ordinated blasts in the |3 November 2010   |
|     |Iraqi capital", BBC News                           |                  |
|118  |"At least 52 people were killed as security forces |1 November 2010   |
|     |stormed a Catholic church", BBC News               |                  |
|119  |"European states must stop forcing returns to      |10 November 2010  |
|     |Iraq", Amnesty International                       |                  |
|120  |"Suicide bomber has killed at least 25 people", BBC|29 October 2010   |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|121  |"Iraq: Bring Bombers to Justice", Human Rights     |28 October 2010   |
|     |Watch                                              |                  |
|122  |"Loose Ends: Iraq's security forces between US     |26 October 2010   |
|     |Drawdown and Withdrawal", International Crisis     |                  |
|     |Group                                              |                  |
|123  |"Convoy carrying the UN's top envoy to Iraq has    |20 October 2010   |
|     |been hit", BBS News                                |                  |
|124  |"Iraqi women hidden fight", Aftad.ir               |20 October 2010   |
|125  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |7 October 2010    |
|126  |"US invasion makes life worse for women in Iraq",  |1 October 2010    |
|     |Seattle Pi                                         |                  |
|127  |"Polygamy promoted to tackle plight of Ambars      |23 September 2010 |
|     |women", Institute for War and Peace Reporting      |                  |
|128  |"Two suicide bombers kill 17", The Telegraph       |20 September 2010 |
|129  |"At least 23 people have been killed", BBC News    |19 September 2010 |
|130  |"Six killed in US Iraq raid", LA Times             |16 September 2010 |
|131  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |14 September 2010 |
|132  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |13 September 2010 |
|133  |"Iraqi authorities powerless against unemployment",|11 September 2010 |
|     |The Voice of Russia                                |                  |
|134  |"Security and Human Rights in South/Central Iraq:  |                  |
|     |Report from the Danish Immigration Service's fact  |10 September 2010 |
|     |finding mission to Amman, Jordan and Baghdad, Iraq |                  |
|135  |"Gunmen in Iraq have killed an Iraqi TV            |8 September 2010  |
|     |journalist", BBC News                              |                  |
|136  |"On the way out, Washington tramples on Iraqi      |8 September 2010  |
|     |women", Colour Lines                               |                  |
|137  |"US soldiers killed", ABC News                     |8 September 2010  |
|138  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |7 September 2010  |
|139  |"The Gulf States - Security and Foreign Forces",   |6 September 2010  |
|     |Jane Sentinel's Security Assessment                |                  |
|140  |"US troops have been called in to help Iraqi       |5 September 2010  |
|     |forces", BBC News                                  |                  |
|141  |"Now it is every Iraqi for themselves", The        |1 September 2010  |
|     |Telegraph                                          |                  |
|142  |"Kurdish officials ban flights returning failed    |31 August 2010    |
|     |asylum seekers from UK", The Guardian              |                  |
|143  |"Iraqi asylum seekers to be forcibly deported", BBC|31 August 2010    |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|144  |"Explosions Wreak havoc in major Iraqi cities",    |25 August 2010    |
|     |Voice of America News                              |                  |
|145  |"Middle East: Dozen killed in wave of bombings     |25 August 2010    |
|     |across Iraq", BBC News                             |                  |
|146  |"At least 50 people have been killed", BBC News    |25 August 2010    |
|147  |"Iraq's Women's Movement Demonstration"            |19 August 201     |
|148  |"Bomber Strikes Iraqi Army recruits killing at     |17 August 2010    |
|     |least 61", Voice of America News                   |                  |
|149  |"At least 59 people, most of them young men lining |17 August 2010    |
|     |up to enlist, were killed", BBC News               |                  |
|150  |"Roadside bombs, Shootings Kill 10 in Iraq: Gunmen |15 August 2010    |
|     |kill 5 in Baghdad checkpoint Shooting spree", Voice|                  |
|     |of America News                                    |                  |
|151  |"Gunmen have killed four Iraqi police officers",   |14 August 2010    |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|152  |"Police protection in general in Iraq - is it      |12 August 2010    |
|     |effective/not effective? Any evidence of informers |                  |
|     |amongst police who give terrorist groups           |                  |
|     |information?", Refugee Documentation Centre, Legal |                  |
|     |Aid Board, Ireland                                 |                  |
|153  |"Iraqi political stalemate raises security fears", |10 August 2010    |
|     |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty                    |                  |
|154  |"Bombers strike Iraq as US Troops prepare to       |8 August 2010     |
|     |Downsize", Voice of America News                   |                  |
|155  |"Iraq Bombings Kills at least 12 in southern city  |3 August 2010     |
|     |of Kut", Voice of America News                     |                  |
|156  |"Iraq's July death toll highest in 2 years", Voice |1 August 2010     |
|     |of America News                                    |                  |
|157  |"Note on the Continued Applicability of the April  |July 2010         |
|     |2009 UHNCHR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing   |                  |
|     |the International Protection needs of Iraqi Asylum |                  |
|     |Seekers" UNHCR                                     |                  |
|158  |"Fallen off the agenda? More and better aid needed |July 2010         |
|     |for Iraqi recovery", Handicap International        |                  |
|159  |"ICRC worried over deterioration of Health Services|30 July 2010      |
|     |sector in Iraq", NAM News Network                  |                  |
|160  |"At least 15 members of Iraq's security forces     |29 July 2010      |
|     |killed", Voice of America News                     |                  |
|161  |"Iraq putting the healthcare system back on its    |29 July 2006      |
|     |feet", ICRC                                        |                  |
|162  |"Mosul struggle with ethnic divides insurgency",   |24 July 2010      |
|     |Washington Post                                    |                  |
|163  |"12 insurgents escaped prison", New York Times     |23 July 2010      |
|164  |"Iraqi Mosque Bombing Kills 15", Voice of America  |21 July 2010      |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|165  |"OGN: Iraq", UKBA                                  |20 July 2010      |
|166  |"Suicide bombers kills at least 46 in Iraq", Voice |18 July 2010      |
|     |of America News                                    |                  |
|167  |"A suicide bomber has killed at least 43 people",  |18 July 2010      |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|168  | "Three women, one child killed in attack",        |14 July 2010      |
|     |People's Daily Online                              |                  |
|169  |"More than 40 people have died and some 100 have   |8 July 2010       |
|     |been wounded", BBC News                            |                  |
|170  |"At least five people have been killed by bombs",  |8 July 2010       |
|     |BBC News                                           |                  |
|171  |"Human Rights Report 1 July - 31 December 2009",   |8 July 2010       |
|     |UNAMI                                              |                  |
|172  |"Female suicide bomber killed at least three       |4 July 2010       |
|     |people", BBC News                                  |                  |
|173  |"Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq", US     |June 2010         |
|     |Department of Defence                              |                  |
|174  |"Iraq and the US, Creating a Strategic             |June 2010         |
|     |Partnership", Anthony Cordesman, Centre for        |                  |
|     |Strategic and International Studies                |                  |
|175  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |30 June 2010      |
|176  |"Eight people have been killed, including four     |29 June 2010      |
|     |policemen", BBC News                               |                  |
|177  |"Car Bombs in Iraq Shrine City kill at least 20",  |26 June 2010      |
|     |Voice of America News                              |                  |
|178  |"Bomb Attack kills 8 in Northern Iraq", Voice of   |21 June 2010      |
|     |America News                                       |                  |
|179  |"Eight people have been killed, including six      |21 June 2010      |
|     |policemen, in a suicide bombing", BBC News         |                  |
|180  |"At least 26 people have been killed in a twin     |20 June 2010      |
|     |suicide car bombing", BBC News                     |                  |
|181  |"At least 20 Killed in Iraq attacks", Voice of     |18 June 2010      |
|     |America News                                       |                  |
|182  |"At least 14 people have been killed in three      |18 June 2010      |
|     |separate attacks", BBC News                        |                  |
|183  |"Sectarian animosity still prevails", The Economist|17 June 2010      |
|184  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |13 June 2010      |
|185  |"Security Developments in Iraq", Reuters           |11 June 2010      |
|186  |"UNHCR cautions against European deportations to   |8 June 2010       |
|     |Iraq", UNHCR                                       |                  |
|187  |"European states must stop the imminent forcible   |7 June 2010       |
|     |return of Iraqis", Amnesty International           |                  |
|188  |"Police infiltrated an Iraqi province", Al-Jazeria |30 May 2010       |
|189  |"Amnesty International Report: Iraq", Amnesty      |27 May 2010       |
|     |International                                      |                  |
|190  |"Entry procedures and residence in Kurdistan,      |April 2010        |
|     |original of Iraq - KRI for Iraqi nationals", Danish|                  |
|     |Fact Finding Mission                               |                  |
|191  |"Iraq must protect civilians at risk of deadly     |27 April 2010     |
|     |violence", Amnesty International                   |                  |
|192  |"Iraq: Civilians under fire", Amnesty International|27 April 2010     |
|193  |"Profile: Al-Qaeda in Iraq (aka Al-Qaeda in        |26 April 2010     |
|     |Mesopotamia)", Council on Foreign Relations        |                  |
|194  |"Information on how the current situation in Iraq -|23 April 2010     |
|     |the breakdown of law and order, societal changes,  |                  |
|     |growing Islamisation - since the international     |                  |
|     |invasion has affected the lives of women regarding |                  |
|     |economic, social freedoms et al", Refugee          |                  |
|     |Documentation Centre, Legal Aid Board, Ireland     |                  |
|195  |"Call to Strengthen Laws Protecting Women",        |22 April 2010     |
|     |Institute for War and Peace Reporting UK           |                  |
|196  |"Secret Prison revealed in Baghdad", Los Angeles   |19 April 2010     |
|     |Times                                              |                  |
|197  |"Do Iraqis miss Saddam?", H. Mahmoud               |4 April 2010      |
|198  |"Iraq's health system needs years of work", IRIN   |4 April 2010      |
|199  |"2010 Investment Climate Statement - Iraq", US     |March 2010        |
|     |Department of State, Bureau of Economic, Energy and|                  |
|     |Business Affairs                                   |                  |
|200  |"Measuring stability and security in Iraq", US     |March 2010        |
|     |Department of Defence                              |                  |
|201  |"Iraq's new ruling elite show contempt in revolt", |29 March 2010     |
|     |The Guardian                                       |                  |
|202  |"Iraq's crumbling corrupt healthcare", The Guardian|25 March 2010     |
|203  |"Iraq - Women's rights in danger", Al-Jazeira.Net  |20 March 2010     |
|204  |"The Iraq Effect: The middle east after the Iraq   |17 March 2010     |
|     |War", RAND Corp                                    |                  |
|205  |"Iraq: Women miss Saddam", IPS                     |12 March 2010     |
|206  |"Restrictions on Movement and Registration of IDPs |24 February 2010  |
|     |(2003-2009), IDMC                                  |                  |
|207  |"Impoverished Women vulnerable to extremists",     |18 February 2010  |
|     |Institute for War and Peace Reporting UK           |                  |
|208  |"The Uncertain security situation in Iraq: Trends  |17 February 2010  |
|     |in violence, casualties and Iraqi perceptions",    |                  |
|     |Centre for Strategic and International Studies     |                  |
|209  |"Re Information on the treatment of persons working|11 February 2010  |
|     |for the American forces" Refugee Documentation     |                  |
|     |Centre                                             |                  |
|210  |"Iraq - was it Province initiative to get doctors  |11 February 2010  |
|     |to return", IRIN                                   |                  |
|211  |"Iraq's influence on Iraq growing", Pajamasmudia   |8 February 2010   |
|212  |"Women living under Muslim laws", Iraqi Widows     |5 February 2010   |
|     |Organisation                                       |                  |
|213  |"Abusers target human rights measure", Human Rights|24 January 2010   |
|     |Watch World Report 2010                            |                  |
|214  |"World Report: 2010", Human Rights Watch           |20 January 2010   |
|215  |"Human Rights, Iraq 2009", US State Department     |2009              |
|216  |"Iraq COI Report", COI Service, UKBA               |10 December 2009  |
|217  |"Determinants of internet use in Iraq", F.H        |November 2009     |
|     |Al-Hammadany and A. Heshmati                       |                  |
|218  |"IOM to increase Aid to displaced female-headed    |4 October 2009    |
|     |households in Iraq", Voice of America News         |                  |
|219  |"KRG delegation tells US business leaders that     |23 September 2009 |
|     |Kurdistan is open for business", krg.org           |                  |
|220  |"Cross cultural understanding - 11 US soldiers, 8  |18 September 2009 |
|     |Iraqis killed and 2 million Iraq widows - 1.5      |                  |
|     |million divorced women in new Iraq", Al-Jazeera    |                  |
|221  |"Iraq's Kurds caught in sectarian war", Daily      |13 September 2009 |
|     |Telegraph                                          |                  |
|222  |"Entitled to stay alive", New York Times           |5 September 2009  |
|223  |"Criminal militias and insurgents, organised crime |26 August 2009    |
|     |in Iraq" Strategic Studies Institute               |                  |
|224  |"Iraq: Halt all attacks on Civilians", Human Rights|23 August 2009    |
|     |Watch                                              |                  |
|225  |"Security and human rights issues in Kurdistan     |July 2009         |
|     |region of Iraq KRI and south central Iraq", Danish |                  |
|     |Immigration Service                                |                  |
|226  |"Iraqi interpreters employed by British to sue over|15 July 2009      |
|     |lack of protection", The Times                     |                  |
|227  |"Facilitating the Transition from Asylum to Return |June 2009         |
|     |and Reintegration in Iraq 2009-2010" UNHCR         |                  |
|228  |"OGN: Iraq", UKBA                                  |June 2009         |
|229  |"Iraqi interpreters left without help because of   |4 May 2009        |
|     |rigid guidelines", The Times                       |                  |
|230  |"UHNCHR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the   |April 2009        |
|     |International Protection needs of Iraqi Asylum     |                  |
|     |Seekers", UNHCR                                    |                  |
|231  |"Trapped by Violence - Women in Iraq", Amnesty     |20 April 2009     |
|     |International                                      |                  |
|232  |"Tabulation Report: Returnee Monitoring and Needs  |March 2009        |
|     |Assessments" MoDM/IOM, Baghdad                     |                  |
|233  |"Security and Human Rights Issues in Kurdistan     |23 March 2009     |
|     |Region of Iraq (KRI) and South/Central Iraq (S/C   |                  |
|     |Iraq)"                                             |                  |
|234  |"Iraqi Women in the grip of 'silent emergency'     |8 March 2009      |
|     |despite security gains", Oxfam International       |                  |
|235  |"Study: Iraqi widows struggle in new roles as      |7 March 2009      |
|     |breadwinners", CNN World                           |                  |
|236  |"Trapped by Violence - Women in Iraq", Amnesty     |1 March 2009      |
|     |International                                      |                  |
|237  |"New York Times reports on the struggle of Iraq's  |23 February 2009  |
|     |war widows", HJT Research                          |                  |
|238  |"Iraq's political landscape", Council on Foreign   |5 February 2009   |
|     |Relations                                          |                  |
|239  |"Iraq probes possible voter fraud", The Washington |4 February 2009   |
|     |Post                                               |                  |
|240  |"Iraq: Warning over plight of Iraqi widows", IRIN  |1 January 2009    |
|     |News                                               |                  |
|241  |"Iraq Labour Force Analysis: 2003 - 2008"          |1 January 2009    |
|     |Interagency Information and Analysis Unit          |                  |
|242  |"Ansar al-Islam (Iraq, Islamists/Kurdish           |5 November 2008   |
|     |Separatists) Ansar al-Sunnah", Council on Foreign  |                  |
|     |Relations                                          |                  |
|243  |"Access to Quality Health Care"                    |August 2008       |
|244  |"Difficulties that stateless Iraqis experience     |August 2008       |
|     |obtaining documentation", Internal Development     |                  |
|     |Monitoring Centre                                  |                  |
|245  |"National Policy on displacement, July 2008",      |July 2008         |
|     |Ministry of Displacement and Migration             |                  |
|246  |"Proceedings of the Iraq Health Symposium: Toward a|May 2008          |
|     |Surge in Health Services", National Academy of     |                  |
|     |Sciences Auditorium, Washington                    |                  |
|247  |"MPs call fro disbanding of Peshmerga", The Kurdish|16 April 2008     |
|     |Globe                                              |                  |
|248  |"Is the US really bringing stability to Baghdad",  |15 February 2008  |
|     |Patrick Cockburn, The Independent                  |                  |
|249  |"Rehabilitation under fire, health care in Iraq    |January 2008      |
|     |2003 - 2007", MEDCAT                               |                  |
|250  |"Human Rights, Iraq 2007",  US State Department    |2007              |
|251  |"Dahouk Governette Assessment report", UNHCR       |2007              |
|252  |"Erbil Governette Assessment report", UNHCR        |2007              |
|253  |"Human Rights in the Republic of Iraq", Amnesty    |2007              |
|     |International                                      |                  |
|254  |"Iraq", Country Policy Bulletin, UKBA              |17 December 2007  |
|255  |"Al-Qaeda attacks the awakening", The Long War     |22 November 2007  |
|     |Journal                                            |                  |
|256  |"Interpreters beg for asylum as militants show them|                  |
|     |no mercy", The Times                               |7 August 2007     |
|257  |"Killing the Patient - Iraq security forces are    |11 June 2007      |
|     |part of the problem", Centre for American Progress |                  |
|258  |"Iraq's women under pressure by Nadje Sadiq        |May 2007          |
|     |Al-Ali", Lamonde Diplomatique                      |                  |
|259  |"A Brazen kidnapping in Baghdad", Assyrian         |29 May 2007       |
|     |International News Agency                          |                  |
|260  |"Country Policy Bulletin: Iraq", UKBA              |27 February 2007  |
|261  |"Iraq President stable in Jordan", BBC News        |26 February 2007  |
|262  |"Country of Origin Information Request", UKBA      |8 January 2007    |
|263  |"Iraq braced for unhappy New Year", BBC News       |1 January 2007    |
|264  |"Iraq drain poses risk to future", Radio Free      |16 November 2006  |
|     |Europe                                             |                  |
|265  |"Iraq removed police leader", Milwaukee Journal    |18 October 2006   |
|     |Sentinel                                           |                  |
|266  |"Sunis change names to avoid Shiite death squad",  |10 October 2006   |
|     |The Guardian                                       |                  |
|267  |"Sulaumaniyah Governette Assessment report", UNHCR |September 2006    |
|268  |"Assault on Boulevard", Pakistani Times            |15 September 2006 |
|269  |"Basrah Governette Report", UNHCR                  |August 2006       |
|270  |"Iraq: Widow numbers rise in wake of violence",    |26 April 2006     |
|     |IRIN                                               |                  |
|271  |"Arising power in the North", National Geographic  |1 January 2006    |
|272  |"US Study Insurgents", CNN                         |25 July 2005      |
|273  |"Pleasure marriage in Iraq under the occupation",  |4 May 2005        |
|     |Y. Furunhashi, Critical Montages                   |                  |
|274  |"Kurdish women worry about losing rights",         |27 February 2005  |
|     |Institute for War and Peace Reporting              |                  |
|275  |"Shahwani - more than 200,000 insurgents in Iraq", |4 January 2005    |
|     |Middle East on line                                |                  |
| 276 |"The Present Situation in Iraq", UNHCR             |9 June 2004       |
|277  |"Caged birds, Iraqi women in post Saddam Iraq",    |12 October 2003   |
|     |Kurdish Media.com                                  |                  |
|278  |"Iraq 2010 - Humanitarian action plan", UN         |Undated           |




