





                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Hoxha and Others) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department (representatives: professional  duties)  [2019]  UKUT  00124
(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London
                                                           30th January 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                            ROBERT HOXHA & others
                                                                  Applicants


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

              MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


Mr J Gajjar, instructed by Mr Salman Zafar of Zafar Law Chambers


   1) OISC organisations are only able to carry  out  judicial  review  case
      management with  counsel  authorised  to  conduct  litigation  if  the
      organisations  are  both  level  3   registered   and   have   special
      authorisation to do this work.

   2) It is a commonplace of working in the difficult  area  of  immigration
      and asylum judicial review, that practitioners are faced with  clients
      who are distressed at the prospect of being removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom. This does not absolve such a professional from  the  need  to
      stand firm and act only as authorised by the statutory scheme.

   3)  Where  a  medical  expert  report  is  relied   upon   by   a   legal
      representative, the representative has a duty to check the report  for
      accuracy, including ensuring the report accurately reflects the way in
      which the information in it came to be obtained.

   4) Failure to carry out properly professional duties as  set  out  above,
      inter alia, may result in  the  Upper  Tribunal  referring  the  legal
      representative / organisation to the relevant regulatory body.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      FINDINGS OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL EXERCISING ITS HAMID JURISDICTION

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
   Introduction

   1. The Upper Tribunal has an inherent jurisdiction to govern its own
      procedure and part of that jurisdiction mandates that we ensure that
      the lawyers interacting with the Upper Tribunal conduct themselves
      according to proper professional standards. The Upper Tribunal cannot
      afford to have its limited resources absorbed by abusive applications
      by those who repeatedly bring meritless applications. Further,
      substantial time spent on meritless and abusive applications also
      risks a loss of public confidence in the processes of the Upper
      Tribunal, particularly if it involves the unjust enrichment of a small
      subsection of unscrupulous individuals preying on the vulnerability of
      applicants who find themselves in difficult immigration situations.

   2. We guide ourselves with reference to the decision in R (Hamid) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWHC 3070 (Admin),
      and the subsequent decisions of R (Sathivel)  & Ors v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2018] EWHC 913 (Admin) and Vay Sui Ip v
      Solicitors Regulation Authority [2018] EWHC 957 (Admin).  The purpose
      of the present hearing is to decide whether it would be appropriate to
      refer Mr Salman Shaheen Zafar, director and owner of Zafar Law
      Chambers, to the Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner
      (OISC).  What we say about the cases with which Mr Zafar of Zafar Law
      Chambers has involvement and our conclusions on his conduct is not
      binding on the OISC, but we hope may assist their further exploration
      of this matter, should we conclude that it is appropriate to make a
      referral.

   The Present Proceedings

   3. On 7th November 2018 the Upper Tribunal wrote to Mr Zafar of Zafar Law
      Chambers regarding the issue of his having seemingly acted beyond his
      OISC registration in 32 judicial reviews, the majority of which had a
      standard "42 page" set of irrelevant grounds and consequently were
      refused and certified to be totally without merit. An additional issue
      was also raised in the letter about the possible involvement of Zafar
      Law Chambers with a chartered psychologist, Dr Saima Latif, in
      producing arguably misleading psychological reports which were
      submitted to the Secretary of State and relied upon in judicial review
      proceedings.

   4. Mr Zafar was required to produce a statement of truth addressing these
      issues within 14 days. He requested an extension of this time period,
      and on 13th December 2018 submitted lengthy representations with
      enclosures. On 20th December 2018 Mr Zafar was informed by letter that
      there would be a Hamid hearing on 30th January 2019 to examine the
      issues raised in our letter further, and asking that he obtain the
      supporting statements from his clients that he said he could produce
      in his representations of 13th December 2018. This was followed up by
      notice of hearing sent on 9th January 2019, and a direction sent on
      11th January 2019 regarding filing of any further supporting
      statements or evidence by 23rd January 2019.

   5. On 24th January 2019 Mr Zafar provided a substantial bundle of
      documents for the hearing which included documents pertaining to Mr
      Rikinkumar Ashokbhai Patel and Mr Muhammad Adnan Asghar who both
      appeared as witnesses at the hearing. In addition, prior to the
      hearing the Upper Tribunal made available two further bundles of
      communications received by us from Zafar Law Chambers in connection
      with judicial reviews, many of which were duplicates or related to the
      cases to which Mr Zafar's attention had been drawn in the original
      Upper Tribunal correspondence.

   6. Mr Zafar was ably represented by Mr Gajjar at the hearing. It was
      agreed that there were three issues which needed discussion: firstly,
      the psychological reports of Dr Latif and any role that Zafar Law
      Chambers played in placing apparently misleading evidence before the
      Secretary of State and the Upper Tribunal; secondly, whether Zafar Law
      Chambers were responsible for the production of the copious standard
      "42 page" grounds judicial reviews;  and thirdly, whether Zafar Law
      Chambers had acted outside of the scope of their level 3 OISC
      registration by conducting judicial review work. We examined these
      issues in turn, with reference to the documentation placed before the
      Upper Tribunal by Mr Zafar, and with the assistance of evidence from
      Mr Zafar himself and from the two witnesses, Mr Patel and Mr Asghar,
      in relation to the second issue, and by way of questions from the
      bench and submissions from Mr Gajjar on all three matters.

   Discussion

   Issue 1 - Psychological reports of Dr Saima Latif

   7. In judicial review JR/4231/18, an application relating to an applicant
      whom we have anonymised as PSP, there appeared in the bundle of
      documents a May 2018 psychological report produced by Dr Latif. The
      application was lodged on 18th June 2018. The grounds in this
      application for judicial review were generic, irrelevant and made no
      reference to anything personal to PSP, and the application was refused
      and certified as totally without merit. Zafar Law Chambers do not
      accept that they were involved with the making of this application,
      although they do accept that they represented PSP from May 2018,
      obtained the psychological report from Dr Latif and succeeded in
      getting PSP released on bail on 27th June 2018.

   8. From the decision under challenge it was clear that the Secretary of
      State contended that the psychological report of May 2018 could not
      have any weight attached to it as the detention centre records showed
      that Dr Latif had not gone to the detention centre to interview PSP
      for the purpose of preparing the report on the day the report
      contended she had attended, and that instead it appeared that a member
      of staff of Zafar Law Chambers had obtained the information on which
      the report was based. There was accordingly concern that Zafar Law
      Chambers were implicated in the obtaining of this highly problematic
      expert evidence to obtain the release of the applicant from detention,
      and in presenting that evidence in a judicial review without providing
      any further explanation to the Upper Tribunal in the context of the
      Secretary of State's concerns.

   9. The response of Mr Zafar to these contentions can be summarised as
      follows. He accepts that Zafar Law Chambers instructed Dr Latif in up
      to 20 detained cases, including that of PSP, where the procedure to
      produce the reports was that there was an initial face to face client
      screening which was conducted by a personal visit in detention to the
      detainee by Mr Sammad S Zafar (who is the brother of Mr Zafar), who
      was acting as an assistant to Dr Latif at that time and who has no
      medical or legal training. Mr Sammad S Zafar was at the time not an
      employee of Zafar Law Chambers, although he later became so. Mr
      Zafar's understanding is that Mr Sammad S Zafar was never in fact paid
      by Dr Latif, as he had not billed her for any of his time, up to the
      point when the probative value of the reports was called into
      question. At that point Mr Zafar and Mr Sammad S Zafar decided that it
      would not now be appropriate for the latter to bill Dr Latif.

  10. Mr Zafar says the initial face to face client screening in detention
      by Mr Sammad S Zafar was followed up with a telephone consultation
      with the detainee by Dr Latif, who then wrote the psychological
      report. These 20 or so reports had all been obtained prior to 7th June
      2018, when the issue of their transparency and probative value was
      raised by the Secretary of State with Zafar Law Chambers. At this
      point the procedure was abandoned and only reports obtained by a face
      to face interview with a medical expert were used. Furthermore, Zafar
      Law Chambers ceased to use Dr Latif, despite having previously
      instructed her to provide a total of about 70 reports for clients and
      having regarded her as a satisfactory expert.

  11. The Secretary of State was sufficiently concerned to refer Dr Latif to
      the Health and Care Professions Council, and in August 2018 Zafar Law
      Chambers provided information to this regulatory body, who had
      commenced an inquiry into the issue.

  12. Mr Zafar points to his openness about the problem with these reports,
      and to his cooperation with the Upper Tribunal, the Secretary of State
      and the Health and Care Professions Council as evidence that Zafar Law
      Chambers were not attempting to mislead anyone. He contends that it
      was simply an error by Dr Latif to have produced the reports in this
      way, and that he and Zafar Law Chambers had been entitled to rely upon
      her professional judgement as a chartered psychologist that this was a
      legitimate way of producing reports.

  13. He further contends that his brother did nothing more than go to the
      detention centre to take instructions to provide useful information as
      a starting point for Dr Latif. He did not accept that Zafar Law
      Chambers should have checked the reports and made sure that they were
      clear about the way in which all the information used in the report
      had been gathered and the date on which the information had been
      obtained by Dr Latif as he regarded it as Dr Latif's job to ensure
      this was all correct and an acceptable procedure followed. He points
      to the fact that in the case of PSP Dr Latif produced a second report,
      in June 2018, which did follow a face to face interview. This was done
      for no extra fee due to the difficulties that had arisen, and to the
      fact that PSP was released from detention seven days later seeming as
      a result of information contained in this report.

  14. Mr Zafar accepts that there have been further enquiries of him from
      the Health and Care Professions Council, which came by email on 20th
      November 2018, but says he has not had time to deal with these due to
      issues raised in the Upper Tribunal letter of 7th November 2018 with
      respect to the "42 page" judicial reviews which he has had to spent
      considerable time investigating.

  15. Mr Gajjar submitted that it can be seen that only very little
      information was obtained by Mr Sammad S Zafar, as his form for PSP is
      in the papers, and that most of the information had been obtained by
      Dr Latif via her telephone interview, thus making clear that the
      reports were the work of a genuine expert and not the unqualified
      assistant, Mr Zafar's brother. Whilst it may have been an error of
      judgement to have failed to ensure that the full details of how and
      when the reports of Dr Latif were compiled were accurate, this should
      be seen as a mistake and not an example of dishonesty on the part of
      Zafar Law Chambers. Mr Gajjar also submitted that there was no attempt
      to mislead the Secretary of State about the connection of Mr Sammad S
      Zafar with Zafar Law Chambers, when it was said by Zafar Law Chambers
      in an email of June 2018 to the Secretary of State that he was not an
      employee of the firm, since at that time this was the case. Things
      then changed and Sammad S Zafar was accurately said to be employed by
      Zafar Law Chambers in August 2018, when the firm responded to the
      Health and Care Professions Council's enquiries. Mr Gajjar said the
      fact that Mr Sammad S Zafar was a family member made the overlapping
      roles not unusual.

  16. Our conclusions on this issue are as follows. We make no judgement as
      to whether a credible psychological report can be obtained by an
      initial screening by an untrained assistant, followed up by a
      telephone interview with a detainee by a chartered psychologist. That
      will be an issue for the Health and Care Professions Council to
      decide.  We accept that the screening form evidence for PSP before us
      strongly suggests that the majority of the information was not
      obtained by Mr Sammad S Zafar, and was therefore probably obtained by
      Dr Latif on the telephone.

  17.  We are clear, however, that it is the role of a legal representative
      to ensure that any expert report accurately reflects the way in which
      the information in it came to be obtained. This is not something which
      can be simply left to the expert. Reports must be read and checked for
      accuracy on this point by the representative, and indeed for anything
      else within the knowledge of that representative.  Representatives
      have professional duties in this respect and are not simply a postal
      service via which this evidence reaches the Secretary of State. The
      duties of experts to be clear about their methodology are set out in
      PP (female headed household; expert duties) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT
      00117 (IAC). We find that the duty on representatives to ensure that
      this was done was not carried out in the case of PSP by Zafar Law
      Chambers. The report misleadingly states that the assessment took
      place on a date and at a place/way which was not accurate.

  18.  We are also concerned that the second Dr Latif report of June 2018
      failed to reflect the totality of her interactions with PSP by this
      stage as there had apparently been a telephone interview, as well as a
      face to face one, and this should have been clear from that report.

  19. Zafar Law Chambers have, we find, failed in this aspect of their
      professional duty.

  20. We accept that Mr Zafar has been open about the number and details of
      other cases when psychological evidence has been produced in this
      questionable way; with the Secretary of State, the Upper Tribunal and
      the Health and Care Professions Council, and that he would appear
      generally to have been helpful in the investigation in this issue by
      all of these bodies, although we do have concerns that he has not
      replied to correspondence from the Health and Care Professions Council
      since November 2018. We note that Mr Zafar also acted promptly to stop
      using the procedure to obtain psychological evidence when the
      Secretary of State judged it to be of questionable probative value. It
      is, however, apparent that, but for the matter being raised by the
      Secretary of State, Mr Zafar would in all likelihood have carried on
      using Dr Latif.

  21. We are concerned that Mr Zafar has not been entirely open about the
      role of his brother, Mr Sammad S Zafar, and his connection with Zafar
      Law Chambers. We accept Mr Gajjar's submission that as he is a family
      member his actual employment status may not have been clarified in
      June 2018. However, in those circumstances it was not appropriate on
      17th June 2018 in correspondence to have written the following so
      abruptly to the Secretary of State: "the "Initial Client Screening"
      was undertaken by Mr Sammad S Zafar an assistant to Dr Saima Latif and
      not an employee of Zafar Law Chambers. This assumption of Mr Sammad S
      Zafar being an employee of Zafar Law Chambers is unjust, unfair,
      unreasonable, without evidence and therefore, possibly unlawful." We
      accept that by 26th August 2018 Mr Sammad S Zafar's status may have
      changed and he may have become more clearly an employee of Zafar Law
      Chambers and no longer an agent of Dr Latif. But this does not explain
      why Mr Zafar states in an email to the Health and Care Professions
      Council that: "Mr Sammad Zafar is employed by us to assist and provide
      support to the registrant [Dr Latif] as and when is required for
      whatever reason the registrant thinks fit." (our emphasis) We are
      aware that Mr Zafar now claims that he misstated the correct position
      and Mr Sammad S Zafar was not employed by him to assist Dr Latif.
      However, on consideration of all of the evidence before us we conclude
      it is likely that Mr Sammad S Zafar was working informally throughout
      this period for Zafar Law Chambers with one of his duties being to go
      to detention centres to obtain the initial screening information for
      Dr Latif in the period whilst the questionable Dr Latif reports were
      obtained via the initial interview by Mr Sammad S Zafar/ telephone
      interview by Dr Latif procedure; and that this explains why she was
      not billed for his time and the response to the Health and Care
      Professions Council.

  22. We conclude that it is appropriate to refer Zafar Law Chambers to the
      OISC in respect of what we consider to be the firm's lack of
      understanding of their proper professional role with respect to the
      checking of the accuracy of expert evidence with respect to matters in
      the reports within their knowledge, and what appears to be an attempt
      to minimise their involvement with the production of expert evidence
      by a methodology which was not made clear on the face of the reports.

   Issue 2 - The "42 page" generic meritless judicial review grounds

  23. In 2018 we believe in the region of a hundred judicial reviews were
      lodged with the Upper Tribunal with the same "42 pages" of generic
      typed grounds. It is hard to be precise about the number as they were
      all lodged ostensibly in person and so their collation has necessarily
      been by way of observation by court staff and judges. The grounds
      consist of a series of submissions on public law topics such as
      standing, legitimate expectation, unfairness, unreasonableness, and
      also include general statements of law regarding paragraph 353 of the
      Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR relying only on case law prior to
      2014, much of which was then obsolete. The grounds make no reference
      at any point to the individual claimant or the decision under
      challenge, and are therefore entirely meritless. The judicial review
      form, T480, is always filled in in neat black pen with the same
      handwriting on each application, with N/A written in each box for
      solicitor's and counsel's details. The T485 form is also filled in in
      the same handwriting and pen, as are fee remission forms (which were
      completed in most of the sample of 24 such applications put to Mr
      Zafar for comment). All the forms, including the fee remission forms,
      appear to have been signed by the same person who completed the form,
      rather than by the applicants, due to the uniformity of the
      signatures.  The applications for judicial review are all lodged by
      post by recorded delivery, as are a number of T485 forms.

  24. In the randomly selected sample of 24 put to Mr Zafar there were a
      variety of pointers that led to suspicion that Zafar Law Chambers may
      have been behind this torrent of time-wasting nonsense. In  many of
      the cases (13) the decision reviewed was sent to Zafar Law Chambers
      JR/5244/18, JR/5349/18, JR/5387/18, JR/5375/18, JR/5378/18,
      JR/5350/18, JR/5482/18, JR/5339/18, JR/5460/18, JR/4322/18,
      JR/5965/18, JR/5846/18, JR/4340/18 ); in three cases the T485 was sent
      to the Upper Tribunal by email by Zafar Law Chambers JR/5345/18,
      JR/5339/18, JR/4231/18; in two cases the action was issued with a
      cheque for the fee to lodge the application from Mr SS Zafar and Mrs H
      Salman (she appears from Mr Zafar's company structure diagram to be
      his PA) JR/5349/18 and JR/5525/18; and in two cases Zafar Law Chambers
      had commissioned a psychological report which appeared in the bundle
      JR/6114/18 and JR/5846/18.

  25. Mr Zafar contends, however, that he had nothing to do with lodging
      these judicial review claims and grounds. Mr Zafar said, in his letter
      of 13th December 2018, the following about these "42 page" judicial
      review cases:

         "I confirm these are our clients. All these clients are detention
        cases. Mostly from IRC Heathrow or IRC Yarl's Wood. These clients
        have contacted us in respect of their immigration matter by way of a
        referral from family and friends. We stop acting for clients at the
        Judicial Review stage. Our investigation has revealed, that a person
        by the name of "Aida" is preparing these clients' Judicial Review
        claims. She is NOT from Zafar Law Chambers. She is not known to us.
        We have never seen her, never met her, never spoken to her. We do
        not have her details except her mobile number, which we will be able
        to get should you require it. Please be informed that we are able to
        get a statement from each of these clients to confirm that Zafar Law
        Chambers did not lodge their Judicial Review claims, and it has been
        lodged by a person named "Aida". Please advise if you require a
        statement from these clients."

  26. The Upper Tribunal did indeed request that statements be obtained from
      Zafar Law Chambers' clients but the situation had moved on by the time
      of the Hamid hearing, and no statements from clients were proffered by
      Mr Zafar.

  27. In his appeal statement dated 20th January 2019, Mr Zafar made no
      mention of Aida. Both in that statement and at the Hamid hearing, Mr
      Zafar contended that the "42 page" judicial reviews were instead
      lodged by two former detainees and clients of his, Mr Muhammad Adnan
      Asghar and Mr Rikinkumar Ashokbhai Patel. When he was asked at the
      hearing why he had first suggested that Aida was responsible for these
      judicial reviews, he said that he had suspected that it was her as he
      had heard from clients that there was such a person who went into
      detention centres and claimed to be from Zafar Law Chambers but when
      he investigated the matter further this was not the case. He had then
      been told by clients that it was these two men, one of whom had the
      nick-name "IT", as he was adept with computers.  He had worked out
      that it was them about two weeks prior to the Hamid hearing and it had
      then taken time to convince them to attend this hearing. Mr Zafar's
      evidence was that he had never employed Mr Patel or Mr Asghar in any
      capacity.

  28. Mr Muhammad Adnan Asghar and Mr Rikinkumar Ashokbhai Patel attended
      the Upper Tribunal. There were no witness statements from either of
      them but they gave oral evidence supporting the contention that they
      alone were responsible for the "42 page" judicial reviews. In summary
      their evidence was as follows.

  29. They said that they had both been detained for immigration reasons,
      and Mr Asghar had been a "welfare buddy" in detention, giving him
      access to others as a helper and Mr Patel had a friend who had that
      role. They maintained that Mr Patel had started the process and then
      passed on the knowledge to Mr Asghar, as Mr Patel had done Mr Asghar's
      judicial review. (Mr Asghar's judicial review was one of the sample of
      "42 page" judicial reviews put to Zafar Law Chambers for comment and
      Mr Patel's application was placed there by Mr Zafar in his bundle.)
      They said that they had obtained the grounds from the internet or by
      email and photocopied them for the cases. Mr Patel said that the files
      were sometimes lodged in person by him.

  30. Both witnesses said they were not employed by Zafar Law Chambers but
      that the firm had represented them. Mr Patel and Mr Asghar did suggest
      that the applicants could go to Zafar Law Chambers for help, and also
      to other firms, but they did not help out at Zafar Law Chambers in any
      way. Mr Asghar said that Zafar Law Chambers had a good name in the
      detention centres as people are satisfied with them.

  31. They said that they did not charge the applicants anything themselves,
      and simply did it to help others, who were often suicidal in
      immigration detention. Mr Patel estimated that he had assisted about
      50 to 55 applicants both in and out of detention.  Mr Asghar said that
      he had possibly helped hundreds of people in detention lodge judicial
      reviews. Mr Asghar said that he had obtained guidance in making his
      own judicial review from Mr Patel. He said that he had spoken to Mr
      Patel only once or twice however, and had only met him for the first
      time at the Upper Tribunal hearing.

  32. We find that the identity or identities of the person or persons who
      lodged these "42 page" judicial reviews is not a matter on which we
      can come to a conclusion as we do not have the investigative powers or
      skills to research the issues necessary to inform such a decision.  We
      are in no doubt, however, that the issue merits investigation by the
      OISC.  The relevant files will be available for forensic
      investigation.

    Issue 3 -Acting beyond the remit of level 3 OISC registration

  33. There are seven judicial reviews identified in our letter of 7th
      November 2018 which do not feature the "42 page" grounds, but with
      respect to which we were concerned that Zafar Law Chambers acted
      beyond their OISC registration in having conduct of a judicial review.
      In JR/4231/18, Zafar Law Chambers lodged the T485; in JR/1027/17 Zafar
      Law Chambers asked for an update on progress; in JR/7672/17 Zafar Law
      Chambers went on the record; in JR/9154/17 and JR/818/18 Zafar Law
      Chambers withdrew a judicial review; in JR/834/18 Zafar Law Chambers
      requested a copy of refusal on the papers; and in JR/10422/17 Zafar
      Law Chambers applied for an injunction and request an oral
      reconsideration of an application.

  34. OISC organisations may only do judicial review case management with
      counsel who is authorised to conduct litigation if the organisations
      are both level 3 registered and have special authorisation to do this
      work. Zafar law Chambers are a level 3 registered organisation but do
      not have authorisation to do judicial review case management. We
      understand that Mr Zafar applied in September 2018 to be granted such
      authorisation but he has not, as yet, been granted it.

  35.   Mr Zafar's evidence at the hearing was that he did not see the work
      outlined above as judicial review case management as he had not
      drafted the grounds for judicial review in any of the cases. He said
      that there were exceptional reasons why he had done what he did in all
      of the cases. For instance, he had asked for the update in JR/1027/17
      because the applicant had been with MBM Solicitors previously where Mr
      Zafar used to work and the applicant had wanted any update and that
      firm had failed to provide this. In JR/10422/17 the applicant had been
      panicking as she thought that she might be removed, given that a
      removal window had been served. In JR/993/18 the applicant had
      previously been represented by Malik Law Chambers and was without a
      representative as Malik Law Chambers had been closed down by the Law
      Society. This applicant therefore wanted Mr Zafar's help. Mr Zafar
      indicated that sometimes he acted rather impulsively, and this is how
      he had been drawn in to helping clients in their time of need.

  36. It was pointed out that the authority which was signed by a number of
      these clients, for instance in JR/834/18, was very wide and said that
      the firm was authorised to act in "matter: immigration", which was
      very broad and so his clients might well have believed that he acted
      for them in respect of their judicial reviews. However, Mr Zafar
      remained adamant that they knew he did not act for them in their
      judicial reviews, and said that this was reflected in the fact that he
      did not charge them for this work.

  37. Mr Zafar gave an assurance that in the future he would not do anything
      with respect to judicial review, beyond referring clients to other
      solicitors if he believed that they might properly make an
      application, until he was granted judicial review case management
      powers by the OISC.

  38. Mr Gajjar submitted that Mr Zafar was a young man of 30 years of age
      who had over-enthusiastically got over involved with these few
      judicial review cases. He had realised that this was not allowed and
      was not intending to do this again until he was properly authorised by
      the OISC. He had given evidence that showed he had good judgement in
      this context, however; for instance, he withdrew JR/834/18 and made
      another application which was successful. Mr Zafar had also shown
      candour in disclosing a previous regulatory matter, even though this
      was in a totally different context from the one under current
      investigation.

  39. We take due account of the points made by Mr Gajjar, including Mr
      Zafar's young age and his limited experience. We are, however,
      concerned that he did not appear to have a proper understanding of the
      limits of his authorisation and that he appears to have considered he
      had been acting appropriately in the cases mentioned under this
      heading. In particular, he cannot reasonably have thought that seeking
      the consent of the Upper Tribunal to withdraw a judicial review on
      behalf of a client is not acting in those proceedings, in a most
      direct and material way.

  40. Also, having had due regard to Mr Zafar's age and experience, we are
      concerned that he appears to have been persuaded to act outside his
      remit by the entreaties of clients. It is a commonplace of working in
      this difficult area that practitioners are faced with clients who are
      distressed at the prospect of being removed from the United Kingdom.
      This does not absolve such a professional from the need to stand firm
      and act only as authorised by the statutory scheme.

  41. We therefore consider it necessary to refer Mr Zafar to the OISC on
      the issue of acting outside the limits of his authorisation.







   Conclusion

  42. We refer Mr Zafar of Zafar Law Chambers to the OISC in respect of
      issues 1 and 3 above.

   Signed: Fiona Lindsley

   Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

   Dated: 4th March 2019






