


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment given orally at     |
|On 17 January 2017                            |hearing                      |
|                                              |Promulgated on               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     SF
                                     SOF
                                     XF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


Even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the law" ground of appeal,
the Tribunal ought to take the Secretary of State's guidance into account
if it points clearly to a particular outcome in the instant case.  Only in
that way can consistency be obtained between those cases that do, and those
cases that do not, come before the Tribunal.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. There are three appellants: all are nationals of Albania, a mother  and
    her two young children.   Each  of  them  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully some time, apparently, in 2012.  Previous to that, they  had
    lived in Albania.  The first appellant's husband came to  this  country
    much earlier.  He obtained indefinite leave to remain and subsequently,
    by false representations as to his nationality  or  identity  or  both,
    obtained a grant of British citizenship.  He  is  currently  serving  a
    sentence of seven and a half years imprisonment for offences  connected
    with people-trafficking.

 2. After the appellants arrived in the United Kingdom, the first appellant
    gave birth to a further child; that child was  born  when  the  child's
    father had indefinite leave to remain (whatever may be said  about  his
    citizenship) and as a result the youngest child is a  British  citizen.
    The appellants were, on 29 April 2015,  served  with  notices  refusing
    asylum claims and deciding that they should be removed from the  United
    Kingdom as illegal entrants, which it is accepted they are.

 3. A number of claims were raised  in  response  to  that  decision.   The
    asylum claim is no longer pursued, and was not pursued before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  A claim based on Article 3 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights was also not pursued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The First-tier Tribunal was invited to consider a claim  based  on  the
    Immigration European Economic Area Regulations 2006 (as amended) on the
    basis that the first appellant was the primary carer of an  EU  citizen
    child.  That claim was  dealt  with  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    rejected as a matter of jurisdiction.  That matter is again  no  longer
    pursued.   What  is  pursued  is  an  argument  that  because  of   the
    nationality of the youngest child, it would be unreasonable  to  expect
    that child to leave the United Kingdom; and that that has an impact  on
    the merits of the decision that the appellants should be  removed.   In
    so far as that matter is  concerned,  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    there  was  some  difficulty  in  ascertaining  precisely  whether  the
    youngest child is indeed a British  citizen.   The  Presenting  Officer
    evidently took the position that because of the unedifying  immigration
    history of the father there was some doubt about the citizenship of the
    child.  That doubt was endorsed by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
    decided that the child was, if we put it in this way, not  entitled  to
    be regarded as a British citizen for the purposes of the appeal.  That,
    it is accepted, was wrong.  The youngest child is  a  British  citizen.
    The Secretary of State has formally accepted that matter in the Rule 24
    notice and indeed rightly so.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeals on the basis  that  there
    was no perceptible reason why this Albanian family, including now three
    children and a mother, all of whom have Albanian  nationality  (whether
    or not they also have British citizenship) should not live in  Albania.
    Their face-to-face contact with the children's father was  the  subject
    of evidence  at  the  hearing;  the  judge  decided  that  it  was  not
    particularly significant and that contact with him while  his  sentence
    continued could be maintained by telephone and so on.

 5. The grounds of appeal, as pursued, are as we have said, now limited  to
    the question whether the need of the youngest child to leave the United
    Kingdom under those circumstances was properly assessed.

 6. The jurisdiction of this Tribunal is that set out in the 2007 Act.   As
    we pointed out to Mr Eaton, if we are satisfied that the making of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved an error of law we may, (but need
    not) set that decision aside; if we do set it aside then  the  decision
    has to be remade by the Upper Tribunal or by remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  We therefore invited Mr Eaton to explain to us what  it  was
    in the decision that had been made, taking into account the  facts  and
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, that showed that the  decision
    would have been different if the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  reached
    a conclusion that the youngest child was a British citizen and entitled
    to be regarded as such.  We think it is  fair  to  say  that  Mr  Eaton
    failed to provide any reason at all to demonstrate  that  the  decision
    would, or indeed might, have been different.  The matters to  which  he
    referred were not matters which showed any aspect  of  unreasonableness
    which could have conceivably affected the First-tier Tribunal's Judge's
    decision.

 7. Mr Wilding, however, has with the fairness  which  Presenting  Officers
    always attempt to apply, drawn our attention to an  important  guidance
    document.  It is  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  -  Family
    Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as  a  Partner  or
    Parent and Private Life, 10 year Routes".  It is the edition of  August
    2015 and therefore not in force at  the  date  of  the  decision  under
    appeal, but it was in force at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing and decision, and is still in  force.   It  contains  important
    guidance about the following topic at 11.2.3: Would it be  unreasonable
    to expect a British Citizen Child to leave the UK?  We will set out the
    relevant parts, they are as follows:

          "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must  not
          take a decision in relation to the parent or primary  carer  of  a
          British Citizen child where the effect of that decision  would  be
          to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age
          of that  child.  This  reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice
          Judgment in Zambrano.
          ...
          Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
          or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,  the  case
          must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
          to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
          or primary carer.


          In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
          parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
          the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
          genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
          It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
          conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to
          considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the
          child could otherwise stay with another parent or alternative
          primary carer in the UK or in the EU.


          The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;
           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

          In considering whether refusal may  be  appropriate  the  decision
          maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.  If
          the decision maker is minded to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
          separation would be the result, this decision should  normally  be
          discussed with a senior caseworker and, where appropriate,  advice
          may be sought from the Office of the Children's  Champion  on  the
          implications for the welfare of the child, in order to inform  the
          decision."

    We were not specifically referred to any other part  of  this  document
    and we do not need to set any more out.

 8. Mr Wilding very properly accepted this was not, from the point of  view
    of the relationship between the first appellant, the  mother,  and  the
    British citizen child, a case which involves criminality; and this  was
    not a case in which the conduct of the mother or of the other  children
    was such as to give rise to considerations of such weight as to justify
    separation: but in any event it does not appear that there has been any
    consideration given to the possibility of  the  British  citizen  child
    staying with another parent or alternative  primary  care  in  the  EU.
    There is said to be a grandmother here.  No other  details  are  known;
    certainly the Secretary of State has not at any stage  taken  the  view
    that there was an alternative primary  carer,  and  in  any  event,  of
    course the result of the  decision  would  be  the  separation  of  the
    youngest child from his siblings and from his mother  if  they  had  to
    return to Albania leaving him here.

 9. It appears to us inevitable that if the guidance to  which  Mr  Wilding
    has drawn our attention had been applied to the present family, at  any
    time after it was published, and on the basis that the  youngest  child
    is  a  British  citizen,  the  conclusion  would  have  been  that  the
    appellants should have been granted a  period  of  leave  in  order  to
    enable the British citizen child to remain in the United  Kingdom  with
    them.  The question is then whether that guidance as guidance  has  any
    impact on the First-tier Tribunal or on us.

10. It is clear that the appellants do not have available to them a  ground
    of appeal on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the
    law such as before the amendments made to the 2002 Act by the 2014  Act
    they might have had.  Nevertheless it appears to us that the  terms  of
    the guidance are an important source of the Secretary of  State's  view
    of what is to be regarded as reasonable in the circumstances, and it is
    important in our judgement for the Tribunal  at  both  levels  to  make
    decisions which are, as far as possible, consistent with decisions made
    in other areas of the process of immigration control.

11. If the Secretary of State makes a decision in a person's favour on  the
    basis of guidance of this sort, there can of course be no  appeal,  and
    the result  will  be  that  the  decision  falls  below  the  radar  of
    consideration by a Tribunal.  It is only possible for Tribunals to make
    decisions on matters such as  reasonableness  consistently  with  those
    that are being made in favour of individuals by the Secretary of  State
    if the  Tribunal  applies  similar  or  identical  processes  to  those
    employed by the Secretary of State.

12. On occasion, perhaps where it has more information than  the  Secretary
    of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a  case  is  exceptional,
    the Tribunal may find a reason for departing from such  guidance.   But
    where there is clear guidance which covers a case where  an  assessment
    has to be made, and where the guidance clearly  demonstrates  what  the
    outcome of the assessment would have been  made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, it would, we think, be the normal practice for the  Tribunal  to
    take such guidance into account and to apply it in assessing  the  same
    consideration in a case that came before it.

13. In our judgement, therefore,  the  way  forward  in  this  case  is  to
    conclude that, not for the reasons argued by Mr Eaton, but  for  those,
    as it happens, argued by Mr Wilding, this is a case where it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the youngest child to leave the United  Kingdom.
    We will therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    substitute a decision allowing the appeals of all three  appellants  on
    that ground.  The period of leave is a matter to be determined  by  the
    Secretary of State.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 24 January 2017
