
MA (DP3/96 - interpretation) Algeria [2005] UKAIT 00127 | |
|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                  |                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 19 May 2005                          |                         |
|                                        |19th August 2005         |
|                                        |.........................|
|                                        |....................     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Senior Immigration Judge)                           |
|Mrs S Hussain, JP                                                 |
|Mrs M E McGregor                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr K Behbahani, for Oaks, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal   against   the   determination   of   an
    Adjudicator, Ms P S Quigley, in which she allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  6  June  2003
    refusing an application for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Following the commencement of the appeal  provisions  of  the
    2004 Act, the  grant  of  permission  takes  effect  as  an  order  for
    reconsideration of the appellant's appeal limited to the  grounds  upon
    which permission to appeal was granted.

2.    The appellant was  originally  granted  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom on 4 December 1995 for a  period  of  6  months  as  a  medical
    visitor, and further leave to remain in the same capacity  was  granted
    until 16 April 1997.   On 18 October 2001 he applied for further  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse of Anna Thomson who is  a
    person present and settled in the United  Kingdom.    This  application
    was refused on 6 June 2003.   On that date the  appellant  was  sent  a
    letter setting out the reasons for refusal and informing him that  this
    case has been considered within guidelines for  dealing  with  marriage
    applications from overstayers  (a  document  commonly  referred  to  as
    DP3/96).  It was considered that his  case  did  not  fall  within  the
    criteria of DP3/96 for reasons we shall set out below.    On  the  same
    date, 6 June 2003, he was served with a Form IS151A being notice  to  a
    person liable to removal, indicating that he was a  person  subject  to
    administrative removal in accordance with section 10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999 and that he was a  person  liable  to  be  detained
    pending the completion of arrangements for dealing with him  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and that it was proposed to  give  directions  for
    his removal from the United Kingdom in due course.  On the same day  he
    was served with a form IS151A Part 2  which  comprises  a  decision  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom and notifying  him  that  directions
    would be given for his removal.  A similar notice  of  the  same  date,
    form IS151B, was also sent to him which is in similar terms except that
    it sets out the available appeal rights in greater detail.

3.    The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from the appellant and  from  his
    wife and his brother.    She found all the witnesses  to  be  credible.
    She noted that the Secretary of State  had  acknowledged  the  marriage
    application by letter of 17 January 2002 and that  letter  referred  to
    the application as a valid application and also said that  there  might
    be  a  delay  in  dealing  with  the  application  and  referred  to  a
    possibility that it could take 6 months or more.    It also  asked  him
    not to make written or telephone enquiries or turn  up  at  the  public
    enquiry office.    In fact the next communication was  the  refusal  of
    the application on 6 June 2003.

4.    The Adjudicator noted the relevant criteria set out in DP3/96.   This
    policy arose it seems essentially as a consequence of the fact  that  a
    person such as the  appellant  might  not  be  able  to  succeed  under
    paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules, under which applications can be
    made to remain as a spouse, because  it  requires  that  the  applicant
    should be living in the United Kingdom lawfully, and that was  not  the
    case for the appellant.    The letter of 6 June 2003 goes on  to  state
    that in recognition of the  fact  that  the  right  of  appeal  against
    removal is exercisable only from abroad it was the Secretary of State's
    normal practice to consider such applications on an exceptional  basis,
    and the guidelines in DP3/96 state that it will normally be appropriate
    to consider a grant of leave to remain, exceptionally, on the basis  of
    a marriage if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

      (i)   the marriage is genuine and subsisting;
    (ii)   that it pre-dates the service of an  enforcement  notice  by  at
           least 2 years;
    (iii)  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  the  settled  spouse  to
           accompany his/her spouse on removal.

5.    The letter then goes on to state that the appellant's  case  does  not
      fall within the general rule, and reference is made to the  fact  that
      in his case his marriage on 25 August 2001 did not pre-date by 2 years
      the commencement of enforcement  action  and  would  not  normally  be
      grounds for allowing him  to  remain.   The  Secretary  of  State  had
      considered the relevant compassionate circumstances but assessed  them
      as not being such as to justify a concession on  the  grounds  of  the
      marriage.   It was considered that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
      both  parties  to  have  been  aware  of  the  appellant's  precarious
      immigration status such that the subsistence of their marriage in  the
      United Kingdom would from the outset be uncertain,  and  it  was  also
      believed that the appellant's wife, although a British citizen,  could
      reasonably be expected to live in Algeria.  It was therefore concluded
      that removal would not be disproportionate to the appellant's  Article
      8 rights.

6.    The Adjudicator went on to note paragraph  5(iii)  of  DP3/96.    This
      contains  a  definition  of  the  term  "Commencement  of  Enforcement
      Action".    This is to be taken as either:

      (a)   a specific instruction to leave with a warning of  liability  to
           deportation if the subject fails to do so; or

      (b)   service of a notice of intention to deport or service of illegal
           entry  papers  (including  the  service  of  papers  during  the
           previous stay in the United Kingdom where the subject  has  been
           returned illegally); or

      (c)   a recommendation by a Court that the person should  be  deported
           following a conviction.

7.    At paragraph 30 of her determination the  Adjudicator  concluded  that
      none of the papers served on the appellant could be said  to  comprise
      commencement of enforcement action as defined in this paragraph.   She
      considered that if and when enforcement action was taken in the future
      the appellant would have satisfied the  requirement  of  having  lived
      with his wife in the United Kingdom continuously since marriage for at
      least 2 years and therefore  did  not  accept  the  interpretation  of
      DP3/96 that was argued by the Presenting Officer who  appeared  before
      her.

8.     Nor  did  the   Adjudicator   consider   that   the   assessment   of
      proportionality was a proper one.    She bore in mind such factors  as
      the acknowledgement that the application was valid that  was  made  in
      the letter of 17 January 2002 and the  inconsistency  as  she  saw  it
      between that and the refusal of the application  a  year  and  a  half
      later, considering that the delay in making  clear  to  him  that  his
      marriage   application   could   not   succeed   was    relevant    to
      proportionality.   She also bore in mind that he has an eye  condition
      for which the prospects of proper treatment on return to Algeria would
      not be good and the fact that Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  travel
      advice counselled against all non-essential travel to  Algeria.    She
      noted objective evidence concerning medical facilities in Algeria and,
      bearing in mind the security threat in Algeria considered that removal
      would be disproportionate.   She therefore allowed  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 and also allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

9.    In his grounds of appeal the Secretary of State contends firstly  that
      the reasoning on proportionality on the part  of  the  Adjudicator  is
      inadequate and that established authority had not been followed.    It
      is also argued that the allowing of the appeal under  the  Immigration
      Rules is inadequately reasoned and that the Adjudicator erred  in  her
      interpretation of the Home Office marriage policy DP3/96.  It is  also
      contended that the finding of the Adjudicator in paragraph 44 that the
      appeal was allowed on the basis of  a  real  risk  or  breach  of  his
      protected human rights did not identify which  human  rights  were  in
      issue.

10.    At  the  hearing  before  us  Mr   Behbahani   indicated   that   his
      understanding was that entry clearance applications could not be  made
      from Algeria at present for  cases  such  as  the  appellant's.     We
      invited both representatives to investigate the  matter,  and  we  are
      grateful to them both for speedily obtaining relevant  information  in
      this regard.    It  would  appear  that  a  number  of  categories  of
      application can be made by post to a given address in Algeria but  the
      evidence is unclear as to whether marriage applications  such  as  the
      appellant's could be, were he to be required to return.      Certainly
      marriage is not one of the categories mentioned  as  being  one  where
      postal applications can be made in the way set out.    It is said that
      all other individual visa applications have to  be  submitted  to  the
      British Embassy in Tunis.    It is unclear whether  such  applications
      can be made by post or whether the application must be made in person.



11.   In his submissions Mr Phillips argued  that  the  Adjudicator  clearly
      erred in law in that she had no power to allow the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules and should rather have  directed  the  Secretary  of
      State to revisit the particular refusal under  DP3/96  and  reconsider
      the matter.  He argued that in any event  however,  her  approach  was
      flawed.    The  notices  that  had  been  served  conformed   to   the
      requirements of paragraph 5 of DP3/96 and  she  had  interpreted  them
      improperly.

12.   As regards the Article 8 findings these  were  flawed.   Return  would
      not be disproportionate and it would not be unduly harsh for him to go
      back and make an application for entry clearance either with his  wife
      returning with him or on his own.    Clearly he could apply in  Tunis.
       It was only a day away from Algeria by road or public  transport  and
      it was quicker still by air.

13.   In his submissions Mr Behbahani referred us to his skeleton  argument.
        It was clear that DP3/96 was mainly focused  on  illegal  entry  and
      deportation cases.    If the Secretary of State was relying on  a  non
      directly applicable policy document then that was not the  appellant's
      fault.    The Secretary of State was simply re-arguing  his  views  on
      proportionality and there was no material error of law.   The relevant
      notices employed were not notices to  deport  or  notices  to  illegal
      entrants.   Removal and deportation were different.

14.   Mr Behbahani was not, he said, to be understood  as  saying  that  the
      policy did not apply to the appellant but  the  point  concerning  the
      stopping of the clock had not had the effect  that  the  Secretary  of
      State contended for it.   A relevant notice would for example, have to
      say it was a notice of intention to deport and it was the case by  now
      that the appellant qualified, having  satisfied  all  the  immigration
      rules requirements except the one to which the policy  applied.     As
      regards returns there was a  risk  of  real  problems.    Algeria  was
      paranoid about its borders and there could be  bureaucratic  obstacles
      to land travel.  Also there was the issue of his health problems.   It
      was likely, given that it was an application for settlement,  that  he
      would be required to be interviewed.   Nothing had been put before the
      Tribunal to clarify what the procedure would be and what  complexities
      needed to be taken into account and this was likely to be problematic.
        It should be questioned whether it was proportionate given how  long
      he had been in the United Kingdom and had satisfied all other  aspects
      of the rules.   The Tribunal was referred to  relevant  paragraphs  in
      the recent determination in MB [2005] UKIAT 00092.

15.    As  regards  the  point  concerning  the  January  2001  letter,   Mr
      Behbahani's understanding was that it was  that  the  application  was
      described as being in the prescribed form and the  rules  allowed  the
      making of such an application.   The  Tribunal  should  however  agree
      with the Adjudicator that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  then  using
      standard reasons for refusal and it was misleading to say that it  was
      valid and the delay could have been ended then and the appellant could
      have perhaps gone back and made an application.     It  supported  the
      overall conclusion that the Adjudicator's reasoning in this regard and
      her conclusions were sustainable.  There was no material error of law.



16.   Mr Phillips had no points to make by way of reply.

17.   We raised with the representatives, whether, if  we  were  against  Mr
      Behbahani, they had any submissions to make as to whether it would  be
      appropriate for us to determine the matter ourselves if we found there
      was a material error of law.   Mr Behbahani's only concern on this was
      that it might be appropriate for the opportunity to  be  provided  for
      further evidence to be given as to  the  practical  difficulties  that
      might exist on return and the making of an  application.    We  stated
      that we would bear this in mind in our consideration as to whether the
      matter would need to be reconsidered or whether we could deal with  it
      ourselves.

18.   It is, we think, common ground that the Adjudicator erred in  allowing
      the appeal under the Immigration Rules.   The point is rightly made in
      the refusal letter of 6 June 2003 that  one  of  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules which deals  with  requirements
      of an extension of stay of the spouse of a person present and  settled
      in the United Kingdom is that the applicant has limited leave to enter
      or remain in the United Kingdom.    It is clear that the appellant did
      not have such leave and as a consequence he could not come within  the
      requirements of paragraph 284.  As the letter goes on to note, it  was
      possible that he could come within the terms of the guidelines set out
      in DP3/96, but, as we have seen, it was concluded that he did not come
      within those  terms.    The  decision  by  the  Adjudicator  that  the
      Secretary of State was wrong in this regard in no sense justified  the
      finding that the appeal could be allowed under the Immigration  Rules.
        At most, it could be argued that it was open to her to find that the
      Secretary of State needed to reconsider the matter, applying DP3/96 in
      accordance with her interpretation in order to make  a  decision  that
      would be in accordance with the law.

19.   As Mr Behbahani pointed out however, it is not the case that there  is
      a precise overlap between  success  under  DP3/96  and  Article  8  or
      failure under both.   This is for the reason identified above, that  a
      successful appeal in relation to the DP3/96 point  would  lead  to  no
      more than  reconsideration  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  whereas  a
      successful appeal under  Article  8  would  have  the  effect  on  the
      appellant of not being required to leave the United Kingdom.

20.   In many ways this appeal turns upon the proper approach to a  document
      such as DP3/96  as  a  matter  of  interpretation.    The  Adjudicator
      clearly  took  an  approach  involving  strict  construction  of   the
      terminology employed in the definition of "commencement of enforcement
      action" as can be seen in paragraph 30 of  the  determination.     The
      three definitions to be  found  at  paragraph  3(iii)  of  DP3/96  are
      clearly alternatives, and it would seem that  the  one  of  particular
      relevance to this case is sub-paragraph (a), which  we  have  set  out
      above.

21.   We do not consider that it is appropriate to regard  such  a  document
      as if it were the equivalent of a statute or a  statutory  instrument.
       The document is rightly described at page 1 as providing guidance  in
      general terms in relation to particular categories of case, and  those
      specified are persons liable to be  removed  as  illegal  entrants  or
      deported who have married a person settled in the United Kingdom.   At
      one stage it seemed that Mr Behbahani was  going  to  argue  that  the
      document would not apply to the appellant since he was  not  a  person
      who was liable to be removed as an illegal entrant (since  he  entered
      the country lawfully) or a person who is  to  be  deported,  but  that
      would of course have had the effect of there being no immigration rule
      or policy within which the appellant could fall, and no  doubt  wisely
      Mr Behbahani did not argue that the document did not apply but  rather
      suggested that its wording was inapt to describe the situation of  the
      appellant.

22.   In our view this further reinforces the need  to  avoid  a  strict  or
      literal approach to the interpretation of such  a  document.   If  the
      policy applies to the appellant, albeit that  he  is  not  an  illegal
      entrant, nor is it proposed that he be deported, it is illustrative of
      a purposive approach to the interpretation of the policy as opposed to
      the strict construction approach adopted by the Adjudicator, which  is
      also consistent with  the  aim  of  the  policy,  to  provide  general
      guidance.

23.   When one looks at the wording of IS151A, IS151A Part 2 and IS151B,  it
      is in our view sufficiently clear that the purport of those  documents
      is entirely consistent with the concept of commencement of enforcement
      action, albeit not within the specific  terms  set  out  at  paragraph
      5(iii)(a) of DP3/96.    It is clear for example, from  IS151A  Part  2
      that a decision has been taken to remove the appellant from the United
      Kingdom.  The implication must clearly be that if he  does  not  leave
      voluntarily he will be removed.   The use of  the  word  "deportation"
      should not in our view be taken  to  be  purely  a  reference  to  the
      technical process of deportation,  but  rather  more  broadly  to  the
      process of removal of a  person  who  in  this  case  was  subject  to
      administrative  removal  in  accordance  with  Section   10   of   the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as set out in IS151A.

24.   One of the points made by Mr Behbahani in  his  skeleton  argument  is
      that the Adjudicator was entitled to come to the conclusion  that  she
      did on her interpretation of this document and there would be no error
      of law in her interpreting it in the way that she did.   However,  the
      Adjudicator acknowledged that the couple had not been living  together
      for 2 years at the time when  the  application  was  refused  and  the
      notices were served on 6 June 2003, (in the letter of  that  date  the
      Secretary of State, inter alia noted that the appellant's marriage did
      not pre-date the service  of  notice  of  liability  to  removal,  and
      concluded that there were insufficient compassionate circumstances  to
      justify a concession on the grounds of the marriage)  and  we  do  not
      consider that even a  purposive  approach  to  the  interpretation  of
      DP3/96 can properly ignore the criterion that the couple  should  have
      been living together for at least 2 years before the  commencement  of
      enforcement action.   It follows that, given that  we  have  concluded
      that the Adjudicator's approach  to  the  issue  of  "commencement  of
      enforcement action" was flawed, she  materially  erred  in  concluding
      that the policy was not applicable to the appellant's case.   We  have
      in any event already found that  there  is  a  material  flaw  in  her
      determination, and we also consider that it is  proper  to  substitute
      our conclusion for hers in concluding that the Secretary of State  was
      right to regard the case as not falling within the Immigration  Rules,
      and, given the facts  of  the  case,  the  policy  cannot  assist  the
      appellant, because the couple had not  been  living  together  for  at
      least 2 years prior to the commencement of enforcement action.

25.   That has clear implications for the remaining  issue.    That  is  the
      question of Article 8.  In this regard Mr Behbahani  took  us  to  the
      determination of the Tribunal in MB to which we have  referred  above.
       This was a case  in  which  the  Tribunal  took  the  opportunity  to
      consider the recent decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Huang  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 105.  At paragraph 28 the Tribunal noted with regard  to  the
      issue of delay that it is the effects of delay to which an Adjudicator
      should look rather than to the fact or extent  of  delay  itself,  and
      went on to comment that delay by itself would not so  much  rarely  be
      determinative as rarely ever significant.

26.   The Tribunal went on to state that in  holding  that  the  Immigration
      Rules are  to  be  regarded  as  the  proportionate  response  of  the
      executive, approved by Parliament to the many and varied circumstances
      which individual immigration cases present, the Court of  Appeal  must
      also have had regard  to  the  way  in  which  those  rules  are  also
      supplemented  by  policies  or  extra-statutory   concessions.      We
      interpolate that that is clearly relevant  to  the  appeal  before  us
      where we are concerned with such a policy.    The Tribunal went on  to
      note that such a policy offers a further  guide  as  to  what  is  the
      proportionate response of the executive.    The Tribunal also  stated,
      at paragraph 32, that where a rule or statutory provision  covers  the
      sort of circumstance upon which an individual relies,  e.g  entry  for
      marriage, entry for  study,  medical  treatment  or  delayed  decision
      making, but the individual falls outside the specific requirements  or
      limits of the otherwise applicable rules or policy,  that  is  a  very
      clear indication that removal is proportionate.   It is said  that  it
      is not for the judicial decision maker, except in the clear and  truly
      exceptional case to set aside the limitations set  by  the  executive,
      accountable to Parliament, and, in the case of the Immigration  Rules,
      approved by Parliament.

27.   These  points  have  clear  significance  to  this  appeal.   We  have
      concluded that the appeal  comes  neither  within  the  terms  of  the
      existing immigration rule nor, for the reasons we  have  set  out,  an
      existing policy.    The Secretary of State was right to  apply  DP3/96
      but to conclude that the appellant did not meet its criteria.  A  case
      must be clearly and truly  exceptional  for  us  to  depart  from  the
      manifestations of the proportionate response of the executive  as  set
      out, specifically in this case, in paragraph 284  of  HC  395  and  in
      DP3/96.  We do not consider that it can  properly  be  said  that  the
      circumstances  of  this  case  are  such  as  to  amount  to  a  truly
      exceptional case.  In this regard we have borne in mind the point made
      by Mr Bebahani at the  end  of  submissions  concerning  the  possible
      desirability of further evidence.  We do not consider upon  reflection
      however, that it would be appropriate for us simply in  this  case  to
      declare there to be a material error of law and for the matter then to
      be reconsidered by us or a different panel of the AIT in  due  course.
      Issues such as  the  difficulty  that  might  be  experienced  by  the
      appellant in making an entry  clearance  application  from  Tunis  are
      matters that could have been anticipated  and  raised  in  submissions
      before us.  We do not consider that the onus is on  the  Secretary  of
      State in this situation to show that there would not be  difficulties,
      but rather the onus was on the appellant  before  the  Adjudicator  to
      show that there would be.

28.   We bear in mind the point of delay that Mr Behbahani referred  us  to,
      but we do not see as at all significant in this case  the  effects  of
      delay as referred to by the Tribunal at paragraph 28 in MB.  It may be
      that had he known how the marriage application would be  treated,  the
      appellant would have availed himself earlier  of  the  opportunity  to
      depart and make an entry clearance application, but that is an unknown
      and in any event does not appear to us to  be  a  matter  of  material
      significance.    We bear in mind his medical circumstances, but  those
      fall well short of being exceptional, as does the situation in Algeria
      with the elements of  political  uncertainty  and  unrest  which  were
      touched upon before us.   Neither separately nor  cumulatively  do  we
      consider that these matters can properly  be  characterised  as  being
      exceptional let alone truly exceptional  as  they  were  described  as
      having to be by the Tribunal in MB.   We have therefore concluded that
      the Adjudicator materially erred in law in allowing the  appeal  under
      Article 8.

29.   In conclusion  therefore  we  have  determined  that  the  Adjudicator
      materially  erred  in  law  both  as  regards  her  decision  on   the
      Immigration Rules and her decision on Article 8.  We have reconsidered
      these matters as set out above, and substitute her decision  with  the
      following  decision.    The  appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  the
      Immigration Rules is dismissed.

30.   The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.





                                                                   D K Allen
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge





