
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MS (s.117C(6): "very compelling  circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]  UKUT
00122 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2019                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, instructed by Gurney Harden Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Pilgerstorfer, instructed by the Government
                    Legal
     Department

    1) In determining pursuant  to  section  117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether there  are  very  compelling
       circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and  2
       in subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public  interest
       in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or  tribunal  must
       take into account, together with any other relevant public  interest
       considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence  of  which
       the foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether  the  foreign
       criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment  of  more  than  4
       years. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2018] UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion.

    2) There is nothing in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2016] UKSC 60 that  requires  a  court  or  tribunal  to
       eschew the principle of public deterrence,  as  an  element  of  the
       public interest, in determining a deportation appeal by reference to
       section 117C(6).


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. SECTION 117C(6) AFTER KO (NIGERIA)

 1. In this appeal, we look first at whether paragraphs 20  to  22  of  the
    judgment of Lord Carnwath in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 changed the  way  in  which  courts  and
    tribunals must  approach  their  task  under  section  117C(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. Section 117C provides as follows:-

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

 3. In paragraphs 20 to 22 of his judgment, Lord Carnwath said this:-

         "20. Turning to section 117C the structure is not entirely easy  to
             follow.  It starts with the general rules (1) that deportation
             of foreign criminals is in the public interest, and  (2)  that
             the more serious the offence the greater that interest.  There
             is however no express indication as to how or at what stage of
             the process those  general  rules  are  to  be  given  effect.
             Instead, the remainder of the section  enacts  specific  rules
             for two categories of foreign criminals, defined by  reference
             to whether or not their sentences were of four years or  more,
             and two precisely defined exceptions.  For those sentenced  to
             less than four years, the public interest requires deportation
             unless exception 1 or 2 applies.  For those sentenced to  four
             years or more, deportation is required "unless there are  very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2"

         21.  The difficult question is whether the specific rules allow any
             further room for balancing of the relative seriousness of  the
             offence, beyond the difference  between  the  two  categories.
             The general rule stated in subsection (2) might  lead  one  to
             expect some such provision, but it could equally be read as no
             more than a preamble to the more specific rules.  Exception  1
             seems to leave no room for further balancing.  It is precisely
             defined by reference to three factual issues: lawful residence
             in  the  UK  for  most  of  C's  life,  social  and   cultural
             integration into the UK, and "very significant  obstacles"  to
             integration into the country of proposed deportation.  None of
             these turns on the seriousness of  the  offence;  but,  for  a
             sentence of less than four years, they are enough, if they are
             met, to  remove  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   For
             sentences of four years or more, however, it is not enough  to
             fall within the exception, unless there are in addition  "very
             compelling circumstances".

         22.   Given  that  exception  1  is  self-contained,  it  would  be
             surprising to find exception 2 structured in a different  way.
             On its face it raises a factual issue seen from the  point  of
             view of  the  partner  or  child:  would  the  effect  of  C's
             deportation be  "unduly  harsh"?   Although  the  language  is
             perhaps less precise  than  that  of  exception  1,  there  is
             nothing to suggest that the word "unduly"  is  intended  as  a
             reference back to the issue of relative seriousness introduced
             by subsection (2). Like exception 1,  and  like  the  test  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B, exception 2 appears self-
             contained."

 4. For the appellant, Ms Patyna submitted that the effect of paragraphs 20
    to 22 and, in particular, the first two sentences of paragraph  21,  is
    that in carrying  out  the  exercise  required  by  subsection  (6)  of
    determining whether there are "very compelling circumstances, over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2", a court or tribunal  must
    not have regard to the relative seriousness of  the  offence  that  the
    foreign  criminal  has  committed,  other  than  as  between  the   two
    categories identified in paragraph 20.  Section 117C(2) is,  in  short,
    "no more than a preamble to the more specific rules".

 5. Ms Patyna  argued  that  section  117C(6),  like  section  117C(5),  is
    concerned with the strength of an individual's  private  and/or  family
    life claim.  She submitted that the reasoning adopted by Lord  Carnwath
    in respect of Exceptions 1 and 2 ought to be applied by analogy to  the
    "very compelling circumstances" test.

 6.  Ms Patyna acknowledged that the Supreme Court did not, in  fact,  have
    to decide this point in respect of individuals  with  sentences  of  at
    least four years.   Nevertheless,  had  the  Court  considered  that  a
    different proportionality balancing exercise was required in respect of
    the "very compelling circumstances" test,  Ms  Patyna  said  that  Lord
    Carnwath would have  said  so.   It  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
    reasoning of Lord Carnwath in respect of Exceptions 1 and 2 to  operate
    a different test in section 117C(6), by graduating the strength of  the
    public interest by reference to the seriousness of the offence,  beyond
    what was inherent in the distinction drawn by  the  section  itself  by
    reference to length of sentence.

 7. A close analysis of paragraphs 20 to 22,  however,  does  not  take  Ms
    Patyna's argument the required distance.  The first point to  note,  as
    Ms Patyna acknowledges, is that the Supreme  Court  was  not  concerned
    with a "four years or more" case.  This explains the  reason  why  Lord
    Carnwath did not consider it necessary to engage with  subsection  (6),
    other than to quote from it, without comment, in the last  sentence  of
    paragraph 20 of his judgment.

 8. The second point to make  is  that,  as  is  apparent  from  that  last
    sentence, the judgment in KO (Nigeria) does not make reference  to  the
    respondent's concession before the Court of Appeal in NA  (Pakistan)  &
    Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662
    that the purpose of section 117C(6) is to ensure that in every "foreign
    criminal" case, Part 5A of the 2002 Act does not operate in such a  way
    as to cause a violation of Article 8.  For this reason, section 117C(6)
    must be read as applying, not only to "four years or  more"  cases  but
    also to those other foreign criminals who fall within section 117C.  As
    we have noted in RA (Iraq) (HU/00192/2018), which was heard immediately
    before the present appeal, nothing in KO  (Nigeria)  casts  doubt  upon
    paragraphs 25 to 27 of the judgment of Jackson  LJ  in  NA  (Pakistan),
    where he held that the respondent's concession was correctly  made  and
    that the ambit of section 117C(6) extends beyond the written  words  in
    the section.

 9. We do not know whether NA (Pakistan) was drawn to the attention of  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  The fact  that  it  was  not  would  be
    unsurprising, given the nature of the "foreign criminal" appeals before
    the Supreme Court, which did not involve looking beyond Exception 1 and
    Exception 2 in subsections (4) and (5).   It does, however,  mean  that
    one  should  be  particularly  cautious  in   attributing   any   wider
    significance to paragraphs 20 to 22 of the judgment than  is  expressly
    contained in the language of those paragraphs.

10. Thirdly, in the second sentence of paragraph 21, it can  be  seen  that
    Lord Carnwath was not, in fact, holding that section  117C(2)  must  be
    read "as no more than a preamble to the more specific  rules";  merely,
    that "it could equally be read as" only having such an effect.  It  is,
    therefore, incorrect to say  KO  (Nigeria)  compels  the  finding  that
    section 117C(2)  is  merely  declaratory  of  the  distinction  between
    foreign criminals who have not been  sentenced  to  imprisonment  of  4
    years or more, and those who have.

11. In our view, the critical part of the reasoning in paragraph 21 of  the
    judgment is to be found in the third, fourth and  fifth  sentences.  In
    them, we find that Exception 1 is "precisely defined  by  reference  to
    three factual issues", none of which "turns on the seriousness  of  the
    offence".

12. In the case of a foreign criminal sentenced to  less  than  four  years
    "they are enough, if they are met, to remove  the  public  interest  in
    deportation".

13. Having reached that finding, Lord Carnwath explained  in  paragraph  22
    why, as a matter of statutory construction, Exception  2  ought  to  be
    interpreted in the same "self-contained" manner as Exception 1.

14. Ms Patyna drew attention to the similarity in the structure of  section
    117C(3) and (6).  Both subsections  expressly  state  that  the  public
    interest requires deportation "unless" a specified state of affairs  is
    found to exist.  It would, she said, be  wrong  to  apply  a  different
    approach as between subsections (3) and (6).

15. The crucial point, however, is that the considerations or  tests  which
    follow  the  word  "unless"  in  those  subsections  are  significantly
    different.  Read in their own terms, Exception 1 and Exception 2 are of
    such a nature  as  to  exclude  further  consideration  of  the  public
    interest.  Although, as Lord Carnwath observed,  the  test  of  "unduly
    harsh" is less hard-edged than Exception 1, its focus is on the  effect
    of deportation on the partner or child.  Once  it  is  found  that  the
    effect reaches a certain threshold, the test  is  met  and  the  public
    interest no longer can be said to require deportation.

16.  By  contrast,  the  issue  of  whether  "there  are  very   compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" is
    not in any sense a hard-edged question.  On the contrary, it calls  for
    a wide-ranging evaluative  exercise.   As  NA  (Pakistan)  holds,  that
    exercise is required, in the case of all foreign criminals, in order to
    ensure that Part 5A of the 2002 Act produces,  in  each  such  case,  a
    result that is compatible with the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

17. Viewed in this light, it can readily be seen that the ascertainment  of
    what constitute "very compelling circumstances", such as to defeat  the
    public interest, requires a case-specific analysis of the nature of the
    public interest. The strength of the public interest, in any particular
    case, determines the weight that must then  be  found  to  lie  on  the
    foreign criminal's side of the balance in order for  the  circumstances
    to be properly categorised as very compelling. It  would,  frankly,  be
    remarkable if a person sentenced to four years' imprisonment for  fraud
    had to demonstrate the same circumstances as a person sentenced to life
    imprisonment for multiple murders.

18.  To say this is not to seek to introduce a  "balancing  exercise"  into
    Exceptions 1 and 2 and the test of "unduly harsh". The words "over  and
    above", as interpreted by Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan),  underscore  the
    difference in the tasks demanded by, on the one hand,  section  117C(4)
    and (5) and, on the other, section 117C(6).

19. Furthermore, as  Mr  Pilgerstorfer  pointed  out,  the  effect  of  the
    judgment in NA (Pakistan), in bringing all foreign criminals within the
    ambit of section 117C(6), means that it is difficult  to  see  how  the
    test  of  very  compelling  circumstances  can   operate   differently,
    depending upon whether the foreign  criminal  has,  or  has  not,  been
    sentenced to imprisonment of at least 4 years. In order for  it  to  do
    so, yet further words would have to be assumed to be written  into  the
    section, over and  above  those  mandated  by  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment.

20. For these reasons, despite Ms Patyna's elegant submissions, we find the
    effect of section 117C is that a  court  or  tribunal,  in  determining
    whether  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances,  as  required  by
    subsection  (6),  must  take  into  account  the  seriousness  of   the
    particular offence  for  which  the  foreign  criminal  was  convicted,
    together  with  any  other  relevant  public  interest  considerations.
    Nothing in KO (Nigeria) demands a contrary conclusion.




B. THE APPELLANT AND HIS APPEAL

21. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines, born in March 1980.   At
    the age of 6 he arrived in the United Kingdom as  a  dependant  of  his
    mother.  He says that he grew  up  in  a  wealthy  environment  in  the
    Philippines but one day the police arrived at his house and put him  on
    a flight to the United Kingdom.

22. Once in this country, the appellant lived on a council estate in London
    and began school.  His stepfather beat the appellant, when  the  latter
    fell behind with his schoolwork.  The appellant ran away from home  and
    was eventually placed in care in a boys' home (Dr Barnardo's).

23. Whilst in the home, the  appellant  came  into  contact  with  ex-child
    soldiers from Somalia and Liberia.  The appellant said  that  he  found
    himself in a neighbourhood where he was menaced by  a  Nazi  group  who
    kidnapped and tortured him.

24. Attempts to find the appellant a foster carer came to  nothing,  as  he
    could not integrate.  Instead, the appellant described himself as being
    groomed for a violent world of organised gangs  and  he  was  recruited
    into a very dangerous and notorious crime syndicate.

25. Between 1996 and 2007, the appellant had been criminally  convicted  on
    fourteen occasions.   In  2006,  at  Winchester  Crown  Court,  he  was
    convicted on five counts, including possessing  prohibited  ammunition.
    He was sentenced to 48 months' imprisonment for the ammunition offences
    and 78 months' imprisonment for possession of a firearm.

26. In July 2007, at Lewes Crown Court,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    conspiracy to commit  aggravated  burglary  and  conspiracy  to  commit
    burglary.  He was sentenced to life imprisonment, with a  minimum  term
    of ten years to be served before being considered for release.

27. From the remarks of the Sentencing Judge, we find that  the  burglaries
    took place at a residential address that was home to  an  adult  couple
    and two 7 year old children.  The first  burglary  took  place  in  the
    morning, when the family was  away  from  home.   The  total  value  of
    property stolen was �12,000.

28. The second burglary took place two days later, when  the  adult  female
    and her daughter were at home.  The burglary was aggravated by the  use
    of weapons, included a loaded gun, machetes and  mallets.   The  mother
    and daughter were kidnapped outside the house and taken back there,  to
    be subjected to a "terrifying ordeal".  A taxi driver who  happened  to
    arrive during the burglary was also seized and threats were made to his
    life.  Similar threats were also made to the mother and daughter.

29.  The  Sentencing  Judge  described  these  as  "crimes  of  exceptional
    seriousness". The judge said that it was "not  possible  to  judge  the
    causes of  the  simple  wickedness  which  was  responsible  for  these
    offences".  Whatever motive each of the defendants had,  each  actively
    participated to a greater or a lesser extent.   The  appellant,  during
    the second burglary,

         "called yourself, and were referred by the  others,  as  number  1.
         That was indeed your role.  You are violent man who  was  recruited
         ... to lead these operations.  ... it was you  who  was  armed  ...
         with a revolver, which I  am  satisfied  was  loaded,  and  also  a
         machete.  You gave instructions to your fellow burglars.  You  ....
         caused maximum terror ...  In my judgment you are a  totally  cold-
         blooded, ruthless  and  highly  dangerous  man.   You  are  rightly
         assessed as being a high risk of re-offending and a  high  risk  of
         serious harm ...  I have no  doubt  in  finding  that  there  is  a
         significant risk to members of the  public  occasioned  by  you  of
         further  specific  offences.   I  am  equally  satisfied  that  the
         seriousness of this offence is sufficient to justify the imposition
         of a life sentence. ..."

30. Faced with deportation, the appellant contended that his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would  breach  its  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR.  The respondent refused those claims  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

31. In a decision which followed a hearing at Taylor  House  on  16  August
    2018, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.   The
    judge noted that,  whilst  in  prison,  the  appellant  had  undertaken
    various rehabilitative programmes.  This led the appellant to begin "to
    deconstruct his own identity", with the result that he "has  now  found
    God and he is his witness".

32. Amongst the courses completed was  one  on  "victim  empathy"  but  the
    appellant had more generally "completed every single course to aid  his
    rehabilitation".   The  appellant  said  that  there   had   been   "no
    rehabilitation process at Barnardo's Children's Home", where he went at
    the age of 12.  To survive in  such  a  care  system,  and  with  child
    soldiers who had killed people, the appellant had "to do what you  have
    to defend yourself".

33. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  protection
    appeal.  He did not consider that the appellant would be at  real  risk
    of serious harm, as a result of his criminal past, if returned  to  the
    Philippines.

34. The judge then  considered  whether  Exception  1  in  section  117C(4)
    applied in the appellant's case.   Although  the  appellant  had  spent
    "considerable time since his arrival in the United Kingdom"  in  prison
    or in care homes, the judge accepted that the appellant had to a degree
    become "socially and culturally integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom.
    His first language is English.  He grew up in the United Kingdom".

35. In considering whether there would be "very significant  obstacles"  to
    the appellant's "integration into" the  Philippines,  the  judge  noted
    that the appellant had arrived at the  age  of  5  and  had  not  since
    returned to the Philippines.  He would not have retained any meaningful
    social ties there.  However, he was an adult who had  acquired  on  the
    evidence before the judge, many  "useful  skills,  including  achieving
    significant success in all ten GCSE examinations  during  his  time  in
    prison.  The skills would assist in his integration".

36. The judge noted that  the  appellant  had  been  on  medication  for  a
    significant period  during  his  incarceration.   Records  indicated  a
    "suggested diagnosis of PTSD.  More significantly, the Parole  Offender
    Manager has confirmed that [this] appellant  has  been  diagnosed  with
    compulsive disorder  and  his  medication  which  he  has  been  taking
    regularly for  a  significant  period,  is  designed  to  minimise  his
    anxiety".  In fact,  the  judge  appears  to  have  accepted  that  the
    appellant "has also been diagnosed  with  PTSD  which  relates  to  his
    experiences of violence, torture and trauma", consisting  not  only  of
    actions to which he had been  subject  but  also  those  "he  has  been
    involved in personally inflicting".

37. Although the judge considered that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    access appropriate medication for his  condition  in  the  Philippines,
    there remained "the undeniable fact that the support system to which he
    has become accustomed in the United Kingdom is assisting  him  to  cope
    with his  condition  and  his  rehabilitation  would  be  significantly
    interrupted by his deportation".  That support system "could not easily
    be replicated in the Philippines".

38. In conclusion, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the  appellant
    "would  in  my  opinion  face  very  significant   obstacles   to   his
    integration" in the Philippines.

39. Thus, the judge found that Exception 1  applied  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant.   However,  since  the  appellant  had  been  sentenced   to
    imprisonment of four years or more, the judge observed that the  public
    interest still required the appellant's deportation, unless there  were
    very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2.

40. With this in  mind,  the  judge  took  account  of  the  rehabilitative
    measures that the appellant had engaged in whilst  in  prison  and  the
    high level of insight that the appellant had achieved.  The judge  also
    took account of the appellant's "strong family life in the  UK",  which
    contrasted with the lack of such ties in the  Philippines.   The  judge
    also recalled his earlier findings  regarding  the  appellant's  mental
    health issues.

41.  The  judge  did  not  accept  the  submission  of   the   respondent's
    representative at the hearing that, in blaming his past, the  appellant
    was failing to  accept  responsibility  for  his  actions.   The  judge
    considered that it "says much  for  the  appellant  and  it  is  highly
    commendable that he has shown the resilience to  deconstruct  his  past
    and to take meaningful steps within the prison system  to  address  his
    past".   The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  prison  record  as  being
    "exemplary save for a number of relatively minor adjudications".

42. Although all these considerations, weighing in favour of the appellant,
    were "most weighty indeed",  the  judge  considered  that  "the  public
    interest in this case is of paramount importance".  The judge dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.




C. SETTING ASIDE AND RE-MAKING

43. On 4 December 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker found an error of law in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and set that  decision  aside.
    In categorising the public interest in deportation as "paramount",  the
    judge had erred and, in the light of that error, the judge's conclusion
    that there were not "very compelling circumstances" in the  appellant's
    case could not be sustained on the basis upon which it was made.

44. In re-making the decision in this case, we have had regard to  all  the
    evidence before us.  That evidence is, in fact, the same as was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Notwithstanding the  setting  aside  of  that
    Tribunal's decision, we consider the  judge  accurately  described  the
    evidence, which is why we have extensively cited from the decision.

45. We also agree with and adopt the conclusion of the judge that Exception
    1, as set out in section  117C(4),  is  satisfied  in  this  case.   Mr
    Pilgerstorfer did not seek to argue to the contrary.

46. Since the protection aspect of the claim  is  not  pursued,  the  issue
    accordingly  comes  down  to  whether  there   are   very   exceptional
    circumstances, over and above Exception 1, which  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the deportation of the appellant (section 117C(6)).

47. In addressing that question, we apply the law, as we describe it above.
     In determining the weight of the public interest, we  have  regard  to
    what is said in section 117C(2); namely,  that  the  more  serious  the
    offence, the greater is the public interests in deportation.

48. There can be no doubt that the offences that occasioned the sentence of
    life imprisonment, with a minimum of ten years, were of extremely great
    seriousness.  That is manifest  from  the  sentencing  remarks  of  the
    judge.  The public interest  in  the  deportation  of  this  particular
    foreign criminal is, accordingly, extremely high and the test of  "very
    compelling circumstances" falls to be determined on that basis.



(a) Public deterrence

49. One particular aspect of  the  public  interests  was  the  subject  of
    submissions by Ms Patyna and Mr Pilgerstorfer.  It concerns the passage
    in the judgment of Lord Wilson in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 in which he agreed with Lord  Kerr's
    dissenting judgment, to the extent that Lord Wilson resiled  from  what
    he had said in OH (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694, that the public interest in  deportation  includes
    the "expression of societal revulsion".

50. Importantly, Hesham Ali contains no analysis of Part  5A  of  the  2002
    Act, since the cases with which the Supreme Court were  concerned  pre-
    dated the introduction of that Part.  We consider that, by  making  the
    seriousness of the offence the touchstone for determining the  strength
    of the public interest in deportation, Parliament, in enacting  section
    117C(2), must have intended courts and tribunals to have regard to more
    than the mere question of whether the particular foreign  criminal,  if
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, would pose a  risk  to  United
    Kingdom society.

51. In any event, it is clear from paragraphs 69 and 70 of the judgments in
    Hesham Ali that Lord Wilson did not intend to resile from the view that
    the general deterrent effect upon foreign  citizens  "of  understanding
    that a serious offence  will  normally  precipitate  their  deportation
    [might] be a more powerful aid to the  prevention  of  crime  than  the
    removal from the UK of one foreign criminal judged  as  likely  to  re-
    offend" (paragraph 69).  As is evident from paragraph 70, in  accepting
    Lord Kerr's criticism of what Lord Wilson had said in OH (Serbia), Lord
    Wilson was doing no more than accepting that his categorisation of  the
    matter "as an expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes"  was
    "on reflection, too emotive a concept  to  figure  in  this  analysis".
    There is also the point that the majority of the Justices who took part
    in Hesham Ali had nothing to say on these issues.

52. In conclusion, therefore, there is nothing in Hesham Ali that  requires
    a court or tribunal to eschew the principle of general  deterrence,  as
    an element of the public interest, in determining a deportation  appeal
    by reference to section 117C(6).



(b) Striking the balance

53. We therefore turn to the factors weighing on the  appellant's  side  of
    the balance, in order to determine whether he can satisfy the  test  in
    section 117C(6).  As did the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  we  give  very
    significant weight to the fact that the appellant came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a young child.  He has plainly been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for most of his life.  We therefore take into account the principles in
    Maslov v Austria (1638/03) [2009] INLR 47.

54. Although, as we have said,  we  find  that  Exception  1  applies,  the
    appellant has become socially and culturally integrated in  the  United
    Kingdom only to a somewhat modest degree.  A good deal of his  time  in
    this country has been spent in prison.  A  significant  period  of  his
    adolescence and young adulthood was spent in the company of  those  who
    cannot be said, in any rational sense,  to  be  representative  of  the
    society and culture of the United Kingdom, as conceived  by  Parliament
    in enacting section 117C(4)(b).

55. Although  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration in the Philippines, if he were returned there, the  overall
    picture is not such as to amount to very compelling circumstances, over
    and above these obstacles.  No challenge has been made  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion that the appellant would  be  able  to
    obtain medical assistance in the Philippines.  Whilst he would lack the
    important support mechanisms mentioned by the  judge,  the  appellant's
    own evidence asserts that he has  already  achieved  insight,  together
    with a religious conversion.  Although the appellant's achievements  in
    this regard would be put  under  strain  by  the  disruption  of  being
    removed to the Philippines, we do not consider the evidence shows  that
    they would be expunged.

56. We also take account of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  obtained
    qualifications which would be likely to stand him in good or  at  least
    reasonable stead, following deportation.

57. Ms Patyna accepted that,  although  rehabilitation,  following  serious
    criminal offences, will not ordinarily count as  a  significant  factor
    weighing in favour of an appellant  facing  deportation  as  a  foreign
    criminal, this was, nevertheless,  such  a  case.   We  have  carefully
    considered this aspect. We note, in particular, the insight achieved by
    the appellant as a result of the help he received whilst in HMP Grendon
    Underwood. We also  have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    rehabilitation  falls  to  be  seen  in  the  light  of  his  intensely
    problematic early years.

58. The stark fact remains, however, that the appellant  was  sentenced  to
    life imprisonment, with a minimum term of 10 years, for crimes of quite
    exceptional seriousness. The public  interest  in  deportation  demands
    very great weight.

59. Viewed in this light, the appellant's rehabilitation, whilst of  course
    commendable (particularly having regard to his early  life),  does  not
    deserve the attribution of the amount of weight that  is  necessary  to
    take his case to the point of success, weighed in the round with  other
    features in his  favour,  including  those  mentioned  in  relation  to
    Exception 1.

60. We have taken account of the interests of family members, including the
    appellant's mother, weighing them in round with  the  matters  we  have
    described.  There  is  no  indication  that  the  mother  requires  the
    appellant's physical presence in order to  be  able  satisfactorily  to
    live her own life.  Indeed, she plainly  has  to  go  for  considerable
    periods of time without being able to see  the  appellant  on  anything
    approaching a frequent basis.

61. In conclusion, we find that,  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions, there are no very compelling circumstances which  outweigh
    the extremely strong public interest in deportation of  the  appellant.
    That interest includes deterrence and (having regard to the seriousness
    of the offences leading to the life  sentence)  the  need  to  maintain
    public confidence in the system of immigration control.

62. All members of the panel have contributed to its decision and reasons.

Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error of law.  We set that decision aside and re-make the decision  in
the appeal by dismissing it.

                           Signed                     Dated: 4 March 2019




                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           Immigration   and
    Asylum Chamber


Anonymity

We have made an  order  under  r.14(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the  original
appellant. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him.   This  order  applies  to  both  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent and all other persons. Failure to comply with  this  order  could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.
