
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL | |
|                                                                  |
|AC (Witness with refugee status -  |                             |
|Effect)                            |                             |
|Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00124         |                             |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  5 August 2005               |18TH August 2005                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Senior Immigration Judge)                        |
|Mr C P Mather (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

This decision deals with the proper approach to the evidence of  a  witness
who, it is alleged on similar facts to those put forward by the  appellant,
has been granted refugee status.  The fact  of  the  grant  is  capable  of
carrying weight but the grant is not to  be  equated  with  an  Immigration
Judge's determination following a hearing.  An Immigration Judge's decision
is likely to be fully reasoned and made after the evidence in  support  has
been tested.  In contrast a grant of status by the Secretary  of  State  is
often an administrative decision based only on the papers.

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M O'Connor, Counsel  instructed  by  Hersi  &  Co
                  Solicitors
For the respondent:     Ms S Leatherland, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Somalia.   She  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom in June 2004 from a refugee camp in Kenya.  On 9 August  2004
      the respondent issued a notice indicating  that,  having  refused  to
      grant her asylum, he refused her leave to enter the  United  Kingdom.
      He indicated that he proposed to give directions for her  removal  to
      Somalia.

2.    The appellant appealed  that  decision  and,  on  7  April  2005,  an
      Immigration Judge (Mr J R A  Hanratty)  heard  the  appeal.   In  the
      determination which he signed on  12  April  2005  he  dismissed  her
      appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

3.    The appellant applied for review.  On 11 May 2005 an order  was  made
      that the Immigration Judge's decision be reconsidered.

4.    The issue in the case was whether the appellant is a  member  of  the
      clan which she claimed.  She asserted that she was a member  of  Reer
      Hamar.

5.    The Immigration Judge found that the appellant  was  not  a  credible
      witness and did not accept that she was a member of that clan.

6.    There are six grounds of appeal and we started by asking Mr  O'Connor
      to elaborate on Ground 6.  The language used was  not  clear  and  we
      wished to ensure that we fully understood  the  import  of  what  was
      being asserted.  He told us that he was no longer relying  on  Ground
      6.

7.    He went on to say that he was only proposing to rely on Ground 1  and
      part of  Ground  2.   The  majority  of  the  hearing  was  spent  in
      considering Ground 1.

8.    The appellant had called as a witness her aunt, Deeqa Mohammed.   She
      was granted refugee status in the UK following  her  application  and
      interview.   It has been established, through DNA testing,  that  she
      is the appellant's aunt as claimed.  Although he did not refer to  it
      expressly in the determination, the Adjudicator  had  in  the  papers
      before him Deeqa Mohammed's SEF statement and interview.  Mr O'Connor
      argued that it must be assumed they are  the  bases  upon  which  her
      status was granted.

9.    The Immigration  Judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the  status  of  the
      appellant's aunt, because he says so. But he went on  to  find  that,
      not only did he disbelieve the appellant, but he did not accept  that
      her aunt was  a  member  of  the  clan  either.   He  said,  somewhat
      robustly, at paragraph 46,

           "The fact that this aunt managed by  deception  to  mislead  the
           Home Office on an earlier occasion does not mean that I will  be
           similarly misled".

10.   Mr O'Connor's  main  complaint  was  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not
      approach the aunt's status, and its significance, appropriately.   He
      argued that compelling evidence was needed to go behind the grant  of
      refugee status to the aunt.   He  did  this  by  referring  to  three
      authorities.  The first was Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702. This  well
      known  authority  provides  that,  in  a  hearing  before  a   second
      Adjudicator, the findings of the first Adjudicator relating  to  that
      same appellant should be the starting  point  for  the  fact  finding
      process.  It went on to give guidance as to when it is appropriate to
      depart from the first  Adjudicator's  findings.   This  guidance,  at
      paragraph 39, is well known and we shall not repeat it here.

11.   He then went on to consider TK (Consideration of Prior  Determination
      - Directions) Georgia [2004] UKIAT 00149 which was a  decision  where
      the situation was slightly different.  In that case an appellant  had
      previously given evidence in her husband's case and been disbelieved.
        When it came to her own appeal the  Tribunal  considered  that  the
      Adjudicator's findings about her evidence in her husband's case  were
      appropriate to be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.   The
      Tribunal said, at paragraph 19:-

           "... Unless some very good reason was advanced to the  contrary,
           for example, compelling new evidence to show that  X's  evidence
           (which originally had been disbelieved) was mistakenly appraised
           by the original Adjudicator, a future  Adjudicator  is,  in  the
           Tribunal's view, not merely entitled to read  the  Determination
           in X's case but also to treat it  as  determinative  as  to  X's
           account."


      That is the source of the assertion by Mr O'Connor that  there  needs
      to be compelling evidence before the Immigration Judge in the instant
      appeal  should  have  rejected  the   aunt's   (and   therefore   the
      appellant's) clan membership.  He argued that there had been no  such
      compelling evidence.


12.   The third authority was SS(ILR, Article 8, return) Sri  Lanka  [2004]
      UKIAT00126.  We found this to be of less  assistance.   The  question
      was whether, when somebody  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
      remain as a refugee some years earlier, it could  properly  be  found
      that it was safe for him to  return  when  an  Article  8  claim  (by
      someone else) came to be considered at a later date.  The  thrust  of
      the decision was  that  the  earlier  decision  was  not  necessarily
      determinative but there would need to be a proper basis for  deciding
      that circumstances had  changed  significantly  since  the  grant  of
      indefinite leave to remain.  That did not seem to us to be on point.

13.   In this appeal, the Immigration Judge has not expressly set  out  his
      approach to the  fact  of  the  appellant's  aunt's  refugee  status.
      However, he clearly  had  it  in  mind.   At  the  end  of  his  long
      consideration of the credibility of both the appellant, and her aunt,
      he found that the  aunt  was  a  singularly  untruthful  and  evasive
      witness.  He made it clear that he disbelieved her and,  as  we  have
      said, felt that she had misled the respondent.

14.   A decision by the respondent to  grant  refugee  status  is  a  quite
      different decision from one  taken  by  an  Adjudicator  or,  now  an
      Immigration Judge.   The decision by an Adjudicator,  or  Immigration
      Judge, is a reasoned judicial decision reached after hearing evidence
      during which, it is to be hoped,  witnesses  will  have  been  cross-
      examined  and  there  will   have   been   a   thorough   adversarial
      investigation of the evidence.  A decision by the  respondent  is  an
      administrative one, which is  unreasoned.    We  accept  that  it  is
      likely that in this  case  the  aunt's  refugee  status  was  granted
      because of clan membership, but we cannot be certain.  It is,   to  a
      large extent surmise.   We  do  not  therefore  accept  that  such  a
      decision is to be treated with  the  same  deference  as  a  reasoned
      decision following a contested hearing.   Of course such a grant must
      be taken into account as part of the overall  evidence.   It  is  not
      something which can be ignored, and it has not been ignored  in  this
      appeal.  Our view is, to an extent, fortified by the  fact  that  the
      appellant's aunt has a sister in the UK.   That  sister  was  refused
      refugee status and has not appealed.   We have no way of knowing  why
      that should be.  It is not unreasonable to assume that she is of  the
      same sub-clan as the appellant's aunt (whatever  that  may  be).   We
      have  seen  no  documentation   about   the   unsuccessful   sister's
      application.  We see no reason why an Immigration Judge must be taken
      to accept the facts of a  situation  which  is  advantageous  to  the
      appellant but not when they are disadvantageous.

15.   The Immigration  Judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the  status  of  the
      appellant's aunt, he heard evidence from both her and  the  appellant
      herself. He has carried out a long detailed consideration of all that
      evidence and made no error of law.  The decision was  on  the  facts.
      His findings cannot be said to be perverse and nor can he be said  to
      have omitted  to  consider  any  relevant  evidence.   He  has  given
      adequate reasons for his findings.

16    There were two other relatively  minor  arguments  from  Mr  O'Connor
      concerning  the  determination.    These  both  relate  to  the  fact
      finding.  Neither finding can be said to be  perverse  or  irrational
      and do not disclose any error of law.  The first is  a  criticism  of
      the Adjudicator for noting  discrepancies  as  to  the  date  of  the
      appellant's father's death, said to be in either 1993  or  1994;  and
      other discrepancies as to when she left Somalia, either  in  1991  or
      1993.   The basis of the criticism is that  the  appellant  was  only
      born in 1985 and would therefore have  been  very  young  when  these
      events took place.  It was wrong, he argued,  to  criticise  her  for
      being discrepant.  Those issues clearly lie within the realms of fact
      finding and are only two of many issues  raised  by  the  Immigration
      Judge as casting doubt on the appellant's credibility.

17.   The second issue is found in Ground 2, at paragraphs 7(b)  and  again
      in paragraph 4 of  the  grounds.   Those  paragraphs  relate  to  the
      Immigration Judge's observation  that  the  appellant  had  said  (as
      indeed she had, in her SEF) that her child had gone to Ethiopia  from
      Kenya whereas it was revealed by the appellant's aunt at the  hearing
      that the child is in England. The Immigration Judge  was  told  after
      the hearing (although he did not approve  of  the  method)  that  the
      child is now in the process of applying for asylum herself.  He  used
      the fact that he had been misled,  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  this
      child, as another reason for doubting  the  appellant's  credibility.
      We find this was open to him.  It is a matter which relates  entirely
      to fact finding and there is no error of law in his having doing so.

18.   It follows from the above that  we  find  no  error  of  law  in  the
      Immigration Judge's determination. As the  Asylum  Tribunal  made  no
      error of law the original determination of the appeal shall stand.

Approved for electronic distribution.
                                                                  C P Mather
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge

