




R (on the application of Zia and Hossan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department (Strike out - Reinstatement refused - Appeal) [2017]  UKUT  00123
(IAC)





                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







     The Queen on the application of Saqib Zia and Mohammad Ahmad Hossan

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all papers lodged and having heard the submissions of  Mrs
T Choudry, Advocate, of A O Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant  Mohammad
Hossan,  the  other  Applicant  being  unrepresented,  together   with   the
submissions of Mr C Thomann  (of  Counsel),  instructed  by  the  Government
Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field  House,
London on 23 November 2016.


   i) A decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing to  exercise  its  power  to
      reinstate a judicial review claim which has been struck out may be the
      subject of an application for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal.


  ii) Such a decision, given its nature  and  consequences,  is  not  to  be
      equated with a mere case management decision.


 iii) Every decision upon an application to reinstate must  give  effect  to
      the overriding objective.


  iv) Rule 8 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  provides
      the only mechanism for challenging a strike out order.   Rule  43  has
      no application in this context.


McCloskey P



History of Proceedings

 1) These two cases were conjoined for the purpose of providing guidance on
    practice  and  procedure.   The  main  issue  raised  is   whether   an
    application may be made to the Upper Tribunal for permission to  appeal
    to the Court of  Appeal  against  an  order  refusing  to  reinstate  a
    judicial review claim which has been struck out.

    The Zia Case

 2) In this case the sequence is the following:

    (a)    The application for permission to apply for judicial review  was
         lodged on 25 November 2014.

    (b)    The Respondent's acknowledgement of service and summary  grounds
         of defence were lodged on 09 January 2015.

    (c)    On 14 August 2015 certain case management directions were issued
         by the Tribunal.  These required, inter alia, that any  application
         to amend the Applicant's  judicial  review  grounds  must  be  made
         within seven days, viz. by 14 August 2015.

    (d)    No such application having been made,  on  22  August  2015  the
         judicial review application was automatically struck out.

    (e)    On 08 September 2015, the Applicant's representatives lodged  an
         application to amend the judicial review grounds.

    (f)    On 04 April 2016 notice of change of solicitor, on behalf of the
         Applicant, was lodged.

    (g)    By  order  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  29  June  2016,  the
         application to amend  the  grounds  and  reinstate  the  claim  was
         refused.

    (h)    On 05  July  2016  the  Applicant's  representatives  lodged  an
         application for "oral consideration of application  for  permission
         to apply for judicial review after refusal on  papers  or  decision
         not to admit".

    (i)    On 16 September 2016, the Applicants' representatives  lodged  a
         further application in the following terms:

           "To reinstate the Applicants' application for permission to seek
           judicial review on the  grounds  that  the  Applicant's  out  of
           country right of appeal is unlawful or inadequate ....

           To reinstate the proceedings for the reasons  mentioned  in  the
         amended grounds ...

           To reinstate the application and list it for an oral hearing"




 3) I am now seized of the two last mentioned  applications.  In  substance
    and reality, it is the  second  of  these  applications  which  is  the
    operative one, given  the  misconception  evident  in  its  predecessor
    application of 05 July 2016: permission to apply  for  judicial  review
    had not been refused on the papers, nor had there been any decision not
    to admit the application.  In  the  events  which  have  occurred,  the
    merits of the judicial review permission application have not yet  been
    determined.



The Upper Tribunal's Directions of 14 August 2015

 4) This is a soi-disant "ETS/TOEIC" case.  It is one of a large number  in
    which  the  Secretary  of  State  has  taken  action  against  students
    suspected  of  having  procured  their  English  language   proficiency
    qualifications by cheating.  During  a  period  of  some  three  years'
    litigation  there  have  been  periodic  landmark  decisions  of   this
    Tribunal, the Administrative  Court  and  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
    processing and listing of cases of this kind have  been  influenced  by
    developments in the ever expanding case law.

 5) This is one of a substantial number of Upper Tribunal  cases  in  which
    the same Notice of Directions was issued, in this  case  on  14  August
    2015.  The Notice was in the following terms:

                  "Directions of the Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal


      Your case has been reviewed following the decision  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Sheraz Mehmood & Shahbaz Ali v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744  and
      the following directions are made:

         (1)      If the applicant considers that his claim has merit, he is
             to lodge within 7 days  from  the  date  this  order  is  sent
             amended grounds (with application fee) presenting his claim in
             the light of the authorities binding on the Tribunal;


         (2)      Failure to comply with paragraph (1) will have the  effect
             that this claim will be struck out  automatically  under  Rule
             8(1) (a);


         (3)      Costs reserved.


      Please note that the Tribunal will not consider it discourteous if you
      do not send in  any  reply  to  this  direction,  in  order  to  allow
      paragraph (2) above to take its course."


    It was considered that, in light of  certain  recent  Court  of  Appeal
    decisions, this  Applicant  (and  many  others)  should  be  given  the
    opportunity to apply to amend their  grounds  of  challenge.  This  was
    designed to assist the Upper Tribunal in its task of giving  effect  to
    the then extant jurisprudence  in  determining  whether  permission  to
    apply for judicial review should  be  granted.   As  appears  from  the
    chronology above, at the stage when  this  Applicant's  representatives
    made their belated response with an application to amend the grounds an
    Order striking out the claim had been made.




The Upper Tribunal's Order dated 29 June 2016

 6) In refusing the last mentioned application,  the  Tribunal  stated  its
    order dated 29 June 2016:

         "The Applicant knew of an unless order and failed  to  comply  with
         it.   No  other  justification  is  advanced.   In  any  event  the
         amendment has no merit.  It is not arguable  that  the  Applicant's
         out of country appeal is unlawful or inadequate".

    The order continues:

         "Hence, I refuse the  application  to  reinstate  as  there  is  no
         adequate explanation for the delay.  Had the application  to  amend
         been in time, I would have  refused  it  because  the  grounds  are
         unarguable.  Had I been required to  consider  permission  to  seek
         judicial review, I would have refused it for like reasons".

    Accordingly, the  order  automatically  striking  out  the  Applicant's
    judicial review claim, which included provision  for  the  Respondent's
    costs of �320, was affirmed.




    The Hossan Case

   7) The sequence of material events is as follows:




   i) The application for permission to apply for judicial review was lodged
      on 04 February 2016.  The Applicant, a  national  of  Bangladesh,  was
      challenging  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  whereby   his
      application for further leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
      compassionate grounds had been refused, on 05 October 2015.




  ii) In contravention of rule 28A (2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008, the  Applicant  failed  to  serve  the  judicial
      review application on the Respondent.



 iii) As a result, on 19 February 2016, the judicial review application  was
      struck out automatically, for non-service by  operation  of  rule  28A
      (2).



  iv) On 07 April 2016, an application to reinstate was lodged.



   v) By order dated 04 May 2016, a Judge of the Upper Tribunal refused this
      application on  the  ground  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      permission application had been served on the  Respondent  and  noting
      that in any event the permission application was both out of time  and
      lacking in merit.



  vi) On 30 August 2016, the Applicant applied for permission to  appeal  to
      the Court of Appeal against the last mentioned order.

Relevant Procedural Rules

 8) The procedural framework applying to this application is found  in  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "Rules").  I  begin
    with the overriding objective, enshrined in Rule 2:

         "Overriding objective and parties' obligation  to  co-operate  with
         the Upper Tribunal


         2.1-(1) The overriding objective of these Rules is  to  enable  the
              Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


         (2)       Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-


              (a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
              the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the
              anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;


              (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
         the proceedings;


              (c) ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
              able to participate fully in the proceedings;


              (d)  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         effectively; and


              (e)  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with   proper
              consideration of the issues.


         (3)     The  Upper  Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the
              overriding objective when it-


              (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or


              (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.


         (4)       Parties must-


              (a)  help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding
         objective; and


              (b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."



 9) Rule 8, which is concerned with the process of  automatic  strike  out,
    provides:

          "Striking out a party's case

         8.(1A) Except for paragraph (2) this rule  does  not  apply  to  an
              asylum case or an immigration case.

          (1)    The proceedings, or the  appropriate  part  of  them,  will
              automatically be struck out -

              (a)  if the appellant or applicant has failed to comply  with
              a direction that stated that  failure  by  the  appellant  or
              applicant to comply with the  direction  would  lead  to  the
              striking out of the proceedings or  part of them; or

              (b) in immigration judicial review proceedings,  when  a  fee
              has not been paid, as required, in respect of an  application
              under rule 30(4) or upon the grant of permission.

          (2)    The Upper Tribunal must strike out the whole or a  part  of
              the proceedings if the Upper Tribunal-

              (a)      does  not  have  jurisdiction  in  relation  to  the
                   proceedings or that part of them; and

              (b)      does not exercise its power  under  rule  5(3)(k)(i)
                   (transfer to another court or tribunal)  in  relation  to
                   the proceedings or that part of them.

          (3)    The Upper Tribunal may strike out the whole or  a  part  of
              the proceedings if-

              (a)      the appellant or applicant has failed to comply with
                   a direction which stated that failure by the appellant or
                   applicant to comply with the direction could lead to  the
                   striking out of the proceedings or part of them;

              (b)      the appellant or applicant has failed to  co-operate
                   with the Upper Tribunal to such an extent that the  Upper
                   Tribunal cannot deal  with  the  proceedings  fairly  and
                   justly; or

              (c)      in proceedings which are  not  an  appeal  from  the
                   decision  of  another   tribunal   or   judicial   review
                   proceedings, the Upper Tribunal  considers  there  is  no
                   reasonable prospect of the appellant's or the applicant's
                   case, or part of it, succeeding.

         (4)      The Upper Tribunal may not strike out the whole or a  part
              of the proceedings under  paragraph  (2)  or  (3)(b)  or  (c)
              without  first  giving  the   appellant   or   applicant   an
              opportunity  to  make  representations  in  relation  to  the
              proposed striking out.

         (5)      If the proceedings have been struck  out  under  paragraph
              (1) or (3)(a), the appellant or applicant may apply  for  the
              proceedings, or part of them, to be reinstated.

         (6)      An application under paragraph (5) must be made in writing
              and received by the Upper Tribunal within 1 month  after  the
              date on which the Upper Tribunal  sent  notification  of  the
              striking out to the appellant or applicant.

         (7)      This rule applies to a respondent or an  interested  party
              as it applies to an appellant or applicant except that-

              (a)      a reference to the striking out of  the  proceedings
                   is to be read as  a  reference  to  the  barring  of  the
                   respondent or an interested  party  from  taking  further
                   part in the proceedings; and

              (b)      a reference to an application for the  reinstatement
                   of proceedings which have been struck out is to  be  read
                   as a reference to an application for the lifting  of  the
                   bar on the  respondent  or  an  interested  party  taking
                   further part in the proceedings.

         (8)      If a respondent or interested party has been  barred  from
             taking further part in proceedings under this  rule  and  that
             bar has not been lifted, the Upper Tribunal need not  consider
             any response or other submission made by  that  respondent  or
             interested party, and  may  summarily  determine  any  or  all
             issues against that respondent or interested party"

         [The underlining is mine]

10) Rule 43 makes provision for setting aside a decision which disposes  of
    proceedings. It states:


         "Setting aside a decision which disposes of proceedings


         43.(1)   The Upper Tribunal may set aside a decision which disposes
              of proceedings, or part of such a decision, and re-make the
              decision or the relevant part of it, if-


                a)     the Upper Tribunal considers that it is in the
                   interests of justice to do so; and


                b)     one or more of the conditions in paragraph (2) are
                   satisfied.


             (2) The conditions are-


                a) a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to,
                   or was not received at an appropriate time by, a party or
                   a party's representative;


                b) a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to
                   the Upper Tribunal at  an appropriate time;


                c) a party, or a party's representative, was not present at
                   a hearing related to the proceedings; or


                d) there has been some other procedural irregularity in the
                   proceedings.
            [...]
            (3)  A party applying for a decision, or part of a decision, to
                 be set aside  under  paragraph  (1)  must  make  a  written
                 application to the Upper Tribunal so that it is received no
                 later than 1 month  after  the  date  on  which  the  Upper
                 Tribunal sent notice of the decision to the party."



  11) At this juncture it is necessary  to  consider  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      powers of review. These derive  from  Section  10  of  the  Tribunals,
      Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act").  This provides:

         "10 Review of decision of Upper Tribunal


         (1)      The Upper Tribunal may review a decision made by it  on  a
             matter in a case, other than a decision that  is  an  excluded
             decision for the purposes of section 13(1) (but see subsection
             (7)).

         (2)       The  Upper  Tribunal's  power  under  subsection  (1)  in
             relation to a decision is exercisable-


             (a)  of its own initiative, or


             (b)       on application by a person who for the  purposes  of
                  section 13(2) has a right of  appeal  in  respect  of  the
                  decision.

         (3)      Tribunal Procedure Rules may-


             (a) provide that the Upper Tribunal may not  under  subsection
                  (1)  review  (whether  of  its  own   initiative   or   on
                  application under  subsection  (2)(b))  a  decision  of  a
                  description specified for the purposes of  this  paragraph
                  in Tribunal Procedure Rules;


             (b) provide that the Upper Tribunal's power  under  subsection
                  (1) to review a decision of a  description  specified  for
                  the purposes of this paragraph in Tribunal Procedure Rules
                  is exercisable only of the tribunal's own initiative;


             (c) provide that an application under subsection  (2)(b)  that
                  is of a description specified for  the  purposes  of  this
                  paragraph in Tribunal Procedure Rules may be made only  on
                  grounds specified for the purposes of  this  paragraph  in
                  Tribunal Procedure Rules;


             (d) provide, in  relation  to  a  decision  of  a  description
                  specified for the purposes of this paragraph  in  Tribunal
                  Procedure Rules, that the  Upper  Tribunal's  power  under
                  subsection  (1)  to  review  the  decision  of   its   own
                  initiative is exercisable only on  grounds  specified  for
                  the purposes  of  this  paragraph  in  Tribunal  Procedure
                  Rules.

         (4)        Where  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  under  subsection  (1)
             reviewed a decision, the Upper Tribunal may in  the  light  of
             the review do any of the following-


             (a)  correct accidental errors in the decision or in a  record
                  of the decision;
             (b)       amend reasons given for the decision;
             (c)       set the decision aside.

         (5)       Where under subsection (4)(c) the Upper Tribunal  sets  a
             decision aside, the Upper Tribunal must re-decide  the  matter
             concerned.


         (6)       Where the Upper Tribunal is acting under subsection  (5),
             it may make such findings of fact as it considers appropriate.


         (7)       This section has effect as if a decision under subsection
             (4)(c) to set aside an earlier decision were not  an  excluded
             decision for the purposes of  section  13(1),  but  the  Upper
             Tribunal's  only  power  in  the  light  of  a  review   under
             subsection (1) of a decision under subsection  (4)(c)  is  the
             power under subsection (4)(a).


         (8)       A decision of the Upper  Tribunal  may  not  be  reviewed
             under subsection (1)  more  than  once,  and  once  the  Upper
             Tribunal has decided that an earlier decision  should  not  be
             reviewed under subsection (1) it may not then decide to review
             that earlier decision under that subsection.


         (9)      Where under this section a decision is set aside  and  the
             matter concerned is then re-decided, the  decision  set  aside
             and the decision made in re-deciding the matter  are  for  the
             purposes of  subsection  (8)  to  be  taken  to  be  different
             decisions."







12) Section 10(3) of the 2007 Act can be linked to Rule 46, which provides:

         "46.(1)  The Upper Tribunal  may  only  undertake  a  review  of  a
                 decision-


             (a) pursuant to rule  45(1)  (review  on  an  application  for
                 permission to appeal); or
             (b) pursuant to rule 47 (reviews of decisions  in  proceedings
                 under the Forfeiture Act 1982).


         (2)      The Upper Tribunal must notify the parties in  writing  of
                 the outcome of any review and of any rights  of  review  or
                 appeal in relation to the outcome.


         (3)      If the Upper  Tribunal  decides  to  take  any  action  in
                 relation to a decision following  a  review  without  first
                 giving every party an opportunity to make  representations,
                 the notice under paragraph (2) must state  that  any  party
                 that did not have an opportunity  to  make  representations
                 may apply for such action to  be  set  aside  and  for  the
                 decision to be reviewed again."




13) Appeals are governed by section 13 of the 2007 Act, which provides:

         "(1)     For the purposes of subsection (2),  the  reference  to  a
             right of appeal is to  a  right  to  appeal  to  the  relevant
             appellate court on any point of law arising  from  a  decision
             made by the Upper Tribunal other than an excluded decision.


         (2)      Any party to a case has a  right  of  appeal,  subject  to
             subsection (14).


         (3)      That right may be exercised only with permission  (or,  in
             Northern Ireland, leave).


         (4)      Permission (or leave) may be given by-


             (a)  the Upper Tribunal, or
             (b) the relevant appellate court,
             on an application by the party.

         (5)      An application may be made under  subsection  (4)  to  the
             relevant appellate court only if  permission  (or  leave)  has
             been refused by the Upper Tribunal.

         [...]


         (7)       An  application  falls  within  this  subsection  if  the
             application is for permission (or leave) to  appeal  from  any
             decision of the Upper Tribunal on an appeal under section 11.


         (8)      For the purposes of subsection (1), an "excluded decision"
             is-


         [...]


             (c)  any decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  on  an  application
                  under section  11(4)(b)  (application  for  permission  or
                  leave to appeal),


             (d) a decision of the Upper Tribunal under section 10-
                  (i)   to review, or not to review, an earlier decision  of
                      the tribunal,
                  (ii)  to take no action, or not  to  take  any  particular
                      action, in the  light  of  a  review  of  an  earlier
                      decision of the tribunal, or
                  (iii)       to  set  aside  an  earlier  decision  of  the
                      tribunal,


             (e) a decision of the Upper Tribunal that is set  aside  under
                  section  10  (including  a  decision   set   aside   after
                  proceedings on an appeal  under  this  section  have  been
                  begun), or


             (f)       any decision of the Upper  Tribunal  that  is  of  a
                  description  specified  in  an  order  made  by  the  Lord
                  Chancellor.


           [...]

         (11)     Before the Upper Tribunal decides an application  made  to
             it under subsection (4), the Upper Tribunal must  specify  the
             court that is to be the relevant appellate court  as  respects
             the proposed appeal.


         (12)      The court  to  be  specified  under  subsection  (11)  in
             relation to a proposed appeal is whichever  of  the  following
             courts  appears  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be   the   most
             appropriate-


             (a)       the Court of Appeal in England and Wales;
             (b)       the Court of Session;
             (c)       the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland.

         (13)      In this section except  subsection  (11),  "the  relevant
             appellate court", as  respects  an  appeal,  means  the  court
             specified as respects that appeal by the Upper Tribunal  under
             subsection (11).


         (14)      The Lord Chancellor may by order  make  provision  for  a
             person to be treated as being, or to be treated as not  being,
             a party to a case for the purposes of subsection (2).

         (15)     Rules of court may make provision as to  the  time  within
             which an application under  subsection  (4)  to  the  relevant
             appellate court must be made."





14) Applications for permission to appeal are regulated by  Rule  45.  This
    provides:

         "45 (1)  On receiving an application for permission to  appeal  the
             Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance with rule
             46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-


              a)  when making the decision the Upper Tribunal  overlooked  a
                 legislative provision or binding authority which could have
                 had a material effect on the decision; or


              b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court  has  made  a
                 decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and  which,
                 had it been made  before  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision,
                 could have had a material effect on the decision.


         (2)      If the Upper Tribunal decides not to review the  decision,
             or reviews the decision and  decides  to  take  no  action  in
             relation to the decision or part of  it,  the  Upper  Tribunal
             must consider whether to give permission to appeal in relation
             to the decision or that part of it.


         (3)      The Upper Tribunal must provide a record of  its  decision
             to the parties as soon as practicable.


         (4)      If the Upper Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it must
             provide with the record of its decision-


            (a)  a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and


            (b)  notification of the right to make an  application  to  the
                 relevant appellate court for permission to appeal  and  the
                 time  within  which,  and  the  method   by   which,   such
                 application must be made.


         (5)      The Upper  Tribunal  may  give  permission  to  appeal  on
             limited  grounds,  but  must  comply  with  paragraph  (4)  in
             relation to any grounds on which it has refused permission."






  15) By virtue of Article 3 of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009,
      "excluded decision" is the subject of an  extensive  definition  which
      has 13 components.  The first  twelve  of  these  are  plainly  of  no
      application  to  the  present  context.   I  draw  attention  to   the
      thirteenth- Article 3(m) - which is in these terms:


           "Any procedural,  ancillary  or  preliminary  decision  made  in
           relation  to  an  appeal  against  a  decision   under   .......
           [specified enactments]."




      This is clearly not apt to embrace a  decision  finally  disposing  of
      proceedings under the Upper Tribunal's judicial review jurisdiction.



The Decided Cases
16) Some guidance can be distilled from the decided cases.  In Patel &  Ors
    v The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev  1)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1175, the following guidance was given as regards the scope of  the
    term "review" in section 10:


   i) The plain and ordinary meaning  of  "review"  embraces  any  revision,
      variation or reversal of an extant "decision".


  ii) "Review" considered in its full section 10 context,  qualifies  for  a
      broad construction.


 iii) By virtue of section 10(1) the power of review does not extend  to  an
      "excluded decision".


  iv) Consistent with (ii), the exercise of the power to review entitles the
      Upper Tribunal to correct accidental errors in its decision, to  alter
      the reasons given for a decision or to set a decision aside, in  which
      case the original decision must be remade.

      (per Aikens LJ at [48]).


  17) The next question to be considered is that of relief  from  sanctions.
      There is clear authority on this topic.  In  Denton  v  TH  White  Ltd
      [2014] 1 WLR 3926 the following  guidance  was  given  in  respect  of
      relief from sanctions applications  made  under  the  Civil  Procedure
      Rules (at [24]):


         "A judge should address an application for relief from sanctions in
         three stages. The  first  stage  is  to  identify  and  assess  the
         seriousness and significance of the 'failure  to  comply  with  any
         rule, practice direction or court order' which engages rule 3.9(1).
         If the breach is neither serious  nor  significant,  the  court  is
         unlikely to need to spend much time on the second and third stages.




         The second stage is to consider why the default occurred.


         The third stage is to evaluate 'all the circumstances of the  case,
         so as to enable the court  to  deal  justly  with  the  application
         including [factors (a) and (b)]"


18) The Upper Tribunal had occasion to consider the decision  in  Denton  v
    White in R (SN) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (striking
    out - principles) IJR  [2015] UKUT 227 (IAC).  Having  considered  this
    decision, together with the other decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Mitchell v News Group Newspapers [2013] EWCA Civ 1537 and R  (Hysaj)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1633  I
    stated, at [18]:


         "(i)     The court can properly take into account the importance of
         the issues to the public  at  large,  where  appropriate.   Subject
         thereto, public law  cases  are  no  different  in  principle  from
         private law cases.


         (ii)     Public authorities are to be treated in the same manner as
         private litigants.


         (iii)    "....  In the case of a solicitor, having  too  much  work
         will rarely be a good reason for failing to comply with the rules."


         (Reiterating what was said in Mitchell)


         (iv)     ".... There are certain kinds of public  law  proceedings,
         for example, appeals concerning claims for asylum and  humanitarian
         protection, in which particular care needs to be  taken  to  ensure
         that appeals are not frustrated by a  failure  on  the  part  of  a
         party's legal representatives to comply with time limits."


         [Emphasis added.]


      v)  "... it cannot be emphasised too strongly that  the  principle  of
         reasonable co-operation ............... is of general application".




     vi) "....   In  the  modern  world  the  inability  to  pay  for  legal
         representation cannot be regarded as providing a  good  reason  for
         delay."


    vii) The fact that a party is unrepresented is of no significance at the
         first stage  of  the  enquiry  when  the  court  is  assessing  the
         seriousness and significance of the  failure  to  comply  with  the
         rules.  The more important question is whether this  amounts  to  a
         good reason for the failure which has occurred.  The  court  should
         not accept that the mere factor of being unrepresented  provides  a
         good reason for not adhering to the rules:  "....   If  proceedings
         are not to become  a  free  for  all,  the  court  must  insist  on
         litigants of all kinds following the rules."


   viii) "In most cases the merits of the appeal will have little to do with
         whether it is appropriate to grant an extension of time.   Only  in
         those cases where the court can see without much investigation that
         the grounds of appeal are either very strong or very weak will  the
         merits have a significant part to play when it comes  to  balancing
         the various factors that have to be considered at  stage  three  of
         the process." In thus holding, the court  noted  the  statement  of
         Lord Neuberger in HRH Prince Abdulaziz  v  Apex  Global  Management
         [2014] UKSC 64, at [29] and [30]:


                 "In my view, the strength of a party's case on the ultimate
                 merits of the proceedings is generally irrelevant  when  it
                 comes to case management issues of the sort which were  the
                 subject matter of the decisions of (successive  High  Court
                 judges).. The one possible exception could be where a party
                 has a case whose strength  would  entitle  him  to  summary
                 judgment ....


                 It would be thoroughly undesirable if every time the  court
                 was considering the imposition or enforcement of a sanction
                 it could be  faced  with  the  exercise  of  assessing  the
                 strength of the parties' respective cases.  It  would  lead
                 to such applications costing much more and taking  up  much
                 more court time than they already do.   It  would  thus  be
                 inherently undesirable and contrary to the aim of the Woolf
                 and Jackson reforms."


         Lord Neuberger added that the merits of a party's claim or  defence
         are relevant, in this context, only when they are  so  strong  that
         there is no real answer to them. He continued, at [39]:


                 "....  When it  comes  to  case  management  decisions  and
                 application of the CPR, just as  the  Court  of  Appeal  is
                 generally  reluctant  to  interfere  with   trial   judge's
                 decisions so should the Supreme  Court  be  very  diffident
                 about interfering with guidance given  or  principles  laid
                 down by the Court of Appeal."


         Finally, at [40], Lord Neuberger emphasised  that  nothing  he  had
         written was intended to impinge on the decisions  in  Mitchell  and
         Denton."




19) I can think of no good reason why the above code of  principles  should
    not apply to the present context. Some further guidance is provided  in
    SN, at [19]:


         "I consider that the principles rehearsed in  the  authorities  set
         out above apply fully to  the  exercise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         discretionary  power  to  strike  out  the  whole  or  a  part   of
         proceedings under rule 8(3) of the 2008 Rules.   I  would  add  the
         following.  The exercise of this power will also, in every case, be
         governed by the overriding objective enshrined in rule 2.  It will,
         further, be informed by rule 2(4) which provides:

                 "Parties must -


               a)  help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the   overriding
                  objective; and


               b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."


         The Tribunal will also be mindful of the  draconian  nature  of  an
         order  striking  out  an  appeal.   It  spells  the  end   of   the
         proceedings, subject only to an application to reinstate under rule
         8(5).  Self-evidently,   the   gravity   of   the   default   under
         consideration  and  the  consequences  thereof  will  be   relevant
         considerations. Furthermore, the extent to  which  the  proceedings
         have been obstructed or delayed by the  relevant  default  will  be
         taken into account. Prejudice to the other parties will also  be  a
         material factor. The scope for making a wasted  costs  order  under
         rule 10(3) and the question of whether this would be an appropriate
         and adequate sanction will also be weighed.  Repeated defaults will
         almost invariably be considered more serious than a single  act  of
         non-compliance.  Finally, the Tribunal will in every case  consider
         the question of whether its process is being misused."

20) There is more than one species of "unless" order.  The context  is  all
    important.  In every case reference must  be  made  to  the  applicable
    provisions of the procedural rules and the terms in which the order  is
    couched.  In certain contexts an unless order requires a further  order
    for the purpose of taking effect.  In other contexts, an  unless  order
    takes effect without any further order: Marcan Shipping (London) Ltd  v
    Kefalas [2007] EWCA Civ 463 at [34] per Moore-Bick LJ).  This  has  the
    consequence that any successful reinstatement application will have the
    effect of the original order being set aside.



  21) I  accept  the  submission  of  Mr  Thomann  that  there  is  a  clear
      distinction of principle between an application seeking to review  the
      original order and an application directed to seeking relief from that
      sanction. The distinction lies in the consideration  that  the  latter
      species of application does not involve reviewing the justification or
      proportionality of the original unless order  made.  I  emphasize,  in
      this context, that every case will be unavoidably fact sensitive.




  22) Under the regime of the CPR, the power to  make  an  unless  order  is
      provided for  under  CPR  3.5(1).    A  party  dissatisfied  with  the
      decision to make such an order is able to bring a conventional  appeal
      under CPR Part 52 on the basis that the decision to impose the  unless
      order  was  wrong,  or  unjust  because  of   a   serious   procedural
      irregularity (CPR Part 52.11(3)).  Any application of this kind relief
      is governed by CPR Part 3.9.


  23) The jurisprudence under the CPR draws a clear  distinction  between  a
      challenge to the correctness of the initial order and  any  subsequent
      application for relief from sanction (see Marcan  Shipping,  supra  at
      [35]). It is assumed, at the latter stage, that the sanction  embodied
      in the order  was  in  principle  correct  and  proportionate  (Marcan
      Shipping [36] and see Mitchell v News Group Newspapers  Ltd  (Practice
      Note) [2014] 1 WLR 795).


  24) Rule 8 of the Upper Tribunal  Rules  (supra)  similarly  distinguishes
      between the original unless order jurisdiction under Rules 8(1) - 8(3)
      and an application for relief from sanction under Rule  8(5).   As  Mr
      Thomann  submitted,  an  application  to  reinstate  is   conceptually
      distinct from an application  seeking  the  exercise  of  a  power  to
      correct errors contained in rules 43 and  45  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      Rules. I consider that a reinstatement  application  does  not  repose
      within the narrow compass of section 10(4) of the 2007 Act.   It  does
      not seek to correct an accidental error in the decision or in a record
      of the decision, to amend the  reasons  given  or  to  set  aside  the
      original decision to impose the sanction. It is, rather, a horse of  a
      different colour.


    General Conclusions


25) I can identify nothing in the  statutory  matrix  considered  above  to
    warrant  any  conclusion  other  than  that  the  decision  to   refuse
    reinstatement is, in principle, appealable.  The  correctness  of  this
    conclusion was acknowledged by Mr Thomann on behalf of the Secretary of
    State.


26) Mr Thomann was anxious to establish the  proposition  that  any  appeal
    against a reinstatement  refusal  decision  must  be  of  intrinsically
    limited scope.  This raises the question of the threshold for the grant
    of permission to appeal against such  decisions.   In  support  of  his
    argument, Mr Thomann drew attention to the statement of Lewison  LJ  in
    Broughton v Kop Football (Cayman) Ltd  (Permission  to  Appeal)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1743, at [51]:

           "Case management decisions  are  discretionary  decisions.  They
           often involve an attempt to find the least worst solution  where
           parties have diametrically  opposed  interests.  The  discretion
           involved is entrusted to the first instance judge. An  appellate
           court does not  exercise  the  discretion  for  itself.  It  can
           interfere with  the  exercise  of  the  discretion  by  a  first
           instance judge where he has  misdirected  himself  in  law,  has
           failed to take relevant factors into  account,  has  taken  into
           account irrelevant factors or has come to  a  decision  that  is
           plainly wrong in the sense of being outside the  generous  ambit
           where reasonable decision makers may disagree. So  the  question
           is not whether we would have made  the  same  decisions  as  the
           judge. The question is whether the judge's decision was wrong in
           the sense that I have explained."

      For my part, I  would  be  reluctant  to  categorise  a  reinstatement
      refusal decision as a (mere) case management direction or decision. It
      partakes of rather more than simply "managing"  the  proceedings.  Its
      effect is to affirm a previous decision or order  sounding  the  death
      knell for the Applicant's  claim.  However,  having  highlighted  this
      distinction, I would not dissent from the second part of the  passage,
      beginning with the words "It  can  interfere  with  ....".   It  seems
      likely that, in practice, the grant of permission  to  appeal  against
      decisions of this genre will be  rare.   To  this  I  would  add  that
      disapproving decisions of the Court of Appeal will probably  be  rarer
      still.


27) For the avoidance of doubt I would emphasise: rule 8 of the  procedural
    rules provides the only mechanism for challenging a strike  out  order.
    Rule 43 has no application in this context.



Conclusion: The Zia Case

28) Giving effect to the various principles, tests and  criteria  rehearsed
    exhaustively above, the  conclusion  that  this  application  is  quite
    hopeless is readily made.  Applying the Denton template, the default in
    question  was  substantial  (though  not  egregious),  it  was   highly
    significant because it resulted in the  automatic  strike  out  of  the
    Applicant's judicial review application, no good reason or  explanation
    or mitigation has been put forward and there  is  no  redeeming  factor
    (such as the risk of infringing  a  fundamental  human  right)  in  the
    broader framework of the  litigation.  I  refuse  this  application  to
    reinstate accordingly.



Conclusion: The Hossan Case

  29) The decision in this case is not quite as straightforward.  This is so
      on account of the provision of certain new documentary evidence at the
      hearing by Mrs Choudry, who represents this Applicant. I  am  disposed
      to  accept  Mrs  Choudry's  explanation  for  the  lateness  of   this
      development which was that her firm had been instructed  late  in  the
      day.  While I acknowledge the force of Mr  Thomann's  submission  that
      this evidence should  have  been  adduced  through  the  medium  of  a
      suitable witness  statement,  taking  into  account  particularly  the
      Draconian character of a strike out and refusal to reinstate decisions
      I am inclined to  forgive  this  omission  in  the  circumstances.  Mr
      Thomann was correct to advance  his  objection  in  suitably  measured
      terms


  30) I am satisfied, firstly, that the three pieces of documentary evidence
      adduced in  this  admittedly  unsatisfactory  fashion  are  authentic.
      Collectively,  they  establish,  first,  that  the   judicial   review
      proceedings were commenced, accompanied by payment of the  appropriate
      fee, on 04 February 2016. I would add that this chimes with the  Upper
      Tribunal's computer records.  Second, these documents confirm  that  a
      further application, again accompanied by  the  appropriate  fee,  was
      lodged with the Upper Tribunal on 06 April  2016.  Third,  objectively
      and    fairly construed, these documents  suggest  strongly  that  the
      judicial review  application  was  served  on  the  Respondent  on  06
      February 2016.


  31) None of the aforementioned evidence was available when this Tribunal's
      previous orders  and  decisions  were  made.  Having  accepted  it  as
      authentic, I must pose the final question, namely  whether  permission
      to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  against  the  order  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal dated 04 May 2016, refusing to reinstate this judicial review
      application should be granted.  While I take  into account the comment
      in the aforesaid order that the judicial review permission application
      was made out of time and had no arguable merit, I am  bound  to  weigh
      these observations as essentially obiter and less than fully informed,
      given that the Upper Tribunal judge concerned was not directly  seized
      of either of these issues.  Moreover, more fundamentally, the  central
      reason  proffered  by  the  judge  for  refusing   the   reinstatement
      application is now confounded by the new evidence adduced.


  32) Based on the foregoing, I exercise my discretion to  grant  permission
      to appeal to the Court of Appeal.   Bearing  in  mind  the  overriding
      objective, the  Respondent's  representatives  may  well  consider  it
      appropriate not to contest the appeal  and  to  consent  to  an  order
      remitting  this  case  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the  purpose  of
      determining the judicial review permission application, which exercise
      will include an evaluation and  determination  of  the  discrete  time
      issue.








Order

  33) Thus  I order:


   i) The application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
      against the reinstatement refusal decision  in  the  case  of  Zia  is
      properly made, but is refused.


  ii) The application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal in the
      case of Hossan is also properly made and is granted.



Costs


  34) The parties and their representatives were invited  to  provide  brief
      written submissions on the issue of costs.  In the case  of  Zia,  the
      Secretary of State is entitled to  an  order  for  costs  against  the
      Applicant.  In the case of Hossan, the Applicant  has  succeeded.   In
      principle, this engages the general rule that the Applicant's costs be
      paid by  the  Secretary  of  State,  to  be  assessed  in  default  of
      agreement.   However,  having  considered  the   further   submissions
      provided I conclude that having regard to this Applicant's defaults in
      the conduct of these proceedings there should be no order as to  costs
      inter-partes. In short, these proceedings were pre-eminently avoidable
      by the exercise of basic diligence on the part of this  Applicant  and
      his representatives.













       Signed:
                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                    President of the Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


       Dated:     30 January 2017 [revised 07 March 2017]




