
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  00123
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2019                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr M Pilgerstorfer, instructed by the Government
                   Legal Department

For the Respondent:   Mr D Bazini, instructed by D & A Solicitors

   1) In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the  Supreme  Court  of  the  test  of
      "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002, formulated by the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  UKUT  223  (IAC),
      does not mean that the test  includes  the  way  in  which  the  Upper
      Tribunal applied its formulation to the facts of the case before it.

   2) The way in which a court or  tribunal  should  approach  section  117C
      remains as set out in the judgment of Jackson LJ in  NA  (Pakistan)  &
      Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

   3) Section 117C(6)  applies  to  both  categories  of  foreign  criminals
      described by Lord Carnwath in paragraph 20 of  KO  (Nigeria);  namely,
      those who have not been sentenced to imprisonment of 4 years or  more,
      and those who have. Determining  the  seriousness  of  the  particular
      offence will normally be  by  reference  to  the  length  of  sentence
      imposed and what the sentencing judge had to say about seriousness and
      mitigation; but the ultimate decision is for  the  court  or  tribunal
      deciding the deportation case.

   4) Rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material weight in favour of a
      foreign criminal.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


A.  SECTION 117C AFTER KO (NIGERIA)

 1.  In  this  appeal  and  that  of  MS   (s.117C(6):   "very   compelling
    circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC),  which  was  heard
    consecutively, we consider how  section  117C  (Article  8:  Additional
    considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign  criminals)   should   be
    construed, following the judgment of the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)
    & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

 2. For convenience, we shall refer to Mr  RA  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent. The facts of the appellant's case
    are set out, beginning at paragraph 34 below.

 3. Section 117C lies within Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  In brief, section 117A explains when Part 5A applies.
     In deciding whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect
    for private and family life is justified  under  Article  8(2)  of  the
    ECHR,  courts  and  tribunals  must  have  regard  to   the   "general"
    considerations listed in section 117B  and,  in  cases  concerning  the
    deportation of foreign criminals (as defined in section 117D),  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117C.

 4. Section 117B provides that the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.   Amongst  other  things,  it  also
    explains when little weight should be given to  a  private  life  or  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner.

 5.  As  well  as  defining  "foreign  criminal",  section  117D   contains
    definitions of "qualifying child" and "qualifying partner".

 6. Section 117C provides as follows:-

         "117C  Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

 7. In KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath, giving the judgment of the Court, first
    considered  the  effect  of  section  117B(6),  which  identifies   the
    circumstances in which the public interest does not require the removal
    of a person who is not liable to deportation.  Lord Carnwath  had  this
    to say about section 117C:-

         "20. Turning to section 117C the structure is not entirely easy  to
             follow.  It starts with the general rules (1) that deportation
             of foreign criminals is in the public interest, and  (2)  that
             the more serious the offence the greater that interest.  There
             is however no express indication as to how or at what stage of
             the process those  general  rules  are  to  be  given  effect.
             Instead, the remainder of the section  enacts  specific  rules
             for two categories of foreign criminals, defined by  reference
             to whether or not their sentences were of four years or  more,
             and two precisely defined exceptions.  For those sentenced  to
             less than four years, the public interest requires deportation
             unless exception 1 or 2 applies.  For those sentenced to  four
             years or more, deportation is required "unless there are  very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2".

         21.  The difficult question is whether the specific rules allow any
             further room for balancing of the relative seriousness of  the
             offence, beyond the difference  between  the  two  categories.
             The general rule stated in subsection (2) might  lead  one  to
             expect some such provision, but it could equally be read as no
             more than a preamble to the more specific rules.  Exception  1
             seems to leave no room for further balancing.  It is precisely
             defined by reference to three factual issues: lawful residence
             in  the  UK  for  most  of  C's  life,  social  and   cultural
             integration into the UK, and "very significant  obstacles"  to
             integration into the country of proposed deportation.  None of
             these turns on the seriousness of  the  offence;  but,  for  a
             sentence of less than four years, they are enough, if they are
             met, to  remove  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   For
             sentences of four years or more, however, it is not enough  to
             fall within the exception, unless there are in addition  "very
             compelling circumstances".

         22.   Given  that  exception  1  is  self-contained,  it  would  be
             surprising to find exception 2 structured in a different  way.
             On its face it raises a factual issue seen from the  point  of
             view of  the  partner  or  child:  would  the  effect  of  C's
             deportation be  "unduly  harsh"?   Although  the  language  is
             perhaps less precise  than  that  of  exception  1,  there  is
             nothing to suggest that the word "unduly"  is  intended  as  a
             reference back to the issue of relative seriousness introduced
             by subsection (2). Like exception 1,  and  like  the  test  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B, exception 2 appears self-
             contained.

         23.  On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an  element  of  comparison.
             It assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is
             a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
             context.  "Unduly" implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be
             equated with a requirement to show "very compelling  reasons".
             That would be in  effect  to  replicate  the  additional  test
             applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences  of  four
             years or more.

         ...

         27.  Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"  in
             this context was given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J
             President and  UT  Judge  Perkins)  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223
             (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15  April
             2015.  They referred to the "evaluative  assessment"  required
             of the tribunal:

                  "By way of self-direction, we  are  mindful  that  'unduly
                  harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
                  undesirable or  merely  difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a
                  considerably more elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this
                  context, denotes something severe, or  bleak.  It  is  the
                  antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
                  addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                  standard still higher.

             On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal  held
             that the test was satisfied:

                  "Approached  in  this  way,  we  have  no  hesitation   in
                  concluding that it would be unduly harsh for either of the
                  two seven year old British citizen children  concerned  to
                  be  abruptly  uprooted  from  their  United  Kingdom  life
                  setting and  lifestyle  and  exiled  to  this  struggling,
                  impoverished and plague stricken west African  state.   No
                  reasonable or right thinking person  would  consider  this
                  anything less that cruel."

             This view was based simply on the wording of  the  subsection,
             and did not apparently depend on  any  view  of  the  relative
             severity of the particular offence. I do  not  understand  the
             conclusion on the facts of that case to be controversial."

 8. As a result of KO (Nigeria),  the  position  is  that,  in  determining
    whether Exception 2 (in section 117C(5)) applies, a court  or  tribunal
    is not to have regard to the seriousness of the  offence  committed  by
    the person who is liable to  deportation.   Importantly,  however,  the
    expression "unduly harsh" sets a high threshold.

B. THE 'UNDULY HARSH' TEST

 9. In seeking  to  articulate  what  is  meant  by  "unduly  harsh",  Lord
    Carnwath, as we have seen, approved the guidance given by the President
    of the Upper Tribunal  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone).   That  guidance  must,
    accordingly, be followed.

10. Mr Bazini, however, drew attention to  the  second  quotation  from  MK
    (Sierra  Leone)  contained  within  paragraph  27  of  Lord  Carnwath's
    judgment.  He submitted that it  was  not  only  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    interpretation of "unduly harsh" in that case that  received  expressed
    approbation from the Supreme Court; it was also  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    application of that test to the facts of the case before it.

11. Mr Bazini relied  particularly  upon  paragraph  40(v)  of  MK  (Sierra
    Leone):-

         "Section 117C(5): Unduly harsh - the two children


         (v)  We turn to consider the question of  whether  the  Appellant's
             deportation would have an unduly harsh effect on either of the
             two children concerned, namely his biological daughter and his
             step son, both aged seven  years.   Both  children  are  at  a
             critical stage of  their  development.   The  Appellant  is  a
             father figure in the life  of  his  biological  daughter.   We
             readily infer that there is emotional dependency  bilaterally.
             Furthermore, there is clear  financial  dependency  to  a  not
             insubstantial degree.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  other
             father figure in this child's life.  The Appellant's role  has
             evidently been ever present, since her birth.  Children do not
             have the resilience, maturity or fortitude of adults.  We find
             that the abrupt removal of the Appellant from  his  biological
             daughter's life would not merely damage this child.  It would,
             rather, cause a gaping  chasm  in  her  life  to  her  serious
             detriment.  We consider that the  impact  on  the  Appellant's
             step son would be at least as serious.  Having regard  to  the
             evidence available and based  on  findings  already  made,  we
             conclude that the effect of  the  Appellant's  deportation  on
             both children would be unduly harsh.  Accordingly, within  the
             matrix  of  section  117C  of  the  2002  Act,  "Exception  2"
             applies."

12. The Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) had  also  to  examine  the  position
    under the relevant Immigration Rules relating  to  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals.  It is in this part of the Upper Tribunal's decision
    that we find the quotations set out by Lord Carnwath in paragraph 27 of
    his judgment.  It is therefore necessary to set out the entirety of the
    relevant paragraphs:-

         "45. We give effect to the new provisions of the Immigration  Rules
             in the following way:

             (a)  The  starting  point  is  paragraph  398(a),  the  effect
                  whereof is that the deportation of the Appellant from  the
                  United Kingdom is deemed to be  conducive  to  the  public
                  good and in the public interest  because  the  offence  of
                  which he was convicted in 2002  attracted  a  sentence  of
                  imprisonment exceeding four years.


             (b)  The next step is to consider  whether  paragraph  399  or
                  399A applies.  If neither of these provisions applies, the
                  public  interest  in  deportation  "...   will   only   be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A."


             (c)  We consider that paragraph 399(a)(i)  applies  since,  as
                  appears from our findings above, we are satisfied that the
                  Appellant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with two British  citizen  children  who  are
                  aged under 18 years and are in the United Kingdom.


             (d)  In accordance with the remaining provisions of  paragraph
                  399, we must decide two further questions.   First,  would
                  it be unduly harsh for either child to go to live  in  the
                  Appellant's country  of  origin?    Second,  would  it  be
                  unduly harsh for either child  to  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom without the Appellant? In order for the Article  8
                  ECHR  claim  to  succeed,  both   questions   require   an
                  affirmative answer.  The second of these tests  replicates
                  Section  117C(5)  of  the  2002  Act.  The  first  belongs
                  exclusively to the Rules.


             (e)  In giving effect to the  new  statutory  regime  we  have
                  already supplied  an  affirmative  answer  to  the  second
                  question:  see  [44]  above.   In  considering  the  first
                  question, we  find  no  reason  to  make  any  distinction
                  between the two children concerned.  Both are  aged  seven
                  years.  Inevitably, their age  and  current  circumstances
                  generally are factors of major significance.  As  we  have
                  observed, both children are at a critical stage  of  their
                  development.  They have spent the entirety of their  lives
                  in the United Kingdom.  They are,  in  consequence,  fully
                  absorbed in the language, culture,  norms,  practices  and
                  lifestyle of United Kingdom society.  The next  factor  of
                  obvious significance is  the  foreign  country  concerned,
                  Sierra Leone.  A basic  comparative  exercise  juxtaposing
                  the two countries being considered will almost  invariably
                  be required in answering the question posed  by  paragraph
                  399(a)(i)(a) of the Rules.  In conducting  this  exercise,
                  it will normally be appropriate for the Court or  Tribunal
                  to make some basic assumptions relating to,  and  to  take
                  judicial  notice  of,  elementary  and   general   matters
                  pertaining to United Kingdom society, subject of course to
                  any evidence to the contrary.  As regards Sierra Leone, we
                  take judicial notice of the facts that  this  is  a  third
                  world west African state whose recent history has featured
                  a lengthy war and   military  coup.   It  has  a  severely
                  depressed economy  which  is  predominantly  agricultural.
                  Life expectancy, income and standard  of  living  bear  no
                  comparison with their counterparts in the United  Kingdom.
                  While  English  is  the  official  language,  it  is  only
                  nominally so.  The effects of the ten year civil war  were
                  ruinous.  Life expectancy remains at 40 years, one of  the
                  lowest  globally.   Much  of  the  grave  destruction   of
                  infrastructure during the civil war has not been  restored
                  and, most recently, the country has been afflicted by  the
                  terrible Ebola outbreak.


         46.  The determination of the two questions which we have posed  in
             [44](d) above requires an evaluative assessment on the part of
             the Tribunal.  This is to be contrasted with  a  fact  finding
             exercise.  By way  of  self-direction,  we  are  mindful  that
             "unduly   harsh"   does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
             inconvenient, undesirable or  merely  difficult.   Rather,  it
             poses a considerably more elevated threshold.  "Harsh" in this
             context, denotes  something  severe,  or  bleak.   It  is  the
             antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
             addition of the adverb "unduly"  raises  an  already  elevated
             standard still higher.  Approached in this  way,  we  have  no
             hesitation in concluding that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for
             either of the two seven  year  old  British  citizen  children
             concerned to be abruptly uprooted from  their  United  Kingdom
             life setting and lifestyle  and  exiled  to  this  struggling,
             impoverished and  plague  stricken  west  African  state.   No
             reasonable  or  right  thinking  person  would  consider  this
             anything less than cruel.


         47.  The final question is whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for
             either child to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
             Appellant.  This is a different question from that  considered
             in [46] above.  We  have  identified  a  range  of  facts  and
             considerations  bearing  on  this  issue.   Once   again,   an
             evaluative judgment on the part of the Tribunal  is  required.
             In performing this exercise we view everything in  the  round.
             The Appellant plays an important role in  the  lives  of  both
             children concerned particularly that of his step son.   He  is
             the provider of stability,  security,  emotional  support  and
             financial support to both children.  We have  rehearsed  above
             the various benefits and advantages which  he  brings  to  the
             lives of both children, coupled with his  personal  attributes
             and merits.  We remind ourselves of section  55  of  the  2009
             Act.  We acknowledge the distinction between harsh and  unduly
             harsh.  We remind ourselves again of the potency of  the  main
             public interest in play, emphasised most recently by the Court
             of Appeal in SSHD v MA (Somalia) [2015] EWCA  Civ  1192.   The
             outcome of our  careful  reflections  in  this  difficult  and
             borderline case and in an exercise bereft of  bright  luminous
             lines is as follows.  Balancing all of the facts and  factors,
             our conclusion is that the  severity  of  the  impact  on  the
             children's lives of the Appellant's abrupt exit with all  that
             would flow therefrom would be of such  proportions  as  to  be
             unduly harsh."

13. Both in his written skeleton argument  and  his  oral  submissions,  Mr
    Bazini submitted that we were obliged to adopt the same approach as  in
    MK (Sierra Leone) to children aged at or around  7  and  that  we  must
    likewise take "judicial notice" of the fact that children at  this  age
    are "at a critical stage of their development".  It was, he  submitted,
    unnecessary and, indeed, inappropriate for a tribunal to expect to  see
    expert evidence on this matter, before making such a finding.

14. We reject these submissions.  Although the application of a legal  test
    to a particular set of facts can sometimes shed light  on  the  way  in
    which the test falls to be applied, it is the test  that  matters.   If
    this were not so, everything from the law of negligence to human rights
    would become irretrievably mired in a search for factual precedents.

15. What might at first appear to be hard-edged findings of fact often turn
    out to be evaluative assessments.  On analysing the above passages from
    MK (Sierra Leone), that is the position  here.   The  Upper  Tribunal's
    conclusion that children aged 7 are  at  a  "critical  stage  of  their
    development" was such an assessment, based on the facts before  it.  It
    was not the laying bare of an obvious fact, of which any other court or
    tribunal must take "judicial notice".  One could  envisage  an  equally
    valid argument that a child of 2 or 3 is at a  critical  stage  of  its
    development;  or  a  child  at  or  approaching  puberty,  and  so  on.
    Childhood is a developmental progression towards becoming an adult.

16. In any event, Mr Bazini's submissions founder when one reads  paragraph
    46 of MK (Sierra Leone) in context.  As can be seen from  the  citation
    at our paragraph 12 above, towards the end of paragraph 47,  the  Upper
    Tribunal in fact acknowledged that this was a "difficult and borderline
    case" and involved "an exercise bereft of bright luminous lines".  That
    is, with respect, entirely right.  The fact that the respondent may not
    have taken issue with the value judgment that the Tribunal  reached  in
    MK  (Sierra  Leone)  does  not  mean  that  a  differently  constituted
    Tribunal, applying the test articulated in the first part of  paragraph
    46, could not lawfully have come to a different conclusion.

17. As can be seen from paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria), the test  of  "unduly
    harsh" has a dual aspect.  It is not  enough  for  the  outcome  to  be
    "severe" or "bleak".   Proper  effect  must  be  given  to  the  adverb
    "unduly".  The position is, therefore, significantly far  removed  from
    the test of "reasonableness", as found in section 117B(6)(b).

C. THE APPLICATION OF SECTION 117C(6) TO ALL "FOREIGN CRIMINAL" CASES

18. Interestingly, Lord Carnwath's analysis of section 117C does not  touch
    upon a very significant matter that arose in NA (Pakistan) & Another  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.  On the
    face of the section, subsection (6) applies  only  in  the  case  of  a
    foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at  least  four  years.   As  the  Court  of  Appeal  explained  in  NA
    (Pakistan), the purpose of section 117C(6) is to ensure that, in  every
    "foreign criminal" case, Part 5A of the 2002 Act does  not  operate  in
    such a way as to cause a violation of  Article  8.   For  this  reason,
    section 117C(6) must be read as applying, not only to  "four  years  or
    more" cases but also to those  other  foreign  criminals  sentenced  to
    imprisonment for a period of less than four years (to  which  one  must
    add the two categories referred to by Lord Carnwath: offence of serious
    harm/persistent offender).

19. This is what Jackson LJ had to say about the matter:-

         "25. Something has  obviously  gone  amiss  with  the  drafting  of
             section  117C(3).   In  Inco  Europe  Ltd   v   First   Choice
             Distribution [2000] 1 WLR 586, HL, at 592 - 593, Lord Nicholls
             (with whom  the  other  members  of  the  Appellate  Committee
             agreed) explained the circumstances in  which  the  courts  in
             interpreting statutes can correct obvious drafting errors.  In
             our view the lacuna in section 117C(3)is an  obvious  drafting
             error.  Parliament must have intended medium offenders to have
             the same fall back protection as serious  offenders.   Mr  Tam
             invited us so to rule.

         26.  In reaching this conclusion it is important to  bear  in  mind
             that the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act is framed in such  a  way
             as to provide  a  structured  basis  for  application  of  and
             compliance with Article 8, rather than to disapply it: see the
             title of Part 5A, the general scheme of the provisions in that
             Part and, in particular, section  117A(1).   If  section  117C
             barred medium offenders from asserting  any  Article  8  claim
             other than provided for in subsections (4) and (5), that would
             plainly be incompatible with Article 8  rights  (either  their
             own or Convention rights of individuals in  their  family)  in
             some  cases.   Equally  plainly,  it  was   not   Parliament's
             intention in enacting Part 5A to disapply or require violation
             of Article 8 in any case.  We also place reliance  on  section
             3(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.   That  provision  requires
             courts to construe legislation in a way  which  is  compatible
             with Convention rights, if it is possible to  do  so.   It  is
             possible to do so here.  In accordance with the guidance given
             by Lord Nicholls, the words which need to be read into section
             117C(3) so as properly to reflect  Parliament's  true  meaning
             are clear, namely the same words as appear in sub-section  (6)
             and in para. 398 of the 2014 rules, which came into effect  at
             the same time as part of an integrated and  coherent  code  in
             primary legislation and the Immigration Rules for dealing with
             deportation cases.

         27.  For all these reasons we shall proceed on the basis that  fall
             back protection of the kind stated in section  117C(6)  avails
             both (a) serious offenders and (b) medium offenders  who  fall
             outside Exceptions 1 and  2.   On  a  proper  construction  of
             section 117C(3), it provides that for  medium  offenders  "the
             public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
             Exception 2  applies  or  unless  there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."

20. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) casts doubt upon this important  conclusion  of
    the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan).  As we have seen,  Lord  Carnwath
    had, in fact, nothing of substance to say about section 117C(6).

D. THE MEANING OF "VERY COMPELLING CIRCUMSTANCES"

21. As a result, the findings of Jackson LJ on the operation  of  the  test
    involving  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and   above   those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2" remain fully authoritative:-

         "28. The next question which arises concerns the meaning  of  "very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2".  The new para. 398 uses the same language
             as  section  117C(6).    It   refers   to   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  paragraphs
             399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the 2014 rules refer
             to the same subject matter as Exceptions 1 and  2  in  section
             117C, but they do so in greater detail.

         29.  In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.


         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute" very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.

         31.  An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention. In  terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case.  To take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement.  The circumstances in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation."

22. It is important to keep in mind that the test  in  section  117C(6)  is
    extremely demanding.  The fact that,  at  this  point,  a  tribunal  is
    required  to  engage  in  a  wide-ranging   proportionality   exercise,
    balancing the weight that appropriately falls to be given to factors on
    the proposed deportee's side of the balance against the weight  of  the
    public interest, does not in any sense permit the tribunal to engage in
    the sort of exercise that would be appropriate in the case  of  someone
    who is not within the ambit of section 117C.  Not only must  regard  be
    had to the factors set out in  section  117B,  such  as  giving  little
    weight to a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established when the  proposed  deportee  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully, the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
    criminal  is  high;  and  even  higher  for  a  person   sentenced   to
    imprisonment of at least four years.

23. Jackson LJ put it as follows:-

         "33.  Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1  AC  338  at  [145].
             Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
             offenders may be separated from their children for many years,
             contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  those  children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace  of  family  life.   That   is   not   usually   a
             sufficiently compelling  circumstance  to  outweigh  the  high
             public interest in deporting foreign criminals.   As  Rafferty
             LJ observed in Secretary of State for the Home Department v CT
             (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation.""

E. NAVIGATING SECTION 117C: NA (PAKISTAN)

24. Jackson LJ then set out the following  important  guidance  on  how  to
    approach matters:-

         "36. In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or Exception  2.   If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  If there are, then the Article 8 claim succeeds.   If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim  fails.   As  was  the
             case under the 2012 rules  (as  explained  in  MF  (Nigeria)),
             there is no room for a general Article  8  evaluation  outside
             the 2014 rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

         37.  In relation to a serious offender, it will often  be  sensible
             first to see whether his case involves  circumstances  of  the
             kind described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both  because  the
             circumstances so described set  out  particularly  significant
             factors bearing upon respect for private  life  (Exception  1)
             and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
             provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can  be  made
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  as  is  required
             under section 117C(6).  It will then be necessary to  look  to
             see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and
             2 are of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
             conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
             circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy
             the test in section 117C(6)."

25. Finally, for  our  purposes,  Jackson  LJ  addressed  the  relationship
    between section 117C and the jurisprudence of  the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights:-

         "38. Against that background, one may ask what is the role  of  the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence?  In particular, how  does  one  take
             into account important decisions such as  ?ner  v  Netherlands
             (2007) 45 EHRR 14 and Maslov v Austria?  Mr  Southey  QC,  who
             represents KJ and WM,  rightly  submits  that  the  Strasbourg
             authorities have an important role to play.   Mr  Tam  rightly
             accepted that  this  is  correct.   The  answer  is  that  the
             Secretary of State and the  tribunals  and  courts  will  have
             regard to the Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests
             set out in our domestic legislation.  For example, a  tribunal
             may be considering whether it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  a
             child to remain in England without the deportee; or it may  be
             considering whether  certain  circumstances  are  sufficiently
             "compelling"  to  outweigh  the  high   public   interest   in
             deportation of foreign criminals. Anyone applying these  tests
             (as required by our own rules and legislation) should heed the
             guidance contained in the Strasbourg authorities.  As we  have
             stated above, the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras.
             398-399A of the 2014 rules is to ensure  compliance  with  the
             requirements of Article 8 through a structured approach, which
             is intended to ensure that  proper  weight  is  given  to  the
             public interest in deportation whilst also  having  regard  to
             other relevant factors as identified  in  the  Strasbourg  and
             domestic caselaw.  The new regime is not intended  to  produce
             violations of Article 8."

26. We make no apology for dwelling upon NA (Pakistan).   Although  decided
    prior to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2016]  UKSC  60,  which  held  that  the
    Immigration Rules relating to deportation were not a  "complete  code",
    Jackson LJ's judgment remains authoritative as regards the matters  set
    out above. Indeed, the finding at paragraph 38 of Hesham Ali that "very
    compelling circumstances" means "a very  strong  claim  indeed"  chimes
    with what Jackson LJ said about the nature of the test.

F. THE SCOPE OF THE SECTION 117C(6) EXERCISE

27. In MS (Philippines), we address in detail the submission advanced by Ms
    Patyna in that case; namely, that on a proper reading of paragraphs  20
    to 22 of Lord Carnwath's judgment in KO (Nigeria), section 117C(2)  has
    no part to play in the process required  of  a  court  or  tribunal  by
    section 117C(6), other than as regards the distinction between the  two
    categories identified by Lord Carnwath in paragraph 20 of KO (Nigeria).
     We do not accept  that  submission  (which  was  not,  in  any  event,
    advanced  by  Mr  Bazini  in  the  present  case).   The   consequence,
    therefore, is that in the case of any  foreign  criminal,  a  court  or
    tribunal engaged in determining  whether  "there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2",
    will need to have regard to the seriousness of the offence.

28. How should a judge approach that task? As Simon LJ held in Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v Suckoo [2016] EWCA Civ 39:-

         "In general, the facts of  the  conviction  and  sentence  will  be
         sufficient: matters of mitigation will be taken into account at the
         sentencing hearing."

29. On the other hand, given that the judge is not constrained to  consider
    seriousness merely by reference to  which  of  the  two  categories  of
    "foreign criminal" the individual falls into, it will be  necessary  to
    determine the seriousness of the actual offence, within the category in
    question. This point emerges from the judgment of Singh LJ in Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Barry [2018] EWCA Civ 790, in  which
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  of  a
    foreign criminal was upheld:

         "56. Ms Patry's second submission under Ground 2 is  that  the  FTT
         adopted an impermissible approach and/or gave weight to  immaterial
         factors, namely the mitigation which it considered to be  available
         to the Respondent and his expressions of remorse: see in particular
         paras. 102-122 of its determination; and the conclusions at  paras.
         154-155. Ms Patry submits that this involved an element of  "double
         counting", since the mitigating factors had already been taken into
         account by the sentencing judge  in  arriving  at  the  appropriate
         sentence for this case.


         57. I do not regard the approach of the FTT in this regard to  have
         been impermissible as  a  matter  of  law.  I  do  not  agree  that
         questions of mitigation are totally  irrelevant  to  the  balancing
         exercise which the FTT had to perform. Ms Patry  is  right  to  say
         that questions of mitigation will already have played their part in
         arriving at the appropriate sentence for  the  underlying  offence.
         However, it must be borne in mind that the three  categories  which
         are set out in the  Immigration  Rules  are  broad  categories.  In
         particular, the most serious category applies to any  offender  who
         has been sentenced to a sentence of  imprisonment  of  at  least  4
         years. However, that can cover a wide range of cases. Although they
         are all serious, they can  vary  in  degrees  of  seriousness.  The
         criminal courts in this country come across some  examples  of  the
         most heinous kind, which would be towards the top end of the  range
         envisaged by Category 1. However, in an appropriate case, I can see
         no reason in principle why either aggravating factors or mitigating
         factors might not be taken into account by the FTT in assessing the
         seriousness of  the  offence  in  question  and,  accordingly,  the
         strength of the public interest in  deportation.  Similarly,  in  a
         case such  as  the  present,  which  falls  into  the  intermediate
         category of seriousness, because the sentence passed was between 12
         months and 4 years imprisonment, I can see no reason  in  principle
         why aggravating or mitigating factors may not be taken into account
         by the FTT".

30. The usual way in which the judge will assign the offence a place within
    the relevant category will be by reference to the  length  of  sentence
    imposed and what the sentencing judge had to say about seriousness  and
    mitigation. But, as Singh LJ makes clear, the ultimate decision is  for
    the court or tribunal.

31. Before us, there was debate as to the significance to  be  accorded  to
    the particular issue of rehabilitation, as part of the section  117C(6)
    exercise.

32. As the Court of Appeal pointed out in Danso v Secretary  of  State  for
    the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA   Civ   596,   courses   aimed   at
    rehabilitation, undertaken whilst in prison, are often unlikely to bear
    material weight, for the simple reason that  they  are  a  commonplace;
    particularly in the case of sexual offenders.

33. As a more general point, the fact that an individual has not  committed
    further offences, since release from prison, is highly unlikely to have
    a material bearing, given that  everyone  is  expected  not  to  commit
    crime. Rehabilitation will therefore normally do no more than show that
    the individual has returned to the place where society expects him (and
    everyone else) to be. There is, in  other  words,  no  material  weight
    which  ordinarily  falls  to  be  given  to   rehabilitation   in   the
    proportionality balance (see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the
    Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  256,   paragraphs   48   to   56).
    Nevertheless, as so often in the field  of  human  rights,  one  cannot
    categorically say that rehabilitation will never be capable of  playing
    a significant role (see LG (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from the  norm
    would, however, need to be fully reasoned.

G. THE APPELLANT'S CASE

(a) Background and evidence

34.  The  appellant  and  his  brother  arrived  in  the   United   Kingdom
    clandestinely in 2007, when the appellant was 14.  The brother returned
    to Iraq under the Assisted Voluntary Return Scheme, having been refused
    asylum.  Owing to his age, the appellant remained in the care of Social
    Services in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's asylum claim of  April
    2009 was refused in October 2009 but he  received  discretionary  leave
    until 1 September 2010.   An  application  to  extend  that  leave  was
    refused and, since July 2011, the appellant has remained in the  United
    Kingdom without leave.

35. He underwent an Islamic marriage to a British citizen, of Kurdish Iraqi
    descent, in April 2012 and became legally married to her in May of that
    year.  The appellant and his wife live in  Yorkshire.   They  have  one
    child, a daughter born in September 2013.

36. In June 2016, the appellant was granted limited leave to remain, on the
    basis of his family life.  On 10 August 2016, however, he was convicted
    on  his  guilty  plea  of  the  offence  of  possessing/controlling   a
    false/improperly obtained identity document; namely, a false  passport.
    He was sentenced to imprisonment for a period of twelve  months,  which
    reflected his guilty plea.

37. The appellant had been sent the false passport by his mother  in  Iraq.
    He wanted to use it in order to visit her.  The Sentencing Judge said:-

         "You sought to present this passport to [the] authorities to enable
         you to travel and they discovered that it was forged.  People  like
         you who  seek  to  travel  on  false  documentation  undermine  the
         immigration and travel pillars upon which this  country  is,  to  a
         certain extent, built, and you must understand that there  will  be
         an  immediate  custodial  sentence  as  a  result.   Having   taken
         everything into account that I have heard, the appropriate sentence
         in my view is one of twelve months' imprisonment."

38. In September 2016, the appellant was served with a decision to  deport.
    Notwithstanding representations on behalf of the appellant as to why he
    should not be deported, the respondent decided to  make  a  deportation
    order.  The appellant appealed against that decision  and  on  12  June
    2018, the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  his  appeal.   The  respondent
    obtained permission to appeal against that decision and in January 2019
    we it set aside, following a concession by Counsel  for  the  appellant
    who accepted (as was the case) that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    applied entirely the wrong test,  asking  herself  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Iraq, rather than
    the test required by section 117C and paragraph 399 of the  Immigration
    Rules.

39. In re-making the decision, we heard evidence from the appellant and his
    wife.  Each adopted their respective witness statements.

40. The appellant told us that  he  has  a  mother  and  sister  in  Erbil,
    northern Iraq.  He had been educated in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had
    trained as a barber.  He had worked at that trade for a short period of
    time, prior to his arrest and imprisonment.

41. In cross-examination, the appellant said that his  daughter  understood
    very little Kurdish and "asks all her questions in English".

42. The appellant said that his wife's family lived in the same road as  he
    and his wife and daughter.  They assisted with the childcare  needs  of
    him and his wife.  The daughter's grandparents spoke to the daughter in
    a mixture of Kurdish and English.

43. The appellant's wife said that she had made  three  trips  to  northern
    Iraq; in 2010, 2014 and 2017.   In  2010  she  had  gone  to  a  family
    funeral.  In 2014 she had taken her small daughter to Erbil to show the
    child to her mother-in-law.  The daughter was  then  around  10  months
    old.  The witness said she and her daughter had stayed in  a  hotel  in
    Erbil since the mother was living in unsatisfactory conditions in  that
    city.  Their stay in Erbil had been prolonged owing to ISIS activity in
    the area.

44. In 2017, the appellant's mother had become very ill and so the  witness
    took her daughter to see the appellant's mother who was by then  living
    in different accommodation, provided by a charity.

45. The appellant's imprisonment had impacted badly  upon  the  appellant's
    daughter, who would wake at night and ask for her father.   When  taken
    to visit the appellant in prison,  the  daughter  had  wanted  to  stay
    there.

46. The witness said that her own life had been adversely affected  by  the
    imprisonment.  She had completed  the  first  year  of  her  degree  in
    biomedical science and had done two weeks of the second year, when  she
    had to suspend her course.  Although she resumed the  course  in  2017,
    she had failed certain exams.  This was because  there  was  "too  much
    going on".  She accordingly changed to a course in human  biology  but,
    in September 2018, she had changed again, in order  to  do  health  and
    social care.

47. The witness said that these changes had been caused by the  appellant's
    imprisonment and the subsequent deportation proceedings.  She said  she
    had worked part-time in Superdrug until December  2018,  when  she  had
    stopped as a result of  the  forthcoming  tribunal  hearing.   She  had
    received state benefits in the past.

48. The witness was adamant that neither she nor her daughter could  reside
    permanently in northern Iraq.  She did not know what  was  involved  in
    communicating with the appellant by Skype, should  that  be  necessary.
    She could not afford to visit the appellant in a third country,  should
    he be deported.

49. The witness was confident that she would  have  passed  her  biomedical
    course, but for the difficulties she had described.

(b) Re-making the decision in the appeal

50. In re-making the decision, we apply the legal principles which we  have
    set out above.  These include the finding that the actual  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) does not form part of any legal
    test.

51. Mr Pilgerstorfer conceded, and  we  find,  that  the  appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife, who is a "qualifying
    partner"  by  reason  of  her  status  as  a   British   citizen.    Mr
    Pilgerstorfer also conceded (and we find)  that  the  appellant  has  a
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child;  namely,  his
    daughter, who is also a British citizen.

52. In determining for the purposes of section 117C(5) whether  the  effect
    of the appellant's deportation on the partner or child would be  unduly
    harsh,  we  look  at  the  position  on  the  basis,  either  that  the
    appellant's wife and child would follow him to Iraq or,  alternatively,
    that both would remain in the United Kingdom.

53. So far as the wife alone is concerned, it would not be unduly harsh  to
    expect  her  to  live  in  northern  Iraq  with  the  appellant.    The
    appellant's wife speaks the local language and, although her  situation
    there with the appellant would be much less pleasant than it is in  the
    United Kingdom, it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh,  applying  the  test
    approved in KO (Nigeria).  The appellant's wife is in good  health,  as
    is the appellant.

54. It would plainly not be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    British daughter for her to be expected to live in northern Iraq.   She
    would not only lose the opportunity of being  educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom but would also face a challenging  physical  environment.   She
    would, in addition, have quickly to master Kurdish Sorani, although the
    evidence indicates that she has exposure to that language as  a  result
    of the presence of her parents, grandparents and other relatives in the
    United Kingdom.

55. Looking at matters in the round, we conclude, albeit with  some  degree
    of hesitation, that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  daughter  to
    live with both parents in northern Iraq. The child is still  relatively
    young. The security position is considerably  improved,  compared  with
    the position when her mother decided to take her there on a visit.  She
    would be with both parents, in a loving relationship.  There  would  be
    other family support to call on in the country,  in  the  form  of  her
    aunt, even if the grandmother may not be able to offer  much  practical
    assistance. There is, in any event, no reason why the appellant  cannot
    secure employment in Erbil. Overall, expecting the daughter to live  in
    Iraq would not be unduly  harsh,  applying  the  test  approved  in  KO
    (Nigeria).

56. We turn to whether it would be unduly harsh on the appellant's wife and
    daughter for the appellant to be deported there, whilst  the  wife  and
    daughter remain in the United Kingdom.

57. The appellant's wife told us that, if that was to happen, she  intended
    to commit suicide.  We reject that assertion, which we  find  was  made
    purely in an attempt to increase the chances of the appeal  succeeding.
    There is no reason whatsoever to assume that, if the appellant were  to
    be deported, his wife would bring  upon  their  daughter  the  distress
    involved in taking her own life.   Nothing  in  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence begins to show that this is even remotely likely.

58. If the appellant were deported, life for the appellant's wife  and  the
    daughter would, we find, be hard.  It would, however, be far from being
    unduly harsh.  The appellant's wife and daughter  live  in  very  close
    proximity to family members, who already provide assistance and who can
    be expected to help the appellant's wife with the consequences  of  the
    appellant's removal.

59. The appellant's wife has, until recently, worked part-time.   She  told
    us that she stopped because of the forthcoming tribunal  hearing.   She
    did not explain, however, why  she  was  expected  to  do  so  much  in
    connection with that hearing as to be unable  to  continue  such  work,
    particularly given the involvement of the appellant's  solicitors.   In
    any event, following the appellant's deportation, it can reasonably  be
    expected that the appellant's wife can work part-time, as do very  many
    mothers with children of  her  daughter's  age.   If,  as  has  already
    occurred, the appellant's wife has to have recourse to  benefits,  that
    would not  be  a  matter  that  would  cause  or  contribute  to  undue
    harshness.

60.  We  agree  with  Mr  Bazini  that  reliance  upon  modern   means   of
    communication, such as Skype, is no substitute  for  physical  presence
    and face-to-face contact.  We do not, however,  believe  that,  in  the
    event of deportation, such face-to-face contact would not be  possible.
    The appellant's wife has made several visits to northern  Iraq  in  the
    past, including two with her (then very small) daughter.  There  is  no
    suggestion that, at that time,  the  family's  financial  circumstances
    were markedly better than they are at present or would likely be in the
    future.  Accordingly, it would be entirely possible for  the  appellant
    to see both his wife and daughter on a face-to-face basis in Iraq.

61. For these reasons, we  find  that  Exception  2  does  not  apply.   We
    accordingly proceed, as described above, to examine whether  there  are
    any  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2.

62.  We  have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  sentence   of
    imprisonment is at the bottom of the range covered by section  117C(3).
    We give that due weight.  We do, however, take account of the fact that
    credit was given for the appellant's guilty plea.  We also take account
    of the fact that, as the Sentencing Judge pointed out, the offence  was
    a serious one.  Given that the appellant has never been found  to  have
    had any legitimate reason to come to the United Kingdom, the fact  that
    he should decide to engage in  criminal  behaviour,  having  only  just
    regularised his former unlawful  presence,  counts  against  him.   The
    weight of the  public  interest,  bearing  in  favour  of  deportation,
    therefore remains high.

63. So far as concern factors  bearing  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    proportionality balance, we have regard to the fact that, as  mentioned
    in section 117B(4)(b), the appellant's relationship with his  wife  was
    established in 2012, at a time when the appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

64. At all material times, the appellant has not had  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and, accordingly, section 117B(5) indicates that  little  weight
    should be given to the appellant's private life in the United  Kingdom.
    In this regard, we observe that the appellant's history  of  employment
    in the United Kingdom is, in any event, exiguous.

65. We accord, however, significant weight to the appellant's  relationship
    with his daughter and to her  own  best  interests,  as  a  child.   We
    accept, as we have already stated,  that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would have serious adverse effects upon his daughter and that,  despite
    the opportunities to meet outside the United Kingdom,  the  appellant's
    daughter will clearly miss the appellant's daily presence in her life.

66. Notwithstanding those factors in favour of the appellant,  we  conclude
    that the weight of the public interest is such that it cannot  be  said
    that there are very compelling circumstances, as  required  by  section
    117C(6), which would make deportation a  disproportionate  interference
    with the Article 8 rights of the  appellant,  his  wife,  or  daughter.
    That is so, looking at each of their positions  both  individually  and
    together.

67. Each member of the panel has contributed to its decision and reasons.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  We set aside that decision and re-make the decision in  the
appeal by dismissing it on human rights grounds.

                           Signed                     Dated: 4 March 2019


                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber


Anonymity

We have made a direction under r.14(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the  original
appellant. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him.  This direction applies to  both  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent and all other persons. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
