
HS (Homosexuals: Minors, Risk on Return) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00120




Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 | |
|Heard at: Taylor House, London                                    |
|Heard on: 19 May 2005 and  |        |Determination issued:       |
|22 July 2005               |        |4th August 2005             |
|Prepared :22 - 28 July 2005|        |                            |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Ms C Jarvis                                                       |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|Miss C Griffith                                                   |
|Immigration Judge                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|Respondent                                                        |

This case is reported for what we say about the treatment of homosexuals in
Iran, including minors, and the assessment of risk on return, in the light
of the background evidence that we received; some of which post dates that
which formed the basis for the determination in RM and BB (Homosexuals)
Iran CG [2005] IUKIAT 00117(8 July 2005), and which determination has
guided our deliberations and decision making.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell of Counsel instructed by Scudamores
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms P Clarke Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:     Mrs L Clark (Farsi - English)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of (________), national of Iran, whose date of
      birth is given as 29 June 1985. He appeals the decision of the
      Respondent made on 21 November 2003, to give directions for his
      removal to Iran, following refusal to grant leave to enter or remain
      in the UK on asylum or human rights grounds.


   2. The Appellant appeals to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal pursuant
      to section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, (
      the 2002 Act), as amended by the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
      Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, (the 2004 Act), by a notice of appeal dated
      December 2003  and the Tribunal has borne in mind the grounds of
      appeal set out in that notice, which refer to alleged prospective
      breach of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
      its 1967 Protocol, as well as prospective breach of the 1950 European
      Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
      (ECHR), as that Convention has been incorporated into United Kingdom
      domestic law by the Human Rights Act 1998.


   3. The Appellant's case is that he has a well-founded fear of being
      persecuted, and of experiencing other serious harm, at the hands of
      the authorities in Iran, by reason of his membership of a particular
      social group, namely homosexuals in Iran, as a person who has already
      come to the adverse attention of the authorities there and who has a
      criminal record resulting from homosexual activity.


   4. The history of the matter is this.  The Appellant claims that he left
      Iran on or about 10 November 2002, and arrived in the UK, apparently
      at Purfleet, on about 3 December 2003, clandestinely, having travelled
      by lorry through a number of countries unknown to him. He was taken to
      police at Grays, who, on taking account of the fact that he was a
      separated child, handed him into the care of the local authority
      social services department. It was not until 16 December 2003 that the
      Appellant was taken to the Home Office, by a social worker, in order
      to lodge his claim to asylum.


   5. A written statement of evidence in support of the claim was lodged,
      dated 27 December 2002, and the Appellant was interviewed by a Home
      Officer on 16 October 2003. The Respondent set out his reasons for
      refusing to recognize the Appellant as a refugee and refusing to grant
      leave to enter or remain on human rights grounds in a letter dated 20
      November 2003 and a supplemental letter dated 12 January 2004.

   6. The Appellant appealed to an Adjudicator, as she then was, of the
      Immigration Appellate Authority, Ms M Dean. His appeal was dismissed
      in a determination issued on 30 March 2004. The Appellant appealed to
      the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT) and was granted permission to
      appeal.

   7. In its determination of that appeal, issued on 14 January 2005, the
      IAT  held that the Adjudicator had materially erred in law, in that
      she had failed to make findings of fact in relation to matters central
      to the Appellant's claim, and to the assessment as to risk on return
      to Iran. The appeal was allowed to the extent that it was remitted to
      be heard afresh, other than by Ms M Dean. It is in this way that the
      appeal comes before us now.


   8. The appeal before us is,  by  virtue  of  the  Commencement  No.5  and
      Transitional Provisions Order 2005, to be reconsidered by  the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal (AIT) as if it had begun its life as  an  AIT
      appeal. It is governed by the provisions of the Asylum and Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants etc.)  Act  2004  (the  2004  Act),  including
      provisions that amend the Nationality, Immigration  Asylum  Act  2002,
      (the 2002 Act). In particular we refer to Section  103A  of  the  2002
      Act, as inserted by Section 26 of the 2004 Act (unification of  appeal
      system); and the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
      2005 (the 2005 Procedure Rules).

   9.  We  remind  ourselves  that  when  hearing   a   case   by   way   of
      reconsideration, the Tribunal must first decide  whether  or  not  the
      determination discloses a material error of law. It is only where that
      question is answered in  the  affirmative  that  it  is  open  to  the
      Tribunal to go on to consider what relief, if any, should be  granted,
      and whether or not fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.


  10. That decision, in this case, was reached by the IAT, in the terms and
      for the reasons set out in paragraph 7 above, in the light of which we
      proceeded by way of a fresh, full reconsideration. We received oral
      evidence from the Appellant with the assistance of a Farsi speaking
      interpreter. We are satisfied that, with the able assistance of Mrs
      Clark,  the Appellant was enabled to give all the evidence that he
      wished to, in terms that the Tribunal was able to understand.

  11. We have before us all the documents referred to above including
      interview records, and the Respondent's letters, in which he sets out
      his reasons for refusing the Appellant's application (the Home Office
      appeal bundle).  Also before us was the Respondent's Country
      Assessment of April 2005. In addition, Ms Clarke lodged an article
      entitled 'Should I Convert to Judaism?', and an article entitled 'Q &
      A about being Gay and Frum (a religious observant Jew), downloaded
      from the internet.

  12. From the Appellant, we received his three statements ; a chronology;
      Psychiatric reports of Dr F E Winton dated 5 February 2004 and 25
      April 2005; medical report of Dr Juliet Cohen, November 2003, and
      addendum dated 27 February 2004; Photographs of scarring to the
      Appellant's person; three expert reports from Anna Enayat, dated 4
      March 2004, 24 April 2005, and 19 July 2005; Article downloaded from
      Roozonline, 21 July 2005 " The Execution of Two Gay Young Men";
      Article from the Times of London,  22 July  2005 :"Public Execution
      for the Teenagers Convicted of Rape", and various reports from bodies
      including Amnesty International; Radio Free Europe;  Voice of America;
       Human Rights Watch;  the UK FCO;  US State Department; European
      Parliament, and  UNHCHR.

  13. The Appellant lodged two cases: the decision of the New Zealand
      Refugee Status Appeals Authority No.74665/03, 7 July 2004, and the
      determination of the IAT in RM and BB (Homosexuals) Iran CG [2005]
      UKIAT 00117.

  14. Aware that the IAT was shortly to give authoritative guidance relating
      to issues before us, we adjourned the hearing of this appeal, part-
      heard, on 19 May 2005, having concluded the oral evidence, to enable
      us to take into account that guidance. We reconvened the hearing on 22
      July 2005, when we were able to receive a copy of that case, and
      receive a written skeleton argument from Ms Rothwell, and oral
      submissions from both representatives, in order to conclude the
      hearing. We reserved our determination, which we now give with our
      reasons.


The Law and the Burden and Standard of Proof


15.   In reaching our decision we have borne fully in mind the relevant law
      and immigration rules, including the 1951 Convention relating to the
      Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and the Handbook on
      Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status ( ' The
      Handbook ) ( Geneva, January 2000). By Article 1(A) (2) of the Refugee
      Convention the term "refugee" shall apply to any person who:-

           "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
           group or political opinion, is outside the country of his
           nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence is unable, or, owing to such fear, is
           unwilling to return to it."


   16.      We remind ourselves that it is for an Appellant to satisfy us
   that there is  a reasonable degree of likelihood, or real risk that,
   should he or she    have to leave this country, he or she will be
   required to return to a   country where he or she fears persecution for a
   Convention     reason,    that is to say, for reasons of race, religion,
   nationality, membership of a   particular social group or political
   opinion.  We apply throughout the    lower standard of proof as referred
   to in R -v- SSHD ex parte      Sivakumaran [1988] Imm AR 147 and the
   Court of Appeal in  Karanakaran -v- SSHD [2000] INLR 122.  We have also
   been guided    by the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case known
   as       Ravichandran and Others [1996] Imm AR 97, and in particular, we
   have borne in mind the definitions of persecution found there; the
   leading judgment having been given by Simon Brown LJ.  We consider
   whether or not the Appellant is a person in need of international
   protection not only at the date of application and of the Respondent's
   decision, but also today, (R -v- SSHD ex parte Adan [1998] INLR 325
   HL).


  17. The Appellant places specific reliance on Article 3 of the ECHR.  It
      is for an Appellant to show that there are substantial grounds for
      believing that he or she is at real risk of ill-treatment contrary to
      Article 3 ECHR, which prohibits torture, inhuman or degrading
      treatment or punishment.  The standard of proof equates to that in
      asylum appeals (see MM(01/TH/994) IAT 4 June 2001 and Kacaj
      (01/TH/00634) 19 July 2001.  Where there is a failure to show a breach
      of Article 3, there may be a breach of the right to physical and moral
      integrity under Article 8.  Unlike Article 3, Article 8 rights are
      qualified rights protecting the right to respect for private and
      family life, home and correspondence.  It is for an Appellant to show
      that one or more of such qualified rights is engaged and that there is
      an interference with such a right or rights.  The Respondent must then
      show that any interference pursues a legitimate aim, is in accordance
      with the law and is proportionate.


  18. In coming to our determination, following Section 85 (4) of the 2002
      Act, we may take into account evidence about any matter which we think
      relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence which
      concerns a matter arising after the date of decision.


  19. It is recalled that Professor Hathaway's categorisation of human
      rights recognised by the International Bill of Rights has been
      approved by the UNHCR; by the UK IAT in Gashi and Nikshiqi ; by the
      Court of Appeal in Ravichandran (above) and by the Court of Appeal in
      Haci Demirkaya [1999] INLR 441.  The House of Lords gave approval in
      general to Professor Hathaway's approach in the case of Horvath -v-
      SSHD [2000] Imm AR 552.  (See also the Law of Refugee Status,
      Professor James Hathaway, Butterworths, 1991).  Following Professor
      Hathaway's categorisation of human rights, Article 3 is concerned with
      Category 1 rights, a breach of which, will always amount to
      persecution under the Refugee Convention, assuming that it is by
      reason of one or more of the reasons set out in Article 1(A) (2) of
      the Refugee Convention.  Article 8 is concerned with Category 2
      rights, a breach of which would constitute persecution under the
      Refugee Convention except in circumstances constituting allowable
      derogation under Article 15.


  20. While the ECHR was not designed to impact on immigration control it
      has, to some degree, been interpreted by the Strasbourg Court in a
      manner which does have that effect.  The rationale for applying Art 3
      ECHR to expulsion cases is that "it is an affront to fundamental
      humanitarian principles to remove an individual to a country where
      there is a real risk of serious ill-treatment".


  21. Where the ECHR is invoked by an Appellant/Applicant on the sole ground
      that, if refused the right to enter or remain, they are likely  to  be
      subject to treatment in breach of the ECHR which is  not  sufficiently
      severe to engage Art 3 then the English courts  are  not  required  to
      recognise that any other  article  of  the  ECHR  is  engaged.   Where
      treatment in the country of origin falls outside Art 3  there  may  be
      cases which justify the  grant  of  exceptional  leave  to  remain  on
      humanitarian grounds and such cases would be subject to  the  ordinary
      principles of judicial review.


   Summary of the Case


  22. The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 29 June 1985, in  Tehran,
      where he lived with his parents and his one sibling, an older brother.
      The  Appellant  is  a  young  gay  man,  who   had   four   homosexual
      relationships whilst  in  Iran,  between  the  ages  of  thirteen  and
      seventeen.


  23. The first relationship, which was with a classmate, lasted  from  when
      the Appellant was thirteen , until he was about fourteen  or  fifteen,
      when his partner moved away from the area, with his family.

  24. The Appellant struck up a second relationship with  a  young  man  who
      lived nearby. The two tended to meet at the Appellant's home  as  both
      his parents worked  and  his  brother  was  often  out  with  friends.
      However, on an occasion when they  were  engaged  in  intimate  sexual
      relations,  the  Appellant's  mother  arrived  home  unexpectedly  and
      discovered them in the Appellant's bedroom. His partner was physically
      ejected from the house and the Appellant was locked in his room  until
      his  father  came  home  later  that  night.  His  father  beat   him.
      Thereafter, he did not get on at all with his parents, who were  angry
      with him. If they were suspicious  about  the  Appellant's  movements,
      they tried not to give him any opportunity to have  time  to  himself,
      and took him to school and tried to collect him also. He was forbidden
      to spend any time with his partner, and in this way, that relationship
      was brought to an end.

  25. The Appellant next formed a relationship with a young man whom he  had
      come to know through his previous partner. They would meet in  a  park
      near school, as students were permitted to leave the  school  premises
      during the day. One day, unable to think of anywhere else  where  they
      could go, he and his boyfriend decided that they  would  go  into  the
      school premises to have sex. The building was a large  one,  and  they
      went to the top floor, to the area leading to the roof, and  found  an
      empty classroom on the top floor. Classes were still going on in other
      parts of the school. The Appellant knew that his parents would  arrive
      to collect him in about half an hour.

  26. There were no windows in the classroom, and with the door closed, they
      thought they would not be disturbed. There was no key in the  door  so
      they could  not  lock  it.  However,  whilst  the  Appellant  and  his
      boyfriend were having sex, a cleaner came into  the  room.  He  was  a
      large man, aged about forty years. On seeing the two,  naked,  and  in
      the act of sexual intercourse, he called the school Bassij, and locked
      the door. The two knew that there was no  escape.  They  dressed,  and
      then sat on chairs and waited.

  27. When the Bassij arrived, with the cleaner, they asked him what he  had
      seen. The cleaner stated that he had seen the two naked, having sexual
      intercourse. During the questioning, the Appellant was  sitting  on  a
      chair with a board (a writing slope) attached; that swings round,  and
      on which you can write. It was made of metal, and meant that there was
      no need for a desk. One Bassij kicked the chair that the Appellant was
      sitting on and he fell, catching his lip on the metal  handle  of  the
      writing slope attached to the chair next to him, causing injury to his
      mouth. The Bassij were swearing at the Appellant  and  his  boyfriend.
      One Bassij picked up the Appellant from his chair and  began  slapping
      him in the face and swearing at him. Two other Bassij were beating the
      Appellant's boyfriend. During these assaults, the Appellant  sustained
      another injury to his face.

  28. The two were dragged to a small room where they were locked in.  After
      about 30 - 45 minutes, two of the school Bassij returned,  accompanied
      by two Entazami. The Appellant was handcuffed  to  one  Entazami,  his
      boyfriend to the other.  Swearing  at  them,  and  pushing  them,  the
      Entazami took the two out of the  school,  and  they  were  driven  to
      Shahrak Gharb station, (branch 123). The Bassij came also. Between the
      vehicle and the station building, one Entazami pushed  the  Appellant,
      who stumbled and caught a leg against  some  building  materials  that
      were there. The two were taken into the station, being hit  and  sworn
      at the while.

  29. They were taken to the officer in charge, a Colonel Amoli. The  Bassij
      recounted how and why the arrests had come about.  The  Appellant  and
      his friend were asked by Amoli whether this was true. Neither replied.
      They were obliged to provide their parents' telephone  numbers.  There
      was no one at the Appellant's home when a call was made. The Appellant
      was locked in a cell. He does  not  know  what  had  happened  to  his
      boyfriend at that stage. He was kept in the  cell  until  his  parents
      arrived at about 10.30 pm, when he was taken to  see  them,  and  they
      were told what had taken place.

  30. It was arranged that the Appellant and his boyfriend would be taken to
      a Juvenile Correction Unit the following day. His parents left, and he
      was put back into the cell, which was locked. There was a  bed  and  a
      blanket. There was no food unless it was paid for. As he had no money,
      he did not eat. He was not handcuffed overnight, but had to knock  for
      along  while  before  being  permitted  to  use  the  toilet.  He  was
      frightened and anxious about what would happen the next day as he  was
      aware of the penalties. He could not think straight.

  31. The following  morning,  the  Appellant  was  taken  to  the  juvenile
      correction centre, which had its own court and its own prison. He  was
      there taken before a judge. The name of the judge was Mosavi. A Bassij
      from the school gave evidence as to  what  had  occurred  between  the
      Appellant and his boyfriend, and the arrest and detention of the  two.
      The Judge asked the Appellant whether he accepted what had been  said.
      He told the Appellant that he had other witnesses there who would  say
      the same thing as the first Bassij. Given what  the  judge  said,  the
      Appellant accepted that what had been stated by the Bassij  was  true.
      The judge told the Appellant that because he  was  under  the  age  of
      eighteen (he was sixteen at the time), and because it  was  his  first
      offence, he would be sentenced to only three months in prison  and  to
      seventy lashes. A payment of 1000 Tomans per lash was  offered  as  an
      alternative. The judge told  the  Appellant  that  in  some  cases,  a
      payment could be accepted in place of a prison term, but  not  in  the
      Appellant's case. It seems that the Appellant's father paid  the  fine
      required to cancel the seventy lashes.


  32. Before he was taken before the judge and sentenced, the Appellant  was
      beaten and  otherwise  ill-treated.  This  beating  and  ill-treatment
      lessened after sentence.


  33. Following the sentence, the Appellant was  expelled  from  school  and
      banned from studying further in Iran.


  34. On entering the prison, the Appellant was placed in a cell with  three
      other juveniles (two sets of bunk beds per cell). For the first  three
      or four days, the cell inmates sat and talked about their lives. After
      that, they were given tasks to do:  physical  practice,  painting,  or
      handicrafts. Sometimes there was compulsory work to be done. Food  was
      put in a metal bowl and a gardening spade used to dish it out. It  was
      called broth but was liquid. They were given bread  to  eat  with  it.
      There was a corridor, and an area with  a  television.   Often,  there
      were about a hundred young people trying to watch  the  television  at
      the same time.

  35. Other inmates, most of  whom  were  quite  friendly,  had  been  given
      sentences for offences such as stealing a  tape  recorder  or  illicit
      sexual relations with a girl or with a boy. The guards were  rough.  A
      trumpet or other instrument was blown at 4am to wake the inmates,  who
      were forced to run in the rain in the yard, and to  jump  like  crows.
      That is, they were forced to  put  their  hands  behind  their  heads,
      crouch down and hop along.

  36. The Appellant was placed in solitary confinement for a period  of  two
      days, by way of punishment, after an altercation with other  prisoners
      in a lunch queue, when older inmates cut in front of him.


  37. On release, the Appellant went to  the  home  of  a  maternal  cousin,
      (_____), who arranged and paid for him  to  take  a  taxi  there.  His
      cousin telephoned the Appellant's father who came to collect him.  The
      relationship between the Appellant and his parents was very poor  from
      then on. He had been expelled from  school,  and  was  prevented  from
      studying further in Iran. He was not permitted to go out, nor to bring
      friends home. He was given little or no pocket  money.  He  stayed  at
      home, or, increasingly, spent time with his cousin (_____), who  lived
      about 20 minutes away, near Melat park, and who had a car.

  38. In July 2002, whilst walking through the park on his way home from his
      cousin's house, the Appellant met a man who struck up  a  conversation
      with him. A relationship developed from this meeting .The man, who was
      older than the Appellant, was an adult. He  was  from  a  well  to  do
      background, and had his own apartment and a car and a  motorbike.  The
      Appellant was told that his new boyfriend's father  owned  a  factory.
      However, he was secretive and, for example, never told  the  Appellant
      his full name. His new boyfriend arranged for the Appellant  to  start
      work at a men's clothing boutique in Tehran. He bought  the  Appellant
      clothes, shoes, everything, even cigarettes. The  Appellant  told  his
      parents that he had found a job. They accepted that.

  39.  The apartment, which was on the first floor of the block, was not far
      from the Appellant's home. It was in an  unfinished  apartment  block,
      and some of the  apartments  were  not  yet  occupied.  There  was  an
      underground car park. The apartment was very  sparsely  furnished.  It
      looked out onto an internal courtyard, but there were no occupants  as
      yet, as far as the Appellant knew, in the other apartments overlooking
      that courtyard.

  40. The Appellant said that his new boyfriend taught him that they must be
      very discreet when they were out in a public  place,  and  not  openly
      show any affection for one another. They would  go  to  the  apartment
      about twice a week, if not more frequently. They were often physically
      affectionate whilst in the car park and on their way from the car park
      to the apartment. They had to take the stairs to the apartment as  the
      lift did not work as yet.


  41. On the afternoon of 25 October 2002, the Appellant and  his  boyfriend
      were at his boyfriend's apartment. They  were  naked  and  engaged  in
      foreplay, when the door to  the  apartment  was  kicked  open  by  two
      officials. The Appellant believes, although he is  not  certain,  that
      they had been tipped off by neighbours who may have seen  them  coming
      and going, or seen them in the car park,

  42. The officials told the two to dress. The Appellant put on his trousers
      and a T shirt. As they dressed, one official stood by  each  of  them.
      Suddenly, the  Appellant's  boyfriend  pushed  the  official  standing
      nearest to him. The  official  fell  to  the  floor.  The  Appellant's
      boyfriend made an attempt to escape, and the other official ran  after
      him. In that instant, the Appellant decided to run out of the flat. He
      did not have time to take his coat, the pockets of which contained his
      identity card and various other  personal  items.  Entering  the  main
      street, the Appellant took a taxi. He was able to pay as he  had  some
      cash in his back pocket. He went to the home of his cousin.


  43. On 28 October 2002, the Appellant's father came to the cousin's  home.
      He told the Appellant that on 27 October 2002, (two days and  not  two
      hours after the escape, as previously noted) the authorities,  in  the
      form of two Entazami, had come to the  family  home  looking  for  the
      Appellant. They had searched the  house.  His  parents  had  told  the
      authorities that the Appellant was out and had not yet returned  home.
      They had said this to protect him. Although the relationship was  very
      bad, his parents did not want him  to  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the
      authorities.

  44. The Appellant's father told him that he must now leave the country and
      assisted by finding and paying an agent. The Appellant took a bus from
      Tehran toward the border. He was put into a container lorry.  He  left
      Iran on 10 November 2002 and after changing lorries some  four  times,
      he arrived in the UK on 3 December 2002. He arrived  at  Purfleet,  as
      indicated above, and the authorities took  him  to  the  local  social
      services department. A social worker took him to claim  asylum  on  16
      December 2002.

  45. Since arriving in the UK he has had no contact with  his  parents  and
      does not wish to do so. He feels strongly that they have hurt him very
      deeply over the last few years. He has had nightmares  since  arriving
      in the UK and is terrified about being  returned  to  Iran,  where  he
      would have problems with the authorities because he  is  gay.  He  has
      found no solace from being in the UK. He remains  terrified  of  being
      returned to Iran.

  46. The Appellant fears that on return he  will  be  taken  to  the  Sangi
      building where his file will be called up. He will be tied to  a  tree
      and  interrogated  and  lashed  until  he  confesses  to  whatever  is
      demanded, whether it is  true  or  not.  He  fears  that  he  will  be
      executed. He fears that these things will happen whether he  is  taken
      to the Sangi building or not. He feels powerless, out of control,  and
      in great fear; all because he was  having  a  consensual  relationship
      with a man whom he loved.

  47. The Appellant states that he continues to love his boyfriend. He  does
      not know what has happened to him, but he fears for his safety. He has
      not had any relationships since arriving in the UK. He has no  one  in
      Iran whom he can trust to try to find out. He does not  want  to  have
      any  new  relationship  without  knowing  what  has  happened  to  his
      boyfriend and coming to terms with whatever that may be. He feels very
      low and does not wish to go out and make new friends in the UK.

  48. The Appellant has kept in touch with his cousin,  who  told  him  some
      months ago that he had been to the Appellant's family home  and  found
      that his parents had moved away. At present, he does  not  know  where
      his parents are.

  49. The Appellant states that he is from Northern Tehran and has not  seen
      a large number of transvestites  walking  the  streets  of  Tehran  as
      asserted by the Respondent.  Nor  does  he  believe  that  sex  change
      operations are frequently and openly carried out in Iran. He  believes
      that because he has one conviction whilst still a minor and is  wanted
      for a further offence, again whilst still a minor, it is not  possible
      that  he  could  return  to  Iran  and  enjoy  a  discreet  homosexual
      lifestyle. He fears that on return he will be detained, tortured,  and
      then killed because he is gay.

  50. In his third statement the Appellant mentions fears  arising  from  an
      encounter in Hyde Park in November 2004, with  some  unknown  men  who
      appeared to be Iranian and who looked  as  if  they  were  members  of
      Hezbollah. The Appellant was in the park with a friend  who  lives  in
      London, whom he was visiting. These men, who reminded the Appellant of
      the Bassij, and who frightened the Appellant, approached  the  car  in
      which he was with his  friend.  They  had  the  Appellant's  name  and
      telephone number, and they made an unsuccessful attempt  to  stop  the
      Appellant's  friend  from  driving  away.  The  Appellant   was   very
      frightened and shaken by this.

  51. He was also worried by receiving a telephone call, a few weeks  later,
      from an unknown male person, who  simply  said  the  Appellant's  name
      before ending the call. A few days after that, the  Appellant  noticed
      men of Iranian appearance, driving cars near his  home.  These  events
      have frightened him and caused him to fear that he is being followed.

  52. The Appellant states that he does not know whether  these  people  are
      after him or are in some way connected to  the  disappearance  of  his
      brother, who had left Iran in about August 2002 and gone to Turkey and
      then to Israel. The Appellant received email messages from his brother
      until about 7 January 2003. He would not tell the Appellant why he was
      in Israel. In 2004 the Appellant enlisted the help of the Red Cross to
      try to trace his brother, but without success to date.

  53. In August 2004, the  Appellant  tried  unsuccessfully  to  report  his
      brother as a missing person to the Israeli Embassy. They told  him  to
      go to the police. This he did. He has produced a  Metropolitan  Police
      memo, giving Interpol's number and stating  that  as  his  brother  is
      missing in Israel, they cannot help him. Then in November 2004 he  was
      able to file a report with the Israeli Embassy, but  the  staff  there
      were very suspicious of him,  he  felt,  and  would  not  give  him  a
      receipt. They do not answer the  telephone  when  he  calls.  He  sent
      information by post to  the  Embassy,  and  has  produced  a  recorded
      delivery receipt dated 6 December 2004.

  54. About eight months ago, the Appellant became interested in the  Jewish
      faith, after a friend told him that Iranians were originally  Israeli.
      He did some research, and made contact with a Jewish  man  through  an
      internet chat room, with whom he has become friends. He has learned  a
      little about the Jewish history and faith. He has been to a  synagogue
      to  ask  about  conversion.  He  feels  that  the  people  there  were
      suspicious of him because he is a Muslim. He was told that the path to
      conversion is a long and difficult one, and that he must study over  a
      number of years before he would perhaps be ready for that.  He remains
      interested in this as a  possibility  for  the  future,  and  is  also
      looking at other avenues.

  55. The Appellant has produced an expert  report  from  Dr  Juliet  Cohen,
      dated November 2003 and an addendum dated 2004. Dr Cohen is a  general
      practitioner of  thirteen  years  standing,  who  works  part-time  in
      Oxford, as a GP, and part-time for the Medical Foundation for the Care
      of Victims of Torture (since 1997). She has experience in working with
       patients who have had traumatic  experiences,  both  in  the  UK  and
      abroad. She has acknowledged that her first duty is to the court.   We
      are satisfied that we may receive her reports as expert evidence.

  56. Dr Cohen notes the Appellant's disclosure that, between his arrival at
      the detention centre, and his being taken before  the  judge,  he  was
      subjected to not only physical, but also sexual abuse at the hands  of
      wardens. He was slapped, punched in the chest and back and  sworn  at.
      Since then he has suffered intermittent nausea and haematemesis.

  57. The wardens pinched his cheeks and touched him all over his body. They
      took off his clothes and touched his genitals. They kissed him and hit
      him, threatening him with further punishment. He was  forced  to  give
      them oral sex and to masturbate. They attempted to rape him, by penile
      penetration of the anus, but did not  succeed.  Dr  Cohen  notes  that
      whilst disclosing these events, the Appellant was visibly  distressed,
      and stated that he found it very difficult to speak of such things. He
      was, he disclosed, then placed in a cell alone  for  two  days.  After
      that, he spent time in a cell with three others.  There  came  a  time
      when he had a fight with another prisoner who had touched his  bottom.
      He was again placed in solitary confinement for a  few  days.  He  was
      then subjected to forced labour such as cleaning the toilets, and hard
      exercise. He lost weight. He was treated as an outcast by  his  family
      who viewed him as dirty and disgusting. He finds it very difficult  to
      sleep and ruminates about the past.

  58. He has a 2cm linear scar below the right eyebrow, which he  attributes
      to a laceration from the edge of  a  desk  during  the  beating  in  a
      classroom. The appearance is consistent with the attribution.

  59. He has a 2cm linear scar at the lateral margin of  the  mouth  on  the
      left, which he attributes to a laceration from the corner of  a  metal
      part of a desk next to the one at which he was sitting when beaten  in
      a classroom. The appearance is consistent with the attribution.

  60. He has a 4cm ovoid scar just below the  right  knee  attributed  to  a
      laceration from a metal bar, which he fell against after  a  shove  on
      arrival at the police station. The wound  was  not  sutured  and  took
      about one month to  heal.  The  appearance  is  consistent  with  this
      attribution.

  61. Dr Cohen is  of  the  expert  opinion  that  the  Appellant  has  Post
      Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD),  and  a  significant  element  of
      depression. She notes,having  herself  conducted  research  into  this
      area, that late disclosure of  sexual  assault  is  a  well-recognized
      feature of testimony. The reasons for this included  shame,  avoidance
      mechanisms, circumstances of the initial interview/s, including  time;
      location, rapport, and gender of the interviewer and  interpreter  and
      non-verbal clues  discouraging  elaboration  of  detail,  as  well  as
      anxiety state, depression, and sleep deprivation.

  62.  Dr  Cohen  advises  further  management  of  both  the  physical  and
      psychological symptoms via the GP.

  63. Following the 3 November 2003 report, Dr Cohen was asked to comment on
      the Respondent's letter of 12 January 2004.  In  her  addendum  of  27
      February 2004, Dr Cohen states that her opinion is not  formed  solely
      on the basis of the account given by a patient. It is also based  upon
      the responses given to many questions  posed  during  examination,  to
      elicit further details of experiences, and the associated symptoms and
      emotional responses. This procedure is  normal  medical  practice,  as
      well as that laid down in the Istanbul Protocol. These  responses,  as
      well as close  observation  of  a  patient,  including  posture,  body
      language, gestures and expressions also assist in forming  an  opinion
      as to psychological state, and inform the assessment of the congruence
      of the findings elicited  in  taking  the  history,  observation,  and
      physical examination.

  64. As to the scarring to the Appellant's  person,  she  states  that  the
      scarring evident was accounted for in a clear and detailed manner, and
      is consistent with the attribution. She would not expect to  see  more
      scaring than is present given the nature of the injuries described and
      the passage of time. The sexual assault as described would  not  cause
      any scarring. It is well known that many methods  of  torture  do  not
      leave scarring and that psychological torture often has a far  greater
      effect than physical torture.

  65. Dr Cohen confirms that during the consultation, the Appellant was  not
      drowsy, psychotic or confused and was able to give a clear account  of
      himself. He has symptoms of depression and PTSD.

  66. The Appellant has produced two reports from Dr F  E  Winton,  dated  5
      February  2004  and  25  April  2005.  Dr  Winton  is   a   Consultant
      Psychiatrist, who trained  at  the  Maudsley,  and  has  worked  as  a
      Consultant for fourteen years. He is currently at the Phoenix Hospital
      in Bury St  Edmunds,  where  he  saw  the  Appellant.  Dr  Winton  has
      acknowledged that as an expert his first duty is to the court. We  are
      satisfied that we may receive his evidence as expert  evidence  within
      these proceedings.

  67. From the 2004 report, we note that it is  the  expert  opinion  of  Dr
      Winton  that  the  Appellant  developed  moderately  severe  PTSD  and
      depression as a result of events in Iran. His condition  improved  and
      became mild, but deteriorated again after receipt of the  Respondent's
      refusal of his application, and became moderately severe again. He has
      PTSD and a Major Depressive Disorder. It is the opinion of Dr.  Winton
      that the  Appellant  would  benefit  from  both  drug  and  debriefing
      therapies. (Diagnostic criteria are annexed to the reports as they are
      to those of Dr Cohen).

  68. It is the expert opinion of Dr Winton,  that  were  the  Appellant  to
      receive this therapy, his symptoms would improve to a small extent. If
      he were to receive the therapy and be  granted  asylum,  his  symptoms
      should become residual or absent within six  months.  Were  he  to  be
      returned to Iran, his symptoms would deteriorate significantly and  he
      would become a suicide risk.

  69. On 26 April 2005, Dr Winton prepared an addendum to bring  his  expert
      opinion up to date. He is of the expert  opinion  that  the  Appellant
      still remains significantly depressed. The depressive features of  his
      illness are more significant than the anxiety ones. He still has PTSD,
      although this has possibly lessened in intensity to a small degree. He
      had sensitive ideas of reference  in  that  he  believed  people  were
      looking at him when he was in the streets.

  70. There has been a chilling intensification of his suicidal  intent.  He
      has clearly thought through the issue in  a  rational  and  determined
      fashion. It is the  very  firm  opinion  of  Dr  Winton  that  if  the
      Appellant were to be told that he was to be removed to Iran, he  would
      carry out his threat of suicide and kill himself.

  71. In addition, the Appellant has produced three expert reports  of  Anna
      Enayat, of St Anthony's College Oxford, dated 4 March 2004;  24  April
      2005, and 19 July 2005. The IAT in  RM  and  BB  also  had  before  it
      evidence from Ms Enayat, and we refer further below to  that  evidence
      and the other evidence that  was  before  the  IAT,  as  well  as  the
      additional evidence of Anna  Enayat,  and  other  background  evidence
      which was before us.


   The Background Evidence

  72. From the background evidence, it is noted that over  the  years  since
      1979 the UN Human Rights  Commission  and  the  UNHCR,  amongst  other
      bodies and organizations, have repeatedly condemned  continuing  human
      rights violations committed by the regime.

  73. The traditional court system is not  independent  and  is  subject  to
      government and religious influence.   The  judicial  system  has  been
      designed to conform, where possible, to an Islamic canon based on  the
      Koran, Sunna, and other Islamic sources. Article 157 provides that the
      head of the judiciary shall be a cleric chosen by the Supreme  Leader.
      The head of the Supreme Court and  Prosecutor  General  also  must  be
      clerics.

74. Although the Constitution  prohibits  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,
  there is reportedly no legal time limit on incommunicado  detention,  nor
  any judicial means to determine the legality of detention.  Suspects  may
  be held for questioning in jails or local Revolutionary Guards offices.

  75. Arbitrary arrest and detention has been and remains a  feature  within
      Iranian society.  However, in March 1997 the decree to  prohibit  pre-
      trial detention of suspects, particularly the young,  elderly,  female
      or unwell, was issued by the Chief Justice (Ayatollah Mohammed Yazdi).




  76. Four types of  proof  exist  within  the  Iranian  legal  system.  The
      application of confession, testimony, and oath and "the  knowledge  of
      the judge" remain unclear to  those  outside  the  Iranian  judiciary.
      There is a  marked  concern  that  confessions  are  often  gained  by
      coercion and that the "testimony of righteous men" excludes women  and
      members of religious minorities.

  77. By law, the death penalty can be carried  out  for  offences  such  as
      espionage; murder; armed robbery; abduction; rape; adultery or incest;
      sexual intercourse between  a  non-Muslim  man  and  a  Muslim  woman;
      homosexual intercourse; drug smuggling; the use of arms to spread fear
      or alarm among the  people,  or  deprive  them  of  their  freedom  or
      security, or the spreading of corruption on earth (mofsed).


  78. The  Iranian  authorities  have  said  that  many  of  the  executions
      conducted  in  Iran  relate  to  drug  trafficking  offences,  but  no
      corroborative statistics or information on  the  protection  of  human
      rights policies in dealing with such offenders is  available.  Numbers
      of stonings and deaths as a consequence are unclear, though most  take
      place in the larger cities  such  as  Teheran,  Hamedan,  Isfahan  and
      Kermanshah. All are endorsed by the Supreme Court,  including  stoning
      of women found guilty of sexual  relations  outside  marriage  or  who
      contravene the Islamic dress code.

  79.  However, the Iranian Foreign Ministry states that whilst execution is
      in Islamic law and cannot be overturned, the government is looking  to
      alternative forms of punishment to stoning.


  80. Prison conditions are harsh.  Some  prisoners  are  held  in  solitary
      confinement or denied adequate food or medical care in order to  force
      confessions. Female prisoners reportedly have been raped or  otherwise
      tortured while  in  detention.  Prison  guards  reportedly  intimidate
      family members of detainees and torture detainees in the  presence  of
      family members.



  81. Paramilitary volunteer forces known as Basijis,  and  gangs  of  thugs
      known as the Ansar-e Hezbollah (Helpers of the Party of God),  act  as
      vigilantes, and  intimidate  and  threaten  physically  demonstrators,
      journalists,  and  individuals  suspected   of   counter-revolutionary
      activities. The Ansar-e Hezbollah often are  aligned  with  particular
      members of the leadership.  The Sepah-e Pasdaran-e  Enghelab-e  Eslami
      (Islamic  Revolutionary  Guards  Corps  (IRGC),  was  created  by  the
      revolutionary regime suspicious of the regular  military.  Its  ground
      forces are said to number 100,000. It operates as the principal arm of
      domestic security, although it has  to  apply  for  a  search  warrant
      before it can raid a private home


  82.  The Basij, or Baseej (paramilitary volunteer forces), come under  the
      control of the Revolutionary Guards.  They are  active  in  monitoring
      the activities of citizens, enforcing the hijab  and  arresting  women
      for violating the dress code,  and  seizing  'indecent'  material  and
      satellite dish antennae.  Ashura Brigades were reportedly  created  in
      1993 after anti-government riots erupted in various Iranian cities. In
      1998 they consisted of 17,000 Islamic militia men and women, and  were
      composed of elements  of  the  Revolutionary  Guards  and  the  Baseej
      volunteer militia.

  83.  Hezbollahi ("partisans of God")  consist  of  religious  zealots  who
      consider themselves as preservers of the Revolution.  They  have  been
      active in harassing government critics  and  intellectuals,  and  have
      firebombed bookstores and disrupted meetings. They are said to  gather
      at the invitation of the  state-affiliated  media  and  generally  act
      without meaningful police restraint or fear of persecution.


  84. There are penalties for violating or attempting to  violate  the  exit
      regulations, such as leaving or attempting to leave on an  illegal  or
      falsified document, ranging from 1 month to three  years  imprisonment
      and/or a  fine,  unless  tried  in  a  revolutionary  court  when  the
      punishment may be far greater.  Citizens  returning  from  abroad  are
      sometimes searched and interviewed by the authorities  on  return.  It
      appears that the act of seeking asylum is not, in itself, regarded  as
      punishable.


  85. The government's human rights record remains poor, and abuses are  not
      comprehensively addressed. The government has retained  power  through
      repression and intimidation. Reports of systematic human rights abuses
      including extra-judicial killings, summary executions, disappearances,
      widespread use of torture and  other  degrading  treatment,  continue.
      Likewise do reports of harsh prison conditions, arbitrary  arrest  and
      detention,  lack  of  due  process,  unfair  trials,  infringement  on
      citizens' privacy, and restrictions on freedom  of  speech,  assembly,
      association, religion and movement. Despite the expressed plans of the
      immediate past President Khatami,  for  a  tolerant  diverse  society,
      there is very little evidence of actual material positive change  (See
      e.g. US State Department Report, CIPU Assessment; Human  Rights  Watch
      Report; Amnesty International Report). Recent press media  reports  do
      not show any positive change, and it is noted that further  executions
      were carried out in the recent past.

  86. An extract from the April 2005 Country Assessment has this to  say  on
      homosexuals and transexuals, at Paragraphs  6.179 - 6.189 :

"6.179 According to the Berlin COI Information Seminar Report 2001,
although homosexuality is never spoken about and thus a hidden issue, in
practice it is not difficult to encounter homosexuals in Iran. There are
special parks in Tehran, known as homosexual meeting places. There are also
a large number of transvestites walking around in North Tehran.
Furthermore, sex changes are permitted in Iran and operations are
frequently and openly carried out. [77a] A different sexual orientation
may, however, create problems. Still, homosexuality is practised every day,
and as long as this happens behind closed doors within your own four walls,
and as long as people do not intend to proselytise 'transvestism' or
homosexuality, they will most likely remain unharmed. [3c](pg104)

6.180 According to the DIRB, technically, homosexual behaviour is sharply
condemned by Islam, and the Islamic code of law Sharia law adopted by Iran.
Sodomy is punishable by death if both parties are considered to be adults
of sound mind and free will. [2b] It must be proven by either four
confessions from the accused, the testimony of four righteous men who
witnessed the act [2b][15b] or through the knowledge of a Sharia judge
"derived through customary methods". If the accused repents before the
witnesses testify, the penalty "will be quashed". [2c](pg15)

6.181 According to the Berlin COI Information Seminar Report 2001,

      "From a legal point of view it is important to take a look at Iranian
      law particularly the Islamic Punishment Act, which carries the
      following provisions for homosexual acts:


      Art. 110: The prescribed punishment for homosexual relations in case
      of intercourse is execution and the mode of the execution is at the
      discretion of the religious judge.
      Art. 111: Homosexual intercourse leads to execution provided  that
      both the active and passive party are of age, sane and consenting.
      Art. 112:  Where a person of age commits homosexual intercourse with
      an adolescent, the active party shall be executed and the passive
      party, if he has not been reluctant, shall receive a flogging of up to
      74 lashes.
      Art. 113:  Where an adolescent commits homosexual intercourse with
      another adolescent, they shall receive a flogging of up to 74 strokes
      of the whip unless one of them has been reluctant.
      Art. 114 to 126 establish how to prove homosexual intercourse.
      Art. 127 to 134 relate to lesbian sexual relations. Punishment for
      sexual intercourse among lesbians is 100 lashes. If the offence is
      then repeated 3 times  - the punishment is execution". [3c](pg105)

6.182 So far, no cases of execution only on the grounds of homosexual
relations have been identified. In fact, the burden of proof is quite high
and it would be difficult to prove homosexual liaisons or intercourse.
According to some reports in local papers there have been instances of
execution of homosexuals. It is not confirmed whether the homosexual act
alone led to execution or whether the person was accused on other charges
too. [3c](pg105)

6.183 According to a Reuters report of 18 July 2002, last year there were
reports that a man accused of sodomising and then murdering his nephew was
to be thrown over a cliff in a sack.  This was given widespread publicity
by the Iranian opposition in the UK and was taken up by other wires, but we
have heard no reports that the sentence was ever carried out. [5ba]

6.184 According to the Berlin COI Information Seminar Report 2001,

      "However, jurisprudence, burden of proof notwithstanding, certainly
      has used accusations of homosexuality. Furthermore, it does happen
      that homosexuality is mentioned as one of the accusations amongst
      other offences held against the defendant. For instance, accusations
      of homosexuality have been used in unfair trials, such as the case of
      a Sunni leader in Shiraz in 1996/97, who was clearly prosecuted for
      politicaly reasons. There have also been other political cases,
      although not in the recent past". [3c](pg105)

6.185 According to the Ta'azirat of November 1983 (valid to June 1996)
sentences of imprisonment for between 1 and 10 years and up to 74 lashes
are possible. The death penalty may also be incurred if the act is deemed
to be  an "Act against God and corruption on earth". Since June 1996 the
revised Ta'azirat omits direct threat of lashes or the death penalty. The
penalties of lashing and of death are, however, still judicial options,
even though they are not mentioned within the revised Ta'azirat. Reports
suggest that since 1996 they have rarely been used. [19a](pg18). Reports of
use of the death penalty in cases where the only offence is
sodomy/execution are extremely difficult to substantiate, and are held to
be an unlikely sentence. More usually lashing is the punishment. [2j]

6.186 However, strict though the legal position is, expert opinion
consulted by the Canadian IRB in 1998 stated that,

       "Theoretically, homosexual behaviour is sharply condemned by Islam,
      but in practice it is present, and has been in the past, for the most
      part tolerantly treated and frequently occurring in countries where
      Islam predominates... In practice it is only public transgression of
      Islamic morals that is condemned and therefore Islamic law stresses
      the role of eye-witnesses to an offence." [2j]

6.187 The same source stated that the police are not empowered nor do they
actively pursue homosexual activity of any kind that is performed behind
the "veil of decency" of closed doors. [2j]

6.188 Sources indicate that there are held to be many differing levels of
homosexual activity within Iranian society. In rural areas, even "lavat" -
sexual activity can be considered socially to be compensatory sexual
behaviour for heterosexual sexual intercourse, and the practitioners held
not to be homosexuals. [2j] The key offensive practice is sodomy, or more
particularly to be sodomised, as an unnatural inversion of God's creation,
and some experts hold that "homosexuals" are understood in Iran to be
willing passive partners. [2j]

6.189 According to a DIRB Report of 1999, lesbian cases rarely come before
the courts, as the case usually fails the test of proof of four righteous
witnesses. Sources hold that lesbian behaviour in public is impossible to
distinguish from accepted social contact between women in Iran. [2o] The
source concludes,


      "Of female same-sex behaviour musahaqa almost nothing is known.
      Islamic law considers it sex outside marriage and therefore as
      adultery, with all the consequences already described. Yet because no
      penetration takes place, punishment is theoretically limited to one
      hundred lashes. In practice lesbian behaviour is regarded as
      relatively unimportant, because it usually takes place discreetly."
      [2o]


Other DIRB sources expand that lesbianism defined as genital contact
between women is punishable by 100 lashes each and by death on the fourth
offence. [2c](pg15)."


  87.  Many  of  the  above  points  are  also  mentioned  in  the   Amnesty
      International reports; Country Assessment; Human Rights Watch, and the
      other background evidence lodged.

  88. We note at  this  point  that  we  received  the  April  2005  Country
      Assessment, whereas the IAT in RM and BB  received  the  October  2004
      Assessment. It is for this reason that we have included  the  relevant
      section from the April 2005  Country  Assessment  above,  although  we
      cannot see that it contains information that is  materially  different
      from that which was before the IAT, and no such difference  was  drawn
      to our attention.

  89. The determination of the IAT in the case of RM and BB is,  of  course,
      of the essence in our assessment of the evidence before us and in  our
      consideration and findings as to the facts and as to risk  on  return.
      It is helpful and convenient to set out here,  certain  extracts  from
      the evidence that was before the IAT, as well as their conclusions  in
      relation to  the  expert  and  other  background  evidence  that  they
      received, as to the situation in general, as opposed to in relation to
      the individual Appellants before them. We note that the IAT found that
      the CIPU was not wholly accurate in all respects,  and  preferred  the
      evidence of and referred to by Ms Enayat.

  90. The IAT received expert evidence from Anna Enayat; a Mr K,  member  of
      the Iranian Bar; Professor Afshar; Professor Amin; the Honorary  Legal
      Adviser to the UK Embassy in Tehran.

  91. At paragraph 15 of the determination in RM and BB we find the relevant
      provisions of Iranian law on homosexuality,  which  we  reproduce  for
      ease  of  reference  and  because  the  Country  Assessment  does  not
      accurately summarize them:

"Relevant Iranian legal provisions

   We set out first of  all  the  relevant  provisions  of  Iranian  law  on
   homosexuality. These are contained in Appendix 1  to  the  report  of  Ms
   Enayat (an expert who gave evidence on behalf of B) of 1  June  2004  and
   are accepted by the Honorary Legal Adviser  to  the  British  Embassy  in
   Tehran, who also provided evidence.

     Chapter 1 - the definition of Lavat
     Article 108:  Lavat is an act of congress [vati] between males whether
     in [the form of] penetration or of tafkhiz [the rubbing  of  thighs/of
     the penis against thighs].
     Article 109:  Both the  active  and  passive  partners  to  lavat  are
     subject to the Hadd [punishment].
     Article 110:  The Hadd [punishment] for lavat  where  penetration  has
     occurred is death and the method of execution is at the discretion  of
     the Shari'a judge.
     Article 111:  Lavat is punishable by death so long as both the  active
     and passive partners are mature, of sound mind, and have acted of free
     will.
     Article 112:  If a mature man commits an act of  lavat  with  a  minor
     [immature youth] the active partner [ie mature man] will  be  executed
     and the passive partner  will,  unless  he  has  acted  under  duress,
     receive up to seventy-four lashes of the whip.
     Article 113:  Whenever an immature person commits an act  of  congress
     [vati:  ie whether penetrative or in the form  of  "tafkhiz  or  other
     similar acts"] with another immature person [both] will receive up  to
     seventy-four lashes unless one of them has acted under duress.
     Chapter 2 - the methods of proving lavat
     Article 114:  The Hadd  [crime]  of  lavat  is  proven  by  confession
     repeated four times before a Shari'a judge.
     Article 115:  Less  than  four  confessions  do  not  incur  the  Hadd
     [punishment] and the  person  who  confesses  will  be  subject  to  a
     discretionary punishment [ta'zir].
     Article 116:  Confession is valid where the confessor  is  mature,  of
     sound mind, in control, has free will and [acts with] intention.
     Article 117:  The Hadd [crime] of lavat is proven by  the  witness  of
     four just men who have observed the act.
     Article 118:  The Hadd of lavat is not proven by the witness of  fewer
     than four just men and the witnesses will be subject to the  Hadd  for
     slander [qazaf].
     Article 119:  The witness of women alone, or in conjunction with  men,
     does not prove the Hadd of lavat.
     Article 120:  The Shari'a judge may rule  [issue  a  verdict]  on  the
     basis of the knowledge  which  he  has  acquired  by  normal/generally
     acceptable methods.
     Article 121:  The Hadd of tafkhiz and similar acts  between  two  men,
     without penetration, will be punished by one hundred lashes  for  each
     [party to the act].
     Note to Article 121:  If the active partner is  "non-Muslim"  and  the
     passive partner is Muslim, the punishment for the  active  partner  is
     death.
     Article 122:  If tafkhiz and similar acts are  repeated  three  times,
     and have each time incurred  the  Hadd  [punishment],  on  the  fourth
     offence the Hadd [punishment] will be death.
     Article 123:  If two men,  unrelated  to  one  another,  lie,  without
     necessity, naked under the same cover, they will each be  punished  by
     up to ninety-nine lashes of the whip.
     Article 124:  If a person kisses another with lascivious intent,  they
     will be punished by up to sixty lashes of the whip.
     Article 125:  If a person who has committed an act of  sodomy  [lavat]
     or the rubbing of thighs [tafkhiz]  or  similar  acts  repents  before
     witnesses have delivered their testimony, he will not  be  subject  to
     the Hadd punishment.  If the person repents after the testimonies have
     been delivered, he will be subject to the Hadd punishment.
     Article 126:  If sodomy [lavat] or the rubbing of thighs [tafkhiz]  or
     similar acts is established by confession,  and  the  person  who  has
     confessed subsequently repents, the judge may request the Vali-ye  Amr
     [supreme leader] to exercise clemency.


   These are provisions taken from book 2 of the law of Islamic  punishment.
   We have Ms Enayat's commentary on these provisions in the bundle, and  we
   shall turn to this subsequently. "


  92. Having considered all the evidence,  which  included  translations  of
      certain judgments of the Iranian Courts, pertaining to cases involving
      charges concerned with homosexuality  and  homosexual  acts,  the  IAT
      reached its general conclusions at paragraphs 108 - 124:


"Conclusions

We consider first the translations of the Iran Court Judgments contained  in
the Bazgir book.  The title of this is translated as  follows  "The  law  of
Islamic punishment as mirrored  in  Supreme  Court  rulings:  Hadoud  crimes
against public virtue (Tehran 1999 to 2000)."  These were  commented  on  by
the Honorary Legal Adviser and by Ms Enayat as set out  above.   Ms  Enayat,
as well as commenting on the translations, set out  a  table  numbering  the
judgments and summarising the verdicts.  We bear in mind the point  made  by
Ms Rogers at paragraph 11 of her summary of evidence that  it  is  important
to note that these cases only represent a selection of the cases  that  will
have been heard by the Iranian courts.  It is also the case  that  they  are
only cases which have been appealed to the  Supreme  Court,  and  we  accept
that it is extremely difficult to assess how  many  criminal  cases  in  the
Iranian court system will have been homosexuality related crimes.   We  note
also, as Ms Rogers points out, firstly that there is no general  concept  of
precedent in Iranian law, which means that a ruling by the Supreme Court  in
one case will have little or no bearing on  subsequent  cases  on  the  same
issue, and secondly that the outcome of cases returned for  hearing  by  the
Supreme Court is unknown.  They are also  cases  concerning  only  instances
where the defendant was originally charged with sodomy, since those are  the
cases over which the Supreme Court has  jurisdiction.   It  is  said  in  Ms
Enayat's report that  in  the  cases  where  the  defendant  was  originally
charged with Tafkhiz, the provincial court of appeal would  be  the  correct
appellate authority.  We also take from Ms Enayat's  report  the  fact  that
cases are very likely to be heard in camera, information is unlikely  to  be
published at the time of hearing or  conviction,  and  the  suggestion  that
Iran is responding to  international  pressure  on  its  use  of  the  death
penalty and other human rights violations by suppressing  information  about
its legal system, such that little information is publicly  available  about
current practices.  It is clear that a number of these cases  were  remitted
by the Supreme  Court.   Case  number  105,  where  the  death  penalty  was
confirmed, is a case where the charge was  murder  and  Tafkhiz.   Case  110
concerned forced sodomy and again the death  sentence  was  confirmed.   The
same is true of case 112.  The sentence in that case however was 74  lashes.
    The accused who received the lashes was fifteen years old  at  the  time
of the crime.  There are also examples of acquittals being confirmed.   Case
116 involved a sentence of six months in the case of forced  sodomy  but  it
was not a case of sex with a minor or a case of  rape.   In  case  117,  the
sentence was six years where the relationship was with a  fifteen  year  old
and was deemed consensual.  It is clear that case  110  was  proved  on  the
basis of knowledge of the judge.   Case  112  appears  to  have  involved  a
confession.  It is unclear what the method of proof was in case  116.   Case
117 appears to have involved the knowledge of the judge.  Case 125  involved
sodomy, and the death sentence was confirmed by  the  Supreme  Court.   This
was proved on the basis of the knowledge of the judge,  and  a  sentence  of
100 lashes in Case 126 was again on that basis.  The same  outcome  and  the
same method of proof applied in case 128.   Cases  129  and  130  are  cases
where a sentence of 100 lashes was confirmed by  the  Supreme  Court.   Case
133 involved  a  similar  sentence  with  the  method  of  proof  being  the
knowledge of the judge in this case.

Ms Enayat made the point that the cases cannot  be  viewed  as  representing
either a comprehensive picture or a statistical sample but are  selected  to
illustrate the variety of situations which, from  a  legal  point  of  view,
might arise in the courts and be problematic as  opposed  to  routine.   She
also made the point that there are no systematic crime statistics  published
in Iran for any type of offence, although she noted that in  the  year  2002
to 2003 slightly over 86,000 offences were  classified  as  "crimes  against
public virtue" which would clearly include sodomy and Tafkhiz.

Ms Enayat's comments on the reports  of  the  Honorary  Legal  Adviser  take
issue first of all with what it is said about the period to which  the  case
histories relate.  Ms Enayat made the  point  that  the  great  majority  of
cases pertain to the period 1991 to 1995.  She noted also that 19 of the  28
Supreme Court cases were cases of  "child  molestation".   There  are  eight
examples in the Bazgir compilation of cases which did not  involve  "force".
She made the point that there are at least  three  examples  in  the  Bazgir
compilation of men charged with sodomy where  the  complainant  was  clearly
the public prosecutor rather than it being a  complaint  by  an  "interested
party" as referred to by the        Honorary Legal  Adviser.   She  referred
to case  1/135  of  1990  in  which  two  men  aged  18  and  26  years  old
respectively were convicted of sodomy and  sentenced  to  execution  by  the
first instance court on the basis of confessions and a medical report.   The
sentence was overturned by the Supreme Court and remitted on the basis  that
the medical certificate did not provide  decisive  evidence  of  intercourse
between them, and in  Court  the  Appellants  denied  the  act  despite  the
confessions.  She referred next to case 13/133  of  1992  where  a  man  was
charged  with  committing  sodomy  with  two  others.   The  Supreme   Court
confirmed the sentence of 100 lashes.   The  court  in  the  first  instance
concluded that  although  there  was  inadequate  evidence  of  sodomy,  non
penetrative sex (Tafkhiz) was proven on the basis of the  knowledge  of  the
judge.  The complainant was the public prosecutor.

Case 14/117 of 1992 was a case where three men were charged with sodomy  and
acquitted for lack  of  evidence  by  the  Court  of  first  instance.   The
complainant was the public prosecutor, who appealed the case  on  the  basis
that they had confessed under  interrogation  and  in  the  presence  of  an
investigating magistrate, and if sodomy could not  be  proven  the  evidence
was sufficient to prove Tafkhiz.   The Supreme Court rejected the appeal.

Case 8, in the Sabri collection, of 1992, was  a  case  where  a  thirty-six
year old man was charged with sodomy and a fifteen year old boy was  charged
with  submission  to  sodomy.   The  Court  found  that  the   evidence   of
penetrative sex was inadequate and that  the  confessions  of  both  parties
were flawed but there  were  adequate  grounds  to  impose  a  discretionary
ta'zir penalty.  The thirty-six year old was  sentenced  to  74  lashes  and
exile for a period of five years and the boy, who had not  at  the  time  of
the crime reached the age of maturity (fifteen lunar  years)  was  sentenced
to 39 lashes of the whip.  The complainant was the public prosecutor.

As regards the Honorary Legal Adviser's comments on declarations of  remorse
and repentance, Ms Enayat referred to articles 125  and  126  and  concluded
that even in cases where repentance follows a confession it is  not  in  the
power of the judge hearing the case to absolve the individual on  the  basis
of their repentance and the Supreme Court  has  ruled  that  judges  in  the
court of issue are expected  to  evaluate  the  "quality"  of  a  repentance
following confessions.  Ms Enayat concluded that the verdict  based  on  the
knowledge of the judge has an equivalent status  in  Shia  jurisprudence  to
guilt established on the basis of witnesses.

With regard to the Honorary Legal Adviser's comment that none of  the  cases
resulted in a conviction for sodomy except one in 1994, she  noted  that  in
fact there are two cases on the Bazgir compilation where the  Supreme  Court
confirmed the conviction of sodomy and the death  sentence.   The  first  of
these is case number 31/112 of  December  1994  to  January  1995  where  an
eighteen year old committed homosexual rape on a nine year old boy  and  was
sentenced to death by being thrown  from  a  height.   The  second  case  no
27/125 confirmed in July 1993 was that  of  a  prison  guard  convicted  for
multiple acts of sodomy with his charges.

As we have seen, of the  twenty-eight  appeals  considered  by  the  Supreme
Court, six resulted in outright acquittal in the court  of  first  instance,
five of these being confirmed by the Supreme Court and  one  being  remitted
for reconsideration, and twelve resulted in a conviction for  sodomy  and  a
death sentence on that account in the court of first instance, ten of  which
were quashed for procedural reasons and remitted to be reheard.  Nine  cases
resulted in a conviction in the Court of first instance for Tafkhiz  and  in
six of these cases the Supreme Court confirmed their  sentence  but  in  one
case remitted it on the basis of inadequate evidence.  We  note  that  there
is no information in  the  sources  on  the  verdicts  handed  down  at  the
rehearings or the response of the Supreme Court to them.

Ms Enayat also commented that, as we have already noted, in a number of  the
cases  of  sodomy  not  involving  rape  the  complainant  was  the   public
prosecutor rather than being the victim or his next of kin.  It is the  case
that where the person was charged with sodomising a minor,  the  complainant
was always the next of kin of the child.

At page 679 of the bundle in the course of this report Ms Enayat  also  made
the point that as a consequence of the status given to private  complainants
in the Iranian legal system, a large source of insecurity for  a  practicing
homosexual in Iran is that  a  complaint  may  be  laid  against  him  by  a
neighbour, servant, a spouse or any other person in his  orbit,  either  out
of a sense of  moral  rectitude  or  for  revenge.   She  stated  that  such
complaints automatically trigger a  Court  hearing  and,  if  the  judge  so
decides, the formulation of charges.  A crucial distinction is  said  to  be
not  so  much  between  the  private  or  public  status  of  the   original
complainant but rather whether or not the  case  can  be  dismissed  if  the
private individual or association withdraws  the  complaint.   None  of  the
Hadd crimes and none of the crimes against public virtue  under  Book  5  of
the law of Islamic punishment are included on the list of  articles  of  the
law where if a case is brought by a  private  complainant  prosecution  will
cease on the withdrawal of the complaint.

As regards cases where the prosecution resulted in a sentence  of  whipping,
and the Honorary Legal Adviser's view  was  that  evidence  was  mainly  the
acknowledgement of guilt and confession by the perpetrator,  but  Ms  Enayat
made the point that in some of the case histories it is unclear what  method
of proof was used.  Where the method is set out, the knowledge of the  judge
was the method used in ten of the fifteen cases, and  confession  by  itself
was the method of proof in two of the  fifteen  cases  and  in  three  cases
confession accompanied by reference to a medical certificate was cited.   In
both confirmed death sentence cases the method of proof  was  the  knowledge
of the judge.  It is clear that in no case was the  "witness  of  four  just
men" used as the method  of  proof.   Ms  Enayat  concludes  that  the  case
history supplied abundant indication of the use  of  the  knowledge  of  the
judge in Hadd cases and  this  evidence  conflicts  with  statement  of  the
Honorary Legal Adviser reported in the British Embassy's letter of  13  June
2004.

Ms Enayat also took issue with the Honorary Legal Adviser's  view  that  the
maximum punishment in cases cited in the book is 74 lashes.   In  six  cases
the Supreme Court confirmed verdicts of Tafkhiz and 100 lashes.  As  regards
the Honorary Legal Adviser's view that the appeal  courts  usually  overturn
the judgments of first instance courts, it was the case in  fact  that  they
had only done so in ten  of  the  twenty-eight  cases.   In  six  cases  the
Supreme Court confirmed outright acquittals by the Court of  first  instance
and in one  case  an  acquittal  was  overturned.   The  majority  of  death
sentences were overturned and the case remitted.  However the Supreme  Court
confirmed the majority of sentences for the lesser offences  of  Tafkhiz  or
an immoral act.  Ms Enayat also comments that it  is  highly  unlikely  that
the executions in two cases of death  sentence  for  sodomy  in  the  Bazgir
compilation would have been announced, given the  approach  of  the  Iranian
authorities in this period.

Ms Enayat set out her conclusions at paragraphs 687 to 689  of  the  bundle.
Among these is her conclusion that the knowledge of the judge is a  commonly
used method of proof across the various types of case.  She also  considered
it to be clear at least from the examples that certain of the Supreme  Court
Judges have been  pedantic  about  what  can  be  accepted  as  evidence  of
penetration  and  have  frequently  rejected  the  evidence  of  a   medical
certificate alone and that the arguments brought are that  medical  evidence
of penetration of the "passive" partner does not by  itself  establish  that
the penetration was by the accused or that evidence of penetration  did  not
necessarily involve penetration by the penis.   She  also  makes  the  point
that the medical reports were drawn up before the  advent  of  DNA  testing.
She also considers it to be evident that the Courts readily accept  verdicts
of Tafkhiz, generally  based  either  on  the  knowledge  of  the  judge  or
confessions which were viewed as imperfect (as proof  of  penetration)  from
the point of the Shari'a.  There is no published  material  on  cases  which
began with charges of Tafkhiz or immoral acts since, as noted  above,  these
would not be  appealed  in  the  Supreme  Court.   She  concludes  that  the
judgments demonstrate that in general sodomy and Tafkhiz (whether forced  or
not) are dealt with in evidential frameworks  that  are  far  more  flexible
than that allowed by the picture given in the CIPU and many  other  accounts
and they have drawn a greater variety of punishments.

In his supplementary skeleton argument of 13 February,  Mr  Kovats  accepted
on behalf of the Secretary of State that the material  now  available  shows
that there are prosecutions and convictions in Iran for  offences  of  Lavat
and Tafkhiz, though he suggests that details are  sparse  and  most  of  the
cases are cases of child abuse and or rape.  It is also accepted that  there
are two instances where the death penalty for Lavat  was  confirmed  by  the
Supreme Court and notes that neither was a simple case of  buggery,  in  one
where the victim was a nine year old boy and in the other the defendant  was
a prison guard convicted on account of buggery of  several  prisoners  which
did not give the impression of being a consensual homosexual relationship.

We have  derived  a  good  deal  of  assistance  from  the  translated  case
summaries and also from Ms Enayat's careful commentary on them.  We  see  no
reason to disagree with the comments she makes or the conclusions  that  she
draws from them.  We have therefore had the benefit of a significant  degree
of more  specific  information  than  appears  to  have  been  available  to
previous courts.  One comment we would make at the outset is to express  our
agreement with Mr Kovats in stating that an impressive level of care  exists
in the Iranian legal system with regard to these matters.  This can be  seen
from the number of cases remitted by the Supreme  Court  for  a  variety  of
reasons and in particular,  as  regards  potential  capital  sentences,  the
formalities required by the system.  In this regard it is relevant to  refer
to the translation of the e-mail question put to Ayatollah  Sanai  at  pages
512 to 513 of Ms Rogers' bundle.  It is clear that the specified  manner  of
proving Hadd, ie four confessions or four just witnesses  of  the  specified
conditions:  "most often  and  generally  has  not  been  and  will  not  be
witnessed after the age/time of the St Imams".  The  Ayatollah  is  also  of
the view that the ways of proving are limited to those two ways and  nothing
else.  The degree of detail and observation required is, as was pointed  out
in Ms Enayat's report, of such a degree as to  make  it  extremely  unlikely
that in the absence of confession a capital sentence would be imposed.

We consider that we can properly conclude from the evidence that it is  most
unlikely, given the statistics and the problems of  proof,  that  the  death
penalty for sodomy is anything other than an extremely rare occurrence.   It
is clear however that, and here we are in agreement with paragraph 24 of  Ms
Rogers summary of the evidence, those guilty of immoral acts  under  Article
147/115 and Tafkhiz under Article  121  face  harsh  punishments  which  can
include long prison sentences up to six years and up to one hundred  lashes.
 We remind ourselves of what Mr Kovats accepted on behalf of  the  Secretary
of State that a sentence of lashing would be such  as  to  give  rise  to  a
breach of Article 3 rights. Although  we  agree  with  Mr  Kovats  that  the
interest of the Iranian authorities in homosexual offenders  is  essentially
focused upon any outrage to public decency, it is in  our  view  clear  that
the authorities would not simply ignore, as Mr Kovats suggested  they  might
in certain  situations,  reports  made  to  them  of  persons  carrying  out
homosexual acts albeit in  private.   If  a  complaint  is  brought  to  the
authorities then we are satisfied that they  would  act  upon  that  to  the
extent that they would arrest the claimed offenders and  question  them  and
thereafter there is a real risk that either on the basis of  confessions  or
knowledge of the judge which might  arise  from  such  matters  as  previous
history or medical evidence or the evidence of the  person  who  claimed  to
have  observed  the  homosexual  acts,  that  they  would  be  subjected  to
significant prison sentences and/or lashing.

Given that we consider therefore that there is a real  risk  that  a  person
who comes to the authorities' attention for having committed an act  falling
within the relevant provisions of the code, it must follow that  since  this
can be presumed to be known by those engaging in  such  acts,  such  actions
would be likely to be carried out carefully.  We have not been addressed  on
the issue of discretion and whether people engaging  in  such  acts  can  be
expected to act discreetly, which was  considered  by  the  Australian  High
Court recently, in Appellant S395/2002 v  Minister  for  Immigration  [2003]
HCA 71.  That is another argument for another day  and  we  would  not  wish
this  determination  to  be  interpreted  as  imposing  a   requirement   of
discretion, but rather a recognition that in  the  legal  context  in  which
homosexuals operate in Iran it can be expected that they would be likely  to
conduct themselves discreetly for fear of  the  obvious  repercussions  that
would follow.  We also  consider,  bearing  in  mind  the  consequences  for
persons prosecuted successfully for such actions, that  Adjudicators  should
view with healthy scepticism  claims  that  family  members  or  friends  or
neighbours reported such actions to the authorities.  Given the severity  of
the consequences we consider that proper  caution  should  be  exercised  in
assessing claims that people came to the attention  of  the  authorities  in
such ways.  This must be particularly so in the case of family  members  and
friends.  In our view, it is the case that homosexual  acts  carried  on  in
private  between  consenting  adults  are  most  unlikely  to  come  to  the
attention of the authorities and it is the case, and we think it  is  common
ground, that the authorities do not seek  out  homosexuals  but  rather  may
respond to complaints of consensual homosexual activity  being  carried  on.
That then is the context in which these appeals must be decided.

  93. We also received three reports from Anna Enayat, as we have indicated,
      and two of those were prepared after the hearing before the IAT, which
      concluded on 15 February 2005. Having referred to the determination of
      the IAT, we next summarize two  articles  which  we  received  at  the
      hearing on 22 July 2005, and then  consider  the  additional  material
      that we have from Anna  Enayat.  We  also  note  that  she  has  given
      permission for her reports in the case of RM and BB to  be  lodged  in
      these proceedings.


  94. Evidence was placed before us, in the form  of  an  article  from  the
      Times of London dated 22 July 2005 and an article from  the  internet,
      from Roozonline, 21 July 2005, to show that two young teenage men, one
      said to be eighteen and one still a minor, were  subjected  to  public
      execution by hanging, apparently after having  more  than  200  lashes
      inflicted upon them; on Tuesday of this week, in  Justice  Square,  in
      the city of Mashhad. Both articles state that whilst the sentence  was
      ostensibly handed down following a  conviction  for  rape  of  another
      teenage boy, both British and  other  Gay  Rights  groups  accuse  the
      Iranian authorities of using the conviction on the charge of rape as a
      smokescreen to justify killing homosexuals, and of torturing  the  two
      young men into wrongful confession. The lawyer for  one  of  the  two,
      stated that a plea to commute the death sentence for the young man who
      was still a minor was  rejected.  He  stated  that  the  two  had  not
      understood that gay relations were forbidden.


  95. We note that Ms Enayat, in her evidence, (paragraph 39 of RM and  BB),
      states that there was a tendency of the Iranian  authorities  only  to
      report cases which satisfied their model of a corrupt  homosexual.  At
      paragraph 43, she was of the expert opinion that for  the  most  part,
      since the Revolution, there would not be a discreet gay  community  in
      Iran, although she thought that there was  a  certain  degree  of  co-
      ordination and contact.


  96. In her report of 24 April 2005, Ms Enayat refers to her December  2004
      report and her testimony before the IAT in the cases of RM and BB. She
      states that material dealing with the charge of an "immoral act" is of
      direct relevance in the case that is before us, given the  Appellant's
      testimony that he already  has  a  conviction,  since  it  illustrates
      further the range of charges and penalties  available  to  judges.  In
      four Supreme Court Act cases reviewed, a sentence of imprisonment  was
      imposed either on account of an "immoral act", or where the judge  was
      faced with confessions that  were  in  some  way  defective  from  the
      viewpoint of the Shari'a, and the judge also made use of his powers to
      impose a discretionary penalty under Article 115.


  97. Ms Enayat makes clear that  "crimes  against  public  morality/virtue"
      (e,g,  adultery,   fornication,   sodomy,   pimping,   non-penetrative
      homosexual acts), are referred to under this general  term.  But  this
      does not mean that these acts are  only  criminal  offences  and  only
      prosecutable as such, if they are committed in a public place.
   .
  98. Further, it is to be noted that where such an offence is committed  in
      public, the offender  will  receive,  "...in  addition  to  the  legal
      penalty for that offence, a prison sentence of ten days to two  months
      and up to 74 lashes of the whip."


  99. Whether or not an act committed  in  private  is  prosecuted  depends,
      simply, on whether it is discovered and brought to  the  attention  of
      the authorities.

 100. Ms Enayat draws attention to two further new  developments  since  the
      hearing in the cases of RM and BB. They are these. First,  the  coming
      into existence of the Social Protection  Division  of  the  Judiciary.
      Since the Autumn of 2004,  the  Iranian  judiciary  has  been  in  the
      process of establishing, under its own supervision, a new organization
      to police moral crimes. The Division may be  regarded  as  a  sort  of
      state run Neighbourhood Watch (although it is also to  have  units  in
      workplaces  etc)  with  wide  legal  powers,   operating   under   the
      supervision of the Head of the Judiciary and the  Prosecutor  General.
      At the grass roots, it is to be run  by  volunteers,  whose  principle
      purpose is to  discover  and  report  'monkerat'  (i.e.moral)  crimes.
      'Monkerat' is short for 'enjoining the good and forbidding  the  evil'
      that is the duty incumbent on all Muslims  to  promote  'virtue').  In
      effect, in Iran, this means the prevention and  prosecution  of  moral
      offenders, including  'cleansing  society  of  criminal  elements  and
      reinforcing the work of the party of God'. [We note that 'monkerat' or
      'morals police' have already been in existence in Iran for some years.
      See e.g. the determination of the  RSAA  of  New  Zealand  in  Refugee
      Appeal No.74665/03].

 101. These Grass roots units will be established through society  and  will
      be organized and supervised by a unit called  the  popular  movement',
      acting as a deputy of the  central  council.  Its  duty  will  include
      collecting all the information received from informants and giving  it
      to the provincial head of the local Social Protection Division  (SPD),
      to be logged on computer, and for decisions  to  be  made  as  to  the
      action to be taken in each case. There is an obligation to  take  such
      action set out in the Articles of Association of the SPD.

 102. Among other duties will be that of gathering information on the social
      ills  of  each  neighbourhood   and   region,   and   about   'deviant
      individuals'.

 103. Lawyers protested about the creation  of  the  SPD,  but  received  no
      response from the judiciary. The actions of  the  judiciary  have  not
      been contested by the current, conservative dominated parliament.

 104. Ms Enayat emphasizes  that  there  are  a  number  of  ways  in  which
      homosexuals in Iran might be vulnerable to discovery and  prosecution.
      There are various government/religious institutions that survey public
      morality, as well as  private  complaints  to  the  judiciary  or  the
      police, which they are obliged to follow up. The new SPD will, says Ms
      Enayat, add considerably to the insecurity of gay people in Iran.

 105. Ms Enayat refers to the 15 March 2005 reports of  the  death  sentence
      being passed upon two men, following the discovery, by the wife of one
      of them, of a video film showing the two engaged in  homosexual  acts.
      Neither man was accused of any crime. According to the  confession  of
      one, he had made the film by way of an insurance  policy  against  his
      older and richer partner perhaps deciding to  withdraw  the  financial
      support that he was providing in return for sex.

 106. Ms Enayat states that it is unprecedented to find such a report in the
      Iranian press, because such trials are normally held  in  camera.  She
      states that it is worth noting that the newspaper in question has over
      the past two years made a point of reporting on moral  offences  where
      able, and has published a number of courageous investigative articles,
      often of the social circumstances of vulnerable women  who  have  been
      sentenced to death or long periods of imprisonment. She further  notes
      that a homosexual was publicly executed in Mashhad in December 2004.

 107. We also note the mention of numbers of child deaths in the article  in
      the Times of 22 July 2005, including that of a sixteen year old  young
      woman who  was  hanged  for  sex  before  marriage.  Medical  reports,
      apparently declared inadmissible, had suggested that she was  mentally
      ill. We also note that the writers of the article in the Times did not
      put their names to the piece, which is simply 'By Our Foreign  Staff'.
      We take the  view  that  this  step  was  considered  necessary  as  a
      protective measure for journalists and some of those who informed  the
      journalists.

 108. Ms Enayat is of the opinion that a convert to Judaism would face  very
      real problems in Iran, owing to the repugnance  felt  by  the  Islamic
      establishment for the State of Israel. [We do not mention that  aspect
      of the evidence  further  as  Ms  Rothwell  made  it  clear  that  the
      Appellant has not pursued his interest in a possible  conversion,  and
      so did not wish it to be considered as a part of his fears  on  return
      to Iran].

 109. In her report of 19 July 2005, Ms Enayat dealt with two  matters.  The
      first is to do with legal proceedings involving a  juvenile,  and  the
      second provides further detail about the SPD, which is already up  and
      running.

 110. Ms Enayat explains that according to Article 1210 of the  Civil  Code,
      the beginning of adulthood is when a child reaches puberty -  9  lunar
      years for girls and 15 lunar years  for  boys,  when  they  may,  with
      permission of their father or paternal grandfather, marry. At this age
      children are, by post 1979  Shari'a  based  legislation,  regarded  as
      having reached the age of criminal responsibility and are  subject  to
      the provisions of the criminal code (The Law of  Islamic  Punishment).
      Notwithstanding these rules, in other spheres,  the  law  applies  the
      concept of "mental development" in  order  to  determine  the  age  of
      maturity.  This  causes  legal  complications  and   ambiguities.   In
      practice, for the purposes of all legal transactions or dealings other
      than marriage or divorce, or punishment for the contravention  of  the
      criminal code, government institutions treat as immature, a person who
      has not yet reached18  solar  years  as  established  by  their  birth
      certificate. Persons under 18 must have  a  guardian  to  oversee  the
      conduct of their affairs.


 111. In Juvenile Courts, procedures are based  on  the  principle  that  an
      accused has not reached maturity, but where he is over 15 lunar years,
      the provisions of the criminal code will apply to him as if he were an
      adult.


 112. Trials in Juvenile Courts are held in camera and only parents or legal
      guardians, defence lawyers,  if  instructed,  and  witnesses,  may  be
      present. Where there is no access to a child's parents, then the court
      is obliged to appoint a lawyer for the child.

 113. Ms Enayat states that any judgment would be explained  and  served  to
      the parents of a juvenile, and copies  served  to  them  and  /or  any
      lawyer that  may  have  been  instructed.  Prisons  do  issue  release
      documentation, which would normally be given to the parents.

 114. There is no public record of such cases, so that information about the
      proceedings and the conviction and sentence  would  not  be  available
      through the media, or on request from a court,  by  a  member  of  the
      public.

 115. It is possible in some circumstances to obtain a copy of an old  court
      judgment through a lawyer, or through a known acquaintance of  someone
      working in the courts, to whom a person  could  safely  pay  a  bribe.
      However, in Juvenile Proceedings, which are secret, that could only be
      done by the juvenile, with  the  help  of  his  parents  or  a  lawyer
      instructed by him. Further, the authorities  are  very  careful  about
      allowing information on  proceedings  concerning  homosexual  acts  to
      enter the public arena.

 116. A request by a young person for copies of such documents would  arouse
      suspicions. If a person were wanted for a further offence, then it  is
      likely that there would be reluctance to assist in obtaining  records,
      on the part of individuals, for fear of endangering themselves, and of
      being  detained  for  questioning  as  to  the  whereabouts   of   the
      individual.

 117. On the SPD, Ms Enayat confirms that the plan is very much  a  reality.
      It has been stated by the Head of Judiciary that the units  will  take
      the place of the police who have proved ineffective, and will  provide
      much greater control over society. Some 210 units have  actually  been
      in  operation  over  the  past  few  months,  with   1970   accredited
      volunteers, functioning in offices, mosques, educational  institutions
      and neighbourhoods. They will provide 'guidance'  where  they  observe
      moral offences and where the offence is serious, will report it to the
      disciplinary forces of the judiciary' for further action to be taken.

 118. The June 2005  elections  in  Iran,  which  have  resulted  in  a  new
      president,  Mahmoud  Ahmadinejad,  who  is  a  representative  of  the
      fundamentalist right; have raised concerns  that  over  the  next  few
      months we will see further deterioration of the general  human  rights
      situation in  the  country  and,  most  especially,  a  tightening  of
      controls over personal conduct. There is scant prospect that  the  SPD
      will fade away.



















Assessment of Credibility and Findings

The Refugee Appeal


 119. We must make findings as to the credibility of the Appellant and the
      claim in the light of the totality of the evidence that is before us,
      including the background evidence. The Respondent took the view that
      the Appellant's claim was not credible.  He considered that there were
      aspects of the account that were implausible, and unsupported by other
      evidence, so he was not satisfied that the Appellant had shown that
      his claim was to be regarded as true.


 120. We have set out in some detail, summaries of both the evidence of the
      Appellant and that of the clinicians on his behalf, as well as the
      background evidence, so that it can be plainly seen that there is
      support for very much, if not all of the Appellant's case to be found
      in the background evidence. We concur with Ms Rothwell in finding that
      to be so, and in finding that to be a significant indicator in his
      favour insofar as the assessment of credibility is concerned.


 121. Ms Clarke in her submission relied upon the Respondent's letters of
      refusal. In particular, the Respondent did not accept that the
      Appellant would have been found guilty of homosexual intercourse on
      the evidence of one cleaner. However, as Ms Rothwell pointed out, the
      Appellant's case was that when he was brought before the court, and
      under pressure, having been told that there were other witnesses ready
      to testify, he actually confessed, after the Bassij had given evidence
      as to what the cleaner had told him. The judge had proceeded, based on
      the confession, by way of judicial knowledge.

 122. The Appellant has given his account in very great detail in relation
      to the discovery, the arrest, detention, charge, trial and sentence,
      as well as what happened to him whilst serving his sentence.  We find
      that his account is consistent with the background evidence, and that
      of the experts, in particular Ms Enayat, on whose evidence the IAT
      placed considerable weight in the cases of RM and BB. We find no
      reason to take any different approach insofar as her careful and
      comprehensive evidence is concerned.

 123. We find that the Appellant has made mention of specific facts such as
      the placing of particular objects within a setting, and the happening
      of quotidian events, such as the daily routine in the Juvenile
      Detention Centre, that cause us to form the view that he gives the
      account that he does because he was there and because it happened, as
      he says that it did. We agree with Ms Rothwell, for the reasons she
      advances, that the Appellant is to be regarded as a reliable witness
      with a credible claim.

 124. We further agree with Ms Rothwell, for the reasons that she advances,
      that it is not appropriate to hold against the Appellant his late
      disclosure of the serious harm that befell him after he had been
      detained, and before he was brought to trial. We are satisfied that we
      may rely upon and give weight to the expert evidence of Dr Cohen and
      Dr Winton in relation to the Appellant's physical and mental health.
      We rely upon Dr Cohen's opinion, which is shared by every other expert
      in the field of whom we are aware; that late disclosure of sexual
      abuse is common, for reasons of shame amongst others, and we find that
      in this case it does not detract from the credibility of the Appellant
      or his claim.

 125. In relying upon the expert evidence of both doctors, we have noted and
      given weight to the information provided by Dr Cohen as to the factors
      taken into account by a clinician when assessing a patient, from which
      it is clear that much more than the account of the patient is
      considered (see paragraph 63 above).

 126. Importantly, we remind ourselves that in addition to the barriers
      created by the experience of the abuse, there is also to be taken into
      account the fact that the Appellant was still a minor at the time of
      his arrival in the UK, when he made his claim, and is still only a
      young adult now. His experiences of being questioned by adults about
      his life have been extremely negative, and these factors may be
      regarded, we find, as having added to his difficulty in disclosing and
      reluctance to disclose the abuse, as well as the factors highlighted
      by Dr Cohen.

 127. Ms Clarke submitted that in addition to the delay in telling the full
      story, the Appellant had not produced any evidence in support of his
      claimed detention, conviction and sentence. However, we note what is
      said in that regard by Ms Enayat, and find that it is clear that it is
      reasonably likely that the Appellant speaks the truth when he says
      that he was not given any documents about his charge, trial and
      conviction, and that any papers such as there were would be with his
      estranged parents. He did not have a lawyer. We find that it is not
      reasonable to expect him to have approached his parents or his cousin
      (_____), in order to try to persuade them to procure and /or send him
      documents, given the difficulties and dangers that such a course
      plainly holds for any concerned. We find that the lack of supporting
      evidence in this regard does not go to show that the events did not
      occur.  On the contrary, we find that the Appellant's account is
      comprehensive, detailed, clear, consistent (internally and
      externally), coherent and compelling.

 128. For similar reasons, we find that the account he gives of the
      relationship that he had immediately before leaving Iran, and the
      events that caused him to flee the country, also occurred as he has
      stated. Again there is the full, consistent detail and the plausible
      noting of small points, unlikely to be observed or recounted by a
      person who had not had the experience described. The Appellant does
      not know for certain how the authorities came to know that he and his
      boyfriend were in the apartment on that day in 2002. He believes, and
      we find his belief genuine and reasonably likely to be correct; that
      neighbours may have informed upon him. We do note and apply the
      finding of the IAT in RM and BB, to which Ms Clarke drew our
      attention, which urges caution on the part of Immigration Judges when
      considering allegations that family or friends may have informed upon
      an individual to the authorities. This is because the consequences of
      such an act can be so dire. (Paragraph124 of RM and BB).


 129. In this case, however, the Appellant does not say that it was family
      or friends. On the contrary, his evidence is that although his parents
      came to hate him, as he sees it, nevertheless, they did not wish him
      to be killed or harmed, and they did not inform on him. Indeed they
      had helped him to escape. His cousin, the person with whom he had
      spent time and with whom he had built up a degree of trust, has
      continued to keep in touch and to be of some support. It is not
      alleged that it was the cousin who informed. We note that the
      Monkerat, or morals police, were in existence at the time. We note
      that the Appellant and his boyfriend did embrace within the confines
      of the car park in the apartment building, which they visited
      regularly and frequently. Parts of the building were still under
      construction, and builders and other connected persons would have been
      in the vicinity as well as some occupants. We find that there is a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that there was an informer who brought
      the situation to the attention of the authorities.

 130. It is clear from the findings of the IAT in RM and BB, that where
      allegations are brought to the attention of the authorities, then they
      will act. See, for example, paragraph 123 of the determination.
      Claimed offenders would be arrested, detained, and questioned. We see
      no reason to find other than that the Appellant's account of events in
      this regard is to be considered reliable.

 131. As to the Appellant's interest in possibly converting to Judaism, we
      note that he does not pursue before us any claim that he would thereby
      be exposed to any risk on return. That is because he has decided not
      to pursue any such conversion. The information is provided merely for
      completeness and we need consider it no further.

 132. The same is true in relation to his concerns about the strange men who
      approached the Appellant and his friend in Hyde Park, and the
      subsequent telephone calls, as well as his efforts to trace his
      brother. We find, and we agree with Ms Rothwell in this regard, that
      they are the expressions of concern on the part of someone who is in
      fear. In such circumstances, events can, as Ms Rothwell submitted,
      take on potentially sinister meanings, and interpretations.  We also
      note that a tendency to fear that he is being observed was mentioned
      by the clinicians as a feature of his presentation, and we find that
      this tendency may well have played a part in his interpretation of
      these events.  We find that these aspects of the case are not
      materially relevant to the issues before us and that we need not make
      specific findings about them. We state, for clarity that they do not
      detract from the credibility of the Appellant and his claim.

 133. In reaching our findings as to credibility, we have applied the
      provisions of section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
      Claimants Etc.) Act 2004. For all the reasons that we have given
      above, in all the circumstances of his case, bearing in mind that he
      was a minor when he left Iran and when he claimed asylum, we find that
      the fact that the Appellant travelled without a valid passport and
      exited Iran illegally , does not fatally adversely affect his
      credibility. Indeed, the Country Assessment shows that there are
      strict exit procedures in place at Tehran airport, and he would have
      had great difficulty in exiting that way without being detected and
      apprehended, even if he had had a passport and ticket. The same is
      true in relation to the fact that he did not claim asylum on arrival.
      He was taken to the local authority social services department, as a
      separated child, and social workers did not arrange to take him to the
      Home Office for some days. It is not appropriate that this delay be
      held against him so as to be fatally damaging.


 134. We are satisfied that the Appellant has shown that the assaults he
      experienced actually occurred, for the reasons given, at the time of
      his arrest, detention, and subsequently. We remind ourselves of the
      very particular nature of the harm, which included very serious sexual
      assault, and find that this was serious harm inflicted by reason of
      his being a homosexual and that it amounted to his being persecuted
      and to breach of his right to freedom from torture, inhuman and
      degrading treatment or punishment under Article 3 ECHR.


 135.  For all the forgoing reasons, in the light of the totality of the
      evidence that is before us, we find that the Appellant and his claim
      are to be regarded as credible and that the relevant material primary
      facts are those summarized above, and taken from all the evidence of
      the Appellant, oral, written, and through the clinicians, as assessed
      in the light of the background evidence and the relevant case law.


   Risk on Return


 136. The Appellant would return to Tehran. He does not have a passport and
      so it would be necessary for the UK government to make arrangements
      with the Iranian authorities for a travel document to be issued. In
      order for this to happen, enquiries will be made centrally and
      locally, with the police and the security forces and the Bassij, about
      the Appellant. The authorities will thereby be fully aware of the
      Appellant's history and the fact that he has the criminal record that
      he does as a juvenile , for offences relating to his homosexuality
      (Lavat, including Tafkhiz). He has been expelled from school and
      prohibited from studying in Iran again.


 137. He was a wanted person when he left the country, having fled the scene
      at his boyfriend's apartment, in October 2002, where the two had been
      caught by the authorities, in an act that is reasonably likely to
      constitute an offence against public morality, such as Lavat or
      Tafkhiz. His father had come to the cousin's house a few days after
      the Appellant fled the scene, and told the Appellant that the
      authorities were seeking him.

 138. In a society such as that described by the experts and in particular
      by Ms Enayat, which keeps such careful watch over its citizens; it
      appears unlikely that there would be no record of the events of 25
      October 2002 and those that followed. Given the secrecy that has
      surrounded trials of those charged with offences connected to
      homosexuality, it has not been possible for the Appellant to find out
      what happened his boyfriend. A little information about such cases,
      sometimes comes into the public domain, thanks to courageous
      journalists, as Ms Enayat points out.

 139. We find that it is reasonably likely that on return the Appellant's
      record will precede him, and he will be of adverse interest on arrival
      at the airport. Alternatively, when he arrives, he will be questioned
      and matters will come to light then. In either event he is reasonably
      likely to be prosecuted for illegal exit from Iran, as is shown in the
      background evidence (USSDR; CIPU, Ms Enayat March 2004, p87), and
      again this is a further channel through which his antecedents will
      come to light.

 140. We find that he is liable to a prison sentence of 1 month to 3 years
      for the offence of illegal exit. He is then at risk of being
      persecuted or subjected to serious harm contrary to Article 3 ECHR, in
      detention, pending and after trial, by reason of his homosexuality, as
      happened to him whilst in detention pending trial in the Juvenile
      Correction Unit.

 141. He is further liable to being charged and tried for Lavat or Tafkhiz,
      arising out of the events on 25 October 2002, of which there will be a
      record on his file. It is not known whether any formal summons or
      warrant has already been issued to, or in respect of the Appellant.
      Any such step in the legal process that may have been taken will come
      to light when his background is investigated. Thereafter, as the IAT
      found in RM and BB at paragraph 123, there is a real risk of serious
      harm to the Appellant. This would be either on the basis of confession
      of the Appellant, or knowledge of the judge, including the Appellant's
      criminal record, and any evidence the judge may have before him
      through any proceedings there may have been in relation to the
      Appellant's boyfriend, who may himself have confessed to acts with the
      Appellant that are crimes in Iran. There is a real risk that the
      Appellant would be found guilty and sentenced to a significant prison
      sentence, and lashes, where he would again be exposed to ill-treatment
       including ill-treatment amounting to being persecuted or other
      serious harm by reason of his homosexuality. In addition, he is at
      real risk of serious harm whilst in detention pending charge and
      trial.

 142. Ms Rothwelll accepted that it was difficult to tell whether the public
      execution of the two young men reported in the Times and in the Rooz
      Online article, had arisen because of genuine convictions for rape, or
      whether it was a smokescreen to enable homophobic killings to take
      place. We are mindful of the evidence of Ms Enayat, in noting the very
      real difficulties of the media in reporting such matters. It is noted
      that there does not appear to be an issue that the two young men were
      homosexuals, one still a minor.

 143. There is concern, as noted from the Rooz Online article, that both
      were minors when the alleged offences were committed, and that there
      had been use of deliberate delay until the minor defendants became
      adult, in order to try and punish them as adults, in circumstances
      where they might otherwise be regarded as minors, which is wholly
      unacceptable. We find that to delay the legal process for such a
      reason, or to such effect, if this occurred, may be regarded as
      persecutory and as breach of Article 3 rights, to include breach of
      Article 6 rights.  Ms Rothwell acknowledges that the Appellant's case
      is not on all fours with those of the young men who were executed
      earlier this week. However, we find that the fact of, and
      circumstances apparently surrounding these public executions,
      constitute real cause for concern as to how the Appellant will be
      treated on return, and as to whether he may be made a scapegoat. This
      concern as to potential persecutory or other serious harm is a further
      factor, albeit not of great weight in itself, to be placed in the
      scales in favour of the Appellant. We remind ourselves of the low
      standard of proof that is applicable, and of the fact that the
      Appellant does not need to show that he will be killed in order to
      succeed in his claim.

Membership of a Particular Social Group

 144. The characteristics of a particular social  group  can  be  identified
      both in negative and positive form. As extracted from the leading case
      law (including Ward v Canada[1993] 2 SCR 689; Shah  and  Islam  [1999]
      INLR 144,  Montoya - v - SSHD  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  620,  and  SSHD  -v-
      Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567) these can be summarised as follows:

        a. There is no requirement for there to be a voluntary,
           associational relationship


        b. Members need not be homogenous nor does the group have to
           exhibit any particular degree of internal cohesion

        c. A particular social group may include large numbers of persons.


        d. The group may not be defined simply on basis of a shared fear of
           being persecuted. The persecution must exist independently of
           and not be used to define the social group.

 145. Following this  three  categories  of  the  "particular  social  group
      concept" can be identified:


        a. Groups defined by  an  innate  or  unchangeable  characteristic;
           whatever the common characteristic that  defines  the  group  it
           must be one that the members of the group either  cannot  change
           or should not be required to change because it is fundamental to
           their individual identities or conscience.


        b. Groups  whose  members  voluntarily  associate  for  reasons  so
           fundamental to their human  dignity  that  they  should  not  be
           forced to forsake the association

        and

        c. Groups associated by a former voluntary status, unalterable  due
           to historical permanence.

 146. No issue has been raised as to the Appellant's claim that he is a
      member of a particular social group, namely homosexuals in Iran. We
      find that his homosexuality is either an innate and unchangeable
      characteristic, or it is a characteristic that is so fundamental that
      he should not be required to change it. There are at least two
      theoretical schools. One that holds that homosexuality is innate, the
      other that it is a matter of political choice. A third would claim
      that both nature and nurture are involved.  It would appear that on
      the facts of this case the Appellant has simply accepted that he is
      gay and has not mentioned any views that he may have on the nature of
      homosexuality. As there is no issue as to whether or not it is a
      characteristic that he should be required to change, and indeed Ms
      Clarke submitted that he should be free to lead what she described as
      an alternative lifestyle, we need explore this aspect no further.

 147. In the light of all the evidence, we find that the discrimination
      experienced by homosexuals in Iran does include discrimination in law,
      not least through a lack of protective legislation, and discrimination
      in terms of criminalization of their daily lives; lack of access to an
      impartial, fair and independent police and judicial service, and
      punishment through that criminalization of their daily lives, that of
      itself is persecutory and contrary to Article 3 ECHR. There is further
      risk of ill-treatment in detention for those who are homosexual, by
      reason of their homosexuality, even if they are not in detention by
      reason of their homosexuality. We further find that the discrimination
      also includes societal discrimination by members of the population,
      from which the authorities either cannot or will not provide
      protection. As it was put by the President in the case of ZH (Women as
      a Particular Social Group) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00207, the lack of
      state protection is inherent in the discrimination relied on.


   Nexus


 148. Mere membership of a particular social  group  is  not  sufficient  to
      enable a successful claim under the Refugee Convention. There must  be
      some nexus between the persecution and  the  reason  for  persecution,
      that  is,  the  persecution  is  for  reasons  of....membership  of  a
      particular social group.


 149. In Shah and Islam Lord Hoffman  said  "what  is  the  reason  for  the
      persecution which the appellants fear?...important to notice  that  it
      is made up of two elements. First there is  the  threat  of  violence.
      This is a personal  affair,  directed  against  them  as  individuals.
      Secondly, there is the inability or unwillingness of the state  to  do
      anything to protect them. There is nothing personal  about  this.  The
      evidence was that the state would not protect them because  they  were
      women."

 150. We find that the evidence in the case before us shows  that  the  ill-
      treatment of the Appellant is at the hands of the state, who make  and
      enforce the discriminatory legislation, and who condone or fail to act
      to protect homosexuals who are further ill-treated in  the  course  of
      detention, and within wider society. The state does  not  protect  the
      Appellant, we find, because he is homosexual.

 151. We find that the background evidence shows that a person with the
      characteristics of the Appellant would be at real risk of detention
      upon return, by reason of his membership of a particular social group,
      namely homosexuals in Iran, whether on arrival, or immediately
      thereafter.


   Risk After Entry


 152. If we are wrong in so finding, and the Appellant were able to enter
      Iran without receiving any adverse attention whatsoever,   we find
      that it would only be a matter of time, before the Appellant would
      come to the attention of the authorities when information passes from
      the Monkerat or the SPD, to the judicial and other authorities. He
      would be a new person in the neighbourhood, wherever he went in
      Tehran, or elsewhere in the country. He has only his cousin so far as
      is known, and presumably would try to stay with him. His presence
      would be remarked upon by neighbours, who would ask questions. If the
      Appellant were to try to find employment, checks would be carried out
      on his history. He cannot study as he is prohibited, by an act of
      serious discrimination, from so doing. Should he try to do so, again
      his history would come to light. He would be under observation by the
      SPD, and there is no real likelihood that he could simply lead a
      discreet homosexual life. We distinguish the facts of this case from
      those in the case of AT (Homosexuals:need for discretion?) Iran [2005]
      UKIAT 00119 27 July 2005.  Further, We accept the evidence of Ms
      Enayat that there is no gay community as such, no gay group or
      organization, in Iran, to whom the Appellant could turn for any
      meaningful support.

 153. We find that the Appellant is at real risk of being persecuted and of
      experiencing other serious harm, in detention following arrival,
      whether he is charged and tried or not.  We remind ourselves that
      there is no legal time limit on incommunicado detention and no means
      to determine the legality of detention. We find that the Appellant
      will already have been persecuted and subjected to other serious harm
      prior to the stage of charge and trial. So that even if he were to be
      found not guilty after a fair trial, which is unlikely given the
      manner in which the criminal justice system functions, as shown in the
      background evidence, or if he were able to achieve a reduction in
      sentence, to a fine, after a deliberately false prosecution, it would
      be too late.


   Conclusion on the Refugee Aspect of the Appeal

 154. For all the above reasons, we find that the Appellant has shown that
      he has a well-founded fear of being persecuted at the hands of the
      authorities, in Iran, by reason of his membership of a particular
      social group, namely homosexuals in Iran, and that he is thereby a
      refugee who needs and deserves surrogate international protection.



Other Human Rights



 155. The Appellant relied on the Human Rights Act 1998. The Appellant
      claims that he is fearful that upon his return to Iran he will be
      severely ill-treated, tortured, or even killed. Upon the material
      facts of the matter which are those set out above and the background
      material before us, and for the same reasons as set out in relation to
      the Refugee aspect of the appeal, we find that the Appellant has shown
      that he will experience torture and cruel,  inhuman or degrading
      treatment or punishment for the reasons claimed. We find that
      substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the Appellant
      would face a real risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to
      Articles 2 and /or 3  (see e.g. Chahal-v-UK [1997] 23 EHRR 413), and
      therefore this aspect of the appeal also succeeds.


 156. Ms Rothwell pursued a separate limb of the claim, namely that the
      Appellant would be at real risk of serious harm contrary to Article 3
      ECHR, and /or Article 8 breach of physical and moral integrity, on
      removal and or return, by reason of his poor mental health, and in
      particular that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that he
      would commit suicide if returned to Iran. Ms Rothwell accepts that the
      Appellant would be able to receive medication and other psychiatric
      treatment in Iran. The focus is on the risk that he would commit
      suicide as noted by Dr Winton.

 157. This becomes relevant only where the Appellant is to be returned as a
      failed asylum seeker. We have found him to be a refugee and we
      therefore deal with this aspect of the matter only for completeness,
      as if he were a failed asylum seeker, which on our findings he is not.

 158. Dr Winton described a chilling intensification of the Appellant's
      suicidal intent. He states that it is his very firm opinion that the
      Appellant would carry out his threat of suicide and kill himself if
      told that he was to be removed to Iran. We have no reason to doubt
      that opinion of Dr Winton, but we note that it was given on 26 April
      2005, about three months ago. We did not receive any addendum to his
      report on 22 July 2005, and the Appellant did not himself give
      evidence about this.

 159. Ms Clarke drew our attention to the Tribunal case of N Kenya in this
      regard, and to paragraphs 21 and 22 in particular, which she submitted
      provided guidance as to how this aspect of the case should be viewed.
      She did not lodge a copy of the case in question. However, we are
      aware that there is subsequent guidance from the Court of Appeal in
      relation to the approach to be taken to a situation in which there is
      concern that a person will commit suicide in the UK on being informed
      of removal directions. That is the case of J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 23
      May 2005.

 160. We note that the Court of Appeal identified three stages in a
      situation such as this. Two relate to circumstances pertaining in the
      UK, and the third to those in the receiving country. This case
      concerns the situation in the UK, as it is here that Dr Winton appears
      to state that the suicide would take place. This is described by the
      Court of Appeal as a 'domestic case', that is a case in which it is
      alleged that the breach of Article 3 rights will arise from the
      conduct of the UK authorities, where the state is said to have acted
      in a way, within its own territory, so as to infringe the enjoyment of
      Article 3 rights within that territory (paragraphs 16 and 17 of J ).

 161. We note that where a person has been identified as being at risk of
      suicide, the Respondent arranges for him or her to be escorted during
      the journey. That being so, we find that there is no evidence in this
      case to show that this Appellant would be at real risk during the
      journey.  The other key period is that spent in the UK between receipt
      of the notice of removal being served and the arrival of the escort.

 162. We note that Ms Rothwell did not develop, in oral submissions, the
      argument set out at paragraph 10 of her written skeleton, which merely
      asserts breach of Articles 3 and 8 by reason of the fact that the
      Appellant presents a high suicide risk. Nor did she seek to respond to
      the brief submission made by Ms Clarke, that service of removal
      directions and removal of the Appellant would not, on the evidence,
      constitute breaches of any of those rights, in the circumstances of
      this case.

 163. It appears that it is likely that the Appellant would be detained at
      the point of service of the notice of removal directions. On the
      evidence before us, it is not to be presumed that he would receive
      other than appropriate care during detention so as to ensure that he
      did not attempt or commit suicide. Further, there is no evidence to
      show that appropriate arrangements would not be made by the
      Respondent, through medical, social, and other services, to ensure the
      Appellant's safety in the community, were he to remain in his home
      pending detention or pending reporting for removal. Ms Rothwell
      accepts that there is treatment for the Appellant's condition
      available in Iran, and she did not take us to any evidence to show
      that the UK authorities would not be able to hand him into the care of
      the Iranian authorities on arrival in Tehran, so as to prevent any
      breach of Article 8 or Article 8 rights at that stage.

 164. In all the circumstances, following the guidance of the Court of
      Appeal in J , ( see 25-43 in particular) we find, on the evidence that
      has been produced, that it has not been shown that there would be a
      breach of Article 3, nor a breach of Article 8 ECHR, (the right to
      respect for physical and moral integrity). We find, following J, that
      the Appellant has not shown that there are substantial grounds for
      believing that there is a real risk of ill-treatment contrary to
      Article 3, in relation to this aspect of the claim.  Ms Rothwell made
      clear that the Appellant did not allege any breach of other aspects of
      Article 8 ECHR. Following the judgment of the court in the case of
      Ullah and Do (above) it is not necessary for us to consider any other
      potential breaches of human rights in Iran.



Summary



 165. For all the foregoing reasons, on the evidence that has been produced
      before us, the Appellant has made good his claims under the Refugee
      Convention and the ECHR, ( although not in relation to the claimed
      breach of Articles 3 and 8 ECHR by reason of the risk of suicide ),
      and both aspects of the appeal are allowed.


 166. We allow the refugee appeal.

 167. We allow the human rights appeal.



C   JARVIS
Senior Immigration Judge                Date: 28 July 2005
