
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Banger (Unmarried Partner of British National) [2017] UKUT 00125 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


      |Heard at Field House                          |Decision promulgated on:      |
|On 13 April 2016                              |30th March 2017               |
|Further submissions completed 22 May 2016     |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between


                     THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               ROZANNE BANGER
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not Made)
                                                                  Respondent




Representation

   For the Respondent:   Mr A Metzer QC and Ms S Saifolahi (of counsel),
                  instructed by    Breytenbachs Immigration Consultants
For the Appellant:        Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting
             Officer


The Upper Tribunal has referred the following questions to the  CJEU  for  a
preliminary ruling under Article 267 TFEU:

    (1)    Do the principles  contained  in  the  decision  in  Immigration
         Appeal Tribunal and Surinder Singh, ex parte Secretary of State for
         the Home Department (Case C-370/90) [1992] operate so as to require
         a Member State to issue or, alternatively, facilitate the provision
         of a residence authorisation to the non-Union unmarried partner  of
         a EU citizen who, having exercised his Treaty right of  freedom  of
         movement to work in  a  second  Member  State,  returns  with  such
         partner to the Member State of his nationality?

    (2)     Alternatively,  is   there   a   requirement   to   issue   or,
         alternatively,  facilitate  the   provision   of   such   residence
         authorisation  by  virtue  of  European  Parliament   and   Council
         Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of  citizens  of  the  Union  and
         their family members to move and reside freely within the territory
         of the Member States ("the Directive")?

    (3)    Where a decision to refuse  a  residence  authorisation  is  not
         founded on an extensive examination of the  personal  circumstances
         of the Applicant and is not justified  by  adequate  or  sufficient
         reasons is such decision unlawful as being  in  breach  of  Article
         3(2) of the Citizens Directive?

    (4)    Is a rule of national law which precludes an appeal to  a  court
         or tribunal against a decision of the executive refusing to issue a
         residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family member
         compatible with the Directive?




                                  DECISION


Introduction

 1. This  is  the  decision  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.  While the application for permission to appeal  was  made
    by the Secretary of State we shall refer to the parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is Rozanne Banger, a national of  South  Africa  aged  50
    years.  The origins of the appeal lie in the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to refuse the Appellant a residence card  as  confirmation  of
    her right to reside with her partner in the United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   "EEA
    Regulations").  The Appellant's partner, Mr Rado, is a British national
    with whom she formerly resided in South Africa, from January 2008.   In
    May 2010, both migrated to The Netherlands, her partner having accepted
    a work assignment there.  They lived together in The Netherlands for  a
    period of some five years during which  the  Appellant  was  granted  a
    Dutch residence card in her capacity of extended family member of an EU
    citizen.

 3. Some three years later, they decided to move  together  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  In advance, the Appellant applied to the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")  for  a  residence
    card.  On 26 September  2013,  this  application  was  refused  in  the
    following terms:

         "Your application has been  considered  under  regulation  9  which
         states that to qualify as the family member of  a  British  citizen
         you must show that you are either the spouse or  civil  partner  of
         the British citizen.  An unmarried partner is not recognised as the
         family member of a British Citizen.  You do not  have  a  basis  of
         stay in the United Kingdom under the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006."

    [We shall describe this legislative measure as the "EEA Regulations"]


    The battle lines between the parties were thereby drawn.

Appeal and Permission to Appeal

 4. The Appellant applied to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") which  allowed
    her appeal.  In thus deciding the FtT gave  effect  to  the  unreported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in SSHD v  Kamila  Santos  Campelo  Cain
    Appeal IA 40868/2013 (hereinafter "Cain "). The grant of permission  to
    appeal is couched in the following terms:

         "The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals against the
         decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hanes  who,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 18 May 2015, and with the agreement of both
         representatives, allowed the Appellant's appeal against  a  refusal
         to issue her a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 to the limited extent that  it  was
         remitted to the respondent for a lawful decision to be made.


         The Secretary of State for the Home Department  contends  that,  in
         holding that the  Surinder  Singh  principles  apply  to  unmarried
         partners, the Judge erred in law.  The Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department further contends that, in relying on an  unreported
         decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Cain  .......  Appeal   Number
         IA/40868/2013), which  apparently  held  that  the  Surinder  Singh
         principle did apply to persons  in  a  durable  relationship),  the
         Judge erred in law."


    While reliance on an unreported decision without supporting  reasoning,
    as in this case, may constitute an error  of  law  which  is  material,
    giving rise to a set aside  order pursuant to Section 12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, we prefer to  approach  this
    appeal on the footing that the main question of law raised is  whether,
    in substance, the FtT erred in law in holding (our  summary)  that  the
    Appellant, being the non-EU partner of a British  citizen/EEA  national
    exercising his EU Treaty right of freedom of movement in  returning  to
    his member State of origin, enjoyed the benefit of the 'Surinder Singh'
    principle.


The Competing Cases In Outline


 5. The central argument advanced on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  is
    that the 'Surinder Singh' principle (see  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    and Surinder Singh ex parte Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    (Case C -370/90)  [1992]  does  not  apply  to  unmarried  partners  or
    extended family members of EU citizens but is confined to spouses.   It
    was further contended that the FtT had erred in law in relying  on  the
    decision in Cain.  The cornerstone of the submissions of Mr  Metzer  QC
    and Ms Saifolahi on behalf of the Appellant is that she  benefits  from
    the embrace of the Surinder Singh principle.

The Surinder Singh Principle

 6. The Surinder Singh principle, at heart, allows a  British  citizen  who
    has been exercising Treaty rights in an EEA state to be treated  as  an
    EEA national with the attendant rights for a  spouse  and  children  on
    return to the United Kingdom.  The family members are not to be treated
    less favourably than required  by  Community  law.   The  contours  and
    rationale  of  the  principle  are  ascertainable  from  the  following
    passages:


         "19.     A national of  a  Member  State  might  be  deterred  from
             leaving his country of origin in order to pursue  an  activity
             as an employed or self-employed person  as  envisaged  by  the
             Treaty in  the  territory  of  another  Member  State  if,  on
             returning to the Member State of which he  is  a  national  in
             order to pursue an activity there  as  an  employed  or  self-
             employed person, the conditions of  his  entry  and  residence
             were not at least equivalent to those  which  he  would  enjoy
             under the Treaty or secondary law in the territory of  another
             Member State.


         20.      He would in particular be deterred from so  doing  if  his
             spouse and children were  not  also  permitted  to  enter  and
             reside in the territory of his Member State  of  origin  under
             conditions at  least  equivalent  to  those  granted  them  by
             Community law in the territory of another Member State.


         21.      It follows that a national of a Member State who has  gone
             to another Member State in order to work there as an  employed
             person pursuant to Article 48 of the  Treaty  and  returns  to
             establish himself in order to pursue an activity  as  a  self-
             employed person in the territory of the Member State of  which
             he is a national has  the  right,  under  Article  52  of  the
             Treaty, to be accompanied in the territory of the latter State
             by his spouse, a national of a non-member country,  under  the
             same conditions as are laid down  by  Regulation  No  1612/68,
             Directive 68/360 or Directive 73/148, cited above.


         22.      Admittedly, as the United Kingdom submits, a national of a
             Member State enters and resides in the territory of that State
             by virtue of the rights attendant upon his nationality and not
             by virtue of those conferred on  him  by  Community  law.   In
             particular, as is provided, moreover,  by  Article  3  of  the
             Fourth Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights,  a
             State may not expel one of its own nationals or deny him entry
             to its territory.


         23.      However, this case is concerned not  with  a  right  under
             national law but with the rights of movement and establishment
             granted to a Community national by Articles 48 and 52  of  the
             Treaty.  These rights cannot be  fully  effective  if  such  a
             person may be  deterred  from  exercising  them  by  obstacles
             raised in his or her  country  of  origin  to  the  entry  and
             residence of his or her spouse.  Accordingly, when a Community
             national who has availed himself or herself  of  those  rights
             returns to his or her country of origin,  his  or  her  spouse
             must enjoy at least the same rights of entry and residence  as
             would be granted to him or her under Community law if  his  or
             her spouse chose to enter and reside in another Member  State.
             Nevertheless, Articles 48 and 52 of the Treaty do not  prevent
             Member States from applying to foreign spouses  of  their  own
             nationals rules on entry and residence  more  favourable  than
             those provided for by Community law.
         ...


         25.      The answer to the  question  referred  for  a  preliminary
             ruling must therefore be that Article 52  of  the  Treaty  and
             Directive 73/148, properly construed, require a  Member  State
             to grant leave to enter and reside in  its  territory  to  the
             spouse, of whatever nationality, of a national of  that  State
             who has gone, with that spouse, to  another  Member  State  in
             order to work there as an  employed  person  as  envisaged  by
             Article 48 of the Treaty and returns to establish  himself  or
             herself as envisaged by  Article  52  of  the  Treaty  in  the
             territory of the State of which he or she is a national.   The
             spouse must enjoy at least the same rights as would be granted
             to him or her under Community law if his or her spouse entered
             and resided in the territory of another Member State."


The Developing Legal Landscape

 7.  The  Surinder  Singh  principle  has  been  considered  in  subsequent
    decisions of the ECJ and CJEU.  In  Minister  Voor  Integratie  v  Eind
    (Case C-291/05); [2007], a national of the Netherlands, Mr  Eind,  came
    to the United Kingdom to work.  His daughter migrated from Surinam  and
    joined him there.  On return to the Netherlands  Mr  Eind  applied  for
    confirmation of his daughter's right  to  reside  with  him.   She  was
    refused a residence permit.  The ECJ found that Mr Eind's daughter  was
    entitled to return with him to the Netherlands.  In thus deciding,  the
    Court gave effect to the principle of free  movement  and  the  related
    principle of efficacious enjoyment of Community law rights.


 8. In Cases C-456/12 and C-457/12, O, B, S and G the CJEU held that  where
    a Member State had refused to grant a derived right of residence  to  a
    third-country national who was a family member of  a  citizen  of  that
    same Member State and a citizen of the EU, by  virtue  of  Article  20,
    residence rights may be derived directly from Article 21(1) TFEU.   The
    Court invoked the decisions in Surinder Singh and Eind and the   Treaty
    right of free movement of workers, considered that the  same  reasoning
    applies in cases where the general free  movement  right  enshrined  in
    Article 21(1) TFEU is at stake.  The Court held that the derived  right
    of residence conferred on family members by Article 21(1) TFEU  extends
    to family members of a third country and that the conditions  governing
    such residence (which, in the United Kingdom, are prescribed in the EEA
    Regulations) should not be stricter than  those  provided  for  by  the
    Citizens Directive.


 9. This Tribunal had occasion recently to review the Surinder Singh stream
    of jurisprudence in Osoro (Surinder Singh)  [2015]  UKUT  00593  (IAC),
    summarising the last mentioned decision of the CJEU  in  the  following
    terms:
         "13.     ...One of the Court's more recent major pronouncements  on
             Articles  21  and  45  TFEU  and  the  Citizens  Directive  is
             contained in Cases C-456/12 and C-457/12, O, B, S and G, where
             the Netherlands authorities had refused to grant  a  right  of
             residence to a third-country national who was a family  member
             of an EU citizen of Netherlands nationality.  The  Court  held
             as follows:
             (i) Article 21(1) TFEU and Directive 2004/38 do not confer any
                  autonomous rights on third-country nationals.  Any  rights
                  conferred on  them  by  provisions  of  EU  law  on  Union
                  citizenship  are  rights  derived  from  the  exercise  of
                  freedom of movement by a Union citizen.
             (ii)      Directive 2004/38 does not establish a derived right
                  of residence for third-country nationals  who  are  family
                  members of a Union citizen in the Member  State  of  which
                  that citizen is a national.
             (iii)     The purpose and justification of a derived right  of
                  residence is that the denial thereof would interfere  with
                  the Union citizen's freedom of  movement  by  discouraging
                  him from exercising his rights of entry into and residence
                  in another Member State.  The trigger for  the  derivative
                  right is the return of the Union  citizen  to  his  Member
                  State of nationality.
             (iv)      The conditions  for  granting  a  derived  right  of
                  residence to the third-country family member  should  not,
                  in principle be stricter than the grant of a derived right
                  of residence under the Directive, even  though  this  does
                  not govern the return of the Union  citizen  to  his  home
                  Member State, following his migratory movement to  a  host
                  Member State in the exercise of Treaty rights.
             (v) The effectiveness of the right to freedom of  movement  of
                  workers may require that a derived right of  residence  be
                  granted to a third-country national who is a family member
                  of the Union citizen in the latter's Member State.  Such a
                  derived right of  residence  may  arise  in  circumstances
                  where its refusal would interfere  with  the  exercise  of
                  fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty."
    This Tribunal further observed in Osoro:
         "14.      Thus the link between the relevant provisions of  primary
             and secondary Community legislation continues  to  feature  in
             the Court's jurisprudence.
         15.      Accordingly, where an EU citizen has, pursuant to  and  in
             conformity with the provisions of the Directive relating to  a
             right of  residence  for  a  period  exceeding  three  months,
             genuinely resided in another Member  State  and,  during  such
             period, a family life has been created and/or  fortified,  the
             effectiveness of Article 51 TFEU requires that  the  citizen's
             family life in the host Member State continue  upon  returning
             to his Member State of  origin.  In  such  cases,  the  third-
             country national who is a member of the  EU  citizen's  family
             may qualify for the grant of a derived right of residence.  An
             essential prerequisite is that the third-country national must
             have had the status of family member of the EU citizen  during
             at least part of the period  of  residence  in  the  host  (or
             second) Member State."
    At [25], it was noted that that the ECJ had decided Surinder Singh -


         "....by resort to the free movement provisions of primary Community
         law.  The case was decided accordingly and its rationale, or  ratio
         decidendi, has the twofold doctrinal components of the principle of
         efficacious enjoyment of Community law rights and the principle  of
         non-discrimination.  These are  the  two  principles  which  demand
         attention in any given context."


10. Post-Surinder Singh  the  developing  jurisprudence  of  the  CJEU  has
    continued to display a succinctly purposive  and  progressive  flavour.
    This is exemplified in Metock v Minister for Justice, Equality and  Law
    Reform [Case  C-127/08]  where  the  Grand  Chamber  decided  that  the
    Citizens Directive  precludes  legislation  of  a  Member  State  which
    requires a national of a non-member country who  is  the  spouse  of  a
    Union citizen residing in that Member  State,  though  not  having  its
    nationality, to have  previously  been  lawfully  resident  in  another
    Member State before entering the host Member State in order to  benefit
    from the provisions of the Directive: see [80].  In  its  judgment  the
    court emphasised  that  the  Community  legislature  has  progressively
    recognised the importance of ensuring the protection of the family life
    of nationals of Member States in order to eliminate  obstacles  to  the
    exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EC  Treaty:  see
    [56].  Next, the court highlighted one  of  the  express  aims  of  the
    Citizens Directive, namely to strengthen the right of free movement and
    residence  of  all  Union  citizens.   The  principle  of   efficacious
    enjoyment of Community law rights emerges in the following passages:
         "62.     ... if Union citizens were not allowed to  lead  a  normal
             family life in the host Member  State,  the  exercise  of  the
             freedoms they are guaranteed by the Treaty would be  seriously
             obstructed.
         63.      Consequently, within the competence  conferred  on  it  by
             those articles of the Treaty, the  Community  legislature  can
             regulate the conditions of entry and residence of  the  family
             members of a Union citizen in  the  territory  of  the  Member
             States, where the fact that it is  impossible  for  the  Union
             citizen to be accompanied or joined by his family in the  host
             Member State would be such as to interfere with his freedom of
             movement by discouraging him from  exercising  his  rights  of
             entry into and residence in that Member State.
         64.      The refusal of the host Member State to  grant  rights  of
             entry and residence to the family members of a  Union  citizen
             is such as to  discourage  that  citizen  from  moving  to  or
             residing in that Member State, even if his family members  are
             not already lawfully resident  in  the  territory  of  another
             Member State.
         65.      It follows that the Community legislature  has  competence
             to regulate, as it did by Directive  2004/38,  the  entry  and
             residence of nationals of non-member countries who are  family
             members of a Union citizen in the Member State in  which  that
             citizen has  exercised  his  right  of  freedom  of  movement,
             including where the family members were not  already  lawfully
             resident in another Member State."
    See [62] - [65].


    Notably, the Grand Chamber also used  the  language  of  "rights"  with
    reference to the third country family members concerned.  See [70]:
         "70.     Consequently, Directive 2004/38 confers on  all  nationals
             of non-member countries  who are family  members  of  a  Union
             citizen within the meaning of point 2 of  Article  2  of  that
             directive, and accompany or join the Union citizen in a Member
             State other than that of which he is  a  national,  rights  of
             entry into and residence in the host Member State,  regardless
             of whether the national of a non-member  country  has  already
             been lawfully resident in another Member State."
11. The right of freedom of movement of workers was formerly  regulated  by
    EC Directive no: 73/148, which was  later  absorbed  into  an  enlarged
    measure, namely Directive 2004/38/EC (the  "Citizens  Directive").   By
    these measures  EU  nationals  and,  progressively,  members  of  their
    families acquired the right to move freely within EU Member States.  No
    rights of entry or residence were conferred  on  third  country  family
    members.

12. Post-Surinder Singh the EU  legal  landscape  underwent  a  significant
    development through the introduction of  citizenship  of  the  European
    Union.  This was initially established  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  in
    1992, in tandem with the creation of the EU itself.   By  this  measure
    every national of each Member  State  became  an  EU  citizen,  thereby
    acquiring certain rights not through their  nationality  of  their  own
    Member State, but qua  EU  citizens  by  virtue  of  the  Treaties  and
    secondary legislation provisions.  Citizenship  of  the  Union  is  now
    governed by  Article 20 TFEU, which provides as follows:


         "Article 20 TFEU (ex Article 17 TEC)
         1. Citizenship of the Union is hereby  established.   Every  person
             holding the nationality of a Member State shall be  a  citizen
             of the Union.  Citizenship of the Union shall be additional to
             and not replace national citizenship.
         2. Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be  subject  to
             the duties provided for in  the  Treaties.  They  shall  have,
             inter alia:
             1.(a)     the right to  move  and  reside  freely  within  the
                  territory of the Member States;
                 ...
                 These rights shall be exercised  in  accordance  with  the
                  conditions and limits defined by the Treaties and  by  the
                  measures adopted thereunder."
    The next succeeding provision of TFEU, Article 21, provides:
         "1.      Every citizen of the Union shall have the  right  to  move
             and reside freely within the territory of the  Member  States,
             subject to the limitations and conditions  laid  down  in  the
             Treaties and by the measures adopted to give them effect.
         2. If action by the Union should prove  necessary  to  attain  this
             objective and the Treaties have  not  provided  the  necessary
             powers, the European Parliament and  the  Council,  acting  in
             accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, may  adopt
             provisions with a view to facilitating  the  exercise  of  the
             rights referred to in paragraph 1."
13. We have adverted above to the  Citizens  Directive.   This  measure  of
    secondary EU Law contains  the  detailed  outworkings  of  the  primary
    provisions noted above.  Its rationale  is  clearly  expressed  in  the
    first and second recitals.  Citizenship of the Union confers on each of
    its citizens a primary and individual right to move and  reside  freely
    within the territory of the Member States, subject to  the  limitations
    and conditions laid down in the Treaty and the measures adopted to give
    it effect.  Further, the free movement of persons  constitutes  one  of
    the fundamental freedoms of the internal market. These  two  principles
    form the prelude to the grand declaration that Union citizenship should
    be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member States "when  they
    exercise their right of free movement and residence": per recital  (3).
    The lengthy recitals which follow are an indication of  the  moderately
    complex nature of the regime established by the Directive.


    We turn our attention particularly to two provisions  of  the  Citizens
    Directive. First, Article 2, which provides:


         "Definitions


         For the purposes of this Directive:

               1. 'Union citizen' means any person having the nationality of
                  a Member State;


               2. 'family member' means:

                   a) the spouse;


                   b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union   citizen   has
                      contracted a registered partnership, on the basis  of
                      the legislation of a Member State, if the legislation
                      of  the   host   Member   State   treats   registered
                      partnerships  as  equivalent  to  marriage   and   in
                      accordance with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the
                      relevant legislation of the host Member State;


                   c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or
                      are dependants and those of the spouse or partner  as
                      defined in point (b);


                   d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending  line
                      and those of the spouse  or  partner  as  defined  in
                      point (b);


               3. 'Host Member State' means the  Member  State  to  which  a
                  Union citizen moves in order to exercise his/her right  of
                  free movement and residence."


    Next, by Article 3:

         "Beneficiaries


             1.  This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move
                  to or reside in a Member State other than  that  of  which
                  they are a  national,  and  to  their  family  members  as
                  defined in point 2 of Article  2  who  accompany  or  join
                  them.

             2.  Without prejudice  to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
                  residence the persons concerned  may  have  in  their  own
                  right, the host Member State shall, in accordance with its
                  national legislation, facilitate entry and  residence  for
                  the following persons:

                  (a)  any  other  family  members,  irrespective  of  their
                      nationality, not  falling  under  the  definition  in
                      point 2 of Article 2 who, in the country  from  which
                      they have come, are  dependants  or  members  of  the
                      household of the Union  citizen  having  the  primary
                      right of residence, or where serious  health  grounds
                      strictly require the  personal  care  of  the  family
                      member by the Union citizen;

                  (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
                      relationship, duly attested.

    The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
    personal circumstances  and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
    residence to these people."


    [Our emphasis]


14. In the  United  Kingdom  legal  system  the  EEA  Regulations  are  the
    transposing measure in respect of  the  Citizens  Directive.   In  this
    appeal there is particular focus on Regulation 9,  which  is  concerned
    with "family members" of EEA nationals and provides as follows:


         "9.-
             (1) If the conditions in paragraph (2)  are  satisfied,  these
                  Regulations apply to a person who is the family member  of
                  a British citizen as if the United Kingdom  national  were
                  an EEA national.


             (2) The conditions are that-


                  (a)  the British citizen is residing in an EEA State as  a
                      worker or self-employed person  or  was  so  residing
                      before returning to the United Kingdom; and


                  (b)  if the family member of the United  Kingdom  national
                      is his spouse  or  civil  partner,  the  parties  are
                      living together in the EEA State or had entered  into
                      the marriage or civil  partnership  and  were  living
                      together in that  State  before  the  United  Kingdom
                      national returned to the United Kingdom.


             (3) Where these Regulations apply to the family  member  of  a
                  British citizen the British citizen shall  be  treated  as
                  holding a valid passport issued by an EEA  State  for  the
                  purpose of the application of regulation 13 to that family
                  member."

    It is convenient to interpose here the observation that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy Regulation 9 as the definition of "family  member"  does
    not encompass the unmarried partner of an EEA national/British citizen.
     The impugned decision of the Secretary of State is,  to  this  extent,
    correct.


15. Logically, the next port of call is Regulation 8,  which  is  concerned
    with "extended family members", as defined.  It provides,  in  material
    part:


         "8.- 'Extended family member'


             (1) In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  regulation 7(1)(a), (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
                  conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
             ...


             (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
                  person is the partner of an EEA  national  (other  than  a
                  civil partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he
                  is in a durable relationship with the EEA national.


             (6) In these Regulations 'relevant  EEA  national'  means,  in
                  relation to an extended family member,  the  EEA  national
                  who is or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is the partner  of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (5)."


    [The emphasis is ours]


    It is also necessary to  consider  the  definition  of  "EEA  National"
    which, per Regulation 2, is as follows:

         "'EEA national'" means a national of an EEA State who is not also a
         British citizen."

16. To summarise, Regulation 9 makes provision for a British national to be
    treated as an EEA national for the purposes of the EEA  Regulations  in
    the circumstances specified.  Regulation 8, however, makes no provision
    for a British national to  be  treated  as  an  EEA  national  for  the
    purposes of considering the circumstances and entitlement of  a  person
    who  is  neither  the  spouse  nor  the  civil  partner  of   the   EEA
    national/British citizen, but is the partner of the latter, and between
    whom there is a durable relationship.

17. There is evident disharmony between Article  3  of  the  Directive  and
    Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.  Whereas  the  former  imports  no
    stipulation relating to the nationality of the Union citizen concerned,
    the latter does: British citizens are, in this context,  excluded  from
    the definition of "EEA national".   Furthermore,  Article  3  does  not
    require the Union citizen's partner to be  either  the  spouse  or  the
    civil partner of the  former,  whereas  Regulation  8  does.   Thus  we
    recognise the argument that Regulation 8 purports  to  legislate  in  a
    manner neither contemplated nor permitted by  the  Citizens  Directive.
    This argument, potentially, involves the discrete contention that  when
    Articles 2 and 3 of the Citizens Directive are  read  as  a  whole  and
    considered in their full context,  the  words  "irrespective  of  their
    nationality" in Article 3(2)(a)  apply  also  to  Article  3(2)(b).  If
    correct, this  argument  would  yield  the  conclusion  that  there  is
    disparity of treatment between British citizens and EEA nationals.

18. Some reflection on non-discrimination on the ground of  nationality  is
    appropriate.  This  is  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Surinder  Singh
    principle.  It is also a principle  of  EU  law  of  some  vintage  and
    pedigree.  Its  origins  are  traceable  to  Regulation  1612/68  which
    entitled migrant workers and, though in  qualified  terms,  members  of
    their family to equal treatment in respect  of  employment  conditions,
    access to vocational training and a series of social and tax  benefits.
    While the equivalent  secondary  legislation  regarding  the  right  of
    establishment and the provision of  services  did  not  have  the  same
    effect, the ECJ  declared  that  a  comparable  protection  reposed  in
    certain Treaty provisions (Konstantinidis [1993] ECR 1-1191,  at  [46].
    Non-discrimination on the ground of nationality has evolved.  It is now
    expressly prohibited by Article 18 TEU, which provides:
         "Within the scope of  application  of  the  Treaties,  and  without
         prejudice  to  any  special  provisions  contained   therein,   any
         discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited".
    Article  18  operates  in   tandem   with   the   Citizens   Directive.
    Thenceforth, the economically active citizens of the Member States have
    made the  transition  from  exercising  the  rights  of  an  individual
    servicing an economic organisation of states to exercising  the  rights
    of a person who has the status of citizen of the EU.

19.  It  is,  of  course,  necessary  to  acknowledge  that  the  Directive
    differentiates between "family members" as defined  and  other  persons
    who could be considered members of the family unit in  a  wider  sense.
    This is made particularly clear by recitals (5) and  (6).   The  former
    highlights the importance of the definition of  "family  member".  What
    follows immediately thereafter, in recital (6), gives rise to  a  clear
    dichotomy:

    "In order to maintain the unity of the family in a  broader  sense  and
         without prejudice to the prohibition of discrimination  on  grounds
         of nationality, the situation of those persons who are not included
         in the definition of family members under this Directive,  and  who
         therefore do not enjoy an automatic right of entry and residence in
         the host Member State, should be examined by the host Member  State
         on the basis of its own national legislation, in  order  to  decide
         whether entry and residence  could  be  granted  to  such  persons,
         taking into consideration their relationship with the Union citizen
         or any other circumstances, such as  their  financial  or  physical
         dependence on the Union citizen."

         [Our emphasis.]

20. It cannot be denied that the Directive accords different  treatment  to
    "family members", as defined and other members of the family unit "in a
    broader sense".  One further aspect of  this  discrete  topic  is  that
    Article 2 of the Citizens Directive confers rights on  family  members,
    whereas Article  3(2)  provides  for  the  facilitation  of  entry  and
    residence  for  family  members  outwith  the  definition  of   "family
    members". This potentially, raises interesting questions concerning the
    Treaty prohibition against discrimination on the ground of  nationality
    and the decision in Metock wherein, as  we  have  highlighted  in  [11]
    above, the CJEU used the language of rights conferred on third  country
    nationals  in its elaboration of the effects of the Citizens Directive.

21. If there is merit in the argument which  we  have  sketched  above,  it
    would follow that Regulation  8  of  the  EEA  Regulations  reflects  a
    failure by the United Kingdom  to  take  all  appropriate  measures  to
    ensure fulfilment of its obligations arising  out  of  the  Treaty,  in
    contravention of Article 5 TEU.  Thus the failure of the Regulations to
    recognise the rights of Union citizens' durable  relationship  partners
    who do not have the status of spouse or civil partner would equate to a
    failure to properly transpose the Citizens Directive. We bear  in  mind
    that we have not received full argument on the issue.


22. We consider that this challenge  falls  to  be  determined  within  the
    confines of the Surinder Singh principle.  It seems  to  us  that  this
    principle continues  to operate in a residual, probably small, category
    of cases in which the Citizen's Directive is not dispositive.  In  pure
    legal doctrinal  terms  it  might  be  said  that  the  Surinder  Singh
    principle co-exists with, and seeks to give effect to,  those  measures
    of primary EU legislation which we have highlighted above which are not
    fully implemented in the relevant EU secondary legislation, namely  the
    Citizens Directive, or are undermined  or  diluted  by  either  the  EU
    secondary legislation or the transposing domestic  legislation  in  the
    decision in any given case.  On this analysis the Citizens Directive is
    not exhaustive of rights and obligations  in  the  field  to  which  it
    applies.


23. We consider that the decision of the CJEU in Case C-83/11, Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v Rahman and Others has a bearing on  the
    issues raised in this appeal.  There it  was  held  unambiguously  that
    Member States must ensure  that  their  legislation  contains  criteria
    which enables family members falling outwith the definition  of  family
    member in Article 2(2) of the Citizens Directive -


         ".....  to obtain a decision on their application for entry and
         residence that is founded on an extensive examination of their
         personal circumstances and, in the event of refusal, is justified
         by reasons ....."


      See [26].  The Grand Chamber further ruled:


         "The Member States have a  wide  discretion  when  selecting  those
         criteria, but the criteria  must  be  consistent  with  the  normal
         meaning of the term 'facilitate'  and  of  the  words  relating  to
         dependence used in Article 3(2) and must not deprive that provision
         of its effectiveness."


24. The matrix of this appeal is as follows.  During their sojourn  in  The
    Netherlands, Mr Rado, the Appellant's  Union  citizen/British  national
    partner, exercised his free movement rights and the Appellant,  as  his
    partner, secured residence authorisation.  The legal foundation of this
    authorisation  can  be  traced  to  Article  3(2)(b)  of  the  Citizens
    Directive.   Upon  the  couple's  return  to  the  United  Kingdom  the
    Appellant has been denied a residence card by the Secretary  of  State.
    This refusal accords with the regime of the  EEA  Regulations.   It  is
    based upon the consideration that the Appellant's partner is a  British
    national.

25. If the Appellant's partner were the national of  another  Union  state,
    the refusal could not be lawfully made under the EEA Regulations.  Thus
    there is disparity  of  treatment  because,  firstly,  the  Appellant's
    partner, being a British national,  is  treated  differently  from  the
    nationals of other EU Member States.  His British  nationality  is  the
    impetus for the disparate treatment.   It  is  the  sine  qua  non.  We
    further observe that the impugned decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    does not proffer any justification for treating Mr  Rado  in  a  manner
    differing from the treatment which would  have  been  accorded  to  the
    Appellant's partner if he were a national of another EU  Member  State.
    Secondly, there is prima facie differential treatment  as  regards  the
    Appellant and other analogous partners of non-British nationals.

26. The treatment of Mr Rado, therefore, differs from that which  would  be
    accorded to the nationals of other EU Member States.  This, raises  the
    question of whether the Secretary  of  State's  refusal  to  grant  the
    Appellant a residence card, infringes both the EU general principle  of
    non-discrimination and Article 18 TEU.

27. At this juncture we return to the Surinder  Singh  principle.   As  was
    observed in Osoro, while this principle  co-exists  with  the  Citizens
    Directive, the precise terms of the relationship between  the  two  are
    not entirely clear.  Cases such as the present  proceed  on  the  basis
    that, in the abstract, the  Surinder  Singh  principle  is  capable  of
    applying to the relationship  under  scrutiny.   The  question  thereby
    raised  is  whether  it  does  apply  in  the  particular  context.  As
    subsequent decisions demonstrate, the principle does not operate  in  a
    straightjacket. Rather, it has sufficient flexibility to be extended to
    contexts analogous to that in which it was devised.  As observed above,
    the jurisprudence of the CJEU in this field has a distinctly purposive,
    progressive flavour.


28. This case, in common with Surinder  Singh,  involves  a  third  country
    partner  of  the  EU  citizen/British  citizen  concerned.   The   only
    difference  is  that  Mr  and  Mrs  Singh  were  married,  whereas  the
    relationship between this Appellant and Mr Rado  is  of  the  unmarried
    variety. There is no dispute that the Appellant and Mr Rado are  united
    by a durable relationship.  In Eind, the third country national in  the
    matrix was the daughter, rather than  the  adult  partner,  married  or
    unmarried, of the EU citizen concerned.  Thus  to  apply  the  Surinder
    Singh principle to the relationship in the present case would involve a
    relatively short step. What is unclear, however, is the  legal  trigger
    for the extension of the Surinder Singh principle in a case such as the
    present.

29. Two of the three  pillars  of  the  Surinder  Singh  principle,  namely
    freedom of movement of an EU  worker  (Mr  Rado)  and  the  efficacious
    enjoyment of this right are undoubtedly engaged.  The third  pillar  is
    the crucial one in the present context. It  requires  determination  of
    the question of whether the facility accorded to this Appellant  during
    the  couple's  sojourn  in  The   Netherlands,   namely   a   residence
    authorisation, was a requirement of Community law.  The CJEU  has  held
    unequivocally  that  neither  Article  21(1)  TFEU  nor  the   Citizens
    Directive confers autonomous rights on third country nationals: see  O,
    B, S and G (supra). Any right acquired by a third country  national  is
    derived from the freedom of movement exercised by the EU national.


30. We have canvassed above the possibility that the necessary  requirement
    of EU law is contained in Article 3(2)(b) of  the  Citizens  Directive.
    Persons embraced by Article 3(2) cannot, however, lay claim to a  right
    of residence in the host Member State.  Nor does Article 3  confer  any
    rights on the EU citizen member of  the  relationship  under  scrutiny.
    Rather, it seems to us  that  Article  3,  reflecting  a  presumptively
    deliberate choice on the part of the Community legislature involving  a
    dichotomy of EU citizen family members (on  the  one  hand)  and  third
    country family members (on the other), is  a  provision  of  restrained
    effect and scope.

31. Two particular features underline the  limitations  of  the  Article  3
    prescription.  First, it is specifically contemplated that its detailed
    outworkings will be prescribed  by  "national  legislation",  in  which
    context the principle of subsidiarity  applies.   Second,  it  provides
    that the host Member State -

    "....   shall  undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
         circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or residence to
         these people."

      This creates a clear margin of appreciation.  It also  envisages  that
    national legislation regulating third country nationals connected to an
    EU citizen by one of the specified relationships may  differ  from  one
    Member  State  to  another.   Notably,  the  requirement  of   detailed
    individualised examination in all cases is expressed in  uncompromising
    terms.

32. Given our analysis above, it seems unlikely that Mr Rado, on  whom  the
    spotlight must fall primarily, being  the  EU  citizen  concerned,  can
    acquire from the  Citizens  Directive  a  requirement  that  his  third
    country national partner, the Appellant, be granted a right  to  reside
    with him in the United Kingdom or that the  Appellant  can  derive  any
    such right from Mr Rado. In light of [34] below we  decline  to  decide
    this discrete issue conclusively.

33. We draw attention to one further  dimension  of  Article  3(2)  of  the
    Citizens Directive.  This imposes on all  Member  States  the  duty  to
    facilitate entry and residence for third country nationals such as  the
    Appellant, to  undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
    circumstances of the family members concerned  and,  in  the  event  of
    deciding to deny entry or residence to a family member, to justify such
    refusal.  Whether these  inter-related  duties  are  discharged  via  a
    formulaic letter which, mechanistically, refuses the facility sought by
    reference to an inflexible provision of the EEA Regulations may be open
    to question.

34. Finally, we refer to Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights  of
    the European Union which confers on everyone the "right to respect  for
    his or her private and family life, home and  communications".   Having
    regard to the basis upon which the impugned decision of  the  Secretary
    of State was made, no  consideration  was  given  to  the  question  of
    whether an infringement of the rights of the Appellant and her  partner
    under this provision was thereby occasioned.  As a result, there is  no
    evidence relating to issues such as legitimate aim or  proportionality.
     This may be linked to what we have said in [23] - [24] and [31] above.

Conclusion and Order

35. Having tentatively formulated certain questions of pure EU law we  have
    considered the parties' further representations and have  reviewed  the
    contents of this inconclusive judgment.   Our preliminary view that the
    acte claire principle does  not  apply  is  confirmed.   We  have  also
    considered the supervening decision of this Chamber in  Sala  (EFM's  -
    right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC), which held  that  there  is  no
    right of appeal to the FtT against a decision of the executive refusing
    to issue a residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family
    member.

36. Accordingly, we have determined to make a reference to the  CJEU  under
    Article 267 TFEU in the terms of the Order annexed.  These  proceedings
    will be stayed in the meantime.
                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                             20 January 2017

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/42398/2013



                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ROZANNE BANGER
                                                                  Respondent


                             Order for Reference
                to the Court of Justice of the European Union
          pursuant to Article 267 of the Treaty on the Functioning
                            of the European Union
                        _____________________________


INTRODUCTION

 1. By this reference, the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  United
    Kingdom Upper Tribunal requests the Court of Justice  of  the  European
    Union ("the CJEU") to provide a preliminary ruling on certain questions
    relating to the situation of a non-EU citizen seeking a residence  card
    to enable her to live in the United Kingdom with her unmarried partner,
    a British national, in circumstances where both have  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom  from  another  EU  Member  State  wherein  the  British
    national worked for some five years.

FACTS


 2. The material facts, which are agreed by the parties, are:

    (i)     The Appellant, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         ("the Secretary of State"), is the alter ego of the United  Kingdom
         Government.


    (ii)    The Respondent is Rozanne Banger, a national of  South  Africa,
         aged 50 years.  Her partner is Mr Philip Rado, a  British  national
         and, hence, an EU citizen, with whom she resided  in  South  Africa
         between 2008 and 2010.


    (iii)   In May 2010, Mr Rado, having accepted a work assignment in  The
         Netherlands, and Ms Banger migrated to that EU Member State.   They
         lived together there for a period of some five years  during  which
         the Respondent was granted a Dutch residence card in  her  capacity
         of extended family member of an EU citizen.


     iv)  In  2013,  following  a  sojourn  of  some  three  years  in   The
         Netherlands, the Respondent and Mr Rado decided to move together to
         the United Kingdom.  The Respondent applied  to  the  Secretary  of
         State for a residence card.  This application was  refused  on  the
         sole ground that she was the unmarried partner of Mr Rado.


THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S DECISION

 3. The Secretary of State refused the Respondent's application for a
    residence card in the following terms:


         "Your application has been  considered  under  regulation  9  which
         states that to qualify as the family member of  a  British  citizen
         you must show that you are either the spouse or  civil  partner  of
         the British citizen.  An unmarried partner is not recognised as the
         family member of a British citizen. You do not have a basis of stay
         in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the   European   (Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006."




RELEVANT LEGISLATION

 4. By Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European  Union
    ("TFEU"), every national of an EU Member State  is  a  citizen  of  the
    Union, a status which confers the  right  to  move  and  reside  freely
    within the territory of the Member States.  The  right  to  freedom  of
    movement of workers and the associated benefits which may be enjoyed by
    certain of their family members are regulated by  Directive  2004/38/EC
    (the "Citizens Directive").  In deciding to make  this  reference,  the
    Tribunal has given particular consideration to Articles 2 and 3 of  the
    Citizens Directive.


 5. Under United Kingdom law,  the  transposing  measure  of  the  Citizens
    Directive is the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    [SI 2006/1003], as amended (the "EEA Regulations").  The provisions  of
    this measure which are particularly germane in the  present  litigation
    context are Regulations 2, 8 and 9.




THE PRELUDE TO THIS REFERENCE

 6. Following the Secretary of State's decision refusing  the  Respondent's
    application for a residence card the Respondent exercised her statutory
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, which allowed  her  appeal.
    The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the ground that the first instance  Tribunal  had  arguably
    erred in law.

 7. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was conducted  by
    the media of both an oral hearing and written submissions in April  and
    May 2016.  The Upper Tribunal reserved its decision.

 8. The reserved decision of the Upper Tribunal, which is  inconclusive  on
    account of having decided to  make  this  reference  to  the  CJEU,  is
    available.  It records, in [5], the central issue of EU law  considered
    to   arise:

         "The central argument advanced on behalf of the Secretary of  State
         is that the 'Surinder  Singh'  principle  (see  Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal and Surinder Singh, ex parte Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department (Case C-370/90) [1992] does not apply to  unmarried
         partners or extended family members of EU citizens but is  confined
         to spouses."


    In its decision, in  [6]  -  [10],  the  Upper  Tribunal  reviewed  the
    Surinder Singh principle and subsequent jurisprudence of the  Court  of
    Justice  of  the  European  Union   ("CJEU")   and   its   predecessor.
    Consideration was also given to the decision of this Tribunal in  Osoro
    (Surinder Singh) [2015]  UKUT  00593  (IAC),  at  [9].   This  Tribunal
    further  reviewed  the  legislative  history  relating  to  freedom  of
    movement of workers and citizenship of the Union, at [11] -  [14].   In
    the context of the EEA Regulations, the critical fact  in  the  present
    litigation matrix is that the Respondent is the unmarried partner,  and
    not the spouse, of the EU citizen concerned. This issue is encapsulated
    in [17]:


         "To summarise, Regulation 9 makes provision for a British  national
         to be treated as an EEA  national  for  the  purposes  of  the  EEA
         Regulations in the circumstances specified.  Regulation 8, however,
         makes no provision for a British national to be treated as  an  EEA
         national for the purposes  of  considering  the  circumstances  and
         entitlement of a person who is neither the  spouse  nor  the  civil
         partner of the EEA national/British citizen, but is the partner  of
         the latter, and between whom there is a durable relationship."

 9. In its decision, at [18], this  Tribunal  considered  the  question  of
    disharmony between Article 3 of the Citizens Directive and Regulation 8
    of the EEA Regulations:

    "There is evident disharmony between Article 3  of  the  Directive  and
         Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.  Whereas the former imports no
         stipulation relating  to  the  nationality  of  the  Union  citizen
         concerned, the latter does: British citizens are, in this  context,
         excluded from  the  definition  of  "EEA  national".   Furthermore,
         Article 3 does not require the Union citizen's partner to be either
         the spouse or the civil partner of the former, whereas Regulation 8
         does.  Thus we recognise the argument that Regulation 8 purports to
         legislate in a manner neither contemplated  nor  permitted  by  the
         Citizens  Directive.   This  argument,  potentially,  involves  the
         discrete contention that when Articles 2  and  3  of  the  Citizens
         Directive are read as a whole and considered in their full context,
         the words "irrespective of their nationality"  in  Article  3(2)(a)
         apply also to Article 3(2)(b).  If  correct,  this  argument  would
         yield the conclusion that there is disparity of  treatment  between
         British citizens and EEA nationals."

10. Next, at [19], this Tribunal gave consideration to the principle of non-
    discrimination on the ground of nationality, including  Article  18  of
    the Treaty of the European Union.  At [20],  this  Tribunal  identified
    the differential treatment which  the  Citizens  Directive  accords  to
    "family members", as defined and other members of the family unit "in a
    broader sense".  It further noted the language  of  rights  as  regards
    family members and facilitation as regards persons falling outwith  the
    definition of "family members".

11. At [22], this Tribunal noted  the  centrality  of  the  Surinder  Singh
    principle in the litigation.   At  [27],  it  recorded  that  the  only
    material difference between the present case and Surinder Singh is that
    the Respondent is the unmarried partner of the  EU  citizen  concerned,
    whereas Mr and Mrs Singh were married. The decision continues, at [27]:

         "Thus to apply the Surinder Singh principle to the relationship  in
         the present case would involve a relatively short  step.   What  is
         unclear, however, is the legal trigger for  the  extension  of  the
         Surinder Singh principle in a case such as the present."

    This Tribunal noted, at [28], that two of  the  three  pillars  of  the
    Surinder Singh principle, namely freedom of movement of  an  EU  worker
    and the efficacious enjoyment of this right were  engaged.   The  third
    pillar, namely whether the residence  authorisation  conferred  on  the
    Respondent during  the  couple's  sojourn  in  The  Netherlands  was  a
    requirement of Community law, is the critical one.

12. This Tribunal concluded, at [34], that the acte claire  principle  does
    not apply and determined in principle to make this reference.

13. The parties were then invited to make written submissions on the  issue
    of a reference to the CJEU under Article 267 TFEU and did so. On behalf
    of the Secretary of  State  the  main  argument  advanced  was  that  a
    reference is inappropriate as the issue concerning  unmarried  partners
    of EU Nationals is acte claire against the Respondent by reason of  the
    decision of the  CJEU  in  Case  C-456/12  O  and  B  v  Minister  Voor
    Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel.  This Tribunal does not agree.

14. Postdating the hearing of this appeal a differently constituted chamber
    of this Tribunal decided that a person who is refused a residence  card
    as an "extended family member" has no right of appeal to  the  relevant
    tribunal under regulation 26 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006
    (SI2006/1003):  Sala (EFM's: Right of Appeal) [2016]  UKUT  411  (IAC).
    If correctly decided, the effect of this decision would  appear  to  be
    that the Respondent in these proceedings had no  right  to  pursue  the
    appeal noted in [6] above.




THE QUESTIONS REFERRED

15. In accordance with Article 267 TFEU, this Tribunal refers the following
    questions for preliminary ruling by the CJEU:

         (1)      Do the principles contained in the decision in Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal and Surinder  Singh,  ex  parte  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department (Case C-370/90)  [1992]  operate
             so as to require a Member State to  issue  or,  alternatively,
             facilitate the provision of a residence authorisation  to  the
             non-Union unmarried  partner  of  a  EU  citizen  who,  having
             exercised his Treaty right of freedom of movement to work in a
             second Member State, returns with such partner to  the  Member
             State of his nationality?

         (2)       Alternatively,  is  there  a  requirement  to  issue  or,
             alternatively, facilitate  the  provision  of  such  residence
             authorisation by virtue of  European  Parliament  and  Council
             Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of citizens of the Union and
             their family members to move  and  reside  freely  within  the
             territory of the Member States ("the Directive")?

         (3)      Where a decision to refuse a  residence  authorisation  is
             not founded  on  an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
             circumstances  of  the  Applicant  and  is  not  justified  by
             adequate or sufficient reasons is such  decision  unlawful  as
             being in breach of Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive?

         (4)      Is a rule of national law which precludes an appeal  to  a
             court or tribunal against a decision of the executive refusing
             to issue a residence card  to  a  person  claiming  to  be  an
             extended family member compatible with the Directive?


                       Signed:


                                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                  PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                  Date:   20 January 2017


