

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of SS) v London Borough of Croydon (AAJR) [2012]  UKUT
00139(IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

|Heard at Field House                    |                        |
|on 2nd, 3rd and 6th February 2012       |                        |
|                                        |                        |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                       The Queen on the application of

                                     SS

                   (by his litigation friend Helen Johnson)
                                                                    Claimant

                                    - v -


                        THE LONDON BOROUGH OF CROYDON
                                                                   Defendant

Representation:

For the Claimant:      Mr Azeem Suterwalla, instructed by Harter and
                            Loveless, Solicitors
For the Defendant:    Mr Andrew Lane, instructed by L.B Croydon



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. In these proceedings the claimant challenges an age assessment carried
      out on behalf of the defendant on 9th September 2010  whereby  it  was
      concluded that the claimant was at that date 17 years of  age  with  a
      nominal date of birth identified as 1st January 1993. His case is that
      he is two years younger, with a nominal date of birth asserted  to  be
      1st January 1995 although, as we shall see, one of the few things that
      is agreed between the parties is that, whatever the claimant's year of
      birth is, he was almost certainly not born on the 1st of January.  The
      acceptance of that fact makes what is already a very  difficult  task,
      the establishment of the claimant's true date of birth, even  more  so
      because, even if a year of birth  is  identified  as  being  the  most
      likely to be correct, that finding still leaves a wide  margin  within
      it as to the claimant's precise age.


   2. Put another way, the difference between the  positions  taken  by  the
      parties is this: as at the date of the hearing before us the defendant
      asserts that the claimant is 19 years old whereas the claimant insists
      that he is 17 years old and so still a minor entitled to the level  of
      services provided by the Defendant that flows from him being a minor.

The claimant's account of his life in Afghanistan

   3. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan. That much, at least, is  not
      in dispute. He was born  and  was  raised  in  a  village  in  Laghman
      Province with his parents and younger sister.  He  attended  a  nearby
      school from the age of 6 until he was, on his account, about 12  years
      old. At some time in 2008 his father decided to cease working for  the
      Taliban and instead stay at home with his family.  Shortly  after  his
      father had obtained an identification document, or  tazkira,  for  the
      claimant, the Taliban came and took him from his home,  presumably  in
      retaliation for his withdrawal from service with them,  and  his  body
      was returned to the village soon afterwards.


   4. A few months later, while the claimant was at school, the Taliban came
      to his house looking for him, saying that they wanted the claimant  to
      join them. His mother denied knowledge  of  his  whereabouts  and  the
      Taliban left. However, they retuned on another day  when,  again,  the
      claimant was at school. They slapped  and  threatened  the  claimant's
      mother when she denied knowing his whereabouts, saying that the  whole
      family would be killed if she did not give him up.

   5. Immediately after this, fearing for her son's safety, his mother  took
      him and his sister to the home of a maternal uncle,  about  an  hour's
      journey away, where they remained while he made arrangements  to  take
      the claimant to Pakistan where an agent was to be found to  bring  him
      to the United Kingdom. While  the  claimant  and  his  maternal  uncle
      stayed in a rented room in Pakistan, waiting for the arrangements  for
      an agent to be finalised, his mother  and  sister  remained  with  the
      family of his maternal uncle  where,  as  the  claimant  confirmed  in
      evidence before us, they remain being  looked  after  by  this  uncle.
      After about five months in Pakistan, the maternal  uncle  brought  the
      claimant back to see his mother in Afghanistan for two or  three  days
      before returning with him to Pakistan where he commenced a four  month
      long journey that brought him to the United Kingdom, arriving in  this
      country concealed in the back of a lorry on  7th  September  2009.  He
      claimed asylum the following day, having spent his first night in this
      country with a stranger he met after decamping  from  the  lorry  that
      brought him here, that anonymous good Samaritan also bringing  him  to
      the place where he was to make his asylum claim.

   History of Proceedings

   6. There have, in fact, been two  age  assessments  carried  out  by  the
      defendant. Both are examined in detail below. The  first  was  carried
      out on 22nd September 2009, shortly after the  claimant's  arrival  in
      the United Kingdom.  The  conclusion  of  that  assessment,  that  the
      claimant's date of birth was 1st January 1993, was  challenged  by  an
      application for permission to seek  a  judicial  review  of  it.  That
      challenge was supported, inter alia by a report  of  Dr  Diana  Birch,
      although no reliance is now placed upon that evidence and we have  not
      been asked to consider  it.  In  response  to  that  application,  the
      defendant agreed to withdraw the first age assessment and to  make  it
      afresh. That was done, as we have mentioned above,  on  9th  September
      2010, although the two social workers  carrying  out  that  assessment
      reached the same conclusion, which was that  the  claimant's  date  of
      birth was said to be 1st January 1993.


   7. Meanwhile, the claimant's asylum claim was being processed. By  letter
      dated 23rd October 2009 UKBA rejected  the  asylum  and  human  rights
      claim, explaining why it was not accepted that the Claimant had  given
      a truthful or accurate account of his experiences in  Afghanistan  and
      rejecting his claim to be as young  as  he  claimed  to  be.  However,
      referring to the age assessment that had taken place, it was  accepted
      that  the  claimant  was  still  a  minor  and  so  he   was   granted
      discretionary leave to remain, for that reason, until 1st July 2010.

   8. Regrettably, there is an error in paragraph 12 of the  refusal  letter
      of 23rd October 2009.   The age assessment referred to was  the  first
      one that was carried out on 22nd September 2009 and which reached  the
      conclusion that the claimant was to be regarded as being 16 years  old
      with a date of birth of 1st January  1993.  Therefore,  the  statement
      that:

           "You have been age assessed by social services to  be  14  years
           old. You have therefore been  granted  discretionary  leave  for
           three years..."


      is, transparently, an error as the period of leave granted  until  1st
      July 2010 was around 9  months  and  not  three  years  and  took  the
      claimant to what would have been the age of 17 � if he had  been  born
      on 1st January 1993.

   9. Before the period of discretionary leave expired, the claimant applied
      unsuccessfully for further leave to remain, on a basis similar to  his
      original asylum claim. His appeal against refusal of that  application
      to vary his leave was  dismissed  by  an  immigration  judge  after  a
      hearing on 21st February 2011.  The  immigration  judge  rejected  the
      claimant's factual account and found as a  fact  that  he  was  not  a
      refugee who would face a real risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  on
      return to Afghanistan for any reason whatsoever. He also rejected  the
      claimant's assertion to be a minor, finding as a fact that he was,  at
      the date of that hearing, an adult with  the  date  of  birth  of  1st
      January 1993.


  10. But, by the time of the hearing before the immigration  judge  of  the
      asylum appeal, the Claimant had already  been  granted  permission  to
      seek a judicial review of the second  age  assessment  decision,  upon
      which the immigration judge had relied, in  part,  in  reaching  those
      conclusions.  In  granting  permission  on  25th  January   2011   and
      transferring proceedings to the Upper Tribunal, Miss Geraldine Andrews
      QC, sitting as a judge of the High Court, said:

           "In my judgement  there  is  a  realistic  prospect  that  at  a
           substantive fact-finding hearing the court will reach a relevant
           conclusion that the Claimant is currently under 18 years old."

  11. And thus the matter now comes before us to carry out that fact finding
      exercise. All that is to be added in order to complete this summary of
      the  procedural  history  is  that  the  claimant  has  been   refused
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the
      immigration judge, both by the First-tier Tribunal and  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal itself.


   The legal framework


  12. Given that it is agreed and common ground between the parties that the
      legal framework applicable to our assessment is clear and  settled,  a
      jointly adopted position with which we agree, it is not necessary  for
      us to carry out an extensive analysis of the authorities. In R (CJ)  v
      Cardiff City Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590 Pitchford LJ observed that :


           1. In R (A and M) v Croydon and Lambert Borough Councils  [2009]
              UKSC 8, [2009] I WLR 2557,  the  Supreme  Court  settled  the
              question whether, in the event of a challenge to the decision
              of a local authority as to the claimant's age, the High Court
              was required either to reach  its  own  decision  as  to  the
              claimant's age or, alternatively, the challenge was by way of
              review of the  local  authority's  assessment  on  Wednesbury
              principles alone. Baroness Hale  gave  the  leading  judgment
              with which the other members of the Supreme Court agreed.  At
              paragraphs 26 and 27 Baroness Hale explained  the  difference
              in approach required for the evaluative  judgment  whether  a
              child was "in need" within the mean of section 20 of the 1989
              Act and the decision upon  the  precedent  question  of  fact
              whether the individual concerned was a child. She said this:
                 "26.  ...  the  1989  Act  draws  a  clear   and   sensible
                 distinction  between  different  kinds  of  question.   The
                 question whether a child is "in need" requires a number  of
                 different value judgments ... but where the  issue  is  not
                 what order the court should make but  what  service  should
                 the local authority provide it is  entirely  reasonable  to
                 assume that Parliament intended such  evaluative  questions
                 to be determined by the Public Authority,  subject  to  the
                 control  of  the  courts  on  the  ordinary  principles  of
                 judicial review. Within the  limits  of  fair  process  and
                 "Wednesbury reasonableness" there are no clear-cut right or
                 wrong answers.
                 27. But the question whether a person is  a  "child"  is  a
                 different kind of question. There is a  right  or  a  wrong
                 answer. It may be difficult to determine what  that  answer
                 is. The decision-makers may have to do their  best  on  the
                 basis of less than perfect or conclusive evidence but  that
                 is true of many questions  of  fact  which  regularly  come
                 before the courts. That does not prevent  them  from  being
                 questions for the courts rather than  for  other  kinds  of
                 decision-makers."
           Lord Hope, in his concurring judgment, said at paragraph 51:
                 "51. It seems to me that the  question  whether  or  not  a
                 person is a child for the purposes of  section  20  of  the
                 1989 Act is a question of fact  which  must  ultimately  be
                 decided by the court. There is no denying the  difficulties
                 that the social worker is likely to face in carrying out an
                 assessment of the question whether an unaccompanied  asylum
                 seeker  is  or  is  not  under  the  age  of  18.  Reliable
                 documentary evidence  is  almost  always  lacking  in  such
                 cases. So the process has to be  one  of  assessment.  This
                 involves the  application  of  judgment  on  a  variety  of
                 factors, as Stanley Burnton J recognised in R (B) v  Merton
                 London Borough Council [2003] 4 All ER 280,  para  37.  But
                 the question is not whether  the  person  can  properly  be
                 described as a child. Section 105 (1) of the Act  provides:
                 "in this Act ... 'child' means, subject to paragraph 16  of
                 Schedule 1, a person under the age of 18". The question  is
                 whether the person is, or is not,  under  the  age  of  18.
                 However difficult it may be to resolve the issue, it admits
                 of only one answer. As it is a question of fact, ultimately
                 this must be a matter for the court."
   The evidence


  13. There is a good deal of evidence before us. The  documentary  evidence
      is contained within two agreed bundles and reference to  those  is  to
      ether bundle A or B and page number. The claimant, as well as  raising
      general criticisms of the age assessments carried out, relies upon:


        a. His own evidence;
        b. The tazkira;
        c. An expert's report confirming the apparent authenticity  of  the
           tazkira
        d. The evidence of a neighbour, Mr Franco  Bruni,  who  offers  his
           view as an experienced parent upon the claimant's likely age;


      The respondent, in support of its case that it has correctly  assessed
      the complainant's age, relies upon the two age  assessments  mentioned
      above and the evidence of five witnesses:

        a. Nimesh Patel, one of the two assessors responsible for the first
           age assessment;
        b. Peter Tucker, one of the two assessors responsible for  the  age
           assessment under challenge in these proceedings;
        c. Doris Besong, the claimant's key worker,
        d. Reni Ravi, of the respondent's Unaccompanied Minor's Team;
        e. Tina Tessie Newall, the claimant's social worker

  14. We propose to approach our assessment of the  evidence  in  the  order
      suggested by Mr Suterwaller. We will consider first the weight  to  be
      placed upon the claimant's own evidence before making what we  can  of
      the evidence relating to the tazkira and then considering the evidence
      of the "lay witnesses" before finally considering the weight to  given
      to the two age assessments themselves, having regard,  of  course,  to
      the evidence of the authors of those reports called before us.


   The evidence of the claimant.


  15. The claimant has set out his account of events and what he  wishes  to
      say about his likely age on a number of occasions:


        a. A witness statement dated 7th October  2009  prepared  with  the
           assistance of Refugee and Migrant Justice, who assisted  him  to
           present his asylum claim ("Asylum statement" found at C42);
        b. The first of two witness statements prepared for judicial review
           proceedings, dated 22nd March 2011 ("first statement" at A104);
        c. Oral evidence given on 21st February 2011 at the hearing of  his
           asylum appeal, as recorded  by  the  immigration  judge  in  his
           determination (C143);
        d. The second statement prepared for these proceedings, dated  10th
           May 2011 ("second statement" at A121)
        e. In oral evidence before us, on 2nd February 2012.


  16. The claimant has made clear that he himself had no reason to be  aware
      of his age or his date of birth before being told about  this  shortly
      before his departure from Afghanistan. In his first statement he said:


        "I have never known the date or month of my  birth.  Birthdays  are
        not celebrated in my culture  and  births  are  not  registered  in
        Afghanistan."

      We know from the evidence now before us that is not entirely  correct,
      as some hospital births in certain areas may lead to  a  registration,
      but we certainly accept that, so far as  the  claimant  is  concerned,
      there was no reason for anyone to be concerned about his date of birth
      and that it was not registered.


  17. While we are not concerned in these proceedings  with  the  claimant's
      claim to be at risk in Afghanistan from the Taliban,  we  do  need  to
      look  at  his  evidence  generally  to  reach  conclusions  about  his
      credibility as that will inform our assessment of what he says himself
      about his age.


  18. There are a number of difficulties with the evidence of  the  claimant
      himself. We take into account the fact that, whatever age we find  him
      to be, he was a minor on arrival. But even having made  allowance  for
      that, it cannot be overlooked that he has given  an  inconsistent  and
      contradictory account about  matters  which,  if  he  were  describing
      events that had actually occurred, and had occurred when he said  they
      had, it would have been reasonable to expect him to be able to give  a
      consistent account.


  19. The claimant's account of his education in  Afghanistan  is  important
      because it is capable of  being  a  useful  reference  point  for  the
      purpose of making judgements concerning age. The claimant says that he
      started school when aged six and remained there for six years. It  can
      be deduced that he would, on that account,  have  been  around  twelve
      years old when he finished school.

  20. The claimant's account of attending school is  relevant  also  to  the
      chorological integrity of his description of  the  circumstances  that
      led to his departure from Afghanistan.

  21. In his oral evidence the claimant told us that  he  had  attended  the
      same school 6 days a week from the age of six until he was  forced  to
      flee with his mother and sister to his uncle's house after the  second
      visit by the Taliban to his home. They spent only  a  few  days  there
      before he was taken by his uncle to Pakistan where they  remained  for
      five months before commencing the  four  month  long  journey  to  the
      United Kingdom. Thus, as we know that he arrived here on 7th September
      2009 we can deduce that he would have last  attended  school,  on  his
      account, nine months earlier, which would be,  approximately,  at  the
      beginning of January 2009.

  22. The difficulty with that is that if his asserted date of birth of  1st
      January 1995 were accepted he would have been just 14  years  old  and
      not twelve years old when he last attended school.  That  is  hard  to
      reconcile with his evidence that he attended school for six years from
      the age of six.

  23. We will examine the tazkira in more detail below. But, on its face, it
      can be seen that this document must have been issued after  22nd  July
      2008 because that is the date of a document produced as  part  of  the
      process of application. The tazkira contains  an  entry  in  a  field:
      "Date of birth and age" which  is  translated  as  "According  to  his
      appearance 13 years old in 1387 (2008)". Thus, this  evidence,  relied
      upon by the claimant, also sits uneasily with his claim to  have  been
      twelve years old when he last attended school some four or five months
      later.

  24. Whatever be the correct position with regard  to  the  claimant's  age
      when he  started  and  finished  his  education  in  Afghanistan,  his
      evidence of his attendance at school raised a  number  of  credibility
      issues. One issue that had been raised  previously  was  why,  if  the
      Taliban came twice to his home looking for him, only to find  him  not
      there, they did not look for him in the local school.

  25. The claimant told us in oral evidence when asked how long it took  him
      to get to school that  it  took  him  "approximately  one  hour  since
      leaving home". He would make that journey  on  foot  or  on  "a  small
      cycle". But the claimant had said when interviewed for the purpose  of
      the first age assessment that on school  days  he  returned  home  for
      lunch. When it was pointed out that involved a two hour round trip  to
      enable him to take his lunch at home the claimant said  that  in  fact
      the school was quite close, perhaps five or ten minutes away, which is
      why he was  able  to  come  home  for  lunch.  Asked  to  explain  the
      contradiction in his account of the journey to school he said that the
      earlier estimate of an hour was the time from when he got  up  in  the
      morning, including the time it would take for his mother to give him a
      bath.

  26. The initial estimate of an hour's journey to school was said to be the
      time taken "since leaving home". We conclude that the  claimant  first
      put forward an account of a lengthy journey to school which he knew to
      be untrue in order to explain why the Taliban, if  they  were  looking
      for him during the day when children might be  expected  to  be  at  a
      nearby school, did not look  there.  The  claimant  told  us  in  oral
      evidence that he was aware that the Taliban visited his school and  so
      it seems clear that they would be well aware of its existence.

  27. There are other difficulties about  the  claimant's  evidence  of  his
      attendance at school. He said in oral evidence that he attended school
      between 9 am  and  4  pm  but  when  interviewed  for  the  first  age
      assessment soon after his arrival in the United Kingdom (B330) he said
      that school started at 8 am and finished at 11.30 am.  When  asked  to
      comment upon that contradiction the claimant simply denied having told
      the social worker what is recorded in the age assessment report. As we
      shall see, though, there are difficulties  with  that  age  assessment
      report and so if this stood alone we would have no regard to it.

  28. There is one piece of evidence that  helps  to  fix  a  date.  If  the
      tazkira is accepted to be a genuine document, since it refers  on  its
      face to a document dated 22nd July 2008 it  must  have  been  obtained
      after then. Also, the claimant's very first account, provided  at  the
      asylum screening interview on 8th September 2009, was that the tazkira
      was issued to him "one year ago", ie in about September 2008.  For the
      purpose of putting this information into a useful  form  we  take  1st
      September 2008 as a possible date upon which the tazkira may have been
      obtained. If that were so, then if the claimant's date of  birth  were
      1st January 1993, as the defendant asserts, then he would have been 15
      years old when obtaining the tazkira and if his date of birth were 1st
      January 1995, as had been claimed by the claimant, then he would  have
      been 13.

  29. In either event, it seems improbable  that  the  need  to  obtain  the
      tazkira was, as the claimant has said, because the  school  had  asked
      him to produce it. As mentioned above, the claimant  would  have  left
      school by August 2008 if he  had  done  so  when  aged  12.  Also  the
      claimant had been attending this school for six years, he  was  living
      in the same village at a house just five or ten minutes walk away,  he
      had not been asked to produce such a document at any  time  previously
      and, as he confirmed in evidence, this  was  not  something  that  all
      children at the school, or even all the children  in  his  class,  had
      been asked to do.

  30. We reject the  claimant's  evidence  that  the  tazkira  was  obtained
      because the school demanded it or that it was required to  enable  him
      to continue his education. We are satisfied that he  had  reached  the
      end of his school education and that his father decided to  obtain  it
      as it would be required as he made his way in the  world,  whether  in
      Afghanistan or elsewhere. We heard from  the  claimant,  for  example,
      that it was necessary for him to produce the tazkira  when  travelling
      with his uncle between Afghanistan and Pakistan.

  31. Further support for that  conclusion  is  found  in  the  inconsistent
      account the claimant has given about the death of his father  and  the
      consequent threat from  the  Taliban  being  the  reason  for  leaving
      school. He has said both that he stopped going  to  school  after  his
      father's murder (first statement A105) and, in oral evidence, that  he
      did go back to school after his father's murder but left school a  few
      months later after the second visit from the Taliban in their  attempt
      to recruit him. Given the enormity of the event of the  death  of  his
      father, we find it hard to accept that the claimant would be in  doubt
      as to whether or not he continued to attend school thereafter.

  32. Another piece of relevant evidence, disputed by the claimant, is  that
      Peter Tucker, who was a co-author of the second age assessment report,
      says that the claimant said (see A144) that his  mother  told  him  in
      November 2008, just before he travelled, that he would be 14 years old
      in one month's time that is in December 2008. If correct,  that  would
      indicate a date of birth of in December 1994.

  33. The claimant was asked at some length when giving oral evidence, about
      the circumstances in which he came to be aware of what he now says  is
      his date of birth, or at least what he says is his year of  birth.  As
      with many areas of his evidence, when pressed as to detail significant
      inconsistency and contradiction emerged in his account.

  34. The claimant has said that he first discovered his year of birth,  and
      so his age, when his father took him to get the tazkira,  which  would
      be, on the claimant's account, a few months before he  was  forced  to
      flee from Afghanistan to escape the attentions of the Taliban. But  he
      has also said that the first time he discovered his age was  when  his
      mother told him, just before he  left  Afghanistan.  He  said  in  his
      witness statement (A106):

           "... I previously only knew I was a child  and  not  how  old  I
           was..."


      Plainly both accounts cannot be correct. When asked  to  explain  this
      contradiction in his evidence  the  claimant  said  that  because  his
      father is no longer alive he listens to his mother. He said  he  could
      not remember what his father had  told  him.  That,  clearly,  is  not
      correct because he set out what his father  told  him  when  providing
      instructions for his witness statement which he  subsequently  signed,
      confirming the contents to be true.

  35. There are other difficulties with the reliability  of  the  claimant's
      account of his experiences. As to how he became aware of the risk from
      the Taliban he said in oral evidence that it was his mother who  first
      told him he was in danger and, in his asylum interview that it was his
      maternal uncle who told him, saying also that as he was young they did
      not want to tell him. Also, as mentioned above, his  account  hitherto
      has been that he lost contact with his mother and uncle soon after his
      arrival, shortly after contacting them by telephone to arrange for the
      tazkira to be sent to the United Kingdom yet his  evidence  before  us
      was that his mother and sister continue to live in  the  home  of  his
      maternal uncle, which he could not know if he had  lost  contact  with
      them.


  36. The claimant has also provided a contradictory account of how he  came
      into possession of the tazkira in the United  Kingdom.  In  his  first
      witness statement he said:

           "My mother had given the document to my maternal  uncle  who  in
           turn gave it to his friend who was  travelling  to  the  UK.  He
           contacted me on my mobile phone and we arranged  to  meet  at  a
           local bus stop where he handed me the document....  I  have  not
           seen my uncle's friend again..."

      But  his  first  account,  given  during  the  asylum  interview   was
      different:

           "It was not sent to me directly, it  was  sent  to  my  maternal
           uncle's address from where I collected it."

      We do not  accept  that  the  claimant  would  be  unsure  whether  he
      collected this document from an address that had been provided to  him
      or whether he obtained it at a meeting arranged at a bus stop. We  are
      satisfied that the claimant has not given a truthful account of how he
      obtained the tazkira.

  37. The claimant gave evidence at some length before us about his  ability
      to cope as a young man living in semi  independent  accommodation.  He
      spoke of problems he experiences with budgeting and cooking meals  for
      himself and explained about how he had dropped out of college  because
      he had not attended sufficiently, due to problems in  sleeping.  This,
      it is said on his behalf, is evidence  of  a  lack  of  maturity  that
      supports his claim to be younger than has been assessed.


  38. Drawing all this together, we find that the claimant has chosen to put
      forward an account that is sufficiently flawed  by  contradiction  and
      inconsistency such as to be unreliable as to the accuracy of  what  he
      says. We are entirely satisfied that he himself simply does  not  know
      what age he is and that whatever  information  his  parents  may  have
      given him, they also did not know his precise date of  birth  but  his
      mother appreciated that it was important for her son to make clear  on
      his arrival in the United Kingdom that he was a minor.


   The tazkira


  39. This, of  course,  is  a  piece  of  documentary  evidence  that  says
      something about itself and so is not dependant upon what  we  make  of
      the claimant's own credibility.  In  reaching  conclusions  about  the
      authenticity of this document we are assisted  by  the  report  of  an
      expert, instructed jointly by the parties, Mr Iain Shearer.


  40. Certainly, Mr Shearer is well placed and qualified to express  a  view
      on the authenticity or otherwise of the tazkira. The  opening  section
      of his report  establishes  that.  That  is,  no  doubt,  why  he  was
      identified by the parties as an appropriate person to be appointed  on
      a joint basis to express an expert view on  the  authenticity  of  the
      document.

  41. Unfortunately, undeterred  by  the  limited  scope  of  the  carefully
      expressed instructions, agreed  after  discussion  and  correspondence
      between the parties, and noted at paragraph 4 of his report:

           "I was commissioned [by both  parties]  ......  to  authenticate
           documents provided to them by [the claimant]."

       Mr Shearer took to himself the task not just of doing that  which  he
      was asked to but also to  go  on  to  express  his  own  view  of  the
      claimant's  credibility,  generally  providing  support  for  all  the
      claimant claimed in respect of his experiences in Afghanistan. He then
      went further even than that, offering the opinion that if returned  to
      Afghanistan, quite apart from the risk from the Taliban, the  claimant
      may be forced to seek employment as a "Bacha Baze" or "dancing boy" in
      order to provide for himself, thus putting himself at risk  of  sexual
      abuse: something that no one had suggested, so far as  we  are  aware,
      was considered by the claimant or his advisers to  be  even  a  remote
      possibility.

  42. He should not, of course, have done so and neither party has asked  us
      to place reliance upon Mr Shearer's views other than in respect of the
      tazkira itself. We have no difficulty in agreeing with  that  approach
      because, although it is plain that Mr Shearer was provided with a copy
      of the determination of the immigration judge who, having  heard  oral
      evidence from the claimant and submissions from both  parties  in  the
      asylum appeal, rejected the claimant's account as untrue, he  took  no
      account of the decision of the immigration judge or  the  reasons  set
      out for reaching  it.  That  calls  into  question  the  value  of  Mr
      Shearer's views upon the claimant's credibility but that concern  does
      not, in our judgement, infect his expert view of the document  itself,
      for the reasons that follow.


  43. In the course of his work Mr Shearer has examined many tazkiras. Based
      on that experience, and upon his professional expertise in this  area,
      he has identified a number of  characteristics  or  features  of  this
      document that establish, comfortably, that we should accept it to be a
      genuine  and  authentic  document,  issued  to  the  claimant  by  the
      appropriate authorities in Afghanistan. Its appearance and content are
      as Mr Shearer would expect. The paper and printing  is  of  "typically
      poor quality". The two ink stamps are as Mr Shearer would expect  them
      to be, as is the variety of hand writing styles on  the  document  and
      the finger mark. Of particular significance, in our view, is  that  Mr
      Shearer identifies that there is  a  signature  on  the  rear  of  the
      photograph affixed to the document, something he has never before seen
      on a forged Afghan document. The photograph itself is of  the  quality
      and type that Mr Shearer would expect to see and  there  is  no  issue
      with the serial number shown on the tazkira.

  44. Further, the timing of the obtaining of the  tazkira  is  appropriate,
      given the conclusions we have reached about the claimant  having  left
      school. Mr Shearer reproduces  an extract from a  report  commissioned
      by the  Canadian  Ministry  of  Immigration,  presumably  quoted  with
      approval of what is said:


           "Procedures for  applying  for  a  tazkira:  a  tazkira  can  be
           obtained as soon as the birth of a child is  registered  at  the
           population office but some people  request  their  tazkira  when
           they are adults - especially those who live in the countryside"

  45. Thus, we proceed to examine the information provided on  the  face  of
      the tazkira, accepting that this is a genuine and authentic document.


  46. In fact, this document takes us not very much  further.  It  does  not
      purport to confirm the claimant's date of  birth  and  does  not  even
      suggest that the claimant's father offered one. The claimant can  tell
      us nothing of what  was  said  during  the  process  of  obtaining  it
      because, as he confirmed in his oral  evidence,  he  simply  presented
      himself and then withdrew, leaving  his  father  to  conduct  whatever
      exchange took place with the official.

  47. All we know, therefore, is that an unidentified official, about  whose
      experience in these matters we know nothing,  expressed  and  recorded
      the view of the claimant's age that:


           "According to his appearance 13 years old in 1387 (2008)"


  48. It can be deduced from this that either the claimant's father did  not
      offer an asserted year of birth, leaving it for the official to  reach
      his own conclusion based upon a quick look at the claimant, or if  the
      claimant's father did offer a date or year of birth the  official  did
      not see fit to record that in the tazkira. The assessment made by this
      unknown official of the claimant's age is, then of little  assistance.
      Indeed, Mr Shearer himself observes at paragraph  13  of  his   report
      that:

           "... age - especially for Afghan males from rural areas - can be
           very hard to gauge from appearance alone."

  49.  Mr Suterwalla argues that an Afghan  official  is  better  placed  to
      judge the claimant's age than those  who  sought  to  do  so  in  this
      country. We  do  not  accept  that  submission.  There  is  simply  no
      information  available  about  the  experience  or  expertise  of  the
      official, nor is  there  any  evidence  as  to  what  information  was
      provided to him on the basis  of  which  to  form  a  view  which  is,
      presumably, why the estimated  age  is  said  to  be  based  upon  the
      claimant's appearance rather than on any other information provided at
      the time the tazkira was requested.

   The evidence of Mr Franco Bruni

  50. It is submitted on behalf of the claimant that the evidence offered by
      Mr Bruni is valuable because, as an experienced parent  with  a  large
      number of children including of a similar age to that claimed  by  the
      claimant who has had a regular opportunity  to  observe  the  claimant
      interacting with his own children, he  is  well  placed  to  offer  an
      informed view of the claimant's likely age.


  51. Mr Bruni is an Italian citizen who gave oral evidence before  us  with
      the assistance of an interpreter.  It  was  plain  from  watching  and
      hearing him give evidence that his English is not good or  fluent  and
      it is not  suggested  that  he  shares  a  common  language  with  the
      claimant. At the commencement of his oral evidence  he  said  that  he
      adopted his witness statement, made on  4th  May  2011  and  that  the
      contents  were  correct.  He  insisted  that,  on  the  basis  of  his
      observations, the claimant could not be more than 17 years old.

  52. Unfortunately it soon  became  apparent  that  the  contents  of  that
      statement were not correct. He said in the  second  paragraph  of  the
      statement that he had known the claimant for the past 8 months,  which
      would mean that he had known him since early September  2010.  But  in
      fact, as Mr Bruni was to confirm, he  first  met  the  claimant  after
      Christmas  2010,  late  in  December.  Also,  when  asked   in   cross
      examination to  explain  what  led  him  to  regard  the  claimant  as
      immature, he said:

           "What is "immature". I do not understand"

      We conclude from this that Mr Bruni was willing to sign  a  statement,
      and then assert that the contents were true when in fact the  contents
      were not true and it contained expressions that he did not  understand
      the meaning of. We are mindful of the  fact  that  oral  evidence  was
      given with the help of an interpreter but so also  was  the  statement
      constructed with the help of an interpreter.

  53. We have no doubt that Mr Bruni wishes no more than to be of assistance
      to the claimant, who has  established  a  particular  relationship  of
      friendship with one of his daughters. But we are unable to accept that
      his evidence amounts  to  more  than  an  expression  of  support  for
      whatever the claimant asserts. At its highest, we can say that nothing
      in his evidence undermines the claimant's case.


   The evidence of Tina Newell


  54. We next heard from Tina Newall, employed by the defendant as a  Senior
      Social Worker and who has worked with the claimant  in  that  capacity
      since 2nd March 2010. She adopted  her  witness  statement  (A136)  in
      which she said that she maintained regular contact with  the  claimant
      who she described as a  polite  and  respectful  individual.  In  oral
      evidence she said that she saw him every six to eight weeks. She said:


           "He has demonstrated that he is able to  manage  money,  cook  a
           balanced meal, clean his home and maintain personal hygiene.  He
           does on occasions need prompting to  clean  his  home  and  cook
           meals for himself."


      She went on to say:


           "I have not  observed  any  behaviour  by  [the  claimant]  that
           depicts that he has been wrongly aged assessed..."


  55. From her answers in cross examination we  learned  that  this  witness
      also carries out age assessments.  Mr  Suterwalla  submitted  that  we
      should give her evidence only limited weight because  her  views  "are
      expressed in negative terms". That is, she does not assert that he has
      been correctly assessed as to age but that she has not  seen  evidence
      to suggest he has  been  wrongly  assessed.  We  do  not  accept  that
      submission. This is a measured  and  reasoned  view,  expressed  by  a
      professionally qualified person who has experience in her own right of
      the process of age assessment. Her view  is  evidence  supporting  the
      defendant's case, to be considered in the round  with  all  the  other
      evidence.


   Evidence of Doris Besong


  56. This witness is a keyworker who has been working in that capacity with
      the claimant since 12th October 2009 and so who may be  considered  to
      have had a good opportunity to observe the claimant and to form  views
      about him, given that she sees him every week.


  57. Ms Besong adopted her witness statement (A131) in  which  she  records
      that she had observed  some  "childish  behaviour"  by  the  claimant.
      Expressing rather a different view than was provided by Ms Newell, she
      said that the claimant still appears to be "incompetent" in the  areas
      of cooking and cleaning his accommodation. She said:

           "I cannot determine his age in definite terms but would  say  he
           probably between the ages of 16-18 year (sic)"

  58. She went on in the statement to  describe  how,  not  having  had  any
      experience of house-work before arriving in this country, he  did  not
      have good cooking, cleaning or budgeting skills and has acquired  them
      only slowly. He was said not to have had any sexual  relationships  at
      the date of her statement in May 2011 although she  told  us  in  oral
      evidence that he now has entered into such a relationship.


  59. In cross examination  she  agreed  that  his  present  appearance  was
      consistent with an age between 17 and 19 years of age and that it  was
      difficult to pinpoint an age within that range and she  described  the
      physical changes in his appearance that she had noticed.  She declined
      to accept the suggestion that his  propensity  to  miss  appointments,
      because  he  preferred  to  play  cricket,   indicated   childishness,
      preferring to categorise it as a lack of responsibility.

   The evidence of Reni Ravi

  60. Without intending any discourtesy or disrespect we can deal  with  the
      evidence of this witness shortly. Ms Ravi is  a  Team  Leader  in  the
      defendant's Unaccompanied Minors Team who, in carrying out that  role,
      holds regular  discussions  with  Ms  Newall,  the  claimant's  social
      worker. But her evidence was based  not  upon  any  contact  with  the
      claimant but upon an understanding of  conversations  with  Ms  Newall
      that transpired not to  be  altogether  reliable.  We  agree  with  Mr
      Suterwalla that this evidence advances neither party's case  and  that
      no weight should be given to it.


   The first age assessment

  61. The first age assessment was carried out on 22nd September 2009, which
      was about two  weeks  after  the  claimant's  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The age assessment report is before us (B324)  and  we  heard
      oral evidence from one of  the  two  social  workers  responsible  for
      producing it, Mr Nimesh Patel. Mr  Suterwalla  points  out  that  this
      assessment was withdrawn by the defendant which  he  argues  indicates
      that by doing so the defendant accepted that it could not be  evidence
      in respect  of  the  claimant's  age.  But  a  major  reason  for  the
      withdrawal of that report was the  submission  of  a  report  from  Dr
      Birch, which is no longer relied upon by the claimant. Therefore we do
      not accept the submission that no weight should be placed upon it  for
      that reason. But, as we shall see, there are other  reasons  why  this
      evidence may be thought to add weight to the claimant's  case,  rather
      than to advance the defendant's case.


  62. The age assessment is set out in an eight page long form, divided into
      sections for comment under various headings, indicating the  structure
      of the interview, and a two page long summary of the key points relied
      upon in reaching the conclusion that the appellant was, at the date of
      that assessment, 16 years old and not 14 years old as  he  claimed  to
      be.

  63. The reasons for that conclusion include the following: The  claimant's
      physical appearance and demeanour suggested that he was older than  he
      claimed; he had well defined features,  indicating  maturity  and  his
      "deep voice" indicated that it had broken.  He  had  "fully  developed
      hair" which was "closely shaven" and "his stubble appeared to be  very
      new. He was considered to be a confident young man  "free  to  discuss
      with people of authority". He gave lengthy explanations for simple and
      straightforward questions.  The report opines that  "overall  the  way
      [the claimant] presented himself in terms of  body  language  and  his
      mannerisms indicate that he is older than 14 years of age".

  64. As Mr Suterwaller pointed out, it was hard to reconcile  an  assertion
      in the report that the claimant was "non specific about  the  age  and
      date of birth of his sibling and  parents"  with  the  record  on  the
      following page of the report that the claimant in fact gave  ages  for
      his siblings and parents, in line with the information he had given at
      his asylum screening interview.

  65. Mr Patel was cross examined at some length about this  age  assessment
      report, as a  result  of  which  Mr  Suterwalla  raises  a  number  or
      criticisms which he argues should lead us to place no weight upon it.

  66. First, it is said that there was no clear evidence that Mr  Patel  was
      sufficiently trained to carry  out  the  assessment.  That  submission
      appears  to  be  based  upon  Mr  Patel's  inability  to  confirm  his
      attendance on any particular course. But, considered as a  whole,  his
      evidence does establish that training was  a  continuing  professional
      obligation which he complied with, even if he was  unable  to  confirm
      his attendance on any particular course.

  67. But Mr Suterwaller is on stronger ground in pointing  out  that  there
      was no independent adult  present  during  the  assessment,  as  there
      should have been, and that the  handwritten  notes  taken  during  the
      interview should have been preserved but were not. The latter omission
      is regrettable but not, in our judgement,  one  that  means  that  the
      report is on that account alone fatally compromised. The typed  report
      was  prepared  almost  contemporaneously  and  we  must   assess   the
      reliability of this evidence in the same  way  that  any  evidence  is
      assessed.

  68. Having said that,  difficulties  with  Mr  Patel's  report  have  been
      disclosed. He was unable to explain, without  the  handwritten  notes,
      what were the lengthy answers the claimant had given which led him  to
      believe the claimant was being  evasive,  a  factor  relevant  to  his
      assessment of maturity. His assessment of implausibility  relating  to
      the claimant's account of his departure being  necessary  even  though
      the Taliban would  not  kill  young  children,  when  he  himself  was
      claiming to be a child,  had no regard to the fact that  the  claimant
      had in mind that his eight year old sister remained.

  69. The latter point is of significance because it was  established  that,
      although the conclusion of  the  assessment  was  discussed  with  the
      claimant and he was told how he could challenge it if he wished to, he
      was not given the opportunity to comment upon adverse findings  before
      the final conclusion was reached, as he should  have  been.  Had  that
      happened, the point about the sister may well have been  made  and  so
      the implausibility point not relied upon in the overall assessment  of
      maturity and so age. A similar observation might  be  made  about  the
      point concerning the age of his parents and siblings.

  70. In the course of a lengthy and rigorous cross  examination,  Mr  Patel
      accepted that there were some errors in the reasoning that led to  his
      conclusion on the claimant's age. His honesty and integrity  in  doing
      so rather than simply seeking to defend that which  had  been  written
      does him credit. Ultimately, he accepted that there were  two  reasons
      that actually underpinned his conclusion; appearance and demeanour and
      the  fact  that  the  claimant  gave  lengthy  answers  to  apparently
      straightforward questions, although he could not  now  say  what  they
      were.

  71. Ultimately, Mr Patel conceded that it was "not  impossible"  that  the
      claimant could be an  age  between  14  and  16  years,  that  it  was
      "possible" that he was 15 years old at the date  of  that  assessment.
      The last question and answer in cross examination of  Mr  Patel  might
      usefully be reproduced:

           Q. So, if you had given him the benefit of the doubt  you  would
           have accepted his claimed age of 14?


           A. Yes.


  72. It must be recognised that the evidence of Mr Patel is  not  distilled
      into this response alone. His evidence is to be considered as a whole.

The second age assessment


  73. The second age assessment was carried out on 9th  September  2010  and
      reached the same conclusion as did  the  first  assessment,  that  the
      claimant's date of birth was 1st January 1993 so that he was  then  17
      years old.  The  difficulty  of  the  task  facing  the  assessors  is
      indicated in the summary report:


           "Assessors would like to emphasize that [the claimant]  did  not
           provide much specific information  for  chronological  purposes.
           Therefore, assessors had no choice but to rely  mostly  on  [the
           claimant's] physical  appearance,  demeanour,  presentation  and
           other factors to aid the decision making process."


  74. The assessors accepted that the claimant had a  "youthful  appearance"
      and looked younger than 18 but lines on his forehead, visible  larynx,
      build and height, depth of voice, the fact that there was evidence  of
      regular shaving and their assessment of his overall demeanour led them
      to conclude that he was older than his claimed age of 15.


  75. One of the authors of that report, Mr Peter Tucker, gave oral evidence
      before us. He adopted his witness statement (A142) in which details of
      his qualifications and experience as  a  social  worker  dealing  with
      young people are set out.

  76. Referring  to  the  caveat  mentioned  above  concerning  the  limited
      evidence upon which the assessment could be based, he made clear  also
      that as only a photocopy of the tazkira was available they  could  not
      rely upon its authenticity.

  77. Questioned about the process of producing the report  Mr  Tucker  made
      clear that the claimant had opportunity to comment  upon  the  reasons
      that were to be key to the conclusion reached. There  was  an  initial
      meeting on 9th September 2010  and  the  evidence  obtained  was  then
      reflected upon. A second meeting was arranged on  the  15th  September
      when the reasons that had been written down were gone through with the
      claimant "line by line, saying this is the reason  we  think  this..."
      and any contradictions were identified to him. He was then invited  to
      sign the report, which the claimant declined to do. We do  not  accept
      Mr Suterwalla's submission that  the  assessment  was  flawed  because
      provisional adverse findings were not put to the claimant.

  78. Put another way, having had the advantage  of  hearing  oral  evidence
      from Mr Tucker about his approach to carrying out the age  assessment,
      we accept that he would have taken full account  of  anything  further
      the claimant had said in response to disclosure of the  reasoning  and
      intended conclusion upon his age.

  79. Nor do we accept, for the reasons given above in respect of the  first
      assessment,  that  the  fact  that  the  handwritten  notes  were  not
      retained, as they should have been, necessarily requires no or  little
      weight to be given to this evidence.

  80. In cross examination it was suggested to Mr Tucker that he was  simply
      wrong to say that the claimant had disclosed during the age assessment
      interview that  his  mother  had  told  him  shortly  before  he  left
      Afghanistan that he would be 14 years old in the following month, that
      is, in December 2008. As the hand written notes of the  interview  had
      not been retained, or at least were not available, it was  put  to  Mr
      Tucker that this part of his evidence was just not  reliable.  But  Mr
      Tucker was adamant that this is precisely what the claimant had  said.
      He did not need to have his memory  refreshed  or  reinforced  by  the
      handwritten notes that were not now available. He had  an  independent
      and distinct recollection of the claimant having said this. We  accept
      this to be the case.

  81. Mr Tucker made clear also that this was a "holistic process" by  which
      everything was considered together. But  his  evidence  does  disclose
      some issues giving rise to concern. We doubt that it  was  appropriate
      to hold against the claimant what appeared to be  a  simple  error  in
      once providing the year of his birth or that the date  of  birth,  1st
      January, was offered when that was, plainly, a "nominal" date of birth
      settled on by those conducting the screening interview on arrival.  It
      is also difficult to understand the certainty with which this  witness
      insisted without compromise that the  claimant's  physical  appearance
      did not admit any possibility that his claimed age of 15 years  and  9
      months at the time, given that it was accepted that he was  under  the
      age of 18 and the evidence we have heard from Mr Patel, set out above.
      While we accept he sought to carry  out  a  holistic  assessment  that
      might have supported his final conclusions it is hard  to  see  how  a
      starting  point  based  upon  physical  appearance  alone  must   have
      established an age in excess of 15 years and 9 months. The  difficulty
      in maintaining such a position was neatly summarised by Blake J  in  R
      (NA) v London Borough of Croydon [2009] EWHC 2357 (Admin) at para 27:


           "It is common ground, and clear throughout all the materials and
           the authorities on this topic, that physical appearance alone is
           a notoriously unreliable basis for assessment  of  chronological
           age. The extensive literature and guidance on the  subject  says
           so. Indeed anyone with ordinary non-expert  knowledge  of  young
           people whether as a parent or otherwise, knows how difficult  it
           is to make such assessment from appearances alone. In any event,
           submits the claimant, it was accepted that the  claimant  looked
           young."


Closing submissions

  82. We do not need to set out in detail the  helpful  closing  submissions
      advanced by Mr Lane and Mr Sutterwala, written and  oral,  because  we
      have taken account of those as we have assessed the evidence  set  out
      above. But we do make clear that we take regard of  the  need  to  see
      that there has been a correct application of  the  principle  of  "the
      benefit of the doubt". Mr Sutterwalla referred us to comments  of  HHJ
      Pearl, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court in R (KN) v  London
      Borough  of Barnett [2011] EWHC 2019 (Admin) at para 20:


           "... it must be remembered that the Local Authority, in reaching
           its assessment that a person is over  18,  should  already  have
           given this person the "benefit of the doubt.""

      Although that was in the context,  which  is  no  longer  the  correct
      approach, that where the evidence does not deliver a clear  answer  to
      the question of age the court was to fall back to  the  position  that
      there is a burden of proof to be discharged, the point is  still  well
      taken, that if that has not been done the court will  need  to  factor
      that into its own assessment. The potential significance of giving the
      claimant "the benefit of the doubt" is well illustrated by Mr  Patel's
      acceptance that once applied his overall assessment may well have been
      different.




Conclusions


  83. Drawing all this together and doing the best we can with the  evidence
      the parties have chosen  to  put  before  us  we  make  the  following
      observations and reach the following conclusions:


        a. We are not reaching a fresh decision upon the claimant's  asylum
           claim but the case that was  put  before  and  rejected  by  the
           immigration judge has been put before us also in the context  of
           the search for the claimant's true age. We are not bound by  the
           conclusions of the immigration judge but see no reason at all to
           depart from his conclusions on issues other  than  age.  We  are
           satisfied that the claimant's account of  the  circumstances  of
           his father's death and the reasons for his journey to the United
           Kingdom are untrue.


        b. We find also that the claimant's account of the circumstances in
           which the tazkira was sent to him  are  untrue.  We  reject  his
           claim to have lost contact with his family. As he told us at the
           hearing, his  mother  and  sister  continue  to  live  with  his
           maternal uncle at his  home  about  an  hour's  drive  from  the
           family's own former home. It seems reasonable to  conclude  that
           after the death of the  claimant's  father,  whatever  were  the
           circumstances of that, the family moved to the uncle's home  and
           arrangements were made for the claimant to move  to  the  United
           Kingdom.


        c. We accept that the  tazkira  is  a  genuine  document,  obtained
           because the claimant had finished his  education  and  so  would
           need such an identity document  in  ordinary  everyday  life  in
           Afghanistan.

        d. It follows that we are satisfied that the claimant had  finished
           his education, and so had certainly passed his twelfth birthday,
           by the time he and his father went to apply for the tazkira some
           time after late July 2008.

        e.  Neither  the  claimant  nor  his  parents  were  aware  of  the
           claimant's precise date  of  birth,  which  is  why  the  Afghan
           official had to assess age simply upon appearance.

        f. The first age assessment was flawed for the reasons given  above
           but, ultimately, the Social worker who gave  evidence  about  it
           accepts that the claimant's probable age  fell  within  a  range
           that would have then made him between 14 and 16, accepting  that
           the lower  end  of  that  range  was  reasonable,  allowing  the
           claimant the benefit of the doubt. We take careful note of  that
           evidence.

        g. The second age assessment was carried out in a way  that  admits
           some criticism but we do not  regard  it  as  flawed.  That  is,
           therefore, also important evidence of which we take account.

        h. It is common ground that  the  claimant  was  a  minor  when  he
           arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th September 2009.

        i. We conclude that the claimant's mother told him that he would be
           14 years old in December 2008.  But this does not mean  that  we
           must accept that as conclusive evidence of his most likely  date
           of birth. The claimant's mother would recall giving birth to her
           first child, the claimant, and there is no reason at all why she
           should not have remembered the time of year that he was born. On
           the other hand, she was at pains to  ensure  that  her  son  was
           aware of the advantage of asserting a young age  on  arrival  in
           the United Kingdom.

        j. If the claimant were, as the information given  to  him  by  his
           mother would indicate, 14 years old as he began his  journey  to
           the United Kingdom, that would mean that the claimant would have
           finished school up to two years before his departure  which  may
           go some way to explain why his evidence concerning his  time  at
           school was not as consistent as would be  expected  if  he  were
           describing on arrival what were recent experiences, even more so
           if he were older that that.

        k. Assembling all of this together, and doing the best we  can,  we
           conclude that the claimant was older than he claimed  to  be  on
           arrival. His own evidence is  unreliable;  the  evidence  of  Mr
           Bruni and Reni Ravi does not assist either way. Little help  can
           be drawn form the tazkira and  the  evidence  of  Ms  Newell  is
           broadly supportive of the defendant's  case  while  that  of  Ms
           Besong is relatively neutral. Mr Suterwalla has established that
           first age assessment was flawed, and considered in  the  context
           of Mr Patel's oral evidence, suggests that  the  claimant  could
           have been aged anywhere in the range between 14 and 16 years  at
           that time. The final concession by Mr Patel, reproduced above at
           paragraph 71,  must  be  seen  for  what  it  is,  and  must  be
           considered in the context of Mr Patel's evidence as a whole.

        l. The second age assessment, although  criticisms  can  be  raised
           concerning it, is the professional assessment of an  experienced
           social worker carried out in a way that,  broadly,  was  "Merton
           compliant" and suggested that the claimant is, at  the  date  of
           the hearing before us, an adult.

        m. On the basis of this evidence it is  said  that  the  claimant's
           true age at the date of the second age assessment lies  anywhere
           between the ages of 17 to 19 years.  There  is  good  reason  to
           believe that his date of birth is in December, as we accept that
           his mother had said so and so we settle upon 15th  December,  in
           the absence of anything to indicate any other date of the month.
           The further one moves towards the extremities of the  age  range
           we have identified the  greater  is  the  risk  of  inadequately
           respecting the countervailing factors and so we settle upon 15th
           December 1993, a date  very  approximately  midway  between  the
           range identified by the parties.

        n. Thus, as at the  date  of  the  second  age  assessment  on  9th
           September 2010 we find that the claimant was in  fact  16  years
           and 8 months old and that, the date of the hearing before us, on
           2nd February 2012, he was 18 years and 1 month old.

Decision

  84.  We make a declaration, therefore, that the claimant's date  of  birth
      is  15th  December  1993.  The  parties  may  make   further   written
      submissions  on  the  terms  of  any  further  orders  sought  and  in
      particular on the issue of costs. In the  absence  of  agreement,  the
      matter will be relisted for further oral submissions on those issues.



                 Signed




                 Upper Tribunal Judge Southern



