
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application  of  Shahzad)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00137 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                   Thursday, 22 January 2015

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE dawson

                                   Between

                               khuram shahzad

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Gibson-Lee, instructed by Khans Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr A Bird, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE DAWSON:  The applicant is a national of  Pakistan  where  he  was
    born on 3 July 1982.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  with  a  visit
    visa in 2007 following a successful appeal against the refusal  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer of his application in 2006.  The applicant  was
    granted leave to enter by virtue of his visa until  28  December  2007.
    He thereafter remained without leave.

 2. On 10 September 2012 he wrote to the respondent  asking  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds referring specifically to Article 3  and
    Article 8.  The documentation he submitted with  that  letter  included
    the respondent's standard application form FLR(O),  statements  by  him
    and his wife, copies of hers and his passport, payslips of his partner,
    family photographs and between items 11 and 16 the following:

    (11) An affidavit from uncle, Mister Abrar Mehmood from Pakistan;

    (12) Police report (FIR) with English translation.

    (13) An email sent from a cousin from Pakistan.

    (14) Proof of private and family life of the applicant.

    (15) Newspaper cutting describing my country's recent situation.

    (16) Country report (Amnesty International).

 3. I pause here to observe that the whereabouts of the above  material  is
    not clear.  It  was  not  included  in  the  application;  it  did  not
    accompany the application to bring judicial  review  proceedings.   The
    file indicates that the respondent returned material to  the  applicant
    and it appears that this was what was sent.

 4. The next step was a further letter,  this  time  from  the  applicant's
    representatives dated 26 March 2013.  Khans Solicitors  explained  that
    they were acting and they set out all detail regarding the family  life
    claim and raised a number of factors they considered  should  be  taken
    into account by the Secretary of State.   Significantly  there  was  no
    reference to the  protection  claim  previously  made.   The  applicant
    continued to wait for a decision.

 5. On 14 August 2013 his solicitors sent a further letter  in  which  they
    included the applicant's wife's payslips for the period March  to  July
    2013, a further revised contract of employment, utility  bills  in  the
    parties' names and  greetings  cards.   The  applicant  and  Ms  Sugden
    married under UK law on 6 March 2013.  They had previously relied on  a
    marriage under Islamic law which they had entered into on 29  September
    2012, in London.  Certificates were provided.

 6. The respondent refused to grant the applicant leave to  remain.   Since
    that refusal did not result in the applicant no longer having leave  to
    remain her decision did not give rise to a right of  statutory  appeal.
    In summary, the respondent considered that the applicant did  not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM for partners and furthermore had failed
    to meet the exceptional criteria at EX.1(b).  Given that the  applicant
    did not have extant leave at the time of his  application,  it  is  not
    surprising that it is not contended he met the requirements of the Rule
    or Rules relevant to his application.  The issue at the  crux  of  this
    case is whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.

 7. Specifically the respondent had this to say:

         "You have a genuine and subsisting relationship with  your  British
         partner.  Whilst it is acknowledged that your partner has lived  in
         the UK all her life and is in employment here, this does  not  mean
         that you  are  unable  to  live  together  in  Pakistan.   Although
         relocating there together may cause a degree of hardship  for  your
         British partner the Secretary of State has not seen any evidence to
         suggest that there are any insurmountable obstacles preventing  you
         from continuing your relationship in Pakistan.  You therefore  fail
         to fulfil EX.1(b) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules."

 8. The respondent also made a  decision  in  respect  of  the  applicant's
    private life claim and concluded that he had spent 25 years of his life
    in Pakistan and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it  was
    not accepted that in the period of time  he  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom he had lost ties to his home country.  Thus the respondent  was
    not  satisfied  the  applicant  met  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(iv).  I pause here  to  observe  that  one  of  the  grounds  of
    challenge initially was that the applicant had spent thirteen years  in
    the United Kingdom. I was not specifically addressed on this  point  by
    Mr Gibson-Lee but it is undisputed that the  applicant  has  only  been
    here since 2007 and the argument based on longer  period  of  residence
    was misconceived.

 9. The respondent also made a decision on exceptional circumstances.   She
    explained  that  the  case  had  been  considered  as  to  whether  the
    application contained any exceptional circumstances which might warrant
    consideration by her outside the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    for a grant of leave.  The respondent decided it did not.

10. A number of grounds were raised by way of challenge to  this  decision.
    As will become apparent,  it  is  unnecessary  to  set  out  all  those
    grounds.

11. It is sufficient to say that the assertions challenged  the  lawfulness
    of the decision including a failure  to  take  into  account  documents
    submitted with the third letter of August 2013.  There was unlawfulness
    in dealing with the Article 8 claim properly, procedural impropriety in
    failing to follow Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  with  specific
    reference to EX.1 and  procedural  impropriety  in  failing  to  follow
    enforcement  instructions  and  guidance  with  specific  reference  to
    chapter 53 in the respondent's Enforcement Instructions and Guidance.

12. The final ground was an irrationality challenge that the respondent had
    failed to give exact reasons why the application  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of R-LTRP.1.1(d).

13. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Macleman  for  reasons
    given in his decision dated 6 August 2014 in these terms:

         "Perhaps the  grounds  are  only  disagreement  with  a  conclusion
         lawfully reached.  Perhaps the appellant's  first  recourse  should
         have been to ask the respondent for a decision carrying a statutory
         right of appeal.  However, at this stage, and  in  absence  of  any
         acknowledgment of service or other information from the respondent,
         I do not think the grounds are so obviously incapable of success as
         to be held unarguable."

    No Acknowledgment of Service has been filed by the respondent.

14. There appears to have  been  an  issue  regarding  the  filing  of  the
    certificate of service.  In any event as pointed out  by  Mr  Bird  the
    respondent is not prohibited from participating  in  these  proceedings
    having regard to Rule  29(3)  of  the  Procedure  Rules  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Mr Gibson-Lee explained his  own  difficulty  regarding  the
    absence of Acknowledgement of Service.  I  do  not  consider  that  any
    prejudice arises from the absence of that material in the light of  the
    narrowing of the grounds by Mr Gibson-Lee at the outset of the  hearing
    before me today.

15. The respondent's detailed grounds of resistance as described were filed
    with the Upper Tribunal on 8 January 2014.  They were served  by  email
    on the applicant's solicitors on Monday, 19 January and  Mr  Gibson-Lee
    explains that notwithstanding the difficulties as they  were  in  email
    format the following day on Tuesday, he was clearly in difficulties  in
    complying with the order made by Judge Macleman as  to  the  filing  of
    documents including the skeleton argument.  He drew my attention  to  a
    draft skeleton that he had prepared prior to seeing this material  from
    the Secretary of State on  17  January  which  adopts  the  grounds  of
    challenge on which permission  was  sought.   Helpfully  Mr  Gibson-Lee
    clarified the applicant's position and explained that he did  not  rely
    on those grounds.  In particular he no longer relied on the  protection
    issues that had been raised in the initial letter of application.   The
    revised grounds he stated were in the following terms:

         "It was accepted that the relationship between  the  applicant  and
         claimant was genuine.  She is a British national and has a  job  in
         the United Kingdom.  It is  simply  unreasonable  and  inconsistent
         with her human rights to expect her to go  to  Pakistan  where  she
         does not speak the language or know the culture.  The  respondent's
         decision was effectively asking her to adopt  a  life  in  Pakistan
         where the relationship was not accepted by the applicant's  family.
         She had never been there.  There were security risks.  It  was  not
         suggested that these were insurmountable but the  couple  would  be
         unable to have the family life that they have in the United Kingdom
         in Pakistan."

     In revising these grounds Mr Gibson-Lee also indicated that  he  relied
    on paragraphs 48, 51 and 52 of the previous grounds.

16. Paragraph  48  argues  that  the  respondent's  decision  violated  the
    claimant, his partner and their children's right to a family  life  and
    that such violation is disproportionate in the circumstances.  I  pause
    here to observe that there are no children to the relationship and that
    appears to have been an error.

17. Paragraph 51 refers to Ms Sugden's status as a British citizen and  her
    full-time work here as well as the fact that  she  has  never  been  to
    Pakistan before where she is unaware of the culture and languages.   It
    is stated that she clearly knows it is extremely difficult for a  woman
    to work in Pakistan,  particularly  when  she  was  a  foreigner.   The
    claimant has enemies in his country and in addition his  relatives  had
    not accepted his marriage to a non-Muslim person.  I observe  that  the
    protection claim was not pursued.

18. Paragraph 52 is in terms that the respondent failed to consider whether
    it is reasonable to expect the couple to leave the  United  Kingdom  to
    live in Pakistan and that her decision  is  unlawful  and  procedurally
    improper.

19. The thrust of Mr Bird's  oral  submissions  was  that  the  apprehended
    difficulties that Ms Sugden would encounter had not been drawn  to  the
    attention of the Secretary of State at any stage and  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State could not be challenged on  rationality  grounds
    in respect of material that was not before her.   He  argued  that  the
    respondent was not obliged  to  assume  stereotypes  in  terms  of  the
    situation she was required to take into account.  I invited him and  Mr
    Gibson-Lee to  address  me  on  the  correct  test  for  insurmountable
    obstacles and I invited the parties to have regard to the  decision  of
    the Administrative Court in Iftikhar  Ahmed  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  300
    (Admin) in which Green J reviews the decisions in Nagre v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin) and the observations by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

20. My attention was also drawn to the revision to Section EX which emerged
    in the changes in July 2014 to the Immigration Rules.  This included  a
    definition of insurmountable obstacles in these terms and I quote:

         "EX.2   For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  insurmountable
         obstacles means the various significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

21. Mr Bird referred me to the  extracts  from  the  respondent's  guidance
    dated October 2013 dealing, inter alia, with insurmountable  obstacles.
    In particular he drew my attention to  paragraph  22  of  the  decision
    under challenge in which it  was  noted  that  the  substance  of  this
    particular guidance was applied when the August 2013  decision  in  the
    case before me had  been  taken.   That  guidance  found  echo  in  the
    revisions to Section EX.   Mr Bird  conceded  that  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test could not be more demanding than that  set  out  in  the
    revisions to the Rules in  July  2014.   Mr  Gibson-Lee  accepted  that
    concession and argued that the revisions indicated the correct test  in
    this case.  That clarifies the correct legal approach the Secretary  of
    State was required to take.

22. I turn to the second limb of Mr  Bird's  argument  which  is  that  the
    factors  which  Mr   Gibson-Lee   contends   rendered   the   obstacles
    insurmountable were not drawn to the  attention  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  So what was the case before the Secretary  of  State  when  she
    reached her decision?  It  was  an  application  by  somebody  who  had
    remained unlawfully since expiry of his visa in 2007  that  included  a
    protection claim and material relating to that claim which is no longer
    relied on.  It included  details  of  a  relationship  with  a  British
    national who was in full employment yielding  a  sufficient  salary  to
    meet the threshold in Appendix FM.

23. An additional factor raised in paragraph 51 of the grounds  adopted  by
    Mr Gibson-Lee is that the applicant's relatives had not  accepted  this
    marriage to a non-Muslim  person.   As  I  have  observed  already  the
    application of September  2012  was  accompanied  by  statements.   The
    applicant's statement focuses upon the risks and  circumstances  giving
    rise to this fear which he no longer relies on and also how he  met  Ms
    Sugden and that they had moved in together.  He refers to  his  parents
    and family having come to know  about  that  relationship,  however  no
    evidence was provided of that nor was there  any  evidence  before  the
    Secretary of State of  the  way  in  which  they  had  expressed  their
    disapprobation.  The applicant made no mention of the  difficulties  it
    is now contended Ms Sugden would face.  Similarly,  her  own  statement
    refers to the history  of  the  relationship.   She  gives  a  slightly
    different account of how the parties had met.  She does  not  refer  to
    concerns about relocation to Pakistan. The  letter  of  26  March  2013
    contained  more  detail  about  the  relationship   and   Ms   Sugden's
    circumstances.  Here too there is no submission that she would find  it
    difficult in Pakistan.

24. The letter dated 14 August 2013 was accompanied by payslips  and  other
    material  relating  to  Ms  Sugden's  circumstances.   The   respondent
    acknowledges that  this  material  was  not  taken  into  account  when
    reaching a decision.  I am satisfied  that  the  new  material  had  no
    material  bearing  on  the  factors  the  respondent  was  required  to
    consider, particularly in the  light  of  her  acknowledgement  of  the
    genuineness of the relationship and the fact of Ms Sugden's  employment
    in the United Kingdom.

25. In the closing stages of Mr Bird's submissions Mr Gibson-Lee sought  to
    further amend the grounds by arguing that the Secretary  of  State  had
    not set out the test she was required to apply and she did not refer to
    her own guidance.  In deciding not to  grant  leave  for  this  further
    ground of appeal advanced I had regard any potential merit.   There  is
    no reason to believe from the decision of the Secretary of  State  that
    she did not have regard to her own guidance in reaching  this  decision
    and furthermore the language in her decision is  indicative  that  such
    guidance was indeed followed.

26. I return to the third point argued by Mr Gibson-Lee that the  Secretary
    of State's decision was  flawed  by  failing  to  have  regard  to  the
    material that I have listed above  which accompanied the initial letter
    of application.  I am not persuaded that that material related  to  the
    case as now put that Ms Sugden herself would be willing to relocate  to
    Pakistan but instead it related to the claims made which was of risk to
    the applicant resulting upon his intervention in a local cricket  match
    in 2007.

27. I am satisfied  that  the  respondent  focused  upon  particular  facts
    relating to the claimant and Ms Sugden.  I am also satisfied that those
    facts as presented fell for appraisal within Section EX  of  the  Rules
    and  her  own  guidance.  Those  same  facts  did  not  necessitate   a
    consideration outside the Rules and guidance.

28. The argument before me is that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    his family life continuing in Pakistan.  The approach I am required  to
    take is not what I would do were I the Secretary of State but instead I
    am reviewing the reasonableness of the Secretary of State's  conclusion
    based on the material before her whatever sympathies I might have.   My
    conclusion is that the decision of the Secretary of  State  was  within
    the range of permissible responses to the facts as presented to her  in
    the three letters and  therefore  Wednesbury  reasonable.   Accordingly
    this application is dismissed.

29. Mr Gibson-Lee makes no application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  I am nevertheless required to decide whether  I  have
    erred in my decision; I am not persuaded that I have.

30. As invited by the parties I make no order as to costs.  ~~~~0~~~~

