
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Amin) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00135 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                   Wednesday, 7 January 2015

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                MD RUHUL AMIN

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, instructed by Universal Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr R Fortt, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE CRAIG:  This is an  application  for  judicial  review  by  three
    people, all of whom are of Bangladeshi nationality although this is not
    entirely clear from either the grounds or the skeleton  argument  which
    has been prepared on their behalf.  I shall deal with  this  aspect  of
    the case in a moment.  Before perfecting this judgement, I  have  taken
    account of a Note jointly signed by Mr Biggs and Mr Fortt, counsel  for
    the respective parties, to which I shall refer below.

 2. The proceedings were initially brought in the Upper Tribunal  but  they
    included a challenge to the validity of the Immigration Rules, it being
    argued within the grounds that these were ultra vires.  For this reason
    the proceedings were transferred to the Administrative Court, it  being
    stated within the transfer order that the proceedings as a  whole  were
    to be determined by a High Court Judge.  There was, as in due course Mr
    Justice Ouseley held, obvious sense in that order because a High  Court
    Judge has power to deal with the issues sitting as a High  Court  Judge
    or if this becomes necessary as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

 3. What then happened is the application was put before His  Honour  Judge
    Blackett who granted permission it would seem on  all  grounds  on  the
    basis that the validity of the Immigration Rules would be considered by
    the High Court
    "before being passed back to the UT for a full appeal on  the  merits".
    The application then came before Mr Justice Ouseley sitting as  a  High
    Court Judge in the Administrative Court.

 4. The case was argued before him, essentially with regard to the validity
    of the Immigration Rules only and  Mr  Justice  Ouseley  dismissed  the
    application on this ground. At paragraph 4 of his judgement,  which  is
    reported at [2014] EWHC 2322 (Admin),  Mr Justice Ouseley indicated  as
    follows:

        "a judge granting permission for a non-mandatory transfer point  to
        be  considered  ought  to  consider  very  carefully  whether   the
        convenient disposal of the entire proceedings would not  be  better
        achieved by the whole being dealt with by a High Court Judge in the
        Administrative Court,  who  has  dual  jurisdiction  or  competence
        should that be necessary".

    He added that:

         "This is a case which, as the order transferring the case from  the
         Upper Tribunal to the Administrative Court  made  clear,  was  just
         such a case."

 5. The difficulty in this case was that the argument that the  Immigration
    Rules  were  unlawful  essentially  because   they   prevented   proper
    consideration  of  the  applicants'  Article  8  rights   having   been
    dismissed, the applicants' Counsel informed the court that he  was  not
    in a position to deal with the remainder  of  the  claim  because  this
    aspect of the case had not been prepared and so the  remainder  of  the
    proceedings were sent back to the Upper Tribunal for it to consider.  I
    agree with Mr Justice Ouseley that it would  be  preferable  for  cases
    such as this to be determined by one judge at one time and I echo  what
    he said at paragraph 67 of his judgment which was that "I do hope  that
    judges who grant permission on a non-transfer point will  not  make  an
    order of that sort without giving it very careful thought, because even
    if no time at all is saved through it being one judge,  it  avoids  the
    case joining the queue twice".  With this in mind he invited the  Upper
    Tribunal to give this case priority so far as listing was concerned  to
    avoid there being yet further delay in its determination.

 6. It is relevant so far as the hearing before me today is concerned if  I
    set out the reasons given by Mr Biggs  who  represented  the  applicant
    before Mr Justice Ouseley as well as before me as to why the case could
    not be disposed of fully by Mr Justice Ouseley.  This  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 58 of the earlier decision of Mr Justice Ouseley  (where  the
    submissions on behalf of the  parties  subsequent  to  the  substantive
    decision are set out).  Mr Biggs said as follows:

         "My position is that it  would  not  be  right  to  deal  with  the
         remainder of the claim today.  I appreciate that is unsatisfactory,
         broadly speaking, but my instructions were limited to deal with the
         ultra vires argument.  There is no written argument,  for  example,
         dealing with the claim in its entirety.  There  are  other  aspects
         that would need to be looked at and  would  need  to  benefit  from
         written argument.  In submission, to  deprive  my  clients  of  the
         benefit of that, and perhaps the benefit of  a  further  bundle  of
         documents  focused  on  the  other  aspects  of  my  claim,  in  my
         submission would not be fair."

 7. It is right also to refer to what Mr Justice Ouseley said  with  regard
    to the substantive case brought by the applicants which was set out  at
    paragraph 6 of his judgment.  This was as follows:

         "The claimants contend in the grounds,  though,  as  I  have  said,
         without providing any of the relevant supporting  material  and  it
         may not have been provided to the  Secretary  of  State  either  in
         their application, that their private life would be infringed by  a
         refusal of leave to remain."

 8. As Mr Biggs accepted before me in the course  of  argument  during  the
    hearing, the reason why  an  adjournment  was  required  and  indeed  a
    further hearing rather than it being possible to dispose of the  entire
    application before Mr Justice Ouseley, was precisely in order to enable
    further  evidence  to  be  provided.   Unfortunately  no  such  further
    evidence was provided

 9. It would be right to set out some observations with regard to  the  way
    the grounds of claim and also the skeleton argument prepared on  behalf
    of the applicants which I did not receive  until  the  day  before  the
    hearing, were drafted.

10. At paragraph 7 of the skeleton argument settled by Mr Biggs relating to
    "the facts" it is stated as follows:

         "7.  The claimants  are  a  family  unit.   Their  details  are  as
             follows:

             (a)  The first claimant, Md Ruhul Amin  (d.o.b.  101/01/1976),
                  arrived in the UK on 18 April 2003  with  valid  leave  to
                  enter and remain as  a  student.   He  is  a  national  of
                  Bangladesh.   His  leave  was  extended  on  a  number  of
                  occasions to 30 November 2009.  After his leave to  remain
                  expired he remained in the UK.

             (b)  The second claimant, Rabeya Sultana, is also  a  national
                  of Bangladesh.  She met the first claimant in 2004.   They
                  formed  a  committed  relationship  and  were  married  in
                  January 2005.

             (c)  On 1 April 2008 Rabeya gave birth to the third  claimant,
                  Master Rahib Amin, in London.  He is now 6 years  old  and
                  has spent his whole life in the UK."

11. In the grounds, at paragraph 14, the position of the third applicant is
    put as follows:

         "14. The third claimant has spent his entire life in  the  UK.   It
             will not be possible or reasonable for him to settle  anywhere
             in the world and it will be a disproportionate expectation  to
             require the third claimant to relocate to Bangladesh.

         15.  We submit that the claimant's application  should  be  allowed
             for  protecting  the  permanence  of  the   family   unit   as
             established by the case law and his deportation will cause the
             break-up of the family."

12. What is missing both from the grounds and  also  from  the  submissions
    contained within the applicants' skeleton argument is any statement  as
    to how the second applicant came  to  be  in  this  country,  when  she
    arrived or what her status is.  At  paragraph  7  of  the  respondent's
    skeleton argument/detailed grounds prepared for  this  hearing,  it  is
    stated on behalf of the correspondent that  "the  second  applicant  is
    alleged to be the first applicant's spouse. She does not appear to have
    had any valid leave to enter or remain in the UK (and no such leave  is
    identified by the applicants)".  Although it is correct  that  no  such
    leave had been identified by the  applicants,  in  fact,  as  has  been
    agreed in the Note signed by both counsel referred to above, it is  now
    accepted that the second applicant did in fact have leave to enter  and
    remain, which leave expired on 30 November 2009. This was made explicit
    within the refusal  letter  of  15  June  2013,  regarding  the  second
    applicant, which was contained within the applicants' bundle. The  mis-
    statement in the respondent's skeleton argument occurred (according  to
    the Note) by reason of an error on the part of the respondent's officer
    who was "responsible for confirming the stance taken in the defendant's
    skeleton  argument".   Although  it  is  unfortunate  that  the  second
    applicant's immigration history was not properly explained, this  would
    not have made a material difference to the outcome of this application.

13. The applicants' skeleton argument is silent as  to  where  the  parties
    were said to have been married and no  evidence  was  provided.   In  a
    later document which was subsequently put before  the  Tribunal  during
    the course of the hearing, it would seem that it is now claimed that it
    was a religious ceremony but no more details have  been  provided  than
    that.

14. With regard to the third applicant, from a quick reading  of  both  the
    grounds and the skeleton argument it would seem  that  what  was  being
    submitted was that, while the first two  applicants  are  nationals  of
    Bangladesh, the third applicant might not be because all that  is  said
    on his behalf is that he was born in London, was now 6  years  old  and
    had spent his whole life in the UK.  Indeed, it is argued in terms  and
    underlined that it would be a disproportionate expectation  to  require
    him  to  relocate  to  Bangladesh.   It  is  further  said  that   "his
    deportation" (although it is not clear to which applicant reference  is
    being made here) "will cause the break-up of the family".  In  fact  as
    is accepted now on behalf of the applicants (Mr Biggs did  not  attempt
    to suggest anything other than this) the third applicant is of course a
    national of Bangladesh and the removal (this would not be a deportation
    as such) of these applicants would not cause the break-up of the family
    because they would return to Bangladesh as a family unit.

15. The next observation I have  with  regard  to  the  way  in  which  the
    applicants' case has been put is that there is  reference  both  within
    the grounds and the skeleton argument to  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain having been made  by  the  first  applicant  which  was
    refused and an appeal having been subsequently dismissed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  However the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (which I have now seen because at my request it was handed to me by  Mr
    Fortt representing the respondent) was never  adduced  in  evidence  in
    support  of  the  claim.   This  was  a  relevant  document  which,  on
    reflection, ought really to have been put before the Tribunal.

16. There is reference at paragraph 15 of Mr Biggs'  skeleton  argument  to
    the applicants having appealed the judgment of Mr  Justice  Ouseley  to
    which I have referred and it is said that "it is  understood  that  the
    appeal is pending".  In fact it appears that  grounds  of  appeal  were
    settled and submitted but  Mr  Biggs  does  not  know  whether  or  not
    permission to appeal has been granted as he  has  not  been  instructed
    with regard to that point.  (If permission to appeal had in  fact  been
    granted, it is likely that Mr Biggs would have been  told).  Again,  it
    would have been better if this had been  stated  in  terms  although  I
    accept that Mr Biggs did not make any  deliberate  attempt  to  suggest
    that the status was other than it was.

17. The next point I make with regard to the way in  which  the  claim  has
    been prepared on behalf of the applicants is that at  paragraph  16  of
    the skeleton argument  it  is  said  that  "On  29  December  2014  the
    claimants' solicitors served and filed further documents in support  of
    the claimants' claims."  The documents said to have been  included  are
    then set out.  I make it clear that the following observations  I  make
    are not intended to suggest that Mr Biggs  personally  was  aware  that
    this was not in fact the case but as a matter of fact  these  documents
    do not appear to have been served on  either  the  Treasury  Solicitors
    representing  the  respondent  or  the  Tribunal.    Furthermore,   the
    respondent's representatives wrote to the applicants' solicitors on two
    occasions, as I was informed by  Mr  Fortt,  requesting  sight  of  the
    documents and stating that they had not been sent  to  them  and  these
    letters appear to have been ignored.  I saw  these  documents  for  the
    first time during the course of the hearing, because they  were  handed
    to me by Mr Biggs who, as I  have  already  indicated,  was  under  the
    impression that they had been served and did  not  appreciate  that  in
    fact they had not.  However, they ought to have been.

18. I now deal with the substance of the claim  and  the  history  of  this
    family's presence in this country can be summarised  as  follows.   The
    first applicant came to this country in  2003  as  a  student  and  was
    thereafter here lawfully until about 2009.  At some stage  he  met  the
    second applicant, who (as I have already noted) had lawful leave to  be
    in this country until 13 November 2009.  It is  not  clear  where  they
    met.  It is said that they were married in 2005  although  no  evidence
    has been produced with regard to that.  The  only  further  information
    regarding this marriage is contained in one of the  documents  referred
    to at paragraph 16 of the skeleton argument as having been served  (but
    which in fact had not been) which was a  CYPS  assessment  report  from
    Newham Borough  Council  and  which  refers  to  there  having  been  a
    "religious marriage".  The third applicant was born in London  in  2008
    and in 2009 the applicants made an application for  "further  leave  to
    remain".  This claim was refused and an appeal against this refusal was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in 2010.

19. As I have indicated I asked for a copy of this determination which  was
    handed to me at the hearing; the appeal before the first-tier  tribunal
    had been heard at Hatton Cross on 22 October  2010  before  Immigration
    Judge Howard and the applicants had been represented at  that  hearing.
    It appears that no claim was made on that occasion either under Article
    3  or  8  which  may  have  some  relevance   in   these   proceedings.
    Subsequently the applicants were refused permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal both by Senior Immigration Judge  Martin  sitting  as  a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal and then by Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Warr, as a judge of the Upper Tribunal.  Judge Warr's decision is dated
    12 April 2011 and so the appeal rights of  all  applicants  would  have
    expired  shortly  afterwards.  At  that  stage  the  first  and  second
    applicant should have returned to  Bangladesh  and  should  have  taken
    their son, the third applicant with them.  The applicants chose not  to
    do so but instead made a further application in 2013 to be  allowed  to
    remain "exceptionally" outside the Rules but as I have  already  stated
    they  supplied  very  little  evidence  as  to  why  their   case   was
    sufficiently strong that  they  should  be  entitled  to  consideration
    beyond that to which they were entitled under paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Rules.  The application was  considered  by  the  respondent  primarily
    under the relevant provisions within  the  Rules  but  also  under  her
    residual powers to consider applications under article  8  outside  the
    Rules as follows:

         "I have also considered whether your application raises or contains
         any exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the  right  to
         respect for private and family life contained in Article 8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant consideration by
         the Secretary of State for the grant of  leave  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom outside the requirement of the Immigration Rules.  I
         have decided that it does  not.   Your  application  for  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom is therefore refused."

    In the next paragraph within the refusal letter, it is then  stated  as
    follows:

         "If you are in fear of being persecuted if you were  to  return  to
         Bangladesh then this would constitute an asylum  application  under
         ECHR Article 3 and also under the terms of paragraph 327(b) of  the
         Immigration Rules.  This claim should therefore be made  in  person
         at an Asylum Screening Unit."

    The contact information of the Immigration Enquiry Bureau was then  set
    out.

20. As I have  already  noted,  the  substantive  argument  raised  in  the
    judicial review application was as to the validity of  the  Immigration
    Rules regarding consideration of Article 8 and that  is  not  a  matter
    which is now before me because  that  aspect  of  the  application  was
    dismissed by Mr Justice Ouseley.  The only matters  before  me  concern
    the substantive reasons why it is said the decision was unlawful.

21. Although I am grateful to Mr Biggs for the  persuasive  and  attractive
    manner in which  he  presented  his  submissions,  ultimately  for  the
    reasons which I shall give they were in my judgment quite hopeless.  Mr
    Biggs' primary submission was that the third applicant had the right by
    statute to have his interests considered as a primary interest pursuant
    to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Section 55 with which all who practise in this field are very  familiar
    provides as follows:

         "55.     Duty regarding the welfare of children


             E+W+S+N.I.
         This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
         (1)  The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
         that-

             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom, and

             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State  and
                  relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.

         (2)  The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-

             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;

             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer;

             ...


         (3)  A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising
             the function, have regard to any guidance given to the  person
             by the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1)."

22. As made clear by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) (FC) v SSHD  [2010]
    UKSC 4 in the judgment of Lady Hale, by virtue of Article 3(1)  of  the
    United Nations Convention on the  Rights  of  the  Child  1989,  it  is
    provided that:

         "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken  by  public
         or  private   social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
         administrative  authorities  or  legislative   bodies,   the   best
         interests of the child should be a primary consideration."

23. Although it is now established jurisprudence (such  that  there  is  no
    need to cite any further authorities to this  effect)  that  while  the
    interests of a child are a  "primary  consideration"  they  are  not  a
    "trump card" and nor will they necessarily outweigh the  countervailing
    factors, Mr Biggs submitted that nonetheless a decision maker needed to
    show that these interests had been properly considered. In  this  case,
    he submitted, it was not clear from the decision which  was  made  that
    any consideration had been given to the best  interests  of  the  third
    applicant and accordingly the decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law.

24. While it is fair to say that Mr Biggs accepted  that  the  evidence  in
    support of the applications was weak, he nonetheless  sought  to  argue
    that even though the respondent might have been  able  to  justify  her
    decision merely by saying "I have considered the best interests of  the
    child but on the basis of the evidence before me consider that in light
    of all the factors he ought to go to Bangladesh with  his  parents  who
    ought to be returned there",  as this  was  not  stated  in  terms  the
    Secretary of State had  not  complied  with  her  obligations  and  her
    decision was accordingly unlawful.

25. On behalf of the respondent Mr Fortt invited the  court  to  appreciate
    that there is reference to GEN 1.1 within the decision  letter  and  as
    this part of the Rules deals with the best interests of  the  child  it
    cannot properly be said that the respondent had not taken into  account
    these best interests.  Essentially it was clear that in formulating the
    Rules the respondent had taken the need to consider the best  interests
    of children into account such that it was not necessary in  every  case
    involving a child to say in terms that specific regard had been had  to
    the best interests of that child.  This  would  only  be  necessary  if
    something out of the ordinary was indicated in the evidence which would
    not necessarily be addressed within the Rules. Mr Fortt further invited
    the Tribunal to note (although it was not  formally  relied  upon)  the
    letter of 30  December  sent  by  the  respondent  to  the  applicants'
    solicitors explaining the decision and making it clear  that  the  best
    interests of the child had been considered  but  setting  out  in  more
    detail why it was  considered  that  nonetheless  the  proper  decision
    refusing the applications had been made.

26. In response to this argument Mr Biggs submitted that  it  simply  could
    not be right that in all cases the respondent should be deemed to  have
    adequately considered Section 55  save  in  those  circumstances  where
    there were some additional features.  Section 55 was not just concerned
    with immigration matters and it had to be considered fully.

27. This is a not unfamiliar argument before this Tribunal.  Since the  new
    Immigration Rules came into effect it has frequently been argued that a
    decision letter is not in accordance  with  the  law  unless  it  deals
    properly (by which it is usually  meant  more  fully)  with  Article  8
    arguments.  The current jurisprudence which  I  shall  summarise  below
    does not support this proposition.

28. This argument came up before Mr Justice Sales as he then was  in  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 in which the judge made it clear that the effect of the
    Rules  was  that  there  was  a  two-stage  approach  involving   first
    consideration  under  the  specific  sections  of  the  Rules  such  as
    paragraph 276ADE  but  then  where  appropriate  further  consideration
    outside of those  Rules  where  it  could  be  said  that  "exceptional
    circumstances" (to which I will add a few words below) apply.   However
    it would only be necessary to give detailed consideration to Article  8
    beyond  the  first  stage  where  there  was  an  argument  capable  of
    succeeding.  There has  been  considerable  discussion  regarding  this
    approach in subsequent decision, including Gulshan (article  8  --  new
    rules -- correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640, a decision of this Tribunal
    (Cranston J and UTJ Taylor), MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 in which
    the Court of Appeal agreed with the Upper Tribunal that there was a two-
    stage process in deportation cases (although so far as deportation  was
    concerned that second stage was within the Rules rather than  outside),
    MM (Lebanon [2014] EWCA Civ 985 (in which the Court of Appeal made  her
    certain observations with regard to the judgement in  Nagre)  and  very
    recently within a further judgment of Lord Justice Sales as he  now  is
    in AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636. What the judgements in these cases
    have in common is  that  they  all  make  it  quite  clear  that  where
    effectively there is no evidence capable of persuading a decision maker
    addressing his or her mind properly to the issues that leave should  be
    granted under Article 8 outside the rules, it is not necessary  to  dot
    every 'I' and cross every 'T'; it is sufficient merely  to  state  that
    this  has  been  considered  but  that  the  argument  cannot  succeed.
    Subsequent to of the hearing, this approach has again been endorsed  by
    the Court of Appeal in Singh v SSHD and Khalid v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    74, in which Underhill LJ also explained  (at  paragraph  64)  why  the
    judgement of Sales J in Nagre was not undermined by the observations of
    Aitkens LJ in MM (Lebanon).

29. Mr Biggs attempted to persuade the Tribunal to the contrary relying  on
    two decisions given on the same day  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan
    which were the decisions in Bosomo [2014] UKUT 492 and Kerr [2014] UKUT
    493, in the second of which Mr Biggs apparently appeared, successfully,
    for the applicant.  However he set out the reasoning of UTJ  Jordan  in
    the case of Bosomo at paragraph 7 of that judgment as follows:

         "The sole consideration therefore of whether the  applicants'  case
         had been properly considered was contained in the  words,  'It  has
         been decided that it does not'.  This is not reasoning at  all  but
         simply a conclusion that  there  was  nothing  exceptional  in  the
         applicants'  case.   That  might  well  have  been  an  appropriate
         response in many cases where the  applicants'  immigration  history
         and her private and family life did not merit any more than such  a
         cursory examination.  However in the circumstances of this case and
         in particular the fact that there were some 50 pages of documentary
         material  which  had  been  submitted  dealing  with  the   overall
         circumstances of the case, no reference was made to this additional
         material nor to the fact, as I have pointed  out,  that  there  was
         prior consideration under the legacy programme which may  have  had
         consequences for the applicant."

30. It is clear in my judgment that what Judge Jordan was referring  to  in
    that decision was a case where the facts were such that  clearly  there
    may have been an arguable case which merited fuller  consideration.   I
    note in particular his observation that the response made that "it  has
    been decided that it does not" "might well  have  been  an  appropriate
    response in many cases where the applicants' immigration history and  a
    private and family life did not merit any  more  than  such  a  cursory
    examination".  As acknowledged on behalf of the applicants in this case
    there was not appropriate evidence put before the respondent capable of
    persuading any decision  maker  to  allow  the  applications.   I  have
    independently considered the evidence which  was  before  the  decision
    maker and I am entirely satisfied that no decision maker  applying  his
    or her mind properly to this evidence could have done other than decide
    that the first and second applicants should be returned  to  Bangladesh
    and the third applicant, their young child, should go with  them.   The
    suggestion in the grounds that this would involve the break-up  of  the
    family is  clearly  not  arguable  because  the  family  should  return
    together.

31. I was shown at the hearing the assessment prepared  by  Newham  Council
    and this does not make out any stronger case either.   I  have  already
    noted earlier that there is reference to the religious marriage between
    the first and second applicant but it is interesting to note that it is
    said within this assessment that "Mr Amin reported  that  he  has  been
    married to Mrs Amin for  over  eleven  years,  they  have  a  religious
    marriage".  That is inconsistent with his case that the couple  married
    in 2005.

32. Reliance is placed on the fact that the applicant  "expressed  that  it
    would not be possible to return home as his parents did not give  their
    blessing of the marriage and do not approve of the relationship" but if
    that was the case it is extraordinary that this was not raised  at  the
    time of the appeal against the 2009 decision which was  made  in  2010.
    So far as the third applicant is concerned, the  only  concerns  raised
    (stated as low risk factors) concern  the  immigration  status  of  the
    family and the lack of a stable home environment, both of which are  as
    a result of the decision of the applicants not to return to  Bangladesh
    as they should  but  to  remain  in  this  country  without  leave  and
    therefore without any right to  work.   As  against  that,  the  report
    indicates  positive  factors  relating  to  the  applicant  which   are
    particularly that he is well cared for by his parents and as is  stated
    in terms "the assessment does not highlight any parenting concerns  and
    there are no concerns  in  respect  of  this".   Accordingly,  even  if
    further evidence was allowed to be adduced as to whether it  would  now
    be appropriate to allow the applicants to remain founded  substantially
    on the best interests of the third applicant, clearly no decision maker
    considering the Rules properly including  the  obligation  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE  could  possibly
    conclude other than that the applications would be bound to be refused.



33. It follows therefore that this application must be dismissed.  Although
    it might be appropriate where arguably  persuasive  evidence  has  been
    adduced for the Secretary of  State  to  deal  with  such  evidence  in
    sufficient  detail  to  show  that  this  evidence  has  been  properly
    considered, in circumstances such as this where no  such  evidence  has
    been advanced, it is sufficient (as Judge Jordan indicated in Bosomo in
    appropriate cases it might be) for the Secretary of State  to  indicate
    that having considered this evidence she has concluded  that  there  is
    nothing out of the ordinary (in her words "exceptional") such as  would
    effectively  show  that  the  consequences  of  the  removal  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh.

34. Judicial review is a discretionary remedy and there  is  no  reason  in
    this case why the discretion should be exercised  in  favour  of  these
    applicants.  The decision was not irrational but was inevitable on  the
    basis of the evidence which was before the respondent and there  is  no
    arguable error of law in her decision.


Permission to Appeal

35. Although no application has been made for permission to  appeal,  I  am
    nonetheless obliged to consider whether or not to grant  permission  to
    appeal pursuant to rule  44  (4B)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I refuse permission to appeal because  there  is
    no error of law in my judgment.


Costs

36. The appropriate order is for the  applicant  to  pay  the  respondent's
    costs.  Because a schedule  has  not  yet  been  prepared  I  give  the
    following directions:

    (1)  The Respondent must file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
         applicant a costs schedule within 21 days of the date on which this
         judgement is sent out.

    (2)  The applicants must file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
         respondent any response to this schedule within 14 days thereafter.

    (3)  I will thereafter summarily assess the costs.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~
