





R (on the application of Raza) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
(Bail - conditions - variation - Article  9  ECHR)  IJR  [2016]  UKUT  00132
(IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                       The Queen on the application of

                                  Asif Raza
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Storey



(i)   Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2012  "Bail  Guidance  for  Judges
      Presiding over Immigration and Asylum Hearings" is  an  instrument  of
      guidance and not instruction.  The guidance should, however, normally,
      be followed and good reason is required for not doing so.

(ii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  is  empowered  to  adjudicate  on
      applications to vary the terms of its bail orders.


 iii) The FtT retains exclusive power to vary any of its bail orders  during
      their  lifespan.  The  Chief  Immigration  Officer  has  no  power  to
      interfere  with  such  orders  or  make  any  other  order   in   such
      circumstances.


  iv) In cases where there is no appeal pending, an application for bail can
      be made to either the FtT or the Chief Immigration Officer.


   v) While every case will be  fact  sensitive,  a  curfew  and  electronic
      monitoring restriction in a bail order will not normally constitute  a
      disproportionate interference  so  as  to  infringe  Article  9  ECHR,
      Article 10 of the Fundamental rights Charter or the Equality Act 2010.



On this  application  for  permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  and
following consideration of the documents lodged by the  parties  and  having
heard Mr C Buttler, of counsel, instructed by Duncan  Lewis  Solicitors  and
Mr Z Malik, of counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department  at  a
hearing conducted at Field House, London on 12  October 2015.

And having considered  the  further  written  submissions  of  both  parties
completed on 10 December 2015.


                                  DECISION

The Applicant is granted permission to withdraw his  judicial  review  claim
pursuant to Rule 17(2) of the Tribunals  (Upper  Tribunal)  Procedure  Rules
2010 and a declaration order is made under  section  15  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 in the terms of [72] of this judgment.


McCLOSKEY J

Introduction

(1)   This application for permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  was
      adjourned into Court and granted expedition.  Further, it proceeded on
      an inter-partes basis, the  Respondent's  Acknowledgement  of  Service
      ("AOS") having been lodged.


   2) The Applicant, a national of Pakistan now  aged  34  years,  has  been
      living in the United Kingdom since January 2005. His history is one of
      a refusal of his claim for asylum, an unsuccessful appeal against this
      decision and, since 2009, a series of further representations  seeking
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom, all of which have been rejected
      by the Respondent, the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      (hereinafter the "Secretary of State").  This is one of  two  judicial
      review permission applications brought before the Upper Tribunal.   In
      the second (JR/11223/2014), in  which  the  Applicant  challenges  the
      Secretary  of  State's  decision  that   his   most   recent   further
      representations, advanced under Article 8 ECHR, did not  constitute  a
      fresh claim, permission to apply for judicial review  was  refused  by
      order dated 13 September 2014. An oral renewal  application  was  then
      made. Following a partial hearing on 06 October and a further  hearing
      on 12 October  2015,  the  refusal  of  permission  was  affirmed  and
      permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused.

   3) As noted in the preamble to this judgment, the  Applicant's  challenge
      was  ultimately  resolved  consensually  between  the  parties.   This
      outcome crystallised on the day of  hearing.  In  exchanges  with  the
      parties' representatives,  the  panel  suggested  that  this  did  not
      necessarily preclude  consideration  of  the  substantive  issues  and
      expressing their views in a considered judgment.  We took into account
      in particular the somewhat unusual and important nature of the  issues
      raised by the Applicant's challenge and the substantial investment  of
      resources in the proceedings by both the Tribunal and the parties.  We
      also had regard to the decision of the House of Lords in R v Secretary
      of State for the Home Department, ex parte Salem  [1999]  AC  450,  at
      456g/457c, which contains the following guidance, per  Lord  Slynn  of
      Hadley:

           "My Lords, I accept, as both Counsel  agree,  that  in  a  cause
           where there is an issue involving a public  authority  as  to  a
           question of public law, your Lordships have a discretion to hear
           the appeal, even if by the time the  appeal  reaches  the  House
           there is no longer a lis  to  be  decided  which  will  directly
           affect the rights  and  obligations  of  the  parties  inter  se
           .......


           The discretion to hear disputes, even in the area of public law,
           must, however, be exercised with caution and appeals  which  are
           academic between the parties should not be heard unless there is
           a good reason in the  public  interest  for  doing  so,  as  for
           example (but only by way of example) when a  discrete  point  of
           statutory construction arises which does  not  involve  detailed
           consideration of facts and where a large number of similar cases
           exist or are anticipated so that the issue will most likely need
           to be resolved in the near future."

      While this guidance was formulated in the context of an appeal to  the
      highest court, it has,  in  practice,  been  applied  subsequently  in
      judicial review proceedings at all tiers  of  the  legal  system.   We
      refer to the recent decision of this Chamber in R (on the  application
      of Bhudia) v SSHD (para 284(iv) and (ix)) IJR [2016] UKUT 25 (IAC).


(4)   Lord Slynn, emphatically, did not purport to prescribe any  inflexible
      rules or principles to be applied in the kind of  circumstances  which
      arose in Salem and which have materialised in the present proceedings.
       We have highlighted certain features  of  the  Applicant's  challenge
      above.   Having   considered   the   submissions   of   the   parties'
      representatives, we gave directions for the filing of further  written
      argument.  Having considered the  parties'  further  submissions,  our
      provisional view that the Tribunal  should  pronounce  upon  the  main
      issues  raised  by  the  Applicant's  challenge  is  confirmed.   This
      judgment is provided accordingly.

The Challenge

   5) In the Judicial Review Claim  Form,  the  target  of  the  Applicant's
      challenge is formulated in the following terms:

           "The Respondent's failure to respond to the Applicant's requests
           to revoke or vary the requirements that he  wear  an  electronic
           tag and abide by a home curfew."

        In a letter dated 30 December 2014 written by his solicitors  it  is
      stated:


           "Our client was released on bail on 07  October  2014  with  the
           conditions to live and sleep at his  wife's  address,  reporting
           conditions between 10am and 4pm every Wednesday and  subject  to
           electronic monitoring between 7pm and 7am."

       In the same letter it was suggested that the Applicant  had  complied
      with his conditions of temporary admission to the United  Kingdom  and
      bail conditions faithfully and without exception.   The  letter  makes
      the following protest:


           "It is contended that the continued electronic monitoring is  an
           unnecessarily restrictive condition upon our client ....


           [It] is having a serious detriment to his  attempts  to  acquire
           formal identification from the Pakistan Embassy,  his  religious
           life  as  he  has  been  unable  to  participate  in   important
           ceremonial occasions for Shia Muslims and his social life, which
           is particularly important for him before Christmas as he may  be
           prevented from enjoying it with his wife's family."

      The  letter  ends  with  a  request  that  the  electronic  monitoring
      condition be removed.


   6) The bail order containing the offending conditions is dated 07 October
      2014.  It was made by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (the  "FtT").
      The only evidence relating to the bail hearing and its outcome is  the
      order itself, which is unremarkable. It contains  provisions  relating
      to sureties, coupled with three "secondary"conditions:  the  Applicant
      was required to live and sleep at a specified address,  to  report  to
      the UK Border Agency in the terms indicated once weekly and to observe
      a curfew, with electronic monitoring, between 19.00  hours  and  07.00
      hours daily. The Order also contains a so-called  "primary  condition"
      requiring the Applicant to appear before the Chief Immigration Officer
      in accordance with the time, date and location specified "and  at  any
      other place and on any other date and time that may be ordered".

   7) In the Pre-Action Protocol ("PAP") letter written by  the  Applicant's
      solicitors it is asserted:

           "The claimant [sic] applied for variation of bail  to  have  his
           tagging removed and this was refused  by  Judge  Clayton  on  16
           February 2015 as she was of the view that electronic tagging was
           appropriate for the claimant.  The Judge was of  the  view  that
           the electronic [tag] was not intrusive despite the claimant  not
           being a criminal or having any history of absconding and  stated
           that the tag was a 'discrete gadget'.  She also stated that  the
           tag was a penalty for entering the UK in the  back  of  a  lorry
           clandestinely.  Since then we have  made  numerous  requests  to
           varying Home Office Departments by letter and telephone to  have
           the client's tagging removed [without response] .....


           The  claimant  then  made  a  further  application  for  a  bail
           variation hearing, which was heard on 14  July  2015.   We  were
           informed that the [FtT] did not have jurisdiction to  hear  this
           matter and the appropriate body  to  make  a  decision  on  bail
           variation would  be  the  Chief  Immigration  Officer  at  North
           Shields."

      To summarise: the FtT made an order releasing the Applicant  on  bail;
      some four months later the FtT considered, and refused, an application
      to vary the conditions of the bail order; and, some five months later,
      declined to consider a further variation  application  on  the  ground
      that it lacked jurisdiction, the outcome being  a  withdrawal  of  the
      application.

(8)   In the evidence filed on  behalf  of  the  Applicant,  which  consists
      mainly of his two written statements, there is some  emphasis  on  two
      religious festivals. The first is that of Muharran, which is described
      uncontentously as an important event for practicing Muslims.   It  was
      scheduled to commence on 13 October 2015, with a projected duration of
      40 days.  In his first witness statement, the Applicant avers:

           "I am a Shia Muslim .....  I  am  a  practising  Muslim  and  my
           religion is very important to me ....


           I attend at my local mosque ....  and take part in prayers every
           week.  This is an important part of  my  religion.  I  currently
           attend at the mosque approximately three to four  times  a  week
           during the day.  I would like to  attend  more  prayers  at  the
           mosque. However my tagging restrictions prevent me from doing so
           ....


           There are currently three evening prayers per day at the mosque,
           so I am currently unable to attend approximately 12 prayers  per
           week on the four days that I would normally attend. The  prayers
           that I am unable to attend start at  approximately  6pm,  8.45pm
           and 10pm ....


           The times of evening prayers change depending  on  the  time  of
           year. In winter I will be unable to attend 1  evening  prayer  a
           day as it starts at 6pm and in summer I miss 3  evening  prayers
           per day."

      Next, the Applicant turns his attention to the  religious  festivities
      of Ramadan. He avers that during the Ramadan period, which began on 18
      June 2015, he was unable to attend any of the evening or night prayers
      which, he suggests, "should be carried out with a  congregation".   He
      continues:

           "Although I was praying at home, attending  evening  prayers  at
           the mosque throughout Ramadan is extremely important to  me  and
           other Muslims .....  [when] ....  we are expected to  attend  at
           the  mosque  for  evening  prayers  unless  there  is  something
           extremely important that someone has to do ....


           To not be  able  to  attend  evening  prayers  left  me  feeling
           isolated from the rest of my  community  during  this  important
           time of worship."


   9) The Applicant's evidence  was  amplified  at  a  late  stage,  via  an
      unscheduled second written statement.  In this the  focus  is  on  two
      particular  periods  of  Muslim  religious  observance,  Ramadan   and
      Muharran.   During  the  first  of  these  periods,  the   Applicant's
      complaint, taken at its zenith, is that while he was  able  to  attend
      three of the five daily prayers on the days of his  choice,  three  or
      four times weekly, the offending bail conditions  precluded  him  from
      attending the two evening prayer sessions, at 7pm and 9pm.  As regards
      the Muharran period, the complaint is that the Applicant was unable to
      attend one evening prayer session, beginning at 8pm.  This  limitation
      was of finite duration, given the change of bail  conditions  effected
      from 08 October 2015.  There is no evidence to  suggest  that  at  any
      material time the Applicant could not engage in congregational  prayer
      at home during evenings.  His case, in substance, is that  this  would
      not be an adequate substitute for praying at a mosque

  10) Notwithstanding a catalogue  of  solicitors'  letters,  including  the
      aforementioned PAP letter, there was no substantive response on behalf
      of the Secretary of State at any time.  Bearing in mind that  judicial
      review proceedings are designed to operate as a last resort and having
      regard to the importance of pre-proceedings  interaction  between  the
      putative parties and the overriding objective, to  all  of  which  one
      superimposes the factor of restriction of liberty, this abject failure
      must be strongly deprecated.

  11) The submissions on behalf of the Applicant have sought to make much of
      the fact that the Secretary of  State  has  not  filed  any  evidence.
      However, we  would  observe  that  there  was  no  obligation  on  the
      Secretary of State to do so, subject to  fulfilment  of  her  duty  of
      candour as set forth in R (on the  application  of  Bilal  Mahmood)  v
      Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (candour/reassessment
      duties; ETS :alternative remedy)  IJR [2014] UKUT  439  (IAC).   While
      one hallmark of the pre-proceedings phase was inexcusable  inertia  on
      the part of the Secretary of State's officials, having considered  all
      the evidence we have no reason to conclude that  there  has  been  any
      breach of the duty of candour owed to this Tribunal.

  12) At the eleventh hour, following the adjournment  and  rescheduling  of
      the hearing date, the Secretary of State's legal representative  wrote
      a  letter  dated  09   October   2015   to   the   Applicant's   legal
      representatives.  This contains the following passage:

           "I have taken instructions from my client and confirm that there
           is  currently  an  ongoing  review  of  all  cases  subject   to
           electronic monitoring provisions and on  this  occasion,  having
           regard to all the circumstances, the decision has been taken  to
           relax  those  conditions  in  your  client's  case.   A   letter
           confirming that electronic monitoring condition will cease  with
           immediate effect was issued to your client yesterday."

      Next, a justification is proffered for making  no  reply  to  the  ten
      letters written by the  Applicant's  solicitors  spanning  the  period
      December 2014  to  July  2015,  namely  the  absence  of  any  written
      statement of the Applicant until August 2015.  The  remainder  of  the
      letter consists of a recitation of the Applicant's immigration history
      and a pleading  akin  to  what  was  already  contained  in  the  AOS.
      Finally, the letter puts in issue the following matter:

           "It is notable that the Applicant has entirely failed to provide
           any evidence as to why  he  could  not  participate  in  evening
           prayers, during the religious period of Moharam [sic] or at  any
           other time, in his own  home.   There  is  a  complete  lack  of
           evidence as to why congregation could not  be  arranged  at  his
           home ....."

      It would appear that this was the main  impetus  for  the  Applicant's
      second statement, considered above.  We cannot leave  the  subject  of
      correspondence  without  observing  that  the  Secretary  of   State's
      professed justification for ignoring ten solicitors' letters  spanning
      a period of nine months is woefully inadequate.

  13) The Applicant's grounds of challenge are these:

      (a)   Breach of Article 9 ECHR.

      (b)   Breach of Article 10 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
           European  Union  (which  we  shall  describe  as   the   "Lisbon
           Charter").

        c) Breach of Article 8 ECHR.


        d) Breach of section 19 of the Equality Act 2010.

      While we shall consider these grounds presently, we are  in  no  doubt
      that the first issue to be addressed is immigration bail.

Immigration Bail

  14) We begin by drawing attention to the following statement in the letter
      dated 09 October 2015 written by the Secretary of State's lawyer:

           ".....  It has been decided in the exercise of the Secretary  of
           State's discretion to cease the electronic monitoring condition.
            The Respondent ....  maintains that her decision to impose  and
           maintain electronic monitoring conditions  was  entirely  lawful
           and reasonable ...."

      There are two features of  the  passage  quoted  which  appear  to  us
      fundamental.  First, the Secretary of State did not make any  decision
      to subject the Applicant to electronic monitoring.   This was, rather,
      the decision of the FtT.  Second, insofar as the  Secretary  of  State
      "decided"  to  discontinue  the  electronic  monitoring   and   curfew
      conditions, this begs the question of whether she was empowered to  do
      so.  If this question yields a negative answer, the cornerstone of the
      Applicant's challenge will be demolished and it will follow inexorably
      that the Secretary of State did not  commit  any  of  the  public  law
      wrongs alleged on behalf of the Applicant in the omissions  attributed
      to her throughout the period under scrutiny.

(15)  The various statutory provisions regulating the grant  of  immigration
      bail are contained in, firstly, Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971
      (the "1971 Act").  There is  no  suggestion  that  the  provisions  in
      paragraph 16 - 20, which concern the detention of  persons  liable  to
      examination or removal, have any application to the Applicant's  case.
      Equally, the power of an  immigration  officer  to  release  a  person
      detained from detention, under  paragraph  21,  does  not  arise,  for
      reasons which we shall develop infra. Paragraph  22(1A)  is  material.
      This empowers a Chief  Immigration  Officer  ("CIO")  or  the  FtT  to
      release on bail  certain  types  of  detainee  upon  execution  of  an
      appropriate recognizance.  We  shall  examine  this  interesting  dual
      jurisdiction at greater length presently.  Pausing, it is  clear  that
      this is the power which the FtT exercised in  making  the  bail  order
      dated 07 October 2014. Paragraph 22(2) is of obvious materiality:

           "The conditions of a recognizance or bail bond taken under  this
           paragraph may include conditions appearing  to  the  immigration
           officer or the [FtT] to be likely to result in the appearance of
           the person bailed at  the  required  time  and  place;  and  any
           recognizance shall be with or without sureties as the officer or
           [the FtT] may determine."

      By paragraph 23, the FtT is empowered to declare the forfeiture  of  a
      recognizance executed under paragraph 22.  By paragraph  24,  where  a
      person released has been arrested subsequently,  he  must  be  brought
      before the FtT which is  empowered  to  direct  his  detention  or  to
      release him on the same or revised terms. Finally, by paragraph 34  of
      Schedule 2, the provisions of paragraph 22 - 25 also apply to a person
      in respect of whom removal directions have been made and who has  been
      detained in accordance with Part 1 of the Schedule.

  16) Electronic monitoring in the realm of immigration bail was  introduced
      by section 36 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
      etc) Act 2004.  The legislative device adopted was to align  this  new
      measure with the grant of immigration bail as defined,  namely  (inter
      alia) bail granted by the  FtT.  Section  36(8)(a)  conferred  on  the
      Secretary of State a rule making power in respect of "arrangements for
      electronic monitoring for the purposes of this section".  The exercise
      of this power is found in Part 5 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
      Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  (the  "FtT
      Rules"), which  came  into  operation  on  20  October  2014  and  its
      predecessor, Part 4 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)
      Rules 2005 (the "2005 Rules").

  17) The procedural outworkings of the broad bail powers conferred  on  the
      FtT by Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act are contained in the FtT Rules.  The
      main provisions are found in rules  38  -  44.   In  the  regime  thus
      established, the Secretary of State must  receive  notice  of  a  bail
      hearing and, further, must file a written  statement  of  reasons  for
      contesting the application (per rule 40).  Where bail is  granted  the
      FtT's notice of decision must contain the conditions of bail  and  the
      amount in which the applicant and any sureties are to  be  bound,  per
      rule 41(2).  Any order refusing bail or forfeiting a recognizance must
      include reasons, per rule 41(3). Mindful that the bail  order  of  the
      FtT in this case was made on 07 October 2014, it suffices to note that
      the main bail provisions in the 2005 Rules did not  differ  materially
      from their successors.

  18) It is of particular note that  rule  37  contemplates  an  adversarial
      process, with two parties.  The first is the "bail party", defined  as
      a person released on bail or applying for such  release.   The  second
      party is the Secretary of State.   The  rules  do  not  make  specific
      provision for an application to vary bail conditions.   However,  rule
      38(2) provides:

           "A bail application must specify whether it is for -


             a) the bail party to be released on bail;

             b) variation of bail conditions;

             c) continuation of bail; or

             d) forfeiture of a recognisance."



           [Emphasis added.]

      By rule 38(3), every bail application, which would embrace a variation
      application, must contain, inter alia, the grounds upon  which  it  is
      made and, where appropriate, "details of any material  change  in  the
      circumstances" since a previous refusal.  Rule 38(6) provides:


           "On receipt of a bail application, the Tribunal must record  the
           date on which  it  was  received  and  provide  a  copy  of  the
           application to the Secretary of  State  as  soon  as  reasonably
           practicable."

      By rule 39(1) and (2):

            "(1) Subject to paragraph (3), where a bail application is  for
           the bail party to be released on bail,  the  Tribunal  must,  as
           soon  as  reasonably  practicable,  hold  a   hearing   of   the
           application.

        2) In all other bail proceedings, the Tribunal  may  determine  the
           matter without a hearing if it considers it can justly do so."


      We construe this latter provision to mean that in  an  application  to
      vary bail conditions, the FtT need not necessarily convene a hearing.


  19) There is  a  further  element  in  the  legal  framework,  namely  the
      Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2012  "Bail  Guidance  for  Judges
      Presiding Over Immigration and Asylum Hearings" (the" Guidance"), made
      in the exercise of the powers conferred by section 7  of  Schedule  4,
      Part 1 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. This has not
      yet been revised to reflect the introduction of  the  new  FtT  Rules.
      Notable provisions in the Guidance  include  the  obligation  on  both
      parties to bring to the Tribunal's attention any relevant evidence  in
      their possession (per paragraph 29) and the detailed guidance relating
      to the imposition of conditions (paragraphs 32 - 44).


  20) Of particular note in the Guidance are the following provisions:


           "32.  The Tribunal will always set some conditions when granting
           bail to ensure that the person concerned answers  when  required
           to do so. However, the stringency of  the  conditions  set  will
           vary according to the circumstances and the level of  monitoring
           of the applicant that may be required.


       33. The first condition is to specify when bail will end.  Where  no
           immigration appeal  is  pending,  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           should grant bail with a condition that the applicant surrenders
           to an Immigration Officer at a time and place  to  be  specified
           either  in  the  bail  decision  itself  or  in  any  subsequent
           variation.


       34. The Judge will usually specify the immigration reporting  centre
           nearest to where the applicant is to reside  when  released  and
           will often specify  that  the  applicant  should  answer  to  an
           Immigration Officer within seven days.


       35. Once the applicant has answered to  an  Immigration  Officer  in
           accordance with that primary  condition,  the  duration  of  any
           further grant of bail  will  be  made  by  a  Chief  Immigration
           Officer rather than the Tribunal. It is to be expected that  the
           Tribunal's decision as to  the  principle  of  release  will  be
           followed in the absence of  a  change  of  circumstances.  If  a
           person does not answer as directed, then forfeiture  proceedings
           are likely to commence in the Tribunal."


      This discrete group of  provisions  is  addressed  to  the  no  appeal
      pending scenario.


  21) The next two provisions in the Guidance, paragraphs 36 and 37, address
      the separate scenario of a pending immigration appeal.  They do so  in
      these terms:


            "36. Where  an  immigration  appeal  is  pending,  the  primary
           condition for bail will be as follows:-


             i. to attend the next and every subsequent hearing of the
             appeal at such places and times as shall be notified or as
             otherwise varied in writing by the Tribunal; and


             ii. following final determination of the appeal, unless bail
             is revoked by the Tribunal or by operation of law, to appear
             before an Immigration Officer at such time and place as
             directed by the Tribunal; and


             iii. the terms of bail may be varied at any time during their
             currency by application or at the Tribunal's own motion.


       37. To enable the Tribunal to promote the achievement of the primary
           condition, a First-tier Tribunal Judge is  likely  to  impose  a
           secondary condition. Secondary conditions usually relate to  the
           place of residence of the person to be released on bail and  how
           the person released on bail should  maintain  contact  with  the
           immigration authorities."

      A dichotomy is  thus  established.  Paragraph  38(6)  adverts  to  the
      electronic monitoring provisions of the  2004  Act.  It  includes  the
      following passage:


           "This condition is most likely to be imposed if bail  is  to  be
           granted to a person who  has  previously  committed  a  criminal
           offence where the immigration authorities have requested  it  as
           an additional  safeguard  for  the  protection  of  the  public.
           However, it remains for a First-tier Tribunal Judge to  consider
           if such additional safeguards are required and  the  immigration
           authorities must substantiate such a request.  Judges will  also
           take into account the guidance in Annexes 5 and 8 regarding  the
           terms  of  the  bail  conditions  that  should  be  imposed   if
           electronic monitoring is deemed necessary."

      It  is  appropriate  to  highlight   the   inexhaustive   and   purely
      illustrative terms in which the first  sentence  of  this  passage  is
      framed.

  22) The Guidance contains a self-contained cluster of provisions  arranged
      under the banner of "Variation of  Bail  Conditions".   These  are  as
      follows:

           "55.  It may be necessary to vary bail  conditions  particularly
           where bail has  continued  for  some  time.  Responsibility  for
           considering such variation lies: (a) with the Tribunal while  an
           appeal is pending; (b) with an Immigration Officer in all  other
           circumstances.


           56.   The standard conditions of bail set out in para. 35  above
           enable the Tribunal to vary the conditions of bail  on  its  own
           motion or on application wherever it is  considered  appropriate
           to do so. The following points apply only where the Tribunal  is
           responsible for considering a variation request.


       57. The Tribunal will consider variation requests without a hearing,
           where  possible.  A  request  to  vary  the  residence  address,
           reporting  conditions  or  electronic  monitoring  will  require
           confirmation from the immigration authorities that the change is
           acceptable. Therefore the person on bail should seek the consent
           of those authorities before applying for such  a  variation.  If
           the person on bail does not seek such consent, then the Tribunal
           will contact the immigration  authorities.  This  is  likely  to
           delay the consideration of a variation request.


       58. In cases where the consent of  the  immigration  authorities  is
           withheld, the Tribunal may arrange a bail variation hearing  but
           will not always do so.


       59. Where the  variation  request  involves  a  proposed  change  of
           surety, the Tribunal should arrange a  bail  variation  hearing.
           This is so a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  can  consider  the  new
           surety, and  release  the  previous  surety  from  the  previous
           obligations."

      We would emphasise that these provisions do not  empower  the  FtT  to
      vary bail conditions.  Rather, they have the status of guidance to  be
      considered and, where appropriate, applied  in  cases  where  the  FtT
      Tribunal has statutory power to act.  We shall address  this  discrete
      issue infra.


  23) What is the status of the Guidance? Instruments of  guidance  made  in
      the exercise of statutory powers are commonplace in the United Kingdom
      legal system. Constant alertness to the  status  and  effect  of  such
      instruments is required on the part of  the  various  members  of  the
      audience to which  they  are  directed.   In  R  v  Ashworth  Hospital
      Authority, ex parte Munjaz [2005] UKHL 58, Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill
      stated, at [20]:

           "There  is  a  categorical  difference  between   guidance   and
           instruction."

      This distinction, it may be said,  is  fundamental.  Turning  next  to
      address the instrument under scrutiny, a code of practice made by  the
      Secretary of State for the guidance of  various  health  professionals
      and institutions providing mental health care, Lord Bingham continued,
      at [21]:

           "It is in my view plain that the Code does not have the  binding
           effect which a statutory provision  or  a  statutory  instrument
           would have.  It is what it purports  to  be,  guidance  and  not
           instruction."

       Continuing his analysis, however, Lord Bingham characterised the code
      in question as "more  than  mere  advice"  and  something  from  which
      hospitals should depart only with "cogent reasons".

  24) What is the function of the Guidance?  It is, fundamentally,  designed
      to promote fair and consistent decision making by FtT  Judges  in  the
      sphere of bail.  It also contains elements  of  advice,  clarification
      and information directed to its  audience.   An  appreciation  of  the
      membership of this audience is essential: it  consists  of  litigants,
      practitioners, Judges and  interested  third  party  agencies.  Viewed
      through the prism of public law, instruments of  this  kind  have  the
      potential to generate substantive legitimate  expectations  which  the
      Courts will vindicate.  This too should be  borne  in  mind  in  cases
      where Judges are contemplating departure from any of  its  provisions.
      While it should normally be followed, departing from it in appropriate
      cases is permissible.

  25) In this context, it is appropriate to emphasise that the  jurisdiction
      of the FtT in the sphere of bail is exclusively statutory. It  has  no
      inherent jurisdiction.  In this respect, it is to be contrasted  with,
      for example, the High Court of Justice in  Northern  Ireland:  see  Re
      Maughan's Application [2010] NIQB 16 at  [4].   Furthermore,  judicial
      decision making is more  likely  to  be  error  free  if  judges  bear
      constantly in mind that a constitutional value, namely the liberty  of
      the citizen, is in play.

  26) As we have highlighted in the dichotomy identified in [21] above,  the
      Guidance contemplates, indeed assumes, that the statutory power of the
      FtT to grant bail will be exercised in one of two scenarios, the first
      where there is an appeal pending and the  second  where  there  is  no
      appeal pending. In this context, we draw  attention  to  [55]  of  the
      Guidance, set out in [22] above.  As appears from the  analysis  which
      follows, we disagree with the suggestion that the FtT is empowered  to
      vary a bail order only in cases where an appeal is pending, as this is
      confounded by the  statutory  language.   It  is  the  second  of  the
      scenarios with which we are concerned in  these  proceedings.   Within
      this latter scenario, we have identified two sub-scenarios:

      (i)   Cases in which the FtT makes a bail  order  of  finite  duration
           containing a  condition  that  the  Applicant  surrender  to  an
           Immigration Officer or the CIO in accordance with  the  relevant
           stipulations, whereupon the order will expire.


      (ii)  Cases where the FtT bail order lacks a clearly expressed  finite
           duration provision of this species.

  27) In the former category identified  above  we  consider  that  the  FtT
      becomes functus officio upon the  expiry  of  its  order.   The  order
      contains a self-limiting lifespan which comes to an end  on  the  date
      specified.  We consider that, in such cases, the FtT has power to vary
      the order during its lifetime, but not  thereafter.   Once  the  order
      expires, the applicant has the choice of applying to either the FtT or
      the CIO, under Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act, for a fresh bail order.  In
      cases belonging to this category, the FtT will have  given  effect  to
      [33] of the Guidance.

  28) Cases belonging to the second sub-scenario adumbrated  in  [24]  above
      are, however, very different. These cases embrace, in  principle,  FtT
      bail orders made in both the appeal  pending  and  no  appeal  pending
      scenarios.  Where the bail  order  of  the  FtT  does  not  contain  a
      lifespan limiting provision of the type of contemplated above, the FtT
      has a continuing role which endures for as  long  as  the  bail  order
      remains in existence.  The reasons for this proposition may be  stated
      briefly.

  29) First, in this scenario, no statutory power is conferred on  the  CIO.
      Second, absent  clear  and  unequivocal  statutory  prescription,  any
      suggestion that the CIO could interfere with an order  of  the  FtT  -
      whether  by  the  mechanisms  of  revision,  amendment,   termination,
      substitution or otherwise - would be inimical to the rule of law.  The
      executive, absent unambiguous  legislative  authority,  cannot  tamper
      with the order of a court  or  tribunal.   The  separation  of  powers
      prohibits it from doing so.  This prohibition is of  such  fundamental
      constitutional importance that it extends to  cases  where  the  order
      seems obviously legally defective.  In such cases, the effect  of  the
      omnia praesumuntur principle, sometimes formulated as the principle of
      presumptive regularity or validity, is that the order remains in force
      unless and until set aside, varied or substituted by a  further  order
      of a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction. This  principle  was
      highlighted recently by the Court of Appeal in KW (by  her  litigation
      friend) and others v Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council [2015] EWCA
      Civ 1054, at [22]:

           "An order of any court is binding  until  it  is  set  aside  or
           varied. This is  consistent  with  principles  of  finality  and
           certainty which are necessary for the administration of justice:
           R (on the application of Lunn) v  Governor  of  Moorland  Prison
           [2006] EWCA Civ  700,  [2006]  1  WLR  2870,  at  [22];  Serious
           Organised Crime Agency v O'Docherty (also  known  as  Mark  Eric
           Gibbons) and another [2013] EWCA Civ 518 at [69]. Such an  order
           would still be binding even  if  there  were  doubt  as  to  the
           court's jurisdiction to make the order: M v Home  Office  [1993]
           UKHL 5; [1994] 1 AC 377 at 423; Isaacs v Robertson [1985] AC  97
           at 101-103."


      Especially of note in this passage is the emphasis on the common law
      principles of finality and certainty.

  30) There is one further matter to be addressed prior  to  expressing  our
      conclusions on this issue.  While the  proposition  that  the  FtT  is
      empowered in the scenarios identified above to vary its bail order was
      not contested before us, Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act does not expressly
      empower the FtT to do so.  However, we are in no doubt that the  power
      exists by implication.  This is one of the long established powers  in
      the history of the development of bail in the United Kingdom,  wherein
      the hallowed importance  of  the  liberty  of  the  citizen  has  been
      recognised for centuries as a value of  constitutional  status.   Bail
      conditions do not deprive a citizen of his liberty.  On the  contrary,
      they form  part  of  a  mechanism  designed  to  liberate  the  person
      concerned from detention.  However,  as  in  the  present  case,  they
      frequently have the effect of granting restricted liberty.  Variations
      of bail applications, where pursued at the suit of the  litigant,  are
      most commonly designed to remove or relax such restrictions. Based  on
      this analysis and applying well  recognised  principles  of  statutory
      construction, the conclusion that the FtT  has  an  implied  statutory
      power to vary the terms of  its  bail  orders  is  readily  made.  See
      Bennion, Statutory Interpretation (Sixth Edition), pages 459 - 460  ET
      SEQ.  Insofar as necessary, this conclusion is  further  fortified  by
      the  presumption  that  common  law  principles  and  the   rules   of
      constitutional law  apply:  op.cit.  pp938  -  942.   The  alternative
      analysis is that the secondary legislation viz the FtT  Rules  confers
      this power, via a combination of paragraph 25(1) of Schedule 2 to  the
      1971 Act and rule 38(2).

  31) Finally, we take cognisance of one of the Applicant's further  written
      submissions, which contains the following passage:

           "...  Everyone detained under the Immigration Act 1971 may  seek
           bail from either the immigration authorities or  the  First-tier
           Tribunal under  paragraph  22  and  34  of  Schedule  2  to  the
           [Immigration Act 1971]."

      We have highlighted the word  "detained"  for  an  elementary  reason.
      Clearly, the Applicant was detained at the time of the application for
      bail to the FtT in October 2014.  However, he was no  longer  detained
      following the grant of bail and the steps  taken  by  him  to  perfect
      same. Thereafter, with effect from 14 October 2014, the Applicant  was
      at liberty, albeit subject to restrictions.  There  is  no  suggestion
      that the restrictions  operated  so  as  to  convert  his  conditional
      liberty into de facto or de jure detention. Rather, the thrust of  his
      challenge is that the impugned restrictions infringed his rights under
      certain measures of United Kingdom and EU law.  The striking lacuna in
      the otherwise detailed submissions of both parties is the  failure  to
      identify the powers, if any, available to the Secretary  of  State  to
      take steps to vary the order of the FtT by the removal  or  relaxation
      of the offending conditions.

  32) We apply our analysis above to the  bail  order  of  the  FtT  in  the
      instant case in the following way:

              i) The bail order  of  the  FtT  dated  07  October  2014  was
                 lawfully made.

             ii) This  order  had  no  self-limiting  provision.   While  it
                 contained a condition requiring the Applicant to report  to
                 the CIO, this did not bring the order to an end.

            iii) The application to the FtT to vary the bail order  and  the
                 ensuing refusal order of the FtT, dated 16  February  2015,
                 were both lawfully made.

             iv) When the FtT, on 14 July 2015,  refused  to  entertain  the
                 merits of a second variation application on the ground that
                 it did not have jurisdiction it erred in law.

              v) The Secretary of State, whether acting  through  the  Chief
                 Immigration Officer or otherwise, in purporting to vary the
                 order of the FtT in October 2015, acted ultra vires:  there
                 was no power to take this action.

             vi) The bail order of the FtT dated 07 October 2014 remains  in
                 force.

  33) In the interests of certainty and finality, we consider  it  desirable
      that the  FtT  make  a  further  order  at  this  stage.   It  retains
      jurisdiction to  thus  act.   It  is  recorded  unambiguously  in  the
      Tribunal's  computerised  record  that   the   July   2015   variation
      application was withdrawn.  Even if  the  Applicant's  assertion  that
      this application was adjourned is correct, this makes no difference in
      principle since the order remains in force.  Insofar as there  is  any
      doubt about the FfT's power to  act  of  its  own  volition  in  these
      original circumstances, finality and clarity will be  achieved  by  an
      application on the part of the Secretary of State under rule 38 (2) of
      the FtT Rules.

Our Primary Conclusion

  34) The effect of our analysis and conclusions above is that the Applicant
      could not have succeeded in this  judicial  review  challenge  as  the
      Secretary of State was not the author of the impugned bail  order  and
      had  no  power  to  vary  the  order  subsequently.   Ultimately,   in
      purporting to vary the order, the Secretary of State has  acted  ultra
      vires.  Notwithstanding this conclusion, we shall  give  consideration
      to the substantive issues raised by the Applicant's  challenge,  given
      their relative novelty and importance  coupled  with  the  substantial
      investment  of  time  and  resources  on  the  part  of  the  parties'
      representatives and the Tribunal.

Article 9 ECHR

  35) By Article 9 ECHR:

           "1.   Everyone has the right to freedom of  thought,  conscience
                 and religion; this right includes  freedom  to  change  his
                 religion  or  belief  and  freedom,  either  alone  or   in
                 community with others and in public or private, to manifest
                 his religion or belief in worship, teaching,  practice  and
                 observance.


           2.    Freedom to manifest one's religion  or  beliefs  shall  be
                 subject only to such limitations as are prescribed  by  law
                 and are necessary in a democratic society in the  interests
                 of public safety,  for  the  protection  of  public  order,
                 health or morals or for the protection of  the  rights  and
                 freedoms of others."

      As the factual framework outlined above  makes  clear,  the  Applicant
      cannot complain that the impugned measures infringed his right to hold
      and espouse religious convictions and beliefs.  Rather, his  case  was
      (and must be) that his freedom to manifest his  religion  and  beliefs
      was  unlawfully  restricted  by  the  impugned  measures.   Thus  this
      challenge is not concerned with  the  absolute  freedom  protected  by
      Article 9.  Rather, its focus is  the  qualified  right  protected  by
      Article 9(2).

  36) The main submission developed by Mr Buttler on behalf of the Applicant
      was that the curfew hours are "indirectly discriminatory and interfere
      with the freedom to manifest religion".  He described this as a  stark
      case, lacking the kind of strong countervailing interest justifying  a
      restriction within the compass of Article 9(2) in some of the  leading
      reported cases  (discussed  infra).  He  highlighted  the  fundamental
      nature of the freedom to manifest  one's  religious  beliefs  and  the
      special recognition accorded to this right by section 13 of the  Human
      Rights Act 1998.  He submitted, in terms, that the Applicant's ability
      to engage in prayer in his home during the prohibited hours was not an
      adequate substitute for doing so at a mosque.  Thus, it was contended,
      an interference with the right was established.  This interference had
      no identifiable legitimate aim and, in any event, was disproportionate
      as  the  curfew  period  imposed  was  not   the   least   restrictive
      interference available.   Counsel's  arguments  highlighted  that  the
      Secretary of State has adduced no evidence addressing the Article 9(2)
      framework.

  37) The riposte by Mr Malik on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  invoked
      several aspects of the pleading in the AOS, namely the absence of  any
      statement of the Applicant prior to 04 August  2015;  the  Applicant's
      failure to bring an application for judicial review against  the  FtT;
      and the assertion that the Applicant has  an  "appalling"  immigration
      history, such that the offending conditions in  the  bail  order  were
      amply justified.  This latter factor is digested in the  Secretary  of
      State's letter of 09 October 2015 in these terms:

           "The Applicant arrived in the United  Kingdom  illegally  on  06
           January 2005 and was served with IS151A, Notice of Liability for
           Removal as an illegal entrant ....


           The Applicant claimed asylum  on  14  January  2005.   This  was
           refused on 20 January 2005 and his subsequent appeal  failed  on
           20 May 2005.  The Applicant should have left the United  Kingdom
           when his appeal rights were exhausted on 27 June 2007 .....


           [He was initially] released [on bail] on 15 February  2005.   He
           was put on reporting conditions.  However ........  [he]  failed
           to report as required on 28 July 2010 ...... [and] again  failed
           to report as required on 02 April 2013 and  07  May  2013.   The
           Applicant was encountered during an enforcement  visit  and  was
           detained as an immigration offender on 28 May 2014."

      Thereafter, the Applicant successfully avoided removal  by  initiating
      the second of his judicial review challenges, noted in [2]  above  and
      securing a restraining order.  He remained in detention and it was  in
      this context that the FtT made the bail order lying at  the  heart  of
      these proceedings.

  38) We note that in the PAP letter there is an  elaborate  passage  taking
      issue with any suggestion that the Applicant had previously absconded.
       However, this does not engage with the fourfold assertion in the  AOS
      that the Applicant entered the United Kingdom illegally; he  has  been
      an unlawful overstayer since his appeal rights were exhausted in  June
      2007;  he  breached  his  reporting  conditions  on  three   different
      occasions; and his detention  in  May  2014  was  precipitated  by  an
      enforcement visit.  Furthermore, based on our assessment  of  all  the
      evidence, this occurred in circumstances where, on his  own  case,  he
      had been "off the radar" during a period of some 2  years,  beginning
      in January 2010 (and, perhaps, post -2012 also): this is based on  his
      own chronology of events.

  39) Notably, the  Applicant's  first  witness  statement,  unimpressively,
      glosses almost entirely this 2  year period.  While he  asserts  that
      during this phase there was contact between the Secretary  of  State's
      agents and his representatives and further representations  were  made
      on his behalf, the detailed chronology in the  solicitor's  letter  is
      strikingly silent as regards these  matters  and,  further,  indicates
      that the further representations were not made until  over  two  years
      later, in July 2014.  Furthermore, there is no evidence of the alleged
      communications during the preceding four year period. Finally, we note
      that in the Applicant's second witness statement,  generated  in  mid-
      proceedings in October 2015, is notably silent on this issue.

  40)  The hierarchical ranking of Article 9 ECHR  in  the  realm  of  human
      rights was addressed by the ECtHR in Eweida v United Kingdom [2013] 57
      EHRR 8 at [79] - [80]:

            "The Court recalls that, as enshrined in Article 9,  freedom  of
           thought, conscience and religion is one of the foundations of  a
           "democratic society" within the meaning of  the  Convention.  In
           its religious dimension it is one of  the  most  vital  elements
           that  go  to  make  up  the  identity  of  believers  and  their
           conception of  life,  but  it  is  also  a  precious  asset  for
           atheists, agnostics, sceptics and the unconcerned. The pluralism
           indissociable from a democratic society, which has  been  dearly
           won over the centuries, depends on it.

           Religious freedom is primarily a matter  of  individual  thought
           and conscience. This aspect of the right set out  in  the  first
           paragraph of Article 9, to hold any  religious  belief  and  to
           change religion or belief, is absolute and unqualified. However,
           as further set out in Article 9  1, freedom  of  religion  also
           encompasses the freedom to manifest one's belief, alone  and  in
           private but also to practice in community  with  others  and  in
           public. The manifestation of religious belief may take the  form
           of worship, teaching, practice and observance.  Bearing  witness
           in words and deeds is bound up with the existence  of  religious
           convictions. Since the manifestation by one person of his or her
           religious belief may have an impact on others, the  drafters  of
           the Convention qualified this aspect of freedom of  religion  in
           the manner set out in Article  9    2.  This  second  paragraph
           provides that any limitation placed on  a  person's  freedom  to
           manifest religion or  belief  must  be  prescribed  by  law  and
           necessary in a democratic society in pursuit of one or  more  of
           the legitimate aims set out therein".

      In [83], the Court addressed the issue of circumvention of limitations
      imposed on a person's freedom to  manifest  religion  or  belief.   It
      noted in particular:


            "More relevantly, in cases  involving  restrictions  placed  by
           employers  on  an  employee's  ability  to   observe   religious
           practice, the Commission held  in  several  decisions  that  the
           possibility of resigning from the job  and  changing  employment
           meant  that  there  was  no  interference  with  the  employee's
           religious freedom."

      This was followed by the adoption of a different juridical analysis:

            "Given the importance in a  democratic  society  of  freedom  of
           religion,  the  Court  considers  that,  where   an   individual
           complains of  a  restriction  on  freedom  of  religion  in  the
           workplace, rather than holding that the possibility of  changing
           job would negate any interference with  the  right,  the  better
           approach would be to  weigh  that  possibility  in  the  overall
           balance when considering whether  or  not  the  restriction  was
           proportionate."

      Finally, in [84] the  Court  recalled  the  consistently  acknowledged
      margin of appreciation accorded to States parties  "...   in  deciding
      whether and to what extent an interference is necessary".

  41) The distinction between the absolute and qualified freedoms  protected
      by Article 9 was noted by the House  of  Lords  in  R  (Williamson)  v
      Secretary of State for Education and Employment [2005]  2  AC  246  at
      [16].  Lord Nicholls also acknowledged the truism:

           "To a  greater  or  lesser  extent  adherents  are  required  or
           encouraged to act in certain ways, most obviously  and  directly
           in forms of  communal  or  personal  worship,  supplication  and
           meditation."

      The question of whether there is a truly  insurmountable  obstacle  to
      manifestation  of  one's  religion  has  featured  in  several  cases,
      frequently in the employment context.  In these cases  the  ECtHR  has
      held that the  freedom  has  not  been  violated  because  the  person
      concerned voluntarily accepted the restriction under scrutiny and  was
      at liberty to leave their  employment.   See,  for  example,  Kalac  v
      Turkey [1999] 27 EHRR 552 and Stedman v United Kingdom [1997] 23  EHRR
      CD 168.  Similarly, in Ahmad v United Kingdom [1981] 4 EHRR 126, where
      a Muslim teacher sought an extended Friday lunch break  to attend  the
      nearest Mosque for prayers, no violation of Article 9(1) was found  on
      the basis that the applicant -


           ".... remained free to resign if and  when  he  found  that  his
           teaching obligations conflicted with his religious duties."

      At [135].

  42)  In every case where an Article 9(2) enquiry is  required,  the  first
      question is whether an interference with the  right  is  demonstrated.
      In Williamson, Lord Nicholls stated, at [38]:

           "What constitutes interference depends on all the  circumstances
           of the case, including the extent to which in the  circumstances
           an individual can reasonably be expected to  be  at  liberty  to
           manifest his beliefs in practice."

      Demonstrating interference may  not  be  straightforward  and  can  be
      contentious, to the extent of dividing the two most senior  courts  in
      the realm.  In Williamson there the majority of the  Court  of  Appeal
      considered that whereas the  impugned  statutory  provision  prevented
      corporal  punishment  and,  further,  that  the  application  of  such
      punishment by certain parents  entailed  the  manifestation  of  their
      religious belief, there was no interference with the  right  protected
      as the parents were  not  prevented  from  attending  the  schools  to
      administer punishment themselves.  The House of Lords did  not  agree,
      preferring to decide the appeal on the basis of proportionality.

  43)  Clearly, the determination of whether there is an interference in any
      given case will invariably be an intensely  fact  sensitive  exercise.
      This is illustrated by decisions such as Gallagher (Valuation Officer)
      v Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints [2008] UKHL 56 (no rates
      exemption  for  a  private  Mormon  temple)  and  Campbell   v   South
      Northamptonshire District Council [2004]  EWCA  Civ  409  (no  housing
      benefit payable to church members who would have  qualified  had  they
      chosen to procure their tenancies from a private landlord).   Further,
      in R (SB) v Governors of Denbigh  High  School  [2006]  UKHL  15,  the
      majority held that the school's prohibition on wearing  a  Jilbab  did
      not interfere with the manifestation of the pupil's religious beliefs.
       Their reasoning was intensely prosaic:  the  family  had  chosen  the
      school for the  pupil  with  knowledge  of  the  uniform  policy  and,
      further, there was no evident restriction in opting for a school which
      did not operate this prohibition.

  44) The onus rests on the Applicant to establish an interference with  the
      right engaged.   Assuming  his  main  assertions  to  be  correct,  we
      consider that the most significant factors to  be  evaluated  are  the
      following. As regards the Ramadan period, the first is his ability  to
      engage in uninhibited  congregational  prayer  at  the  mosque  during
      daytime  periods,  which  account  for  the  majority  of  the  prayer
      sessions.  The second is his ability to engage in the same prayer,  at
      his home during evenings.  There is a  third  factor  to  be  weighed,
      namely the Applicant's unrestricted ability to manifest his  religious
      belief at a time and location of his choosing throughout  the  greater
      part of  the  calendar  year.   We  also  weigh  the  absence  of  any
      suggestion that communal worship  is  a  matter  of  cult  obligation.
      Furthermore, the Applicant has not made the case that any norm or rule
      of the religious belief which he professes  precludes  or  discourages
      domestic prayer during either of the festivals in question.

  45) As regards the Muharran  Autumn  2016  prayer  period,  we  take  into
      account that, based on the Applicant's second witness  statement,  the
      offending  bail  conditions  were  discontinued  before  this   began.
      Finally, it seems  realistic  to  assume  that  many  practising  Shia
      Muslims would be unable to attend every prayer session during the  two
      periods under scrutiny, both daytime and nightly, at their mosque  for
      a host of prosaic reasons.  An evaluative judgment on the part of  the
      Tribunal is required. While we are mindful that section 6 of the Human
      Rights Act 1998 encompasses both actual and prospective  infringements
      of protected rights, balancing all of these factors, we conclude  that
      the threshold for interference has not been overcome. It follows  that
      no infringement of the Applicant's rights under Article 9(1) ECHR  has
      been established.

  46) The effect of this conclusion is that there is no further exercise  to
      be performed under Article 9(2)  ECHR.   However,  to  cater  for  the
      possibility that our no interference conclusion is incorrect, we shall
      proceed to consider the issues of legitimate aim and  proportionality.



  47) By virtue of Article 9(2) ECHR the freedom to manifest one's  religion
      or beliefs can be limited if it is prescribed by law, has a legitimate
      aim and is necessary in a  democratic  society.   The  requirement  of
      legal prescription was considered by the ECTHR in Hasan and  Chaush  v
      Bulgaria [2002] 34 EHRR 55,  where  a  government  agency  decided  to
      replace the Chief Mufti and  other  senior  Muslim  Clerics  with  the
      State's own preferred religious leaders.  Finding that  this  was  not
      prescribed by law, the Court reasoned, at [86]:

           "....  The interference with the  internal  organisation  of  the
           Muslim community and the Applicant's freedom of religion was  not
           'prescribed by law' in that it was arbitrary  and  was  based  on
           legal provisions which allowed an unfettered  discretion  to  the
           Executive and did not meet the required standards of clarity  and
           foreseeability."

      This is to be contrasted  with  the  present  context,  in  which  the
      relevant measure, namely the bail  order  of  the  FtT,  was  made  in
      accordance with the statutory  regime  outlined  in  [14]-[17]  above.
      There being no suggestion that this regime is deficient as regards the
      essential  qualities  of  accessibility  and  foreseeability,  we  are
      satisfied that the restrictions were imposed in  accordance  with  the
      law.

  48) The second requirement of Article 9(2) is that the restriction  pursue
      one of the specified legitimate aims: public safety, the protection of
      public order, health or morals or the protection  of  the  rights  and
      freedoms of others. In SB, the legitimate aim recognised was  that  of
      respecting  and  accommodating  a  range  of  religious  beliefs   and
      convictions  and  doing  so  in  an   inclusive,   unthreatening   and
      uncompetitive way: see [32] especially.  In Williamson, the legitimate
      aim was that of protecting children from the harmful  effects  of  the
      infliction of physical violence, embraced by  the  protection  of  the
      rights and freedoms of others.  As decisions  such  as  Manoussakis  v
      Greece [1997] 23 EHRR 387 illustrate, in the Article 9(2) context,  as
      in others, the ECtHR has consistently accorded  a  certain  margin  of
      appreciation to the Contracting States: see [44].

  49) The legitimate aims in play are readily identifiable.  They are rooted
      in the various aspects of the Applicant's conduct since his arrival in
      the  United  Kingdom  some  nine  years  preceding  the  bail   order,
      highlighted in the AOS and the letter of 09 October 2015.  As  regards
      the factual foundation on which we are to proceed, in this respect, we
      consider that the Secretary of State has discharged any  onus  resting
      on her under Article 9(2) ECHR of establishing the asserted  facts  to
      our satisfaction.  While  the  Applicant  has  disputed  some  of  the
      assertions made, belatedly, in his unscheduled second statement, based
      on  our  analysis  above  we  are  singularly   unconvinced   by   his
      protestations.  The  legitimate  aims  to  which  the  offending  bail
      conditions were directed were, plainly, the maintenance  of  effective
      immigration control, the prevention of crime and the protection of the
      rights and freedoms of others.

  50) The next question to be addressed is whether the offending  conditions
      were necessary in a democratic society viz a  proportionate  mechanism
      of securing the legitimate aims engaged.  The court, or  tribunal,  is
      the arbiter of proportionality and the exercise is  one  of  objective
      adjudication: SB at [30], per  Lord  Bingham.   The  contours  of  the
      principle of proportionality have been restated by the  Supreme  Court
      in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury No 2 [2013] UKSC 39, at [20].  The  tests
      to be applied are the following:

      (a)   Whether the objective is sufficiently important to  justify  the
           limitation of a fundamental right.

      (b)   Whether the measure is rationally connected to the objective.

        c) Whether a less intrusive measure could have been employed.


        d) Whether, having regard to these matters and the severity of  the
           consequences, a fair balance has been struck between the  rights
           of the individual and the interests of the community.

  51) For the avoidance of doubt, everything which follows in this paragraph
      focuses on the FtT,  rather  than  the  Secretary  of  State.  In  our
      judgment, these tests are satisfied for  the  following  reasons.   In
      summary, the offending conditions were  clearly  designed  to  keep  a
      tight rein on the Applicant, in  circumstances  which  included  three
      factors in particular, namely his highly unsatisfactory  history,  his
      obvious incentive  to  disappear  from  the  radar  (as  he  had  done
      previously) and the consideration that, in terms of legal  challenges,
      he had virtually reached the end  of  the  road.  The  requirement  of
      rational connection is plainly satisfied. Theoretically, of course,  a
      less intrusive measure such as the  imposition  of  a  shorter  curfew
      beginning later in the evening was  possible.   However,  this  is  no
      basis for concluding, at this remove, that the conditions imposed were
      excessive and unbalanced to the extent of being disproportionate.   In
      this context, we  further  consider  that  an  appropriate  margin  of
      appreciation is to be accorded to the FtT, the judicial body which was
      seized of all relevant information and formed the evaluative  judgment
      now under  review.   The  FtT  obviously  considered  the  curfew  and
      electronic monitoring conditions to be necessary in the  circumstances
      and we have no basis for concluding that it should have  opted  for  a
      less restrictive measure. Furthermore, in our application  of  all  of
      the Bank Mellat tests, we bear in mind our assessment  of  the  actual
      impact of the limitations imposed upon  the  Applicant,  rehearsed  in
      [41] above.  Our conclusion is  that  the  offending  conditions  were
      proportionate.

  52) We reject Mr Buttler's submission that it is not open to this Tribunal
      to conclude that the offending conditions were  proportionate  on  the
      basis that the Secretary of State has not filed any evidence.  This is
      misconceived.   Fundamentally,  this  complaint  is  advanced  on  the
      fallacious basis that the Secretary of State was the public  authority
      legally  responsible  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  offending  bail
      conditions.  Furthermore and in  any  event,  the  available  evidence
      readily permits the inference that on the occasions of  the  two  bail
      hearings before the FtT, the Secretary of State complied with her duty
      under rule 40 of the FtT Rules to file evidence.  We would add that in
      common with many judicial review cases, the Secretary of  State's  AOS
      consists of a mixture of evidence and legal argument.   The  task  for
      this tribunal has been, in part, to evaluate this evidence and  accord
      to it such weight as we consider  appropriate.   Further,  as  appears
      from [45] above, insofar as there is any onus resting on the Secretary
      of State, we are satisfied that this has been discharged.  Finally, as
      demonstrated above, the related contention that the Secretary of State
      has made no response to the Applicant's case is unsustainable.

  53) We also consider it apposite, in this  context,  to  recall  that  the
      provision of evidence on the part of the public authority concerned is
      not an  invariable  prerequisite  to  the  judicial  determination  of
      justification.  This is illustrated particularly in Williamson: see in
      particular [44] - [47], per Lord Nicholls.  The gist of this reasoning
      is that in certain contexts the court, or tribunal, is well  equipped,
      without the reception of evidence, to form its judgment on the various
      elements  of  justification  under  Article   9(2).     Finally,   the
      Applicant's argument is at odds  with  the  principle  that  in  human
      rights  cases  what  matters  predominantly  is  the  outcome,  to  be
      contrasted with the subjective claims, assessments  and  deliberations
      of the public authority decision maker.  This feature of human  rights
      adjudication was highlighted by this Tribunal recently  in  R  (SA)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (Human  Rights  Challenges:
      Correct Approach) IJR [2015] UKUT 536 (IAC).

  54) For this  combination  of  reasons  we  conclude  that  the  offending
      provisions within the bail order satisfied all of the requirements  of
      Article 9(2) ECHR.

Article 10 of the Lisbon Charter

  55) Article 10 of the Lisbon Charter, under  the  rubric  of  "Freedom  of
      Thought, Conscience and Religion", provides:


           "1.   Everyone has the right to freedom  of  thought,  conscience
                and religion. This right includes freedom to change religion
                or belief and freedom, either alone  or  in  community  with
                others and in public or in private, to manifest religion  or
                belief, in worship, teaching, practice and observance.


           2.    The right to  conscientious  objection  is  recognised,  in
                accordance with the national laws governing the exercise  of
                this right."

      The Charter is primary EU Law.  It  is,  in  tandem  with  the  Lisbon
      Treaty (the "TEU") and the TFEU, one of the three supreme  instruments
      of governance of the Union. It entered into operation on  01  November
      2009.  Its driving forces are  those  of  Union  citizenship  and  the
      creation of an area of freedom, security and justice.  In its recitals
      it recalls that the UE "places the individual  at  the  heart  of  its
      activities".  The recitals  further  enunciate  that  the  Charter  is
      designed  "to  strengthen  the  protection  of   fundamental   rights"
      [emphasis  added],  the  derogation  whereof  is  the   constitutional
      traditions and international obligations common to the Member  States,
      the ECHR, the Social Charters and the jurisprudence of  the  two  main
      European Courts.

  56) The Charter's field of application is regulated by Article 51(1) which
      provides

           "The  provisions  of  this   Charter   are   addressed   to   the
           institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union with  due
           regard for the principle of subsidiarity and to the Member States
           only when they are implementing Union law."

            [Our emphasis.]

      As appears from the words which follow, when the  Charter  is  engaged
      the  duty  thereby  triggered  is  to  respect  the  rights  which  it
      enshrines, observe the principles which it  establishes  and  promotes
      the application thereof, while "..... respecting  the  limits  of  the
      powers of the Union as conferred on it  in  the  Treaties".   This  is
      followed  by,  in  Article  51(2),  a  clear  acknowledgement  of  the
      principle of subsidiarity:


           "The Charter does not extend the field of  application  of  Union
           law beyond the powers of the Union or establish any new power  or
           task for the Union, or modify powers and tasks as defined in  the
           Treaties."

      This reflects an  underlying  intention  that  the  Charter  will  not
      operate to confer new  competences  on  the  Union.   The  Charter  is
      generally considered to be a codifying instrument which endeavours  to
      assemble comprehensively all of the rights recognised by the Union.

  57) One of the leading pronouncements of the CJEU  on  the  scope  of  the
      Charter is contained in Aklagaren v Fransson, Case C-617/10  of  2013.
      The CJEU opted for an expansive interpretation of Article 51(1).   The
      principal mechanism which it employed for doing so was its pre-Charter
      jurisprudence.  See [18]:

           "[Article 51(1)] confirms the Court's case law  relating  to  the
           extent to which actions of the Member States must comply with the
           requirements flowing from the fundamental  rights  guaranteed  in
           the legal order of the Union."

      Pausing here, one recalls that, during a period of some  two  decades,
      the CJEU had progressively assumed responsibility for the  recognition
      and protection of fundamental rights and  freedoms  in  the  EU  legal
      order.  See, for example, Kremzow v Austria [1997]  ECR  I-2629.   The
      judgment continues, at [19]:


           "The Court's settled case law indeed states, in essence, that the
           fundamental rights guaranteed in the legal order of the  European
           Union are applicable in all situations governed by European Union
           law, but not outside such situations."

                 [Emphasis added.]

      In the next passage, the Court coins the test of whether  the  measure
      in  question  "falls  within  the  scope  of  European   Union   law".
      Accordingly, in every case in which the Charter is invoked, the  first
      question for the court or tribunal must be whether the Charter applies
      to the subject matter of the litigation.


  58) The Tribunal asked for the  Applicant's  specific  submission  on  the
      issue of whether the Charter applies at all, having regard to  Article
      51.  The submission developed in response was that  the  treatment  of
      illegally staying third country nationals is  regulated  by  Directive
      2008/115/EC.  This is the so-called "Return Directive", a  measure  of
      EU law which regulates the common standards and procedures  in  Member
      States for returning illegally staying third  country  nationals.   We
      consider that this does not bring the  Applicant's  case  through  the
      gateway of Article 51 of the Charter, for two  reasons.   First,  this
      Directive, which entered into operation on 14 January 2009,  does  not
      apply to the United Kingdom.  Second, while  the  Directive  addresses
      the issue of detention, it is entirely silent on the question of  bail
      and kindred issues such as bail conditions and the variation  thereof.
      Furthermore,  while  our  attention  was  drawn  to  the  decision  in
      Mukarubega  v  Prefet  de  Police  [2015]  1  CMLR  41,  without   any
      accompanying argument, we note that this case is  concerned  with  the
      question of the person's right to be  heard  in  the  decision  making
      process prior to being removed from the  host  country.   We  consider
      that this has nothing to  do  with  the  context  of  the  Applicant's
      challenge, which is focused on bail  conditions  allegedly  infringing
      his Art. 9 ECHR rights.  We would merely add  that  if  the  Applicant
      were able to establish an interference with his right to  respect  for
      private life under Article 8(1), this would be justified under Article
      8(2) on the basis set forth in [45] - [52] above.

  59) In the Applicant's pleaded case, the main emphasis is on section 19 of
      the Equality Act 2010.  Article 9 ECHR and Article 10 of  the  Charter
      are rolled together, with no suggestion that the latter adds  anything
      to the former.  In counsel's  submissions,  it  is  acknowledged  that
      Article 10(1) of the Charter is the analogue of Article 9  ECHR  which
      adds nothing except, it is contended, a directly enforceable right  to
      an effective remedy for its breach under  Article  47.   There  is  no
      suggestion that, in the context of the present challenge,  Article  47
      enlarges or enriches the Applicant's case in any way.  In  particular,
      there is no argument to  the  effect  that  any  remedy  available  in
      principle to the Applicant for establishing a breach of Article 10  of
      the Charter is any better than a remedy for a breach of Article 9 ECHR
      under the machinery of the Human Rights Act 1998.


  60) For this combination of reasons,  we  conclude  that  the  Applicant's
      challenge under Article 10(1) of the Lisbon Charter leads nowhere.

Article 8 ECHR

  61) While Article 8 has been pleaded,  we  consider  that  it  is  a  mere
      makeweight.  The real question in this case is  whether  the  impugned
      measures interfere with the Applicant's religious manifestation  right
      under Article 9(1) and, if so, whether such interference is  justified
      under Article 9(2).  Any excursus into Article 8 in these  proceedings
      would be a misguided and otiose diversion.

The Equality Act 2010

  62) The Applicant makes the case that the impugned measures are tantamount
      to  unlawful  indirect  discrimination.   He  founds   this   discrete
      challenge on section 19 of the Equality Act 2010, which provides:

           "1. A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if  A  applies
           to B a provision, criterion or practice which  is  discriminatory
           in relation to a relevant protected characteristic of B's.


           2. For the purposes of subsection (1), a provision, criterion  or
           practice is discriminatory in relation to  a  relevant  protected
           characteristic of B's if-

              (a) A applies, or would apply, it to persons with whom B does
              not share the characteristic,


              (b) it puts, or would put, persons with whom B shares the
              characteristic at a particular disadvantage when compared
              with persons with whom B does not share it,


              (c) it puts, or would put, B at that disadvantage, and


              (d) A cannot show it to be a proportionate means of achieving
              a legitimate aim.


           3. The relevant protected characteristics are -


              age;
              disability;
              gender reassignment;
              marriage and civil partnership;
              race;
              religion or belief;
              sex;
              sexual orientation."

  63) In the Applicant's grounds, his challenge under the  Equality  Act  is
      structured in the following way:

         (1)     The characteristic in question is  being  a  Muslim.   The
              Respondent would apply the bail condition to a Muslim as to a
              non-Muslim.


         (2)     The condition puts a Muslim at a  particular  disadvantage
              because he is unable to attend evening prayer at the  Mosque,
              which is not a disadvantage that would be suffered by a  non-
              Muslim.


         (3)     The Applicant is put to that disadvantage.


         (4)     The Respondent cannot show  this  to  be  a  proportionate
              means of achieving a legitimate aim.

      Developing this challenge, Mr Buttler submitted that  bail  conditions
      are embraced by the terminology "provision, criterion or practice"  in
      section 19(2), highlighting the analysis of Pill LJ that  this  is  of
      broad scope: R (Bailie) v Brent LBC [2012]  LGR  530,  at  [9].   This
      contention was not disputed and we accept it.  Emphasising that  under
      section 19 the burden of proof rests on the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
      Buttler also drew attention to  the  statement  of  Mummery  LJ  in  R
      (Elias) v Secretary of State for the Defence [2006]  1  WLR  3213,  at
      [130] - [133], that a respondent will find  it  difficult  to  justify
      indirect discrimination where it has not recognised the discriminatory
      impacts and, still less, has not had due regard to them in  accordance
      with the duty imposed by section 149 of the statute.

  64) The concept  of  less  favourable  treatment  lies  at  the  heart  of
      discrimination in every field.  This, in turn, conjures up the  notion
      of disadvantage or disbenefit and frequently stimulates  detailed  and
      sometimes complex enquiries into so-called comparators.  In Shamoon  v
      Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary [2003] UKHL  11,  the
      existence of this latter phenomenon  and  its  potential  to  generate
      "needless problems" were highlighted by Lord Nicholls: see  [8].   His
      Lordship noted the practice whereby tribunals frequently adopt  a  two
      stage approach.  First, they consider  the  question  of  whether  the
      claimant  received  less  favourable  treatment  than  the  identified
      comparator.   Next,  they  examine  the  issue  of  whether  the  less
      favourable  treatment  was  perpetrated  on  the  relevant  proscribed
      ground.  Lord Nicholls observed:

           "No doubt there are cases where it is convenient and  helpful  to
           adopt this two step approach to  what  is  essentially  a  single
           question: did the claimant, on  the  proscribed  ground,  receive
           less favourable treatment than others?"

            [Emphasis added.]

      His Lordship advocated the virtues of "concentrating primarily on  why
      the complainant was treated as [he/she] was": see [11]:

  65)  To like effect, in R v Secretary of State for Work and  Pensions,  ex
      parte Carson and Reynolds [2005] UKHL 37, the House of Lords,  in  the
      context of Article 14 ECHR, advocated a similarly simplified approach:
      per Lord Nicholls at [1]  and  Lord  Rodger  at  [43]  -  [44].   Lord
      Carswell stated at [97]:


           "Many discrimination cases resolve  themselves  into  a  dispute,
           which can often seem a more than a little arid, about comparisons
           and identifying comparators, where a broader approach might  more
           readily yield a serviceable answer which  corresponds  with  ones
           instincts for justice .....


           Much of the problem stems from focusing too  closely  on  finding
           comparisons ..."


      We bear in mind these exhortations.

  66) We consider that the effect of section 19(2) (a), (b) and (c)  of  the
      2010 Act is to require of the court or tribunal concerned an  exercise
      in comparison.  Those to be compared are, in shorthand, the  Applicant
      (on  the  one  hand)  and  those  who  do  not  share   the   relevant
      characteristic (on the other).  The relevant  characteristic  in  this
      context is that of "religion or belief".  The question is whether  the
      offending bail order conditions place the Applicant "at  a  particular
      disadvantage"  when  compared  with  those  who  do  not  share   this
      characteristic.  Who, therefore, are the comparators put forward?  The
      Applicant compares himself with those who do not  have  any  religious
      belief.   While  we  consider  that  both  this  comparison  and   the
      requirement  of  demonstrating  "a  particular  disadvantage",   (with
      emphasis on the adjective "particular") are demanding of  considerably
      more detailed argument than  that  received,  we  shall,  for  present
      purposes, assume these matters in the  Applicant's  favour.   Adopting
      this approach, the question then becomes: has the Secretary  of  State
      demonstrated that the offending bail conditions  are  a  proportionate
      means of achieving a legitimate aim?

  67) Referring to our conclusions  in  [29]   above,  this  aspect  of  the
      Applicant's  challenge  was  doomed  to  failure  ab  initio,  on  the
      elementary basis  that  the  author  of  the  measure  containing  the
      impugned conditions - the bail order - was the FtT, not the  Secretary
      of  State  and  the  latter  was  guilty  of  no  assailable  omission
      thereafter.

  68) Further, Mr Buttler's submissions acknowledged, correctly in our view,
      that the proportionality question under section 19(2)(d) of  the  2010
      Act does not differ from its analogue under Article 9(2)  ECHR.   This
      we have addressed in full in [46]  -  [49]  above.   This  conclusion,
      logically, applies fully  to  the  Applicant's  inequality  challenge,
      considered in the abstract.

Omnibus Conclusion

  69) We express our main conclusions in the following terms:


        i) As the Secretary of State did not make the bail order and had  no
           power to vary its terms, the whole of the  Applicant's  challenge
           is misconceived.


       ii) No interference  with  the  Applicant's  right  to  manifest  his
           religion  or  beliefs,  protected   by   Article   9   ECHR,   is
           demonstrated.


      iii) In the alternative to (ii), any interference with the Applicant's
           right aforesaid is justified under Article 9(2).


       iv) The Applicant's invocation of Article 10 of  the  EU  Charter  of
           Fundamental Rights is misconceived, since, per  Article  51,  the
           measure under challenge, namely the bail order made by the First-
           tier Tribunal, does not fall within the ambit of EU law.


        v) In the alternative to (iv), the Charter adds nothing of substance
           to the Applicant's challenge in any event.




       vi) The Applicant's challenge under Article 8 ECHR  adds  nothing  of
           substance.


      vii) The Applicant's challenge under the  Equality  Act  2010  is  not
           established.


  70) We draw attention to the context  in  which  this  judgment  has  been
      prepared: see [1] - [4] above.  Given the terms in which  the  parties
      ultimately  resolved  their  differences,   which   contemplated   the
      possibility that the Applicant will pursue  a  claim  for  damages  in
      another forum, we wish to emphasise that we have decided this case  on
      the basis of the evidence available to this Tribunal,  which  may  not
      necessarily be identical to the evidence generated in another judicial
      forum.  We would also highlight that the evidence considered  by  this
      Tribunal, bilaterally, was not tested by cross examination.

Order

  71) The first part of our Order  is  set  out  in  the  preamble  to  this
      judgment. We have granted the Applicant permission to discontinue  his
      judicial review application.  We  decline,  however,  to  approve  the
      terms of the draft consent order as this reflects both parties' belief
      and  understanding  that  the  Secretary  of  State/Chief  Immigration
      Officer was empowered to discontinue the  offending  bail  conditions,
      which we have found to be erroneous in law.  The Order which  we  have
      made suffices to dispose of these proceedings.   While our  evaluation
      of the further issues addressed in this judgment speaks for itself, we
      consider that the bail issues are of sufficiently elevated  importance
      to warrant the making  of  a  declaration  under  section  15  of  the
      Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.


Declaration


       72) (i)   Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2012 "Bail Guidance for
           Judges Presiding over Immigration and  Asylum  Hearings"  is  an
           instrument of guidance and not instruction.  It should, however,
           normally be followed and good reason is required for  not  doing
           so.

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") is empowered  to  adjudicate  on
applications           to vary the terms of its bail orders.


      iii) The FtT retains exclusive power to vary any of  its  bail  orders
           during their lifespan. The Chief Immigration Officer has no power
           to interfere with such orders or make any  other  order  in  such
           circumstances.


       iv) In cases where there is no appeal  pending,  an  application  for
           bail can be made to either  the  FtT  or  the  Chief  Immigration
           Officer.


Permission To Appeal

  73) The application made by the Applicant for permission to appeal to the
      Court of Appeal,  supported  by  Mr  Malik  for  the  Respondent,  is
      refused: first, because the parties previously resolved by  agreement
      the central matters in dispute  in  the  judicial  review  challenge,
      namely  the  offending  bail  condition  and,  second,  because   the
      principal argument relied on, that the Secretary of State  has  power
      to vary the  conditions of  a  bail  order  made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal where the latter remains seized of bail  jurisdiction,  does
      not satisfy the governing threshold. Furthermore, as  the  production
      of this judgment is the result of applying the principle in Ex  parte
      Salem, it is  considered  that  the  decision  on  whether  to  grant
      permission to appeal is more properly made by  the  appellate  court.
      Finally, we are mindful that significant  statutory  reforms  in  the
      realm of immigration/asylum bail appear imminent.

Costs

  74) The Applicant has applied for costs against the Secretary of State  on
      an indemnity basis.  The cornerstone of this application is  that  the
      Secretary of State has "given the Applicant the  relief  sought":  see
      R(M) v LB Croydon [2012] 1 WLR 2607  at  [61].   Next,  the  Applicant
      prays in aid the need to apply  the  governing  principles  rigorously
      because the legal aid system and the survival  of  legal  aid  depends
      upon lawyers recovering their fees where claims have been  successful:
      R (E) v JSS Governing Body [2009] 1 WLR 2353, at [24] - [25].   Third,
      the Applicant relies on the Secretary of State's failure to  take  the
      action clearly required by the terms of the PAP letter.  The Applicant
      refers to the PAP of the High Court, which does not, of course,  apply
      to the  Upper  Tribunal,  drawing  attention  to  the  possibility  of
      indemnity costs being awarded where there is a breach,  per  paragraph
      16(b).  Finally, the Applicant relies upon the egregious  failures  on
      the part of the Secretary of  State  to  respond  to  a  total  of  11
      letters, including the PAP letter.

  75) Given our conclusions in [34] above, there are clearly no grounds  for
      ordering the Secretary of State to pay the  Applicant's  costs  on  an
      indemnity basis.  While the effect of our analysis and conclusions  is
      that both parties were fundamentally misguided from  July  2015,  when
      the FtT declined to consider the bail  variation  application  on  the
      erroneous ground that it had no jurisdiction to do so,  we  take  into
      account that this was misconceived in law, albeit the  correct  course
      for the Applicant was to challenge this refusal  by  judicial  review.
      While the Applicant ultimately secured the benefit he was seeking,  we
      have found that the Secretary of State acted ultra vires in purporting
      to act as she did.  We must also  balance  the  Secretary  of  State's
      failure to make any substantive response to the  Applicant's  repeated
      requests during a period of some nine months, which we have deprecated
      above.  Subject to the various qualifications thus highlighted,  by  a
      rudimentary analysis the  contention  that  the  Applicant  ultimately
      secured the benefit he had  been  seeking  via  these  proceedings  is
      correct.  We conclude, on balance, that the Secretary of State  should
      pay the Applicant's costs, to include those incurred after 09  October
      2015, on the normal basis, to be assessed in default of agreement.


      Stay


  76)  The  imposition  of  a  stay  on  the  whole  of  this  judgment  is
      inappropriate, given that the judgment is declaratory in  nature  and
      has resulted in the making of a declaratory order.  Judgments of this
      genre are not executory - to  be  contrasted  with,  for  example,  a
      judgment resulting in a mandatory order.  See Zamir  and  Woolf,  The
      Declaratory Judgment (3rd ed) paragraph 1.02.   Further  and  in  any
      event permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal has  been  refused.
      However, given the intimation that  one  or  both  parties  may  seek
      permission from the Court of Appeal, we shall impose a  stay  on  the
      costs order only, with liberty to apply.





                 [pic]
        Signed:


                 The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 President of the Upper Tribunal




        Dated:    16 January 2016
