


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 and 20 November 2019 and                |                              |
|14 January 2020                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     AS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms Naik QC, Mr Toal and Ms Loughran, Counsel
                    instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Singh QC, Counsel instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department











                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE




    Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban

     i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a
        senior government or security services official, or a spy)  is  not
        at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.


    Risk of serious harm in Kabul


    ii) There is widespread and  persistent  conflict-related  violence  in
        Kabul. However,  the  proportion  of  the  population  affected  by
        indiscriminate violence is  small  and  not  at  a  level  where  a
        returnee, even one with no family or other network and who  has  no
        experience living in Kabul, would face  a  serious  and  individual
        threat  to  their  life  or  person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate
        violence.


    Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul

   iii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul
        as well as the difficulties faced by the  population  living  there
        (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other returnees,  which
        are not dissimilar to the conditions faced  throughout  many  other
        parts of Afghanistan) it will not, in general, be  unreasonable  or
        unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health to relocate  to
        Kabul even if he does not have any specific connections or  support
        network in Kabul and even if he does not have a Tazkera.



    iv) However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual  applicant
        must be taken into account in the  context  of  conditions  in  the
        place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
        of  support  network/connections  with   Kabul/Afghanistan,   their
        physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,  education  and
        vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
        the general position set out above. Given the limited  options  for
        employment, capability to undertake manual work may be relevant.



     v) A person with a support network or specific connections in Kabul is
        likely to be in a more advantageous position on return,  which  may
        counter a particular vulnerability of an individual  on  return.  A
        person without a network may  be  able  to  develop  one  following
        return. A person's familiarity with the cultural and societal norms
        of Afghanistan (which may be affected by the age at which  he  left
        the country and his length of absence) will be relevant to whether,
        and if so how quickly and successfully, he will be able to build  a
        network.



    Previous Country Guidance

    vi) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive remains unaffected by this decision.



   vii) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the  (un)reasonableness  of  internal
        relocation  to  Kabul  (and  other  potential  places  of  internal
        relocation) for certain categories of women remains  unaffected  by
        this decision.



  viii) The country guidance in AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
        [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also remains unaffected by this decision.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



                              Table of Contents

|Introduction                                                     |   |
|The 2018 UT decision                                             |   |
|The Appellant's Claim and Preserved Findings of Fact             |   |
|The Legal Framework - Internal Relocation                        |   |
|Overview                                                         |   |
|The first limb: real risk of serious harm                        |   |
|The second limb: reasonableness                                  |   |
|Burden and standard of proof                                     |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|Evidence                                                         |   |
|Overview                                                         |   |
|Dr Lisa Schuster                                                 |   |
|Dr Ayesha Ahmad                                                  |   |
|Safety and security                                              |   |
|Population growth and absorption capacity                        |   |
|Poverty and humanitarian conditions                              |   |
|Family and other networks                                        |   |
|Accommodation                                                    |   |
|Employment                                                       |   |
|Afghan identity document (Tazkera)                               |   |
|Mental health                                                    |   |
|Experience of returnees and returnee assistance                  |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|UNHCR's Legal Analysis and Recommendations                       |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|UNHCR's opinion at the time of the 2018 UT decision              |   |
|The 2018 UNHCR Guidelines                                        |   |
|The 2019 UNHCR Submissions                                       |   |
|The 2019 COI UNHCR Report                                        |   |
|The legal status of UNHCR's legal analysis and recommendations   |   |
|Weight given to UNHCR's legal analysis and recommendations       |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|EASO's Legal Analysis and Recommendations                        |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|                                                                 |   |
| Analysis and Decision in relation to Internal Relocation        |   |
|The first limb: real risk of serious harm                        |   |
|The second limb: reasonableness                                  |   |
|Country Guidance                                                 |   |
|The Appellant's case                                             |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|Article 8 ECHR                                                   |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|Appendices                                                       |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|Appendix A: Summary of documentary evidence                      |   |
|                                                                 |   |
|Appendix B: Error of Law Decision                                |   |
|                                                                 |   |


                                  Glossary

|Afs              |Afghani (Afghan currency)                           |
|                 |                                                    |
|COI              |Country of Origin Information                       |
|EASO             |European Asylum Support Office                      |
|ECHR             |European Convention on Human Rights                 |
|GDP              |Gross domestic product                              |
|HRW              |Human Rights Watch                                  |
|IDPs             |Internally displaced persons                        |
|IEDs             |Improvised explosive devices                        |
|IRA/IFA          |Internal relocation alternative/Internal flight     |
|                 |alternative                                         |
|IOM              |International Organisation for Migration            |
|OCHA             |UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  |
|The Panel        |The panel of judges who gave the 2018 UT decision   |
|The Qualification|EU Council Directive 2004/83/EC                     |
|Directive or QD  |                                                    |
|                 |                                                    |
|Refugee          |Convention and Protocol relating to the status of   |
|Convention       |Refugees                                            |
|UN               |United Nations                                      |
|UNAMA            |UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan                |
|UNHCR            |UN High Commissioner for Refugees                   |
|2003 UNHCR       |UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection:       |
|Guidelines       |"Internal Flight or Relocation Alternative" within  |
|                 |the Context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention |
|                 |and/or 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of      |
|                 |Refugees, dated July 2003                           |
|2016 UNHCR       |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for assessing the      |
|Guidelines       |international protection needs of asylum seekers    |
|                 |from Afghanistan, dated 19 April 2016               |
|The 2018 UNHCR   |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for assessing the      |
|Guidelines       |international protection needs of asylum seekers    |
|                 |from Afghanistan, dated 30 August 2018              |
|The 2018 UT      |AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 |
|decision         |(IAC)                                               |
|The 2019 Court of|AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  |
|Appeal decision  |Department [2019] WLR(D) 304, [2019] 4 All ER 855,  |
|                 |[2019] EWCA Civ 873                                 |
|The 2019 UNHCR   |Submissions in the case of MJ v Netherlands         |
|Submissions      |(application no. 49256/18) before the ECtHR dated 6 |
|                 |December 2019                                       |
|The 2019 COI     |UNHCR, Afghanistan: Compilation of country of origin|
|UNHCR Report     |information relevant for assessing the availability |
|                 |of internal flight, relocation or protection        |
|                 |alternative to Kabul, dated December 2019           |
|                 |                                                    |
|The 2019 EASO    |EASO Country Guidance: Afghanistan, Guidance Note   |
|Guidance         |and Common Analysis, dated June 2019                |
|The UNHCR        |The 2018 UNHCR Guidelines, the 2019 UNHCR           |
|Documents        |Submissions and the 2019 COI UNHCR Report           |


A. Introduction



1. On 23 March 2018 the Upper Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judges  Allen  and
  Jackson) promulgated a Country Guidance decision  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
  Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) which considered the risk  faced  by
  citizens of Afghanistan on return to  Kabul  from  the  Taliban  and  the
  reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul.  The  conclusion  of  the
  Upper Tribunal was that a person who is of lower-level interest  for  the
  Taliban is not at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul  and
  that, having regard to the security and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul
  as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population  living  there,  it
  would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult
  male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not  have  any
  specific connections or support network in the city.



2. One of the issues considered in the 2018 UT decision was  the  likelihood
  of a person living in Kabul being  killed  or  injured  as  a  result  of
  conflict -related violence.  The  Upper  Tribunal  referred  to  a  0.01%
  likelihood of being a casualty of a security  incident  even  though  the
  evidence before the Tribunal  indicated  that  the  percentage  risk  was
  substantially higher than this.



3. On 24 June 2019  the  Court  of  Appeal  (Lord  Justice  Underhill,  Lady
  Justice King and Lord Justice Singh) in AS (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of
  State for the Home Department [2019] WLR(D) 304, [2019]  4  All  ER  855,
  [2019] EWCA Civ 873 set aside the 2018 UT decision on the basis that  the
  conclusion that the percentage risk of being a casualty from  a  security
  incident was 0.01% was not reasonably open to the Upper Tribunal  on  the
  evidence before it. The Court of Appeal found that the case would need to
  be remitted to the Upper Tribunal in  order  for  it  to  reconsider  the
  decision on  the  reasonableness  of  Kabul  as  an  internal  relocation
  alternative on the basis of the correct figure regarding risk of death or
  injury from security incidents. This was the only error of law identified
  by the Court of Appeal, which stated the following with  respect  to  the
  scope of the remittal:

           80.In those circumstances it seems to me that  the  remittal  to
           the Upper Tribunal can and should be on the basis that  it  need
           reconsider its conclusions only on the question of the extent of
           the risk to returned asylum-seekers from security  incidents  of
           the kind considered at paras. 190-9 of its Reasons. Although  of
           course the relevance of that risk is to  the  overall  issue  of
           whether it is reasonable for asylum-seekers to  be  expected  to
           relocate to Kabul, it is in practice  a  self-contained  element
           within that assessment, and since I would hold that there was no
           error of law in the Tribunal's approach to the other elements  I
           see no reason why those elements require to be reconsidered.

           81.The fact that the remitted issue is self-contained means that
           there would be no difficulty in it being heard by a differently-
           constituted Tribunal; and I think that in the  circumstances  of
           the present case, given the nature of the  error  on  ground  1,
           that would be the correct course.  A  fresh  Tribunal  would  of
           course not be privy to  the  evidence  called  on  the  previous
           occasion, or the submissions made; and that would mean that  the
           evidence as to security risk adduced  at  the  previous  hearing
           would have to be adduced again (unless  agreed),  together  with
           any updating evidence that might now be available,  and  further
           submissions made. But the scope of the  remitted  hearing  would
           still be far more limited than first time round.

           82.Those limits on the scope of the remittal are subject to  one
           important qualification. We were told that last year, after  the
           decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,   UNHCR   produced   further
           Guidelines on returns to Afghanistan,  which,  unlike  the  2016
           version,  unequivocally  recommend  that  "given   the   current
           security, human rights and humanitarian situation in  Kabul,  an
           IFA/IRA is generally not available in the city". It will be  for
           the Tribunal, no doubt after hearing  submissions,  to  consider
           whether  that  assessment  requires  a  reconsideration  of  its
           country guidance on a more extensive basis than is  required  by
           the remittal of this appeal. If it decides that it does,  it  is
           likely to make sense either for  the  scope  of  hearing  to  be
           increased or (which may be procedurally more  correct)  for  the
           remittal in this case to be heard along with whatever appeal  is
           the vehicle for that wider consideration.



4. On 24 July 2019, the Upper Tribunal gave the  parties  Directions  which,
  inter alia, provided that:



        a. the findings made in the 2018 UT  decision  are  preserved  save
           that




              i. new findings are to be made on the extent of  the  risk  to
                 returned asylum seekers from security incidents of the kind
                 considered in paragraphs 190 - 199 and as to the  relevance
                 of that risk to the reasonableness of Kabul as an  internal
                 relocation alternative;




             ii. the Upper Tribunal is entitled to  reconsider  any  of  the
                 findings made in the 2018 UT decision if and to the  extent
                 it thinks it right to do so in the  light  of  developments
                 since that date; and



        b. the appellant has permission  to  argue  on  the  basis  of  the
           evidence before the Upper Tribunal that removal  to  Afghanistan
           would expose him to a real  risk  of  serious  harm  within  the
           meaning of Article 15(c) of  the  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC
           ("the Qualification Directive").



B. The 2018 UT Decision




5. The question considered by the Panel for country guidance in the 2018  UT
  decision was whether the current situation in Kabul  was  such  that  the
  guidance given  in  AK  (Afghanistan)  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  needed
  revision in the context of consideration of internal relocation to Kabul.



6. The 2018 UT decision was made following consideration of the written  and
  oral evidence of three experts (Dr Liza Schuster,  Dr  Antonio  Giustozzi
  and Ms Emily Winterbotham) and a substantial body of documentary evidence
  including, inter alia, reports from the United Nations High  Commissioner
  for Refugees (UNHCR), the UN Assistance Mission in  Afghanistan  (UNAMA),
  the European Asylum Support Office (EASO), the United Nations Office  for
  the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  (OCHA),  and  multiple  reports
  from  news  sources  and  non-governmental  organisations.  Evidence  was
  considered up to and including December 2017.



7. The Panel found that the appellant was not at risk  of  persecution  from
  the Taliban in Kabul even though he would be at risk in his home area. It
  was also found that he would not be at risk of forcible recruitment to an
  armed group in Kabul, or at risk because of "westernisation". This aspect
  of the 2018 UT decision was not appealed and the case  proceeded  on  the
  basis that the appellant does not face a risk of persecution in Kabul.



8. At paragraph 172 the Upper Tribunal noted  that  the  appellant  did  not
  claim that conditions in Kabul  were  in  breach  of  Article  3  of  the
  European Convention on Human Rights or that the situation  in  Kabul  met
  the threshold in Article 15(c) QD.



9. The Panel began its assessment  of  the  evidence  relevant  to  internal
  relocation by summarising the position of UNHCR as set out  in  the  2016
  UNHCR Guidelines. The 2016 UNHCR Guidelines, which  do  not  include  any
  specific guidance about internal  relocation  to  Kabul  (as  opposed  to
  Afghanistan generally), state that  internal  relocation  would  only  be
  reasonable where an individual has access to shelter, essential  services
  (such  as  sanitation,  healthcare   and   education),   and   livelihood
  opportunities. It also states that internal relocation is reasonable only
  where an individual has  access  to  a  traditional  support  network  of
  members of his or her (extended) family or his or  her  ethnic  community
  who have been assessed to be willing and able to provide genuine  support
  to the applicant in practice unless the applicant is a single able-bodied
  man (or part of a married  couple)  of  working  age  without  identified
  specific vulnerabilities. In respect of a single able-bodied man  without
  external support, the 2018 UT decision quoted the following from the 2016
  UNHCR Guidelines:

           UNHCR considers that the only exception to  the  requirement  of
           external support are single able-bodied men and married  couples
           of working age without identified specific vulnerabilities. Such
           persons may in certain circumstances be able to subsist  without
           family and community support in urban and semi-urban areas  that
           have the necessary infrastructure and  livelihood  opportunities
           to meet the  basic  necessities  of  life  and  that  are  under
           effective  Government  control.   Given  the  breakdown  in  the
           traditional social fabric of society caused by decades  of  war,
           mass refugee flows and  internal  displacement,  a  case-by-case
           analysis will, nevertheless, be necessary.

10. The Panel considered a range of factors at paragraphs 98 - 171  relevant
  to the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  to  Kabul,  which  were
  evaluated  under  the  following  subheadings:  the  security  situation,
  housing and associated amenities,  healthcare,  employment/socio-economic
  conditions, returns procedure and available  assistance  on  return,  and
  evidence of the experience of returnees to Afghanistan.



11.  Having  set  out  the  relevant  evidence,  the  Panel  emphasised,  at
  paragraph 189, the weight that can and should be  attached  to  the  2016
  UNHCR Guidelines.



12. It then made the following findings  at  paragraphs  190  -  230  which,
  taken together, led it to conclude that it was not  generally  unsafe  or
  unreasonable for a single healthy man to internally relocate to Kabul:



        a. The fluidity and volatility of armed conflict is  likely  to  be
           less in Kabul than in smaller  urban  centres  and  rural  areas
           given that it is well defended and the authorities have  a  good
           record of maintaining control of larger cities (paragraph 190).




        b. The number of civilian casualties has increased between 2009 and
           2017 (paragraph 192).




        c. Security incidents are spread around the city with a wide  range
           of targets affecting many  areas  of  everyday  life  (paragraph
           193).




        d. There has been a deterioration  in  the  security  situation  in
           Kabul since the withdrawal of international security  forces  in
           2014, and there are increasing protection measures  being  used,
           such as a greater number of higher blast walls and road closures
           (paragraph 194).




        e.  Residents  of  Kabul  have  an  increasing  fear  of  incidents
           affecting them and their families (paragraph 195).



        f. The frequency of security incidents is not at such a high  level
           as to make Kabul unsafe for internal relocation (paragraph 196).



        g. Conflict-related violence affects the entire population of Kabul
           and returnees do not face a greater risk of being a casualty  of
           a  security  incident  than  the  general  population  of  Kabul
           (paragraph 197).




        h. The security situation in Kabul is not significantly worse  than
           the situation prevalent throughout the majority  of  Afghanistan
           and is better than some areas (paragraph 198-9).



        i. There are no issues with a returnee safely accessing Kabul since
           they would be returned directly to it (paragraph 200).



        j. Although social networks are important in  terms  of  employment
           and accommodation and a single person living alone is outside of
           the social norm in Afghanistan, it is not essential for a person
           to have an existing support network in Kabul for them to be able
           to access housing or employment (paragraphs 204 - 213).




        k. A single male in Kabul would have limited  housing  options  but
           would nonetheless be able to find  some  sort  of  accommodation
           which is comparable to that available for the  majority  of  the
           city's population, even without a  support  network  (paragraphs
           214 - 219).



        l. Although there is high unemployment, low skilled jobs,  such  as
           day  labouring,  portering  and  taxi  driving,  are   available
           (although precarious) to a person without a family network and a
           single man could survive much better on irregular  work  than  a
           person who was supporting a family (paragraphs 222 - 223).




        m. Kabul remains a destination of choice for  returnees,  IDPs  and
           economic migrants (paragraph 225).



        n. The evidence does not show that there is  a  real  risk  that  a
           single man will  feel  compelled  to  join  an  armed  gang  for
           economic survival in Kabul (paragraph 226).




        o. There is a basic level of support  to  returnees,  including  an
           offer of temporary accommodation,  travel  expenses  and  either
           cash on return or support in kind that makes a material, even if
           only marginal, difference to a returnee (paragraph 227).



13.  Having  found,  based  on  the  factors  listed  above,  that  internal
  relocation is not generally unsafe or unreasonable for a  single  healthy
  man, the Upper Tribunal proceeded  to  consider  the  following  specific
  factors that need to  be  considered  when  assessing  reasonableness  of
  relocation on a case-by-case basis for a particular person:



        a. Minors have a greater risk and vulnerability (paragraph 231).




        b. The older a person was when  they  left  Afghanistan,  the  more
           likely they are to be familiar with employment opportunities and
           living independently (paragraph 232).



        c. A person will be in a better position if they  have  connections
           depending on where they are and the financial resources,  status
           and connections of the family/support network. At paragraph  233
           it is stated that the availability  of  a  support  network  may
           counter a particular vulnerability of an individual returnee.




        d. Poor physical or  mental  health  would  need  to  be  carefully
           considered (paragraph 234).



        e.  Speaking  the  local  language,  as  well  as  educational  and
           vocational skills, will strengthen a person's prospects in Kabul
           (paragraph 235).



C. The Appellant's Claim and Preserved Findings of Fact



14. The appellant, who was born in January 1986 and entered  the  UK  on  an
  unidentified date which is accepted to be "towards the end of 2008", made
  a protection and human rights claim on 29 January 2014. In  summary,  his
  claim is that he is at risk from the Taliban in his home area of  Laghman
  Province, having been abducted and detained following the murder  of  his
  father and brother, and it would not be safe or  reasonable  for  him  to
  relocate to Kabul. He also claims that removing him to Afghanistan  would
  breach Article 8 of the ECHR.



15. On 12 February 2015 the appellant's asylum and human rights  application
  was refused by the respondent. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal.



16. In a decision promulgated on 30  July  2015,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Bradshaw dismissed the appeal on the basis that even though  the
  appellant would be at risk in his home area from the  Taliban,  he  could
  relocate to Kabul. The First-tier Tribunal also found that removal of the
  appellant  from  the  UK  would   not   constitute   a   disproportionate
  interference with his right to respect for his private  and  family  life
  under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.



17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  set  aside  by  the  Upper
  Tribunal following an acceptance by  the  respondent  that  the  decision
  contained an error of law. However, the primary findings of facts made by
  the First-tier Tribunal were preserved, as was the  conclusion  that  the
  appellant would be at risk of persecutory treatment in his home area.



18. The  preserved  findings  of  fact  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
  summarised at paragraph 8 of the 2018 UT decision, and are as follows:



        8. For the purposes of the present appeal and, in  particular,  the
        letter of instruction to the  experts,  the  following  are  agreed
        facts.




           a) The Appellant (dob 1 January  1986)  is  a  single  man  from
              Kardai village, Laghman province, Afghanistan.  He is thus 31
              years of age.




           b) The Appellant's father was the imam of the local  mosque  and
              well-known in the village, where the Taliban have a presence.
               He refused to cooperate with them or propagate for them  and
              was labelled a government agent.  In 2006 the Taliban  killed
              him.




           c) The Appellant's brother reported their father's murder to the
              authorities and 10 days later there  was  an  attack  on  the
              local Taliban by government forces. The Taliban suspected the
              Appellant's brother of spying for the government  and  killed
              him in 2007.




           d) Sometime later the Taliban abducted the  Appellant  from  his
              house and detained him  away  from  the  village  along  with
              others.   While  detained,  he  was  not   fingerprinted   or
              photographed by the Taliban.  A  week  later,  the  Appellant
              escaped during a night raid by government forces and returned
              to Kardai village, whereupon his maternal uncle passed him to
              a friend and then to an agent to take him out of Afghanistan.




           e) The Appellant fled  Afghanistan  clandestinely  in  2008  and
              entered the United Kingdom towards  the  end  of  that  year,
              having  passed  through  other  countries   en   route.   The
              Appellant's  mother,  younger  brother  and  maternal   uncle
              remained in Kardai village.




           f) The Appellant would be at risk of persecution if returned  to
              his local area.



19. It was also assumed  in  the  2018  UT  decision,  for  the  purpose  of
  instructing experts, that:



        a. the appellant attended school for 9 years and thereafter  worked
           with his brother in farming;




        b. he has not had contact with  his  family  in  Afghanistan  since
           arriving in the UK; and



        c. he has no family or support in Kabul.



D. The Legal Framework - Internal Relocation

(a) Overview

20.  Article  8  of  the  Qualification  Directive  (QD)  concerns  internal
  relocation. It provides:

      1. As part of the assessment  of  the  application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.

      2. In examining whether  a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.

      3. Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
         to the country of origin.

21. Article 15 QD  gives  a  definition  of  the  term  "serious  harm".  It
  provides:

      Serious harm consists of:

      (a)   the death penalty or execution; or

      (b)   torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment  of  an
      applicant in the country of origin; or

      (c)   serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person  by
      reason of indiscriminate violence in situations  of  international  or
      internal armed conflict.

22.  The  effect  of  Article  8  QD  is  substantially  reproduced  in  the
  Immigration Rules at Rule 339O(i), which provides:

      i)     The Secretary of State will not make:

           a)    a grant of refugee status if in part  of  the  country  of
              origin a person would not have a well founded fear  of  being
              persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected to stay
              in that part of the country; or

           b)    a grant of humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
              country of return a person would not  face  a  real  risk  of
              suffering serious harm, and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
              expected to stay in that part of the country.

       (ii)   In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
           country of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of
           State, when making a decision on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
           humanitarian  protection,  will  have  regard  to  the   general
           circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to  the
           personal circumstances of the person.

       (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to
           the country of origin or country of return.

23. There are two limbs to Article 8(1) QD. The first limb concerns  whether
  the person seeking protection will be exposed to a real risk  of  serious
  harm or persecution in the place of the proposed internal relocation.  If
  he or she will, the second limb (reasonableness of  internal  relocation)
  will not need to be considered. As stated in Secretary of State  for  the
  Home Department v SC [2018] WLR 4004, [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 at [39]:




           The tribunal only reaches the [reasonableness] stage of the test
           if it is satisfied that the person would not  be  exposed  to  a
           real risk of serious harm.



24. The second limb of Article 8(1) QD provides that there will be  no  need
  for international protection if a person can reasonably  be  expected  to
  stay in another part of his country of origin.




25. UNHCR structures its approach to internal relocation  by  distinguishing
  between "relevance" (which substantially corresponds to the first limb of
  Article 8(1) QD) and "reasonableness" (which corresponds  to  the  second
  limb of Article 8(1) QD). The 2003 UNHCR Guidelines state:

      [T]he assessment of whether or not there is a  relocation  possibility
      requires two main sets of analyses, undertaken on the basis of answers
      to the following sets of questions:

         I. The Relevance Analysis

               a) Is the area of relocation practically, safely, and legally
               accessible to the individual? If any of these  conditions  is
               not met, consideration of an alternative location within  the
               country would not be relevant.

               b)  Is  the  agent  of  persecution   the   State?   National
               authorities are presumed to act throughout  the  country.  If
               they are the feared persecutors, there is  a  presumption  in
               principle that an internal flight or  relocation  alternative
               is not available.

               c) Is the agent of persecution a non-State agent? Where there
               is a  risk  that  the  non-State  actor  will  persecute  the
               claimant in the proposed area, then the area will not  be  an
               internal flight or relocation alternative. This finding  will
               depend on a determination of whether the persecutor is likely
               to  pursue  the  claimant  to  the  area  and  whether  State
               protection from the harm feared is available there.

               d)  Would  the  claimant  be  exposed  to  a  risk  of  being
               persecuted or other serious harm upon relocation? This  would
               include the original or any new form of persecution or  other
               serious harm in the area of relocation.

         II. The Reasonableness Analysis

               a) Can the claimant, in the context of the country concerned,
               lead a relatively normal life without facing undue  hardship?
               If not, it would not be reasonable to expect  the  person  to
               move there.

 (b) The first limb: real risk of serious harm

26. In the 2018 UT decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the
  first limb of Article 8(1) QD was limited to the question of whether  the
  appellant had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Kabul.  Having
  concluded that he did not, the Panel proceeded  to  consider  the  second
  limb: whether it would be  reasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
  appellant to internally relocate to Kabul.



27. The Panel did not address, in the context of considering the first  limb
  of Article 8(1) QD, whether Kabul  is  practically,  safely  and  legally
  accessible  (the  question  identified  at  paragraph  I(a)  of   UNHCR's
  Relevance Analysis  in  the  2003  UNHCR  Guidelines)  as  this  was  not
  disputed. It has also  not  been  raised  by  the  appellant  before  us.
  Plainly, this is not an issue, as the appellant will be returned to Kabul
  by plane.



28. Nor did the Panel consider whether the appellant would be at  real  risk
  of suffering serious harm for reasons other  than  persecution  in  Kabul
  when assessing the first limb of Article 8(1) QD.  This  is  because  the
  appellant did not claim that the situation in Kabul met the threshold  in
  either Article 15(c) QD or Article 3 ECHR. The Panel did, however, in the
  context of considering the second  limb  (reasonableness  of  relocation)
  make the finding (at paragraph 196) that the security  incidents  in  and
  around Kabul City were not at such a high level so as  to  make  internal
  relocation to Kabul unsafe and that the evidence before  them  fell  very
  far short of the Article 15(c) QD threshold.



29. The absence of consideration of whether the appellant would be  at  real
  risk of serious harm in Kabul  because  of  the  security  situation  and
  generalised violence for the purposes of assessing whether the first limb
  of Article 8(1) QD was engaged (as opposed to  considering  this  in  the
  context of assessing reasonableness under the second limb of Article 8(1)
  QD) was not challenged by the appellant and it is apparent from Underhill
  LJ's judgment in the 2019 Court of Appeal decision that the issue was not
  contentious as the only reference to the first limb of  Article  8(1)  QD
  was at paragraph 61(1), where he stated:




 By way of preliminary, internal relocation is obviously not an  alternative
where there is a real  risk  that  the  applicant  for  asylum  will  suffer
persecution, or serious harm  within  the  meaning  of  Article  15  of  the
Directive (which includes treatment which would be contrary to Article 3  of
the ECHR), in the putative safe haven. We are  concerned  with  cases  where
there is no such risk.



30. Recognising that, because  of  the  security  situation  in  Kabul,  the
  appellant may have wanted to argue that there would be  a  real  risk  of
  serious harm from indiscriminate and generalised violence  (in  order  to
  establish that the first limb of  Article  8(1)  QD  applied)  the  Upper
  Tribunal gave Directions permitting the appellant to argue  that  removal
  to Afghanistan would expose him to a real risk of serious harm within the
  meaning of Article 15(c) QD. However, the appellant declined to make such
  an argument; or to advance any argument  that  he  would  otherwise  face
  serious harm  within  the  meaning  of  Article  15  QD  (which  includes
  treatment which would be contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR) in Kabul.  At
  paragraphs  13-14  of  her  consolidated  written  submissions,  Ms  Naik
  confirmed that we were not being asked to determine whether  there  is  a
  real risk of serious harm in Kabul within the meaning of Article 15(c) QD
  because  it  is  the  appellant's  case  that  he  is  disqualified  from
  subsidiary protection (in the language of the Qualification Directive) or
  humanitarian protection (in the language of the Immigration Rules) as  he
  qualifies for protection as a refugee.




31. Ms Naik submitted that, notwithstanding the appellant's decision to  not
  argue that he would face serious harm as defined in Article 15(c)  QD  in
  Kabul, we should nonetheless consider whether he would face a  real  risk
  of serious harm from generalised violence in Kabul. At  paragraph  20  of
  her written submissions,  Ms  Naik  wrote:  "the  Tribunal  must  examine
  whether there is a real risk  to  the  appellant  of  serious  harm  from
  generalised violence."



32. We invited Ms Naik to provide us with an  authority  (or  rationale)  to
  explain why the term "serious  harm"  in  Article  8  QD  should  not  be
  interpreted in accordance with the definition of that term in Article  15
  QD; and if not, what alternative threshold should be applied. Ms Naik was
  unable to point us to any authorities and did not propose a different, or
  alternative, threshold for serious harm. She did however submit  that  in
  the 2018 UT decision the Panel recognised that a different,  and  lesser,
  threshold applied, and that there was no basis  for  us  to  depart  from
  this. This submission has no merit. At  paragraph  196  of  the  2018  UT
  decision, when discussing  whether  the  security  situation  made  Kabul
  unsafe, the Panel stated that it was not necessary to reach the threshold
  in Article 15(c) QD. However, this was in the context of considering  the
  second limb of Article 8(1) QD  (reasonableness),  not  the  first  limb.
  Indeed, it is clear from paragraph 172 that the reason the Panel did  not
  address the serious harm part of the first limb of  Article  8(1)  QD  is
  that the appellant then - as now - did not pursue the  argument  that  he
  would face a real risk of serious harm within the meaning of  Article  15
  QD.



33. Mr Singh's position was that by choosing to  exclude  Article  15(c)  QD
  from the ambit of the appeal,  the  appellant  has  taken  the  issue  of
  whether internal relocation is  not  an  option  because  of  generalised
  violence under the first limb of Article 8(1) QD outside the scope of the
  appeal. In respect of the contention that "serious harm" has, or ought be
  given, a meaning other than that in Article  15  QD  in  the  context  of
  interpreting Article 8(1) QD, he drew attention to the language  used  in
  the 2003 UNHCR Guidelines where, at paragraph 20, the concept of "serious
  harm" in the context of internal relocation is  linked  to  how  risk  is
  assessed  in  "complimentary  forms  of   protection"   (which   includes
  subsidiary protection under the Qualification Directive). Paragraph 20 of
  the 2003 UNHCR Guidelines states:



20. In addition, a person with an established  fear  of  persecution  for  a
1951 Convention reason in one part of the  country  cannot  be  expected  to
relocate to another area of serious harm. If the claimant would  be  exposed
to a new risk of serious harm, including a serious  risk  to  life,  safety,
liberty or health, or one of serious discrimination, an internal  flight  or
relocation alternative does not arise, irrespective of whether or not  there
is a link to one of the Convention grounds.  The  assessment  of  new  risks
would therefore also need  to  take  into  account  serious  harm  generally
covered under complementary forms of protection



34. We agree with Mr Singh that the term "serious harm" in Article  8(1)  QD
  should be interpreted consistently with the definition of "serious  harm"
  in Article 15 QD, for the following reasons:



        a. Precisely the same wording  is  used  in  Article  8(1)  QD  and
           Article 15 QD.




        b. Neither party was able to identify (and we are not aware of) any
           authorities in which a different meaning has been given  to  the
           term serious harm in the context of Article 8(1) QD.




        c. We do not consider there to be  any  reason,  in  principle,  in
           order to give effect to the purpose of the  Refugee  Convention,
           for the term serious harm to be given a more  expansive  meaning
           in Article 8(1) QD than in Article 15 QD because any instance of
           serious harm not covered by, or falling short of  the  threshold
           in, Article 15 QD would not escape consideration as it would  be
           assessed  as  part  of  the   broad   holistic   evaluation   of
           reasonableness in the second limb of Article 8(1) QD.



        d. We make the further observation that the argument as to  whether
           or not a risk of harm from indiscriminate violence falls  within
           the first limb of Article 8(1) QD  is  liable  to  be  arid  and
           academic as the same evidence and  factors  will  in  any  event
           require examination under the second limb of  Article  8(1)  QD.
           Both parties were in agreement that, irrespective of its  scope,
           all of the evidence relevant to considering the  first  limb  of
           Article 8(1) QD would  fall  to  be  considered  when  assessing
           reasonableness under the second limb.




35. We also agree with Mr Singh that it is misconceived  for  the  appellant
  to ask us to determine whether he faces a real risk of  serious  harm  in
  Kabul because of generalised violence such that  internal  relocation  is
  not an option whilst declining to make any submissions as to  whether  he
  faces a real risk of serious harm as defined in Article 15(c) QD,  or  as
  to what alternative standard/threshold should be applied. However,  given
  that  the  substance  of  the  appellant's  argument  is  that   internal
  relocation is not an option because of the serious  harm  he  would  face
  from indiscriminate violence in  Kabul  -  and  that  the  appellant  has
  adduced a substantial amount of evidence on this issue -  we consider  it
  appropriate to assess the serious harm  element  of  the  first  limb  of
  Article 8(1) QD.




36. In order to determine  whether  the  appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
  serious harm in Kabul for the purposes of the first limb of Article  8(1)
  QD we must assess the categories  of  serious  harm  in  Article  15  QD.
  Article 15(a) (death penalty or execution) and Article 15(b) (torture  or
  inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment) are clearly not  applicable
  because, even in a generalised way, the appellant has not argued they are
  relevant. However, Article 15(c) QD (serious and individual threat  to  a
  civilian's life  or  person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
  situations of international or internal  armed  conflict),  although  not
  argued by the appellant in terms, forms the basis for his submission that
  he would face a  risk  of  serious  harm  in  Kabul  such  that  internal
  relocation is not an option.  We  will  therefore  consider  whether  the
  appellant faces a real risk within the meaning of  Article  15(c)  QD  in
  Kabul.



37. As set out in  Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van  Justitie  (C-465/07);
  [2009] 2 CMLR 45 at para. 43,  and  confirmed  subsequently  on  multiple
  occasions, most recently by the Upper Tribunal in SMO, KSP & IM  (Article
  15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC), in order  for
  the  threshold  in  Article  15(c)  QD  to  be  reached  the  degree   of
  indiscriminate violence must be at:



[S]uch a high level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a
civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as the case may  be,  to  the
relevant region, would, solely on account of his presence on  the  territory
of that country or region, face  a  real  risk  of  being  subject  to  that
threat.



38. The source of the threat to an individual need not  come  directly  from
  the armed conflict. As explained in HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG
  [2012] UKUT 00409(IAC):




[T]he threat to life or person of an individual need not come directly  from
armed conflict.  It will suffice that the  result  of  such  conflict  is  a
breakdown of law and order which has the effect of  creating  the  necessary
risk.




39. In addition, the assessment of risk is not limited to civilian  casualty
  rates. At para. 114 of HM, in a paragraph cited with approval in SMO,  it
  is stated:




One aspect of the inclusive approach  is  an  appreciation  that  there  are
threats to the physical safety  and  integrity  of  civilians  beyond  those
measured in the civilian casualty rates.  As put by Michael Knights  of  the
Washington Institute for Near East Policy in a report of 16  February,  2012
entitled "A Violent New Year in Iraq, The National  Interest  (cited  at  n.
217 of the May 2012 UNHCR Guidelines), "[m]ass casualty  attacks  tell  only
part of the story of violence in Iraq,  and  mortality  statistics  overlook
the targeted nature of violence in today's Iraq, where a high proportion  of
victims are local progovernment community leaders. For every one  person  of
this kind who is killed, an exponential number  of  others  are  intimidated
into passive support for insurgent groups". Whilst our principal focus  when
examining levels of violence is physical harm causing death  or  injury,  it
is important that we also take account of indirect forms  of  violence  such
as threats, intimidation, blackmail, seizure of  property,  raids  on  homes
and businesses, use of checkpoints to push out  other  factions,  kidnapping
and extortion. To adopt Mr Fordham's metaphor, these factors mean that  most
Iraqis (outside the KRG) l continue to "live under the shadow of violence".



40. Article 15(c) QD encompasses a "sliding scale" whereby, as  set  out  in
  paragraph 39 of Elgafaji:

      The more the applicant  is  able  to  show  that  he  is  specifically
      affected  by  reason   of   factors   particular   to   his   personal
      circumstances,  the  lower  the  level  of   indiscriminate   violence
      required.

41. We did not hear any submissions  in  relation  to  the  "sliding  scale"
  under Article 15(c) QD and  both  parties  only  addressed  the  personal
  circumstances of the appellant in submissions regarding reasonableness of
  relocation. We consider this the correct approach.  Whilst  the  "sliding
  scale"  will  clearly  be  relevant  in  a  case  concerning   subsidiary
  protection  under  Article  2(e)  QD,  in  appeals  concerning   internal
  relocation the  sliding-scale  considerations  are  subsumed  within  the
  assessment of reasonableness.




42. We remind ourselves that the threshold in Article 15(c) QD  is  relevant
  only to the question of whether, because of the risk of serious  harm  in
  Kabul, internal relocation is not an option. It has no  applicability  to
  the evaluation of reasonableness under the second limb  of  Article  8(1)
  QD. The same evidence will, however, be relevant to both limbs.




43. Although we are considering Article 15(c) QD risk  for  the  purpose  of
  assessing the availability of internal relocation, and not  in  order  to
  evaluate whether the appellant  is  eligible  for  subsidiary  protection
  under Article 2(e) QD, we recognise that our analysis will be relevant to
  those considering the latter.

(c) The second limb: reasonableness

44. The 2019 Court of Appeal decision includes a careful  consideration  and
  summary of the second limb of Article 8(1)  QD.  We  see  no  benefit  to
  either expanding upon or  seeking  to  summarise  further  the  Court  of
  Appeal's summary and therefore we set out in full paragraphs 61 -  68  of
  Underhill LJ's judgment:




      61. I start by summarising the essential points, so far as relevant to
      this appeal, established by the authorities about the  nature  of  the
      exercise required by article 8 of the Directive. I emphasise that this
      is not intended as a comprehensive analysis of all the  issues  raised
      by the authorities to which I have referred.


           (1) By way of preliminary, internal relocation is obviously  not
           an alternative where there is a real risk that the applicant for
           asylum will suffer  persecution,  or  serious  harm  within  the
           meaning of article 15 of the Directive (which includes treatment
           which would be contrary to  article  3  of  the  ECHR),  in  the
           putative safe haven. We are concerned with cases where there  is
           no such risk.
           (2) The ultimate question is whether  in  such  a  case  "taking
           account of all relevant circumstances pertaining to the claimant
           and his country of origin, ... it is reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to do so". That is the formulation of Lord Bingham in
           Januzi, repeated in AH (Sudan). It pre-dates the  Directive  and
           is not identically  worded:  in  particular,  the  reference  to
           whether relocation would be "unduly harsh"  is  not  present  in
           article 8 but  derives  from  the  UNHCR  2003  Guidelines  (see
           Januzi, para. 20). But it was common ground before  us  that  it
           states the test required by article 8. When in doubt  it  is  to
           that question that tribunals should return.
           (3) The test so stated is one of  great  generality  (save  only
           that it excludes any comparison of the conditions, including the
           degree of respect for human rights, between those  obtaining  in
           the safe haven and those of the country of refuge -  this  being
           the ratio of Januzi). It requires consideration of  all  matters
           relevant  to  the  reasonableness  of  relocation,  none  having
           inherent priority over the others (AH (Sudan), para.  13).  This
           is  the  same  as  Lady  Hale's  description  of  the  necessary
           assessment as "holistic" (AH (Sudan) paras. 27-28).
           (4) One way of approaching that assessment is to ask whether  in
           the safe haven the applicant can lead "a relatively normal  life
           without facing undue hardship ... in the context of the  country
           concerned". That language derives from the UNHCR Guidelines  and
           is quoted by Lord Bingham with approval in Januzi (para. 20) and
           also used by Lord Hope (para. 47); but it does not appear in the
           Directive or in Lord Bingham's formulation of the test,  and  it
           should not be treated as a substitute for the latter. Rather, it
           is a valuable way of approaching the reasonableness  analysis  -
           "one touchstone", as Lord Brown puts it (AH (Sudan)  para.  42).
           Its value is because if a person is able to  lead  in  the  safe
           haven a life which  is  relatively  normal  for  people  in  the
           context of his or her own country,  it  will  be  reasonable  to
           expect them to stay there (AH (Sudan), para. 47).
           (5) It may be reasonable, and not  unduly  harsh,  to  expect  a
           refugee to relocate even if conditions in the safe haven are, by
           the standards of the country of refuge, very bad. That  is  part
           of what is decided by Januzi itself, and the passages quoted  at
           paras. 34  and  35  above  reinforce  it.  It  is  also  vividly
           illustrated by the outcome of AH (Sudan),  where  the  House  of
           Lords upheld the decision of the AIT that it was reasonable  for
           Darfuri refugees to be expected to  relocate  to  the  camps  or
           squatter slums of Khartoum. That may seem inconsistent with  the
           suggested approach of asking whether the applicant would be able
           lead a "relatively normal life"  in  the  safe  haven;  but  the
           reconciliation lies in the qualification "in the context of  the
           country concerned".
           (6) Point (5) does not mean that it will  be  reasonable  for  a
           person to relocate to a safe haven, however bad  the  conditions
           they will face there, as long as such conditions are  normal  in
           their country. Conditions may be normal but nevertheless  unduly
           harsh: this is the point emphasised by Lady Hale in  AH  (Sudan)
           and is exemplified by AA (Uganda).
           (7) The UNHCR Guidelines contain a full  discussion  of  factors
           relevant to the reasonableness analysis. These are described  by
           Lord Bingham as "valuable" and  partly  quoted  by  him  (Januzi
           para. 20); and at para. 20 of her opinion  in  AH  (Sudan)  Lady
           Hale endorses a submission made in  that  case  by  UNHCR  which
           summarises  the  factors  in  question.  A  decision-maker  must
           consider those factors, so far as material, in each case (though
           it  does  not  follow  that  everything  said  in  the  detailed
           discussion in the Guidelines is authoritative).
           (8) The assessment must in each case be conducted  by  reference
           to  the  reasonableness  of  relocation   for   the   particular
           individual.
      62. In his written submissions Mr  Fordham  identified  "UNHCR's  core
      submission". He said:
           "The correct approach when assessing  the  reasonableness  of  a
           proposed internal relocation, flight or  protection  alternative
           ("IFA") is to carry out  a  single,  holistic  assessment  which
           focuses  upon  the  circumstances  of   the   individual.   That
           assessment:
           2.1 may, as one factor, consider what is  'a  relatively  normal
           life' in the context of the country concerned; but
           2.2 must consider the conditions  in  the  place  of  relocation
           against certain objective 'baseline standards'; and
           2.3 must consider the impact of the proposed relocation  on  the
           particular  individual,  having  regard  to  that   individual's
           characteristics, personal circumstances and past experiences."
      63. Although I have ranged wider, it will be seen that my  summary  is
      essentially consistent with that submission. I would, however, sound a
      note of caution about the reference to "certain  objective  'baseline'
      standards". I would accept that the point made at para. 61  (6)  above
      requires an objective judgment by the decision-maker, and also that it
      does imply some concept of a threshold below  which  it  will  not  be
      reasonable to expect the individual to stay in the safe haven  -  that
      indeed is the burden of the passage from Dr Storey's article  approved
      by Lord Bingham in Januzi (see para. 38  above).  But  the  particular
      terminology of "objective baseline standards" is to my mind rather too
      suggestive of the Hathaway/New Zealand approach  which  the  House  of
      Lords has disapproved.


      64. It is convenient to deal here with one central theme of Ms  Naik's
      submissions. She contended that,  because  the  exercise  required  by
      article 8 of the Directive required the application of objective norms
      applicable to the conditions which a returnee would experience in  the
      safe haven, comparison with the conditions experienced by  others  was
      irrelevant. That goes too far. Any assessment of  reasonableness  must
      be, in one sense, objective; but that does not preclude the comparison
      of the conditions which a returnee would enjoy in the safe haven  with
      those that apply  generally  in  the  country  in  question,  and  the
      authorities positively require that such a comparison form part of the
      assessment.


      65. Against that background, I turn to the effect of para. 42  in  the
      speech of Lord Brown in AH (Sudan).  As  already  indicated,  I  agree
      entirely with the passages which I have quoted from  the  decision  of
      the UT in AAH: see paras. 52-55 above. In  particular,  I  agree  that
      Lord Brown cannot have been  intending  to  enunciate  a  "significant
      minority test" in the sense which Mr Singh was understood to have been
      advancing in that case: that is, he was not  saying  that  if  it  was
      established that a significant minority of people in  the  country  in
      question lived in conditions of great hardship it necessarily followed
      that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  a  returnee  to  live  in  those
      conditions. Such a conclusion would have been  contrary  not  only  to
      what Lady Hale said in AH (Sudan), as argued by Ms Naik,  but  to  the
      basic approach enunciated by Lord Bingham in both that case and Januzi
      and accepted by the other members of the House in both  cases.  As  we
      have seen, Lord Brown said in terms that he  endorsed  every  word  of
      Lord Bingham's opinion.


      66. It seems  to  me  clear,  rather,  that,  instead  of  veering  so
      inexplicably off-piste, Lord Brown was making a  more  limited  point.
      The subject of para. 42 is, avowedly, a challenge by the applicants to
      a finding by  the  AIT  that  "people  in  Sudan  generally  live  [at
      subsistence level]". He does not in fact spell out what the  challenge
      was, but it appears to have been that the evidence did not support the
      finding that a majority of people in Sudan lived at subsistence level.
      His point was that, even if that was so, it did not mean  that  living
      at subsistence level could not be regarded as relatively normal in the
      context of Sudan. All that he was doing was to elaborate a  little  on
      what "relatively normal" - or its cognate,  "prevailing  generally"  -
      entailed: conditions can be normal/general even if they apply to  less
      than half the population.


      67. So understood, what Lord Brown says in  para.  42  of  his  speech
      seems to me, with respect, right; and my conclusion is  reinforced  by
      the fact that the speech as a whole was agreed with by Lord  Hope  and
      that this particular passage was endorsed by Buxton LJ in AA (Uganda).
      As the UT puts it in AAH, the lived lives of  the  population  of  any
      country will "entail a diversity of experience". Or, as  the  Tribunal
      put in the present case:


           "There is no single standard or set of  conditions  which  apply
           throughout a country, but a range of  examples  of  'normal'  or
           conditions which are experienced either in particular  parts  of
           the country, or throughout it by groups of people."
      It would be arbitrary  and  unworkable  -  and,  more  to  the  point,
      contrary to the whole  nature  of  the  required  exercise  -  if  the
      question of what was "relatively normal" in the  context  of  a  given
      country depended on having to show that  the  conditions  in  question
      were experienced by 50%+1 of the population.
      68. I wish to make one other point before leaving  this  part  of  the
      discussion. In my view it is contrary to the  message  of  Januzi,  as
      repeated in AH (Sudan), to pick on particular statements or phrases in
      any of  the  speeches  in  either  case  -  or  indeed  in  the  UNHCR
      Guidelines, valuable though they are -  and  subject  them  to  minute
      examination as if they had quasi-statutory effect, still less to treat
      them as giving rise to distinct "tests". Lord Bingham went out of  his
      way in AH (Sudan) to emphasise that the assessment  of  reasonableness
      was "one of great generality": see para. 13 of his  opinion.  What  is
      essential is that  the  decision-maker  should  conduct  the  kind  of
      holistic assessment, encompassing all relevant  considerations,  which
      is required.


45. In considering the evidence before us, we have kept at the forefront  of
  our mind these passages from Underhill LJ's judgment  and  that  what  is
  required  is   a   holistic   assessment,   encompassing   all   relevant
  considerations pertaining to the appellant in Afghanistan.

(d) Burden and Standard of Proof

46. The burden of proof  is  on  the  appellant  to  establish  that  he  is
  entitled to protection as a refugee, and the standard of proof  is  lower
  than in civil claims (often expressed as  "reasonable  chance",  "serious
  possibility", "substantial grounds for thinking" or "real risk").




47. With regard to whether the appellant would face a real risk  of  serious
  harm in Kabul, the burden is on the appellant. See SMO at para. 206.




48. In respect of whether it is reasonable for him to  internally  relocate,
  an evaluative and  holistic  assessment  is  required,  as  explained  in
  Secretary of State for the Home Department v SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ
  2112 at [36] and by the Upper  Tribunal  in  MB  (Internal  relocation  -
  burden of proof) Albania [2019] UKUT 00392 (IAC), where it was stated:

           The  burden  of  proof  remains  on  the  appellant,  where  the
           respondent has identified the location to which it  is  asserted
           they could relocate, to prove why that location would be  unduly
           harsh, in line  with  AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
           crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  445  (IAC),  but
           within that burden, the evaluation exercise should be  holistic.
           An holistic approach to such an assessment  is  consistent  with
           the balance-sheet approach endorsed later in SSHD v SC (Jamaica)
           [2017] EWCA Civ 2112, at paragraphs [40] and [41]. MM v Minister
           for Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Ireland  (Common  European
           Asylum System - Directive 2004/83/EC)  Case  C-277/11  does  not
           impose a burden on the respondent or result in a formal  sharing
           of  the  burden  of  proof,  but  merely  confirms  a  duty   of
           cooperation  at  the  stage  of  assessment,  for  example   the
           production of the country information reports.


49. We remind ourselves that, as stated in MB at [25]:




           An over-emphasis on  the  overall  burden  of  proof  can  be  a
           distraction from that holistic assessment.

E. Evidence

(a) Overview

50. When considering the evidence, we have kept in mind that  Kabul  is  the
  name of both a city and province. The appellant will be returned to Kabul
  City (and is likely to live in its environs) but  most  of  the  evidence
  before us refers to Kabul Province, of  which  the  city  forms  a  part.
  Population estimates vary considerably. Estimates for  Kabul  City  range
  from 3 to 6 million and those for Kabul Province  are  between  4  and  8
  million. Unless specified otherwise, when we refer to Kabul  (or  cite  a
  document that refers to Kabul) we are referring to Kabul Province.




51. We were provided with, and have carefully considered, a large number  of
  reports and other  documents  concerning  the  current  circumstances  in
  Afghanistan and Kabul. In Appendix A, we have summarised those  documents
  which we have found most helpful to our assessment.  However,  we  stress
  that we have considered all of  the  evidence  that  was  before  us  and
  omission from Appendix A does not mean a document was  not  reviewed  and
  considered. Similarly, although the summaries in Appendix A only refer to
  parts of the evidence, we have considered - and taken into account -  the
  entirety of the documents before us.




52. We note that, prior to the final day of the hearing,  we  were  provided
  with several documents that were not in the initial bundle. In  addition,
  we drew to the attention of  the  parties  a  report  (EASO  COI  Report:
  Afghanistan Networks, dated February 2018) that was not  in  the  bundle.
  All of these documents have been considered.



53. In addition, on the evening before the  last  day  of  the  hearing  the
  appellant served the 2019 UNHCR Submissions and  2019  COI  UNHCR  Report
  (discussed above). We gave permission for these documents  to  be  relied
  upon and directed the parties to make written submissions on  them  after
  the hearing (which they have done).



54. The parties provided detailed written submissions (in  addition  to  the
  further submissions on the 2019 UNHCR  Submissions  and  2019  COI  UNHCR
  Report), which we have carefully considered.



55. We also  note  that,  following  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the
  respondent provided a  copy  of  the  2019  UNAMA  Report,  published  in
  February 2020. As we had informed the parties that we would not  consider
  any further evidence following the conclusion of the hearing, we have not
  had regard to this report.



56. We heard expert evidence from two  experts:  Dr  Lisa  Schuster  and  Dr
  Ayesha Ahmad.



(b) Dr Lisa Schuster

57. Dr Schuster  is  a  Reader  in  the  Department  of  Sociology  at  City
  University of  London  with  extensive  experience  researching,  writing
  about, and living in Afghanistan. Amongst other things, she has published
  articles about the experience  of  returnees  to  Afghanistan.  She  gave
  evidence on the current circumstances in Kabul,  and  how  the  city  has
  changed in the last several years, based not only  on  her  research  but
  also on her personal experience of living in  and  visiting  Kabul  since
  2001 (most recently in February/March 2019).




58. This summary is based on Dr Schuster's report dated 23  September  2019,
  her response to questions posed by the respondent dated 15 October  2019,
  her report dated 26 July 2017 in the previous Upper  Tribunal  case,  and
  her oral evidence given at the hearing.




59. Much of Dr Schuster's evidence focused  on  the  security  situation  in
  Kabul. She stated that there has been a significant deterioration between
  her first visit to Kabul (in 2011) and her most recent visit  (in  2019),
  when she felt unable to move around the city and limited herself  to  her
  friend's home and the University.




60. She stated that there has been a failure of  the  Afghanistan  state  to
  control territory and the  Taliban  are  openly  active  in  70%  of  the
  country. She cited a report that the Taliban are able to  tax  businesses
  in areas not considered to be under their control; and  noted  that  ISIS
  have increased their attacks in Kabul.



61. She cited UNAMA statistics on the total number  of  civilian  deaths  in
  Afghanistan, noting an upward trend, and highlighted  casualties  arising
  in Kabul. She stated that Kabul is the province in Afghanistan  with  the
  highest number of casualties. In cross-examination, she acknowledged that
  although Kabul is the province with the highest number of casualties,  it
  does not have the highest number as a proportion of the population.



62. Dr Schuster noted UNAMA's casualty figures in Kabul  Province  for  2017
  and 2018 (1,831 and 1,866, respectively) and stated that this  is  likely
  to remain unchanged  in  2019.  She  highlighted  that  the  figures  are
  conservative and that the underestimating of civilian casualties is  well
  established. She referred to the work of an Australian journalist she  is
  familiar with (Andrew Quilty) whose (as yet unpublished)  analysis  shows
  civilian casualties are higher in reality than the reported figures.  She
  noted a report of 85,477 trauma-related consultations between January and
  September 2018 in Afghanistan.



63. Dr Schuster contrasted the risk of being killed by a  security  incident
  in Afghanistan to Britain, stating that the chance of being killed  by  a
  terrorist is a thousand times greater in Kabul.



64. Dr Schuster  stressed  that  casualty  figures  do  not  give  the  full
  picture, as a death or injury will often have very wide repercussions for
  family members in a society without social security. She stated that  the
  frequency of attacks is such that there will rarely be a moment when  one
  is not experiencing or recovering from the fear  engendered  by  such  an
  attack. She also talked about the reluctance of the population to  travel
  within Kabul for unnecessary journeys and a  decline  in  voting  numbers
  attributable to fear  of  security  incidents  during  an  election.  She
  described the UNAMA figures as "sterile", as they failed  to  convey  the
  huge level of trauma and fear in the population. She stated that she does
  not know anyone who has not lost or  had  injured  a  family  member  and
  subjectively she felt that a casualty rate of one in 900 was too low. She
  cautioned against over reliance on statistics which do not give the  full
  or complete picture of the severity of the situation. She also  expressed
  the view that the statistics underestimate the risk to  men,  given  that
  men are more likely to be in public spaces than women;  as  well  as  the
  risk to people without a network who are new to  Kabul,  as  such  people
  would lack insight into how to minimise risk.



65. She drew attention to the survey  of  the  Afghan  people  by  the  Asia
  Foundation 2018, noting that more than 60% of the population believe  the
  country is going in the  wrong  direction  and  insecurity  is  the  most
  frequently cited reason for this.



66.  She  expressed  the  view  that  a  young  man  looking  for  work  and
  accommodation who was unfamiliar with Kabul and lacked a  social  network
  to offer guidance and support would be particularly at  risk  of  getting
  caught up in attacks.



67. She noted that although there is some targeting of Shia and Hazara,  all
  civilians are at risk from  the  indiscriminate  violence,  or  of  being
  killed or injured even if they are not part of the target group.



68. Dr Schuster noted the prevalence of human rights abuses and  corruption;
  and that this contributes to the  high  level  of  fear  and  anxiety  in
  society. She stated that the authorities are unlikely to be a  source  of
  protection for civilians, and that  this  is  a  particular  problem  for
  people who do not have a social network to protect them. She stated  that
  access to protection depends on belonging to whichever  ethnic  group  is
  dominant in that area.



69. She considered there to be a  risk  of  forcible  recruitment  to  anti-
  government elements, particularly for people who suffer from destitution.
  She also considered there to  be  a  heightened  risk  of  kidnapping  of
  returnees because they are  perceived  as  having  access  to  a  network
  abroad.



70. Dr Schuster described physical violence as being "normal" in Kabul,  and
  expressed concern that a returnee such as the appellant would be at  risk
  of experiencing violence because he would be unaccustomed to the ways  in
  which such violence can erupt and of how to avoid it. She also  commented
  that the "gait and comportment" of  a  returnee  would  attract  negative
  attention. She stated that returnees would stand out in areas they do not
  belong to ethnically.



71. With respect to living conditions and economic  survival  in  Kabul,  Dr
  Schuster cited and relied upon data found in the  OCHA  reports,  stating
  that the number of people in humanitarian  need  in  November  2018  (6.3
  million) had doubled since December 2017 (3.3 million). These figures are
  for all of  Afghanistan.  She  attributed  this  to  a  deterioration  in
  security, the prolonged drought, and the number of returnees  from  Iran.
  Dr  Schuster  commented  that  returnees  from  Iran  are  a   vulnerable
  population.



72. Dr Schuster referred to there being 2,580,000 IDPs by the  end  of  2018
  in Afghanistan, contrasting this to 2012 when there were only around half
  a million. She noted that more than a million documented and undocumented
  Afghans returned in 2016, more than 610,000 in 2017, and 673,000 in 2018,
  many of whom were unable to return to their homes  because  of  conflict,
  drought and land disputes, swelling the number of IDPs. The vast majority
  of the returnees are from Iran and Pakistan. She stated that even  though
  the current number of  returnees  per  year  is  not  as  high  as  2016,
  cumulatively returnees now account for a large part of the population  in
  Afghanistan. She also stated that because the number of Afghans  in  Iran
  and Pakistan is now significantly reduced (because so many  have  already
  returned), the pool of potential returnees is now substantially  smaller,
  meaning that there are unlikely to be such large numbers of returnees  in
  the future.



73. Dr Schuster  stated  that  there  is  no  independent,  durable  support
  available for returnees in Kabul. IOM is involved in providing assistance
  but this is very limited. There is a maximum grant of 900, but it is  in
  kind (not cash) and is difficult to access as a returnee must have a bank
  account and documents must  be  provided  to  show  it  is  for  a  small
  business, to sign a lease or augment a salary. She also stated that  this
  sum would in any event not last more than a few weeks. Dr Schuster  added
  that returnees receive 12,500 Afs (125 approximately) on arrival at  the
  airport, and can stay at the (cheap) Spinzar hotel in central  Kabul  for
  up to two weeks. Dr Schuster considered there to be serious problems with
  the support packages available, with uptake very  low  due  to  practical
  difficulties and ignorance of what is available.



74. Dr Schuster noted the  high  unemployment  and  prevalence  of  insecure
  work, and expressed the view that without a network the  appellant  would
  be unlikely to obtain employment (and  that  even  day  labour  would  be
  sporadic) with the likely consequence that he  would  be  destitute.  She
  commented that the appellant could find himself  competing  with  100-150
  men waiting  for,  say,  only  10  day-labour  jobs;  and  those  with  a
  network/connections would be more likely to obtain the work.  She  stated
  that speaking English would be of little benefit for  the  type  of  work
  available to the appellant.



75. She also thought that the appellant would have significant  difficulties
  finding accommodation, both due to the cost and because he would  not  be
  welcome as a single young man. His  only  realistic  option  would  be  a
  dormitory room in a cheap hotel. She described such hotels as  resembling
  dosshouses, being dirty and having no  privacy  or  security.  They  were
  places where he would be vulnerable  to  exploitation  and  violence.  Dr
  Schuster provided 5 photographs that were taken  by  a  colleague  on  18
  December 2019 of such a dormitory room and cheap hotel.



76. In regard to a Tazkera, Dr Schuster's evidence was that the document  is
  easily forged and there is not a huge impact in day-to-day  life  of  not
  having one; but it is required for official purposes. She  thought  that,
  with the assistance of a family member, it could be possible for  one  to
  be issued in Kabul.



77. Dr Schuster's opinion is that the appellant would not be able to have  a
  "relatively normal" life in Afghanistan without family  support,  and  in
  the absence of support he would either be  recruited  by  anti-government
  elements or criminals; or become destitute.  She  stated  that  the  only
  people who have been successful, to her knowledge, in making a  life  for
  themselves in Kabul are  those  who  have  friends  or  family  and  some
  resources.



78. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision described the evidence of Dr  Schuster
  as clear, comprehensive and well researched; and significant  weight  was
  attached to it. We reach the same conclusion. Mr Singh  advanced  several
  criticisms of her evidence. He  argued  that  she  failed  to  take  into
  account (or was unaware of) important objective evidence about the  level
  of risk in Kabul relative to Afghanistan as a whole,  greatly  overstated
  the actual inflow of IDPs and returnees to Kabul, did not appear to  have
  a good knowledge of the economic circumstances  in  Kabul  and  presented
  information selectively. We accept that there were gaps in Dr  Schuster's
  knowledge. However, given the huge amount of information available  about
  Afghanistan it is not surprising that Dr Schuster had not read  (and  was
  not aware of) all of the material evidence. We found Dr  Schuster  to  be
  conscientious and careful - and to be clear about what she knew  and  did
  not know.



 (c) Dr Ayesha Ahmad

79. Dr Ahmad is a lecturer in global health at  St  George's  University  of
  London who researches mental health and conflict with a country focus  on
  Afghanistan. She has spent one week in Afghanistan, in 2017. She does not
  have medical qualifications and is not a  psychiatrist  or  psychologist.
  Her opinion  is  based  on  academic  research  and  not  on  a  clinical
  assessment of the appellant. She explained that her contribution  was  to
  provide an academic and theoretical  perspective  on  mental  health  and
  trauma.




80. In her report, Dr Ahmad gave an opinion, based on  academic  literature,
  on the impact on a person's mental health of living in a  conflict  zone.
  She maintained that living in a  war  zone  has  a  significant  negative
  effect on a person's mental health. She stated that this has been gravely
  underestimated due to poor reporting and diagnostic tools.



81. She stated that, in the case of the appellant, the mental health  impact
  of being in a war zone will be exacerbated because he will be  without  a
  support network, has spent a significant time period  in  a  non-conflict
  setting, will be in a city with which he is not familiar,  is  unfamiliar
  with the current social/cultural environment, has a  poor  socio-economic
  situation and had traumatic experiences in his childhood. She  emphasised
  the significance of having  had  an  adverse  and  potentially  traumatic
  experience in childhood, stating that this would make  him  significantly
  more vulnerable.



82. Dr Ahmad cited a World Health Organisation estimate in  June  2019  that
  one in five people in post-conflict  settings  have  depression,  anxiety
  disorder,   post-traumatic   stress   disorder,   bipolar   disorder   or
  schizophrenia. She added to this that the appellant can (and she believes
  he will, based on  the  academic  literature  and  her  research)  suffer
  psychologically in a  war  zone  even  without  a  diagnosed  psychiatric
  disorder.



83. Dr Ahmad also expressed an opinion on mental health  care  provision  in
  Afghanistan. She stated that public healthcare is  of  poor  quality  and
  medication is frequently counterfeit. She referred to attacks on  medical
  staff  and  security  concerns  affecting   access   to   healthcare   in
  Afghanistan.   She  commented  on  there  being  inadequate   psychiatric
  services and only one mental health hospital  in  Afghanistan,  which  is
  located in Kabul and has only  60  beds  for  in-patients  and  40  in  a
  separate facility for drug addicts. Dr Ahmad expressed the view  that  in
  Afghanistan there is little understanding of  mental  health  and  people
  with mental health conditions are stigmatised and socially ostracised.



84. Dr Ahmad was a conscientious witness who tried to assist  the  Tribunal.
  We accept, as argued by Ms Naik, that it  was  within  her  expertise  to
  express an opinion, as a general matter, on how people in general respond
  to living in a conflict zone and the relevance to  this  of  experiencing
  trauma as a child. We also accept that  Dr  Ahmad  was  able  to  provide
  information  about  the  availability  of  mental  health  treatment   in
  Afghanistan. To that extent, Dr Ahmad's report is  helpful  and  we  note
  that her opinions are consistent with the view  expressed  by  UNHCR  and
  others about the prevalence of mental health problems in Afghanistan as a
  result of the prolonged conflict and the  lack  of  available  treatment.
  However, Dr Ahmad has  not  assessed  the  appellant  or  considered  his
  medical records and history. Her report is not  the  equivalent  of,  and
  cannot be treated as a substitute for, a  report  by  a  psychiatrist  or
  psychologist based on an assessment of an individual. There  is  no  such
  report - indeed, there is no evidence of any sort - before us to indicate
  that  the  appellant  suffers  from  a  mental  health  condition  or  is
  vulnerable to do so.



 (d) Safety and security




85. We were provided with a  considerable  amount  of  up-to-date  evidence,
  emanating from reputable sources, about the violence faced  by  civilians
  in Kabul Province whilst going about their day-to-day activities, as well
  as the general  security  situation.  In  addition,  we  have  considered
  evidence (and heard evidence from both Dr Schuster and  Dr  Ahmad)  about
  the psychological impact of living in (and of being returned from  Europe
  to) an environment with widespread indiscriminate violence.




86. The consistent view expressed by UNHCR, OCHA, UNAMA and others  is  that
  Afghanistan (and  Kabul)  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  profoundly
  affected by continual and widespread violence that significantly  impacts
  civilians. The 2019 EASO Guidance describes the conflict in Kabul City as
  being characterised by  asymmetric  tactical  warfare  involving  suicide
  bombers and IEDs. Reference is made to an average of  4.8  incidents  per
  week related to  insurgents  being  reported  between  January  2018  and
  February 2019 (although it is not said what  these  incidents  involved).
  UNAMA's 2018 annual report refers to Kabul as the  Afghan  province  most
  affected by IEDs (mainly suicide).



87. A  report  by  the  Swedish  Migration  Agency  dated  4  December  2018
  describes the security situation in Kabul City as being characterised  by
  increased violence and frequency of suicide bombings. It is  stated  that
  although the incident level in Kabul is relatively low,  each  individual
  attack can potentially claim a large number of casualties;  and  although
  Kabul is under stable government control, the  frequent  attacks  have  a
  great impact on people's perceived  security  and  many  residents  limit
  their movement in the city to only necessary travel. This is reflected in
  the findings of the Asia Foundation Afghanistan  survey  which,  in  both
  2018 and 2019, found that a substantial majority  of  the  population  in
  Kabul thought Afghanistan was moving in the wrong direction, and the most
  frequently  cited  reason  for  this  in  the  Central/Kabul  region  was
  insecurity/crime.



88. A similar observation was  made  by  the  Finnish  Immigration  Service,
  following an Afghanistan fact-finding mission to  Kabul  in  April  2019,
  where the security situation was described as  the  biggest  concern  for
  returnees and civilians  in  general,  with  the  random  nature  of  the
  violence meaning that everyone is at risk. It is said that life tends  to
  return to normal very quickly after a security incident.




89.  Since  2009  UNAMA  has  been   systematically   documenting   civilian
  casualties attributed to the conflict in Afghanistan. When  UNAMA  refers
  to casualties they include both deaths and injuries.  A  person  is  only
  counted as a civilian casualty in its statistical reporting if there  are
  at least three different and independent types of sources. UNAMA does not
  presume fighting age men are either civilians or  fighters  but  assesses
  claims on the facts available in relation  to  each  casualty  and  where
  insufficient  information  is  available  such  casualties  will  not  be
  included in the statistical reporting. UNAMA acknowledges that there is a
  possibility of under reporting of civilian casualties  because  of  their
  methodology.



90. UNAMA statistics are referred to  in  most  assessments  of  Afghanistan
  (and Kabul) that we have seen, including the 2018 UNHCR  Guidelines;  and
  we consider them to be the most reliable source for estimating the number
  of injuries and deaths in Kabul occurring because of the conflict, and in
  identifying casualty trends. That  said,  we  consider  it  likely  that,
  because of the (robust) methodology used, UNAMA's figures understate  the
  number of casualties.



91. We have extracted from the documents  before  us  casualty  figures,  as
  documented by UNAMA, for Kabul Province and Afghanistan for  years  where
  the information is available. It is important, in order to  contextualise
  the figures, to have regard to the relevant population size (between  4-8
  million for Kabul Province and 35-38 million for Afghanistan).  The  2019
  EASO Guidance states that the majority of victims in Kabul  Province  are
  in Kabul City. The population of  Kabul  City  is  approximately  3  -  6
  million.



|          |Number of casualties (deaths and injuries     |
|          |attributed to the conflict) recorded by UNAMA |
|Year           | |Kabul Province   |Afghanistan         | |
|               | |(population 4-7m)|(population 35-38m) | |
|2013           | |Not available    |8,638               | |
|2014           | |Not available    |10,535              | |
|2015           | |Not available    |11,035              | |
|2016           | |1,758            |11,452              | |
|2017           | |1,831            |10,459              | |
|2018           | |1,866            |10,993              | |
|2019           | |1,491            |8,239               | |
|(until         | |                 |                    | |
|30.9.2019)     | |                 |                    | |


92.  In the 2019 EASO Guidance, it was stated that in  2018,  based  on  the
  UNAMA casualty figure of  1,866,  there  were  38  civilian  victims  per
  100,000 inhabitants in Kabul Province.




93. An alternative source for casualty  numbers  in  Kabul  is  the  Special
  Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR) Quarterly Report
  to the United States Congress dated January 30, 2019, where it is  stated
  that the number of casualties in Kabul Province between 1 January and  16
  November 2018 was 1,703, corresponding to 0.31 per thousand  (or  31  per
  100,000) based on a population of 5,452,652.



94. The SIGAR report provides comparable  figures  for  other  provinces  in
  Afghanistan,  showing  that  many  have  significantly  higher  rates  of
  casualties than Kabul, such as Nangarhar (0.81 per thousand), Kunar (0.52
  per  thousand),  Uruzgan  (0.51  per  thousand)  and  Paktiya  (0.48  per
  thousand). Langhman Province, from where  the  appellant  originates,  is
  recorded as having a casualty rate of  0.34  per  thousand.  In  absolute
  terms, Kabul has the highest number of casualties (1,703). The only other
  province where there were more than 500 casualties is Nangahar, where the
  total is 1,517. The population in Nangarhar, however, is  only  1,864,582
  (approximately one third of Kabul).



95. A comparison of provinces, based on  UNAMA  figures,  can  be  extracted
  from the 2019 EASO Guidance, which, like the  SIGAR  report,  shows  that
  several provinces have a substantially higher casualty rate  than  Kabul.
  The rate in 2018 for Nangarhar, for example,  was  recorded  as  111  per
  100,000 inhabitants and in Kunar was 82  per  100,000  inhabitants.  This
  compares to 38 per 100,000 inhabitants in Kabul.



96.  The  casualty   figures   do   not   take   into   account   individual
  characteristics that might make one person more at risk than another. The
  2020 OCHA Humanitarian Needs Overview issued in December 2019 states that
  women and children accounted for 41% of casualties in Afghanistan in  the
  first three quarters of 2019. This is consistent with the evidence of  Dr
  Schuster, which is that those who are economically active,  and  need  to
  travel around Kabul, are at greater risk than those (mostly women) who do
  not.



97. Dr Schuster argued  that  returnees  (especially  those  without  family
  support and guidance) may face a greater risk than the general population
  because they lack experience of and familiarity with Kabul that  may,  in
  some circumstances, enable a person to avoid a situation that  would  put
  them at risk. She maintained that the UNAMA statistics do not reflect the
  (higher) risk from indiscriminate violence a person with the  appellant's
  profile (an economically active male returnee without family support, and
  who lacks familiarity with Kabul) would face.



98. Dr Schuster also emphasised  that  the  statistics  do  not  convey  the
  impact of the violence beyond the individual victim. She highlighted  the
  impact on the families of casualties,  particularly  where  the  casualty
  provided an income  for  his  wider  family.  She  also  pointed  to  the
  psychological impact of the violence. She  described  the  population  in
  Kabul as living under the shadow of an ever present and  constant  threat
  of conflict-related violence. This is consistent with the view  expressed
  by UNHCR. In the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines it is stated:




         UNHCR notes that civilians who partake in day-to-day  economic  and
         social activities in Kabul are exposed to a risk of falling  victim
         to the generalized violence that affects the City. Such  activities
         include travelling to and from  a  place  of  work,  travelling  to
         hospitals  and  clinics,  or  travelling  to   school;   livelihood
         activities that take place in the City's streets,  such  as  street
         vending; as well as going to  markets,  mosques  and  other  places
         where people gather.




99. In the 2019  COI  UNHCR  Report,  UNHCR  referred  to  a  Swedish  study
  published in December 2018 finding that many  residents  of  Kabul  limit
  their movement in the city to only necessary travel because of a fear  of
  violence. This is consistent with the 2019 Asia Foundation  Survey  where
  it was found that 74.5% of Afghan respondents in Afghanistan as  a  whole
  (data was not provided for Kabul) stated that they often fear  for  their
  personal safety (the highest rate since the survey began). OCHA,  in  its
  2019 Humanitarian Needs Overview, referred to a report stating  that  (in
  Afghanistan as a whole, rather than Kabul specifically) 70% of men do not
  feel safe travelling to work, the mosque, health and education facilities
  or the market, and that people  have  restricted  their  movements  as  a
  consequence of the violence.




100. There is evidence before us  that  (at  least  some)  Afghans  consider
  Kabul safer than other parts of Afghanistan. EASO, in its April 2019 "Key
  socio-economic indicators" report stated that "many returnees end  up  in
  Kabul because of relatively higher security  than  in  their  regions  of
  origin, and because of expectations of more job opportunities and support
  facilities for returnees."



101. The 2019 Asia Foundation Survey of Afghan People asked  respondents  to
  name  up  to  two  of  the  biggest  problems  in  their  area.  In   the
  Central/Kabul region, 35% cited  insecurity/crime.  Significantly  higher
  percentages were given for insecurity/crime in some other  regions  (e.g.
  45% in South East and 48.2 in West). Insecurity and crime was the  second
  highest identified problem  in  Kabul,  after  lack  of  utilities/public
  services, which was identified by 41% of respondents.




102.  We  have  been  provided  with  a  considerable  amount  of   evidence
  concerning the security situation in Afghanistan as a whole. We  approach
  this evidence with caution given that Afghanistan is a large country with
  very  significant  differences  in  the  security  situation  throughout.
  However, some observations about Afghanistan as a whole are  relevant  to
  the security situation in Kabul. In particular:




     a. UNAMA repeatedly expresses  concern  about  the  unacceptably  high
        number of civilian casualties in Afghanistan.  In  the  2017  UNAMA
        annual report, expressing a sentiment repeated in their 2018 annual
        report and their 2019 quarterly reports, it stated:

           UNAMA remains extremely concerned by the continued  increase  in
           civilian casualties from suicide and complex attacks. The impact
           of such indiscriminate or targeted attacks, typically  occurring
           in urban civilian populated  areas,  disproportionately  affects
           the civilian population.

     b. In August 2017 the United Nations  Secretary  General  changed  its
        assessment of Afghanistan, for the  first  time  since  before  the
        Taliban regime in 2001, from a country in  a  situation  of  "post-
        conflict" to "a country undergoing a conflict that shows few  signs
        of abating" and OCHA stated in December 2017 that  (in  respect  of
        Afghanistan as a whole) "what was once a low intensity conflict has
        now escalated into a war". The report of the  Secretary-General  to
        the  General  Assembly  Security  Council  on  the   situation   in
        Afghanistan  dated  3  September  2019  states  that  the  security
        situation  remains  volatile,  with  a  high  number  of   security
        incidents causing harm to  civilians  and  fighting  continuing  at
        consistently high levels.




     c. OCHA, in its Humanitarian  Needs  Overview  2019,  emphasised  that
        there  is  a  chaotic  and  unpredictable  security  situation   in
        Afghanistan and stated:



           the invisible toll of the conflict  has  been  no  less  severe.
           With  the  ever-present  threat  of   violence   turning   daily
           activities into a potentially life-threatening affair, increased
           anxiety levels can be seen across much of the Afghan population.
            According to a recent Whole of Afghanistan (WoA) Assessment, 70
           per cent of men do not feel safe when travelling  to  work,  the
           mosque, health and education facilities or the market.




103. Also relevant to the security risk in Kabul is the  prospect  that  the
  Afghan authorities will lose control  of  the  province.  Both  the  2018
  report by the Swedish  Migration  Agency  and  the  2019  Report  by  the
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands state that Kabul is  under
  government control. In the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines  it  is  stated  that
  although the Taliban have intensified their attacks on Kabul, the  Afghan
  National Defence and Security  Forces  have  proved  generally  adept  in
  defending major urban centres. This is also the view of EASO, who  state,
  in the 2019 EASO Guidance, that although  the  Taliban  are  active,  and
  there are frequent security incidents from  different  groups,  Kabul  is
  considered as "under government control or undetermined."




104. The 2019 COI UNHCR Report refers to the  Taliban  remaining  present  -
  and visible - in Kabul, and to a perception that the central  authorities
  are "staying safely behind  closed  doors".  UNHCR  also  refers  to  the
  presence of ISIL, who have been  responsible  for  terrorist  attacks  in
  Kabul. OCHA, in the 2019 Humanitarian Needs Overview, considers that ISIL
  is unlikely to be fully eradicated and can  be  expected  to  retain  the
  capacity to carry out spectacular mass casualty incidents in major  urban
  centres such as Kabul.




(e)  Population growth and absorption capacity

105. The June 2019 EASO Country of Origin Report states that Kabul  City  is
  the fifth fastest-growing city in the world with an average annual growth
  rate of 4.74%. EASO states that population estimates vary from 3.5 to 5.5
  million, and the population has increased fourfold since 2001.




106. The 2019 COI UNHCR Report records, inter alia, that:



     a.  IOM's assessment in October 2019 was  that  the  total  inflow  of
        returnees and IDPs into Kabul Province since 2012 stood at  443,238
        as of 30 June 2019, with returnees and IDPs representing more  than
        8% of Kabul Province's total population; and that Kabul is:




           "potentially susceptible to social instability induced by  large
           influxes of returnees and IDPs, who face limited access to basic
           services and livelihoods, jeopardizing  reintegration  prospects
           and fueling secondary displacement".




     b. OCHA's 2019 Humanitarian Needs Overview reported that  as  many  as
        two thirds of all  people  displaced  outside  their  province  are
        moving towards the five regional capitals including Kabul.



     c. The Vienna Institute for  International  Dialogue  and  Cooperation
        reported in November 2018 that  since  2002  Kabul,  Nangarhar  and
        Kunduz provinces have become the  top  destinations  for  returning
        registered refugees, while 52% of unregistered refugees returned to
        Nangarhar and Kabul.



     d. The World Bank reported in June  2019  that  "Kabul  and  Nangarhar
        alone account for one third of all returnees; and returnees who  do
        not settle in their province of origin  move  to  relatively  urban
        areas".




     e. An article published by Afghan Analysts  Network  in  January  2019
        reported that the growth of Kabul has compounded the problems  with
        housing and sanitation, property and other factors.



     f. A report by the Norwegian Refugee Council in June 2019 stated  that
        the influx of IDPs and returnees to Herat, Jalalabad and Kabul  has
        put a strain on resources and public services while increasing  the
        number of unemployed.




107. The 2018 UNHCR Guidelines state that Kabul City  region  has  seen  the
  largest population increase in Afghanistan, with rapid  growth  following
  returns from Iran and Pakistan. Concern is raised that population  growth
  in  the  city  is   outpacing   the   capacity   to   provide   necessary
  infrastructure, services and jobs; with 70% of the population  living  in
  informal settlements. A report is cited stating that 55% of households in
  Kabul's informal settlements were severely food insecure in January 2017.




108. In a February 2017  report  on  Afghan  returns  from  Pakistan,  Human
  Rights Watch reported that UNHCR estimated that at least 25% of  refugees
  returning from Pakistan will try and settle in Kabul, where new  arrivals
  are putting tremendous pressure on the city. The report quotes  the  head
  of IOM in Kabul stating in November 2016:




         "with all these returns from Pakistan and Iran as well, and looming
         returns from Europe, it is a perfect recipe  for  a  perfect  storm
         because that puts a strain on the capacity  of  the  government  to
         respond".



109. Also quoted is a 2016 UNHCR document stating:



"Kabul has  been  significantly  affected  by  the  surge  in  returns  from
Pakistan,  with  almost  a  quarter...  settling  in   Kabul's   overcrowded
settlements. In light of the well documented contraction of Kabul's  economy
following the  withdrawal  of  international  forces  in  2014,  the  City's
absorption capacity has been extremely limited due to the  low  availability
of  livelihoods...  appropriate  shelter,  and  access  to  basic  services,
particularly health and education."



110. EASO's report on  Afghanistan's  security  situation  dated  June  2019
  states that as  many  as  two-thirds  of  Afghans  displaced  from  their
  province have moved towards  the  five  regional  capitals,  and  Kabul's
  growth has been particularly significant although  the  total  number  of
  IDPs in Kabul is not known and movement to and within the city is  fluid.
  It is said that IDPs often settle in the outskirts and frequently  mingle
  with other vulnerable groups  such  as  the  urban  poor,  returnees  and
  economic migrants. Due to lack of adequate land and  affordable  housing,
  most new and protracted IDPs in Kabul reside in  one  of  the  60  to  70
  informal and illegal settlements around the City.




111. Similar observations  are  made  by  EASO  in  its  country  of  origin
  information report dated April 2019, where, inter alia, it is  said  that
  Kabul is a "magnet" for labourers as it is the major trade and employment
  hub in the country, with salaries being generally higher  than  in  other
  provinces.




112. The attraction of Kabul for returnees is emphasised in the  Afghanistan
  country of origin report by  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  the
  Netherlands dated 1 March 2019, where it is stated  that  most  returnees
  settle in urban areas such as Kabul.




113. OCHA, in its 2020 Humanitarian Needs Overview, gives  figures  for  the
  number of returnees to Afghanistan from Iran and  Pakistan,  as  well  as
  from Turkey. They state that in 2019  (up  to  the  end  of  November)  a
  significant number (430,000) of Afghans returned from  Iran.  There  were
  also 25,000 from Pakistan and 16,000 from  Turkey.  The  report  provides
  figures for the number of returnees from Iran and Pakistan  by  year,  as
  follows:



|                   |No. of cross border   |
|Year               |returnees from Iran   |
|                   |and Pakistan          |
|2013               |522,000               |
|2014               |563,000               |
|2015               |722,000               |
|2016               |1,064,000             |
|2017               |617,000               |
|2018               |821,000               |
|2019               |453,000               |



114. These figures are for Afghanistan as a whole. They show  a  significant
  peak in 2016.




115.  According to IOM (as reported in the 2019 COI  UNHCR  Report),  as  of
  June 2019, since 2012 the total number of returnees  and  IDPs  who  have
  moved to Kabul is 443,238. This is consistent with the  IOM  Displacement
  Tracking Matrix for October to December  2018,  which  recorded  a  total
  inflow of returnees and IDPs to Kabul from 2012 to 2018 of 369,841.  Only
  four provinces had a higher total inflow of returnees and IDPs than Kabul
  during  this  period:  Nangarhar  (798,563),  Herat  (636,306),   Helmand
  (434,173) and Jawzjan (424,949). However, the vast majority of  provinces
  had a higher number of returnees and IDPs than Kabul as a  percentage  of
  the population. IOM reported that returnees accounted for 7%  of  Kabul's
  population. This contrasts to,  for  example,  41%  in  Badghis,  33%  in
  Nangarhar, 42% in Jawzjan, 24% in Herat and a national  average  of  18%.
  IOM comments that Nangarhar Province  is  the  province  most  critically
  affected, hosting 15% of returnees, nationwide.



116. Although IOM provides  data  which  facilitates  a  comparison  between
  provinces, neither the IOM reports  nor  the  other  evidence  before  us
  provides a qualitative assessment of how the influx of IDPs and returnees
  compares between provinces. That said, the consistent view of EASO, UNHCR
  and others is that the impact of IDPs and returnees  in  Kabul  has  been
  significant. EASO's 2019 Key socio-economic indicators  (focus  on  Kabul
  ity, Mazar-e Sharif and Herat City) report dated  April  2019  considered
  Kabul alongside Herat and Mazar-e Sharif, both of which  have  a  greater
  number of returnees and IDPs as a percentage of the population. There  is
  nothing in the report to indicate that the impact on Kabul has been  less
  significant than it has been in Mazar-e Sharif and Herat  City,  and  the
  view expressed by EASO is that the large number returnees  to  Kabul  has
  challenged the absorption capacity of the government and NGOs.



(f) Poverty and humanitarian conditions

117. The most up to date evidence  before  us  concerning  the  humanitarian
  situation in Afghanistan is OCHA's 2020 Humanitarian  Needs  Overview  of
  Afghanistan, issued in December 2019. This states that almost  a  quarter
  of the country's population is estimated to be in  need  of  humanitarian
  assistance and describes the outlook as bleak.




118. The report gives a breakdown of people in need  by  region.  In  Kabul,
  1.07 million people are said to be in need (of which 0.24 million are  in
  severe need) out of a total population of 7.98 million. Mr Singh made the
  observation that the proportion in need (13%) is  lower  than  any  other
  region, and the proportion in severe need  (3%)  is  substantially  lower
  than any other region.  In  fact,  even  though  Kabul  has  the  highest
  population of any region, it has the lowest number of  people  in  severe
  need of any region.



119. In 2018 Afghanistan experienced an extended  period  of  drought.  OCHA
  reported that it affected more than two thirds  of  the  population.  The
  2019 Special Inspector General  for  Afghanistan  reconstruction  (SIGAR)
  report refers to the significant drought in 2018, followed  by  flooding.
  The UN Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary General  is  quoted
  as describing the level of suffering in 2018/9 as being as bad as he  has
  ever seen, following the drought and in  light  of  the  high  levels  of
  violence and general poverty level. Most Afghan households  are  said  to
  face acute food insecurity.



120.  In the 2019 EASO  Guidance  it  is  recorded  that  the  Famine  Early
  Warning System labelled Kabul as "stressed"  in  December  2018,  meaning
  that even with humanitarian assistance at least one in 5  households  had
  minimally adequate food  consumption  but  was  "unable  to  afford  some
  essential non-food expenditures without engaging in  irreversible  coping
  strategies".



121. The 2019 EASO Guidance describes Kabul as being regarded as one of  the
  world's most water stressed cities, with only 10% of residents  receiving
  potable water, and the majority of shared water points  are  said  to  be
  contaminated, posing grave health concerns.  It  is  reported  that  only
  about half of the population have basic  sanitation  services.  The  2017
  Asia  Foundation  Survey  records  that  over  23%  of  Afghans  in   the
  Central/Kabul region report issues with drinking water as  one  of  their
  biggest local problems.



122. EASO's report on  Afghanistan's  security  situation  dated  June  2019
  refers to worrying indications of rising poverty in informal settlements,
  contributing to street begging, overcrowded accommodation and  heightened
  risk of gender-based violence; and perceived isolation  of  IDP  families
  from surrounding host communities. IDPs arriving and  residing  in  Kabul
  are described as adding pressure to the  community,  basic  services  and
  social infrastructure, strongly affecting the absorption capacity of  the
  city. Reference is made to a Norwegian study published in January 2018 in
  which more than 80% of the Kabul IDP respondents listed  access  to  food
  and water as a major challenge in their daily lives.  It  is  noted  that
  Kabul is facing a severe water shortage, which seriously affects  already
  vulnerable groups like displaced people.



123.  Challenges  said  to  face  displaced  persons  include  limited   job
  opportunities, few or no social  protection  nets,  poor  shelter/housing
  conditions, impeded access to education and  healthcare,  and  continuous
  fear of  eviction.  IDPs  are  said  to  mostly  work  as  unskilled  day
  labourers, competing for low-paid and precarious jobs in the construction
  sector and to a lesser extent in agriculture.



124. EASO records that 54.5% of Afghans live in poverty. The World Bank,  in
  2019, reported that poverty is likely to have been exacerbated by drought
  conditions, slower growth, and continued displacement during 2018.



125. UNHCR's 2018 Returnee and IDP  Monitoring  Report  noted  that  27%  of
  returnees in 2017, and 39% in 2016, reported skipping a meal in the  past
  week, which is a strong indication of food insecurity.



126. EASO,  in  its  2019  COI  report  on  key  socio-economic  indicators,
  comments on the high number of households living below the  poverty  line
  in Kabul. It is noted that the cost of  living  is  significantly  higher
  than in other provinces, and that Kabul's inhabitants  tend  to  be  more
  reliant on credit then people in other areas.



(g) Family and other networks

127. A consistent theme in the evidence about Afghanistan is the  importance
  of social networks.




128. Dr Schuster's opinion is that without a social network there is a  real
  risk of destitution, as without family or other support  it  is,  in  her
  view, almost impossible to obtain work (even casual labour) or  permanent
  accommodation.




129. In the 2018 EASO Country of Origin Information  Report:  Afghanistan  -
  Networks, it is stated that  some  networks  are  family  or  clan-based,
  whereas others are built and developed, and Afghans in general  are  good
  at building networks.  A  report  is  cited  stating  that  there  was  a
  consensus among the people spoken to that it is difficult to  imagine  an
  Afghan who is completely alone, who is not in contact  with  his  or  her
  family, or who does not have any other network.




130. EASO, in its 2019 COI report on Key socio-economic  indicators,  states
  that it is common for new settlers in Kabul to settle according to  their
  place of origin, allowing them to benefit from social networks.  However,
  EASO has also recorded, in its June 2019 COI Report  on  the  Afghanistan
  Security Situation, that in central areas of Kabul movement of  residents
  is more common with a disruptive effect on social networks and it is  now
  common to hear the complaint "one does  not  know  one's  neighbours  any
  more".



(h) Accommodation

131. The Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey 2016 - 17, published in  2018,
  states that 72.4%  of  Afghanistan's  urban  population  live  in  slums,
  informal settlements or inadequate housing.  In  its  2019  report,  EASO
  gives a similar figure for Kabul. Homes in informal settlements  tend  to
  lack sewerage systems, waste disposal, and access to drinking water.




132. OCHA, in its 2019 Humanitarian Overview report, refers to 39%  of  IDPs
  and returnees living in makeshift shelter conditions.



133. The evidence of Dr Schuster is that the only  realistic  option  for  a
  single young man in Kabul without family or connections  (or  independent
  funds) is to stay in a  dormitory  room  in  a  cheap  hotel,  which  she
  characterised as a "doss house". Her  evidence  was  that  this  type  of
  accommodation is inexpensive, commonplace, and available to a  person  in
  the appellant's circumstances. However, she considered such accommodation
  substandard as the carpet would be greasy and dirty, there  would  be  no
  locks on the doors, and there would not be a bed, just a mattress to roll
  out.



134. In the 2018 EASO Country of Origin Information  Report:  Afghanistan  -
  Networks, it is stated that there are inexpensive low-quality guesthouses
  throughout the country that are utilised by single men. The local term is
  said to be chai khana (tea house). It is stated:



In Kabul and other large cities, there are many such chai khana and, if  one
place is full, it is possible to get room  and  board  somewhere  else.  One
does not need to know anyone to be allowed in, and it  is  not  unusual  for
guests to come alone.

(i) Employment




135. The 2018 EASO Country  of  Origin  Information  Report:  Afghanistan  -
  Networks highlights the importance  of  networks  to  access  the  labour
  market. It is stated that even for people who  are  highly  educated  and
  well qualified it is difficult to  obtain  work  without  a  network,  as
  nepotism is widespread and personal relationships and networks are valued
  above formal qualifications and other factors.  The  report  also  states
  that most Afghans are unskilled and are part of an informal,  unregulated
  labour market,  consisting  mainly  of  manual  work.  It  described  how
  labourers are hired from the street, having congregated at local  meeting
  points for people looking for work. Many people turn  up,  some  bringing
  their own tools or equipment, and not everyone gets work.




136. Dr Schuster, similarly, explained that without connections it would  be
  very difficult to obtain employment. She considered that even  day-labour
  work is difficult to obtain without a network,  as  the  competition  for
  work is intense. She commented that for the type of work available  to  a
  returnee without connections, the ability to speak English  would  be  of
  little benefit.




137. EASO, in its 2019 Afghanistan: Key  socio-economic  indicators  report,
  cited  a  report  from  Oxfam  stating  that  30%  of   returnees   faced
  difficulties finding livelihood opportunities and 18% had  challenges  in
  accessing food. Oxfam's research found  that  returnees  could  generally
  work only from time to time in Kabul as daily wage workers and most could
  not find jobs everyday making their earnings unstable.




138. The 2019 Finish Immigration  Service  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Kabul
  found that "the job market is exhausted" with  the  economy  not  keeping
  pace with the population growth. It is stated:

      "there have been so many young Afghan men returning that their chances
      of accessing  employment  opportunities  are  getting  more  and  more
      reduced. The main problems for people  in  Kabul  are  insecurity  and
      joblessness"

(j) Afghan Identity Document (Tazkera)

139. Dr Schuster's evidence was that a Tazkera, which is the  main  identity
  document in Afghanistan, is easily forged and there is not a huge  impact
  on day-to-day life of not having one, but it  is  required  for  official
  purposes. She thought that with the assistance  of  a  family  member  it
  could be possible for one to be  issued  in  Kabul  although  normally  a
  person would need to obtain it from his or her home area.




140. The evidence from OCHA, in the 2020  Humanitarian  Needs  Overview,  is
  that lack of a Tazkera  inhibits  access  to  government  services.  OCHA
  states that although access to  health  services  and  education  is  not
  dependent on having a Tazkera many people believe that it is.  OCHA  also
  states that a Tazkera is necessary to obtain a  registered  mobile  phone
  SIM card which, in turn, is required to open a mobile banking account.



141. OCHA has found that  households  without  a  Tazkera  are  particularly
  vulnerable after displacement as they must rely  mostly  on  income  from
  unskilled, unstable, day labour. In its 2018 Multi Sector Needs Analysis,
  OCHA states that 80% of households without a Tazkera reported 3  or  more
  unmet needs, compared to 56% of other households. It was also found  that
  households without a Tazkera were the least  economically  resilient.  It
  was stated that this may be due to the common requirement of an  official
  identification card for many formal employment opportunities.




142. EASO, in its 2019 Report  on  Key  socio-economic  indicators,  records
  that  a  Tazkera  is  the  most  important  identification  document   in
  Afghanistan and is required to access a range of public services such  as
  education, employment, healthcare and official loans provided  by  banks;
  and is particularly important in urban areas in  order  to  access  basic
  services and credit. The lack of a  Tazkera  could  increase  a  person's
  vulnerability to harassment from the authorities.



143. EASO also reports that, generally, in order to obtain a  Tazkera,  IDPs
  need to travel to their district of origin. It is also  stated  that  the
  Afghan government has recognised the importance of documentation and  has
  been working with international organisations to  address  it,  but  that
  IDPs continue to have to travel back to their places of origin to receive
  their documents. It is also stated that a Tazkera is necessary to  obtain
  other documents, such as a passport.

(k) Mental Health

144. OCHA's 2020 Humanitarian  Needs  Overview  of  Afghanistan,  issued  in
  December 2019 states:

      Constant exposure to high stress,  conflict  situations  and  repeated
      loss of friends and family members are taking their toll on the mental
      health of people living in Afghanistan.

145. OCHA also states that:



With  extremely  low  availability  of  psychosocial  support  services  and
repeated exposure to traumatic shocks, recovery opportunities are likely  to
be minimal, with people instead resorting to negative coping mechanisms.



146. The evidence of both Dr Schuster and Dr Ahmad is  that  the  prevalence
  of violence combined with the long-standing conflict has  resulted  in  a
  large number of people suffering from (undiagnosed and untreated)  mental
  health problems. Dr Ahmad expressed the view that individuals returned to
  a conflict zone would almost inevitably suffer mental health problems  as
  a result.




(l) Experience of returnees and returnee assistance




147. There is a limited amount of  assistance  available  to  returnees.  Dr
  Schuster stated that returnees receive the  equivalent  of  approximately
  125 in cash on arrival at the airport and can stay for up to 2 weeks  at
  the Spinzar hotel in central Kabul. Additionally, an  in-kind  grant,  to
  sign  a  lease,  augment  a  salary  or  start  a  small   business,   of
  approximately 900  can,  if  certain  stringent  criteria  are  met,  be
  accessed, although this takes a considerable amount of time.  She  stated
  that there is a very low uptake of  this  assistance  and  for  the  vast
  majority of returnees there will be no assistance other than the  initial
  cash payment, which will not last long.




148. The 2019 COI UNHCR Report  includes  a  section  on  the  situation  of
  Afghans who are returned to Kabul. A German report  (which  we  have  not
  seen) is quoted extensively. The report is a study of 55 deported Afghans
  from Germany. The term "deported" is used but it appears that the  report
  is not limited to deportees, as that term is used in the UK. The findings
  of the report cited in the 2019 COI UNHCR Report include that (a)  nearly
  all deportees wanted to leave Afghanistan; (b) 90%  experienced  violence
  (although it is later said that 25% were affected by criminal  violence);
  (c) they are treated with suspicion, targeted and subject to  threats  by
  security forces and by society in general because they are seen as having
  betrayed  their  country,  being  un-Islamic,  infidels,  or  spies   and
  traitors; (d) they are perceived as being serious criminals; (e) they are
  unable to find work - it is said only one participant in  the  study  was
  able to make a living from work, which he found through  his  uncle;  and
  (f) landlords are put in  danger  by  renting  a  property  to  deportees
  because of targeting by the Taliban.




149. UNHCR also states that returnees are targeted  by  criminal  gangs  who
  assume  they  have  money  and  that  impoverished   Afghans,   including
  returnees, join the Taliban as part-time fighters.




F. UNHCR's Legal Analysis and Recommendations

(a) UNHCR's opinion at the time of the 2018 UT decision

150. The 2016 UNHCR Guidelines, which were in force at the time of the  2018
  UT decision, give  an  opinion  on  internal  relocation  in  Afghanistan
  generally, but are silent on Kabul specifically.




151. In December 2016, UNHCR expressed concern about internal relocation  to
  Kabul to Human Rights Watch, as mentioned in a report cited at  paragraph
  99 of the 2018 UT decision, where it is stated:

          The Human Rights Watch Report "Pakistan Coercion,  UN  Complicity:
          The Mass  Forced  Return  of  Afghan  Refugees",  (February  2017)
          records the UNHCR, in December 2016, cautioning against  returning
          failed Afghan asylum  seekers  to  Kabul  on  an  internal  flight
          alternative basis for the following reasons:


             "Kabul faces serious pressures on housing and services, due to
             years of primary and secondary  population  displacements  ...
             resulting in large-scale movements to the City, together  with
             a natural (non-conflict-related) process of urbanization  from
             rural areas. In 2016, the situation was made worse by the fact
             that more than 25 percent of Afghan  returnees  from  Pakistan
             went  to  Kabul.  This  has  immediate  consequences  for  the
             assessment of Kabul as a proposed internal flight alternative,
             in   particular   with   regards   to   the   [criterion]   of
             "reasonableness." The considerations presenting in  the  April
             2016 [Eligibility] Guidelines remain relevant for  assessments
             of Kabul as an internal flight alternative. In the context  of
             a dramatic  increase  in  competition  for  access  to  scarce
             resources,  the  availability  of  an  IFA  will  need  to  be
             considered on a case-by-case basis, taking  into  account  the
             particular circumstances of the individual applicant."

(b) The 2018 UNHCR Guidelines

152. On 30 August 2018 UNHCR published  the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines,  which
  replaced the 2016 UNHCR Guidelines.




153. The 2016 and 2018 UNHCR Guidelines give the same  opinion  on  internal
  relocation within Afghanistan generally. They both express the view  that
  internal relocation is not "relevant" if, inter alia, the  proposed  area
  of relocation is an area affected  by  active  conflict  or  where  anti-
  government elements have effective control. In terms  of  reasonableness,
  they both state that internal relocation would generally be  unreasonable
  without a support network (either family  or  ethnic  community  who  are
  willing and able to provide genuine  support)  unless  the  person  being
  returned is a single able-bodied man (or part of  a  married  couple)  of
  working age without identified specific vulnerabilities as such a  person
  may be able to subsist without family and community support in urban  and
  semi urban areas that are under effective government control.



154. In contrast to the 2016 UNHCR Guidelines,  the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines
  contain a distinct assessment of Kabul and state the following conclusion
  at page 10:



"Against the background of the considerations relating to the relevance  and
reasonableness analysis for Kabul as a proposed area of IFA/IRA, and  taking
into account the overall situation of conflict and human rights  violations,
as well as the  adverse  impact  this  has  on  the  broader  socio-economic
context,  UNHCR  considers  that  [internal  relocation]  is  generally  not
available in Kabul"



155. UNHCR's reasons for this conclusion are relatively  brief.  Given  that
  the significance, legal status, and the weight that should be attached to
  the opinion of UNHCR was a matter of significant contention  between  the
  parties, we set out its reasoning, at pages 112-114  of  the  2018  UNHCR
  Guidelines, in full:




       Internal Flight or Relocation Alternative in Kabul




       In addition to the general guidance provided in Sections III.C.1 and
       III.C.2  above,  and  against  the  background  of  the   additional
       information provided in Section III.C.3, UNHCR offers the  following
       specific guidance relating to the two limbs of an IFA/IRA assessment
       for Kabul.  In line with the guidance provided in  Sections  III.C.1
       and III.C.2, an assessment of the possibility of relocation to Kabul
       requires an assessment of both the relevance and the  reasonableness
       of this proposed area of relocation. In addition, if an  IFA/IRA  to
       Kabul is considered in asylum procedures, all relevant  general  and
       personal circumstances regarding the relevance and reasonableness of
       Kabul as a proposed area of relocation for the particular  applicant
       must be established to the extent possible and must  duly  be  taken
       into account. The applicant must be given an adequate opportunity to
       respond to the purported relevance and reasonableness  of  Kabul  as
       the proposed IFA/IRA.




       The relevance of Kabul as an IFA/IRA

       To assess the relevance of Kabul  as  a  proposed  IFA/IRA,  and  in
       particular the risk that the applicant would face  a  real  risk  of
       serious harm, including a serious risk to life, safety,  liberty  or
       health, or one of serious discrimination, decision-makers  must  pay
       due regard to the  negative  trends  in  relation  to  the  security
       situation for  civilians  in  Kabul.  UNAMA  reported  993  civilian
       casualties (321 killed and 672 injured) in Kabul province during the
       first six months of 2018. In 2017 UNAMA "continued to  document  the
       highest levels of civilian casualties in Kabul province, mainly from
       indiscriminate  attacks  in  Kabul  city.  Of  the  1,831   civilian
       casualties (479  deaths  and  1,352  injured)  documented  in  Kabul
       province, 88 per cent resulted  from  suicide  and  complex  attacks
       carried out by Anti-Government Elements  in  Kabul  City."  As  also
       noted in Section II.B.1 above, UNAMA reported  that  the  number  of
       civilian casualties in Kabul city  caused  by  suicide  and  complex
       attacks in 2017 represented 70 per cent of all  civilian  casualties
       in Afghanistan in 2017 caused by such  attacks.   UNHCR  notes  that
       civilians who partake in day-to-day economic and  social  activities
       in Kabul are exposed to a risk of falling victim to the  generalized
       violence that affects the city. Such activities  include  travelling
       to and from a place of work, travelling to hospitals and clinics, or
       travelling to school; livelihood activities that take place  in  the
       city's streets, such as street vending; as well as going to markets,
       mosques and other places where people gather.

       The reasonableness of Kabul as an IFA/IRA




       In accordance with the guidance provided in Section  III.C.2  above,
       to assess whether Kabul provides a reasonable IFA/IRA,  it  must  be
       established that the applicant will have access in  Kabul  to:   (i)
       shelter;  (ii)  essential  services,  such  as  potable  water   and
       sanitation,   health   care   and   education;   (iii)    livelihood
       opportunities, or proven and sustainable support to enable access to
       an adequate standard of living. Relevant  information  to  be  taken
       into account by decision-makers in this regard  includes  the  grave
       concerns expressed by humanitarian and development actors about  the
       limits of Kabul's absorption capacity. Since the fall of the  former
       Taliban regime in 2001, Kabul  city  Region  has  seen  the  largest
       population increase in Afghanistan.  Official  population  estimates
       indicate that  by  early  2016  Kabul  city  Region  had  5  million
       residents, 60 per cent of which  were  in  Kabul  city.  The  city's
       population has seen further rapid growth in the wake of  the  large-
       scale returns to Afghanistan from Iran  and  Pakistan  (see  Section
       II.F).  The International  Growth  Centre  noted  in  January  2018,
       "Kabul has been undergoing rapid urbanisation  for  the  last  three
       decades. Population growth in  the  city  is  outpacing  the  city's
       capacity to provide necessary infrastructure, services and  jobs  to
       citizens,  resulting  in  the  emergence  of   widespread   informal
       settlements that house an estimated 70% of  the  City's  population.
       "Against a background  of  general  concerns  about  rising  poverty
       levels in Afghanistan, the Asia  Foundation's  2017  Survey  of  the
       Afghan People  found  that  perceptions  of  a  worsening  financial
       situation was most common in the Central/Kabul region, at  43.9  per
       cent. In January 2017 it was reported that 55 per cent of households
       in Kabul informal settlements were severely food insecure.



       OCHA's 2018 Humanitarian Needs Overview ranks  Kabul  among  the  10
       provinces (out of a total  of  34  provinces)  that  are  "the  most
       conflict-affected". In addition,  the  Humanitarian  Needs  Overview
       notes  that  "needs  are  particularly  pronounced  in  large  urban
       centres, including Kabul and Jalalabad  City,  where  both  IDP  and
       returnee populations  have  congregated  in  search  of  income  and
       livelihoods opportunities as well as access to basic  and  essential
       services. Humanitarian needs  in  these  two  provinces  [Kabul  and
       Nangarhar] comprise 42 percent of all  those  relating  to  internal
       displacement and cross-border influxes."




       Conclusion on the Availability of an IFA/IRA in Kabul




       UNHCR considers that given the current security,  human  rights  and
       humanitarian  situation  in  Kabul,  an  IFA/IRA  is  generally  not
       available in the City.




156. We make the observation that although UNHCR evaluated  the  "relevance"
  and "reasonableness" of internal relocation, the  conclusion  it  reached
  was  that  internal  relocation  was  "not  available".  The  2018  UNHCR
  Guidelines do not explain whether internal relocation is "not  available"
  because it is not relevant or not reasonable, or whether "not  available"
  means something else.




(c)  The 2019 UNHCR Submissions




157. UNCHR made submissions about relocation  to  Kabul,  dated  6  December
  2019, in the case of MJ v Netherlands (application no.  49256/18)  before
  the ECtHR.




158. After reiterating key points made in the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines,  the
  2019 UNHCR Submissions state that since the issuance of  the  2018  UNHCR
  Guidelines the security situation for civilians, including returnees,  in
  Kabul has further deteriorated. It is stated that the number of  civilian
  casualties  between  1  January  and  30  September   2019   (1,491)   is
  unprecedented. The unprecedented level of violence is attributed  to  the
  presence of Taliban and Islamic state, the  absence  of  visible  central
  authority, and violent crime. It is also stated that:



Given the deterioration  of  the  socio-economic  situation  in  Kabul,  the
absorption capacity in terms of infrastructure  and  housing  is  even  more
limited than in 2018. This is notably due to the population  increase  since
the fall of the Taliban  regime  and  the  number  of  returnees  and  IDPs,
representing more than 8% of Kabul Province's total population...




159. The 2019 UNHCR Submissions express concern that  the  large  influx  of
  returnees in Kabul is putting a strain on resources and public  services,
  while increasing the number of unemployed. Reference is made  to  a  2018
  World Bank study and a 2019 report by the Norwegian Refugee Council about
  the strain on resources and public services in Kabul,  and  the  pressure
  due to the large influx of returnees.




160. The 2019 UNHCR Submissions refer to a 2019  German  report  documenting
  the (negative) experience of 55 deportees from Germany. It is stated that
  they encounter suspicion, hostility and violence, as well as  significant
  difficulties accessing the labour market.



161. The 2019 UNHCR Submissions reaffirm, in their conclusion,  the  opinion
  given in the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines that internal relocation is "generally
  not available" in Kabul. However, they also, at paragraph 4.9, state that
  "Kabul is still not a relevant IFA". This is the only occasion, of  which
  we are aware, in which UNHCR has  stated  in  terms  that  Kabul  is  not
  "relevant".



(d) The 2019 COI UNHCR Report



162. The 2019 COI UNHCR Report is a document dated  December  2019  that  is
  intended to provide decision makers with country  of  origin  information
  for assessing internal relocation in Kabul.




163. The report is divided into three sections. The  first  section  of  the
  report considers the security  situation  for  civilians.  It  starts  by
  stating that UNAMA's Quarterly Report covering 1 January to 30  September
  2019 documented the highest number of civilian  casualties  that  it  has
  recorded in a single quarter since it began systematic  documentation  in
  2009. It also states  that  civilian  casualties  were  higher  in  Kabul
  Province than in any other Province; and that, according to a  report  by
  Action on Armed Violence, the month July 2019 saw the highest  number  of
  casualties since it began monitoring in 2010 and Kabul was the city  most
  impacted "with almost a third of all civilian casualties occurring in the
  capital". The report highlights the activities of the Taliban and ISIL in
  Kabul and the prevalence of violent crime.



164.  The  second  section  of  the  report  discusses  the   socio-economic
  situation in Kabul. Kabul is described as being  the  main  gravitational
  centre for migrants in the country, with IOM reporting an inflow  (as  of
  30 June 2019) of 443,238 returnees and IDPs  into  Kabul  Province  since
  2012, with  returnees  and  IDPs  representing  more  than  8%  of  Kabul
  Province's total population.  OCHA's  2019  Humanitarian  Needs  Overview
  Report is cited, as reporting that  as  many  as  two  thirds  of  people
  displaced outside their  province  are  moving  towards  the  5  regional
  capitals including Kabul. Reference is made to  infrastructure  problems,
  poverty, pressure on basic services, unemployment, insecurity of property
  ownership and lack of water and food supplies. The report also  discusses
  that many residents limit their movement because of security concerns and
  the prevalence of (undiagnosed and unsupported) mental health problems.



165. The third section of the report discusses the situation of Afghans  who
  are returned to Kabul. Reliance is placed on the same German report cited
  in the 2019 UNHCR Submissions. Concern is expressed about returnees being
  recruited by insurgents. It  is  also  said  that  there  is  a  negative
  perception of returnees, and returnees fear  being  targeted  as  alleged
  infidels. Returnees are said to be particularly vulnerable when accessing
  the labour market.



166. The 2019 COI UNHCR Report  recalls  the  position  in  the  2018  UNHCR
  Guidelines that internal  relocation  is  "generally  not  available"  in
  Kabul.  Like the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines,  but  unlike  the  2019  UNHCR
  Submissions, it is silent on whether  the  non-availability  of  internal
  relocation is because it is considered that internal  relocation  is  not
  "relevant" or not "reasonable".

 (e) The legal status  of  UNHCR's  legal  analysis  and  recommendation  on
internal relocation

167. The appellant submits that there must be a "substantial  countervailing
  reason" to justify the Upper Tribunal reaching a different conclusion  to
  that of UNHCR, as set out in the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines  and  subsequently
  confirmed in the UNHCR 2019 Submissions and COI Report.




168. The respondent's position is that UNHCR's recommendation does not  have
  a presumptively binding status and the weight to be given to  it  is  for
  the Tribunal to determine. Mr Singh submitted that  the  Tribunal  should
  consider all the evidence, including the UNHCR Documents, and  give  each
  piece of evidence the weight it thinks fit.




169. Mr Singh argued that the appellant's position is contrary to the  Court
  of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1276,  [2014]  1
  WLR 1329. One of the issues in HF was whether UNHCR guidance  on  Article
  15(c)  risk,  as  set  out  in  UNHCR's  Guidelines  for  Assessing   the
  International  Protection  Needs  of  Iraqi  Asylum  Seekers,  should  be
  followed unless  there  were  cogent  reasons  for  not  doing  so.  This
  contention was rejected by Elias LJ, who gave the lead judgment and  with
  whom Fulford LJ and Maurice Kay LJ agreed. Elias LJ stated as follows:

           "43...In my judgment, there is no  justification  for  requiring
           the court in this context to approach its task  any  differently
           from other cases where it has to draw conclusions  from  primary
           findings of  fact.  The  court  must  assess  all  the  evidence
           affording such weight to different  pieces  of  evidence  as  it
           thinks fit.  No  principle  of  international  or  domestic  law
           dictates  any  different   approach.   The   authorities   which
           demonstrate the considerable respect which the courts afford  to
           UNHCR material are entirely  consistent  with  the  conventional
           view that questions of weight are for the court...

           44. There is, in my view, no justification for  conferring  this
           presumptively binding status on UNHCR reports merely because  of
           their source. Frequently the court is faced, as  in  this  case,
           with a raft of reports from various international, state and non-
           governmental organisations, and although the guidance enunciated
           in a UNHCR  report  will  typically  command  very  considerable
           respect...it will do so because of its intrinsic quality  rather
           than the status of its author. Ultimately each piece of evidence
           has to be put into the balance but the  relative  weight  to  be
           given to the different reports is for the decision-maker."

170. Ms Naik submitted that there  are  two  Supreme  Court  decisions  post
  dating HF that are authority for  the  proposition  that  absent  a  good
  reason the opinion of UNHCR should be followed. The cases are IA  v  SSHD
  [2014] UKSC 6, [2014] 1 WLR 384 and R (EM (Eritrea)) v SSHD  [2014]  UKSC
  12, [2014] AC 1321.




171. IA concerned an appellant  who  had  previously  been  granted  refugee
  status by UNHCR. The issue before the Supreme Court was the effect  of  a
  grant of refugee status to an individual by UNHCR. Lord Kerr  (with  whom
  the other judges agreed) stated  that  there  needed  to  be  substantial
  countervailing reasons to justify  a  different  conclusion  to  that  of
  UNHCR. He made the following findings at paragraphs 48 - 49:




         48.The circumstance that the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  UNHCR
         decision cannot be articulated in an exact way must not be  allowed
         to detract from the influence that it wields. Quite apart from  the
         respect that is due to such a decision by reason of the unique  and
         matchless experience and  expertise  of  UNHCR,  considerations  of
         comity, legal diplomacy and the need for consistency of approach in
         international protection of refugees demand  no  less.  The  United
         Kingdom's obligation to  cooperate  with  UNHCR  also  impels  this
         approach. Moreover, as a general rule, the UNHCR decision will have
         been taken at a time more  proximate  to  the  circumstances  which
         caused the claim to have been made. Frequently, it will  have  been
         made with first-hand knowledge of and insight into those conditions
         superior to that which a national adjudicator can  be  expected  to
         possess.




         49.All of these factors  require  of  the  national  decision-maker
         close attention to the UNHCR decision and considerable pause before
         arriving at a different conclusion. The  approach  cannot  be  more
         closely prescribed than this, in my opinion. The  UNHCR  conclusion
         on refugee status provides a substantial backdrop to  the  decision
         to be made by the national authority. A claimant for asylum who has
         been accorded refugee status by UNHCR  starts  in  a  significantly
         better position than one who does not have that status. But I would
         be reluctant to subscribe to the notion  that  this  represents  "a
         starting point" in the inquiry because that also hints at the  idea
         of a presumption. Recognition of refugee status by UNHCR  does  not
         create a presumption, does not shift the burden of proof and is not
         a starting point (if by that one implies that it  is  presumptively
         assumed to be conclusive) but  substantial  countervailing  reasons
         are required to justify a different conclusion.




172.  The  difficulty  with  Ms  Naik's  submission  is  that,  whereas  the
  circumstances in HF are analogous to those in this case (both concern the
  approach that should  be  taken  to  UNHCR  eligibility  Guidelines),  IA
  concerned something completely  different:  the  effect  of  a  grant  of
  refugee status by UNHCR. UNHCR "guidance" about a country is not the same
  as a UNHCR "decision" about an individual whose particular  circumstances
  have been specifically considered, and the requirement for  there  to  be
  "substantial countervailing reasons" to justify a different conclusion to
  UNHCR about whether an individual should be granted refugee  status  does
  not mean that there must also be substantial  countervailing  reasons  to
  reach a different conclusion to UNHCR  about  the  much  wider  and  more
  general level of risk in a part of a country.




173. EM concerned deficiencies in Italy's asylum procedure, the issue  being
  whether removal of the appellant to Italy would be contrary to Article  3
  ECHR. UNHCR submitted a report containing recommendations in relation  to
  Italy. Lord Kerr, in  passages  highlighted  by  Ms  Naik,  stressed  the
  "particular importance" that should be attached to the view of UNHCR, who
  he described as having "unique and unrivalled expertise".  At  paragraphs
  71 - 72, he stated:



           71. The Court of Appeal recognised  that  particular  importance
           should attach to the views of UNHCR and noted that ECtHR in  MSS
           had  treated  UNHCR's  judgment  as  "pre-eminent  and  possibly
           decisive". At para 41 Sir Stephen Sedley said this:




                 "It seems to us that there was a reason for  according  the
                 UNHCR a special status in  this  context.  The  finding  of
                 facts by a court of law  on  the  scale  involved  here  is
                 necessarily a problematical exercise, prone to influence by
                 accidental factors such as the date of  a  report,  or  its
                 sources, or the quality of its authorship, and conducted in
                 a single  intensive  session.  The  High  Commissioner  for
                 Refugees,  by  contrast,  is  today  the   holder   of   an
                 internationally  respected  office  with  an  expert  staff
                 (numbering 7,190 in 120 different states, according to  its
                 website), able to assemble  and  monitor  information  from
                 year to year and to apply to it standards of knowledge  and
                 judgment which are ordinarily beyond the reach of a  court.
                 In doing this, and in reaching his conclusions, he has  the
                 authority of the General Assembly of the United Nations, by
                 whom he  is  appointed  and  to  whom  he  reports.  It  is
                 intelligible in this situation that a  supranational  court
                 should pay special regard both to the facts which the  High
                 Commissioner reports and to the value judgments he  arrives
                 at within his remit."




           72. I fully agree with this assessment. In a recent decision  of
           this court, the unique and unrivalled expertise of UNHCR in  the
           field of asylum and refugee law was acknowledged. In IA (Iran) v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  UKSC  6  this
           court said at para 44:

                 "Although little may be known about the actual  process  of
                 decision-making by UNHCR in granting refugee status  in  an
                 individual case, the accumulated and  unrivalled  expertise
                 of  this  organisation,  its  experience  in  working  with
                 governments  throughout   the   world,   the   development,
                 promotion and enforcement of procedures  of  high  standard
                 and consistent decision-making  in  the  field  of  refugee
                 status  determinations  must  invest  its  decisions   with
                 considerable authority."



174. Lord Kerr concluded that:

           74...The  UNHCR  material  should  form  part  of  the   overall
           examination of the  particular  circumstances  of  each  of  the
           appellant's cases, no more and no less.

175. The analysis and conclusion of Lord Kerr in EM  does  not  support  the
  proposition advanced by the appellant  that  there  must  be  substantial
  countervailing reasons to depart from a conclusion reached by UNHCR about
  the degree of risk in a (or a part of a) country. Lord Kerr did not  find
  that recommendations  by  UNHCR  must  be  followed  in  the  absence  of
  significant countervailing reasons. Rather,  his  conclusion,  consistent
  with  HF,  is  clear:  UNHCR  material,  although  it  must  be  afforded
  considerable  respect  and  authority,  forms  a  part  of  the   overall
  assessment, "no more and no less".




176. We therefore approach the UNHCR's opinion  from  the  perspective  that
  although, because of its unrivalled expertise, as well as its  reputation
  for independence, reliability  and  objectivity,  a  legal  analysis  and
  recommendation by UNHCR will typically command very considerable  weight,
  the weight that we ultimately decide to attribute to UNHCR's  opinion  on
  internal relocation to Kabul  will  depend  primarily  on  its  intrinsic
  quality rather than its provenance. Moreover, UNHCR is only one source of
  material and we are required to reach our own  conclusion  based  on  the
  whole body of evidence before us.



(f) Weight given to UNHCR's legal analysis and  recommendation  on  internal
relocation

177. As summarised above, whilst in the 2016 UNHCR Guidelines UNHCR did  not
  express a view, one way or the other, about internal relocation to  Kabul
  (as opposed to Afghanistan generally), in the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines UNHCR
  expressed  the  opinion/gave  a  legal   recommendation   that   internal
  relocation is "generally not  available  in  Kabul".  UNHCR  subsequently
  confirmed this opinion in the  2019  COI  UNHCR  Report  and  2019  UNHCR
  Submissions. Moreover, in the 2019 UNHCR Submissions, UNHCR went  further
  and stated that Kabul is "not a relevant IFA".




178. Mr Singh submitted that UNHCR's  legal  analysis  and  opinion  is  not
  persuasive and should be given only  limited  weight  because  UNHCR  has
  failed to explain what has changed in Kabul since 2016 that would justify
  a different conclusion to that in the 2016 UNHCR Guidelines, and has been
  selective in the evidence cited and the way the evidence was conveyed.



179. In respect of the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines, Mr  Singh  made,  inter  alia,
  the following observations.



     a. UNAMA casualty figures show a broadly stable trend in the  rate  of
        casualties.




     b. OCHA's comments about the level of armed conflict were  similar  in
        2016 and 2018.



     c. The supporting evidence relied on by UNHCR to show  the  prevalence
        of informal settlements did not show a change since 2016.



     d.  UNHCR  relied,  in  the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines,  on   the   Asia
        Foundation's 2017 Survey finding that 43.9% of respondents  in  the
        Central/Kabul region perceived there to be  a  worsening  financial
        situation but the equivalent survey in 2015  (referred  to  in  the
        2016 UNHCR Guidelines)  found  there  to  be  a  higher  percentage
        (55.3%) who considered the financial situation to be worsening.



     e. In the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines reference is made to it being reported
        in  January  2017  that  55%  of  households  in   Kabul   informal
        settlements were severely  food  insecure.  However,  the  evidence
        indicates that  a  similar  percentage  (48%)  were  severely  food
        insecure at the end of 2015.



     f. The 2018 UNHCR Guidelines refer to rapid growth  in  population  in
        the wake of large-scale returns from Iran and Pakistan but this was
        equally an issue in 2016.



180. Mr Singh also submitted that the UNHCR's opinion is undermined  by  not
  considering the availability of returns assistance.




181. With respect to the 2019 UNHCR Submissions and 2019 COI  UNHCR  Report,
  he made, inter alia, the following comments.



        a. UNHCR described civilian casualties between 1 January  2019  and
           30 September 2019 as being at "an unprecedented number" when (a)
           the statistics do not support this conclusion as  the  level  of
           casualties was  broadly consistent with previous years; and  (b)
           the footnotes cited to support the conclusion do not justify the
           use of the word unprecedented. He noted that  the  UNAMA  report
           cited by UNHCR described violence in Afghanistan generally - not
           in Kabul - as being at an unprecedented level.




        b. UNHCR failed to take into account  Kabul's  population  size  or
           acknowledge that other provinces have higher casualty rates.



        c. UNHCR relied on data taken from a report  by  "Action  on  Armed
           Violence"  about  particularly  high  casualties  in  July  2019
           without acknowledging that data from a single  month  is  not  a
           reliable basis to  discern  a  longer  term  trend  and  without
           mentioning that in the same report there is  a  reference  to  a
           substantial decrease in civilian casualties in the first half of
           2019.



        d. UNHCR did not acknowledge, when describing the population growth
           in Kabul, that the evidence from IOM shows that  the  proportion
           of Kabul composed of  returnees  and  IDPs  has  barely  changed
           (increasing from 7% to 8% between the 2018 and 2019 IOM Baseline
           Studies) and that IOM statistics show that  30/33  provinces  in
           Afghanistan received a higher inflow of returnees and IDPs  than
           Kabul province. Mr Singh submits  that  the  evidence  from  IOM
           shows that Kabul is one  of  the  least  affected  provinces  in
           Afghanistan  in  terms  of  returnees  and  IDPs,  whereas   the
           impression formed upon reading the 2019  COI  UNHCR  Report  and
           2019 UNHCR  Submissions  is  that  Kabul  is  amongst  the  most
           affected.



        e. In its assessment of returnees, in the 2019  COI  UNHCR  Report,
           UNHCR appears to make significant generalisations from a  single
           study with  a  very  small  sample  (55  Afghans  deported  from
           Germany). Mr Singh noted that he  was  unable  to  consider  the
           report, because it is not translated; but even from the  limited
           information that can be gleaned  from  the  UNHCR  summary,  the
           report appears inconsistent: reference is made to 90% of studied
           deportees experiencing violence, but then  to  only   25%  being
           affected by criminal violence, without any explanation as to the
           nature of the violence experienced by the other 65%.



182. Ms Naik argued that the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines reflect a negative  trend
  in the security situation for civilians  affecting  day-to-day  life  and
  that the  evidence  shows  that  population  growth  meant  that  Kabul's
  infrastructure is so overstretched that the limits of absorption capacity
  have been reached. She argued that the position adopted by UNHCR in  2018
  is, in effect, that "a tipping point" has been reached as a result of the
  cumulative effect of the multifaceted, ongoing and deepening crisis.




183. In respect of the 2019  UNHCR  Submissions  and  COI  Report,  Ms  Naik
  argued that UNHCR has focused on the particular experience  of  returnees
  and that UNHCR is uniquely well-placed  to  engage  with  the  "immensely
  complex task" of assessing  relocation  to  Kabul.  She  highlighted  the
  cumulative  effect  of  violence  and  inward  migration  to  Kabul;  and
  submitted that it is a fallacy to  relativise  casualties  by  population
  size without regard to geographical size and population density.



184. We agree with Mr Singh that the evidence relied  on  by  UNHCR  in  the
  2018 UNHCR Guidelines - and the 2019 UNHCR Submissions and 2019 COI UNHCR
  Report - does not show there has  been  a  substantial  deterioration  in
  Kabul since 2016. In particular:



        a. The evidence from UNAMA does not  show  a  negative  trend,  but
           rather  a  persistent  and  stable  level  of  casualties:   see
           paragraphs 91 and 207;




        b. The  evidence  from  IOM  does  not  point  to  there  being  an
           overwhelming influx  of  returnees  and  IDPs  into  Kabul:  see
           paragraphs 115 and 220; and



        c.  the documents and reports referred to by UNHCR do not  indicate
           a  substantial  deterioration   in   food   security,   poverty,
           availability of accommodation, or any other factors relevant  to
           the reasonableness of relocation, occurring since 2016.



185. However, it is not necessary for  there  to  have  been  a  significant
  change since 2016 for UNHCR to conclude that internal relocation is  "not
  available" in Kabul. The 2018  UNHCR  Guidelines  are  not  a  comparison
  between the circumstances in 2016 and 2018 - they are UNHCR's  assessment
  of Kabul in 2018, no such specific assessment having been made  in  2016.
  Therefore, the fact that the circumstances in 2016 are not  significantly
  different to those in 2018 does not undermine the  opinion  expressed  in
  2018 and 2019. In any event, as argued by Ms Naik, even  a  small  change
  could result in a "tipping point" being crossed.



186. That said, Mr Singh has argued  that  only  limited  weight  should  be
  attached to UNHCR's opinion because they  have  reached  conclusions  not
  supported by evidence and have been selective in evidence cited  (and  in
  the way it is framed).



187. We recognise UNHCR's unrivaled expertise and experience, and that  they
  have based their assessment of Kabul on multiple sources, some  of  which
  (including individuals "on the ground") are not available to us. We note,
  in particular, the comments made in the 2019 UNHCR Submissions that UNHCR
  "underlines the significance" of the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines and that  they
  are:



 "based on in-depth research, information provided through  UNHCR's  network
of  offices  in  Afghanistan   and   material   from   independent   country
specialists,  researchers  and  other  sources,  rigorously   reviewed   for
reliability."



188. However, whilst this means we approach the  UNHCR  Documents  with  the
  greatest of respect, it does not mean they can escape scrutiny.  Mr Singh
  has made a range of submissions critiquing the UNHCR's Documents that  we
  find persuasive. The most significant are as follows.



189. Firstly, UNHCR describes Kabul as having the highest level of  civilian
  casualties without acknowledging that, even though,  in  absolute  terms,
  more civilians die or are injured in Kabul than in  any  other  province,
  relative to its population Kabul is not the  province  with  the  highest
  rate of casualties. It is  striking  that  whilst  EASO  and  SIGAR  both
  contextualise UNAMA's statistics on civilian casualties by  setting  them
  against the size of the population, UNHCR does not. For example,  in  the
  first section of the 2019 UNHCR COI Report it is said that  "the  highest
  number of civilian casualties [were] reported in Kabul province  [between
  1 January and 30 September 2019], namely 1,491"  and  that  "15%  of  the
  total civilian casualties  in  Afghanistan  occurred  in  Kabul  province
  between 1 January 2019 and 31 May 2019". However, nowhere in  the  report
  is it clarified that Kabul has more than 15% of the total population (16%
  according to the report the 15% figure was taken  from),  or  that  there
  were multiple provinces where, although the absolute number  of  civilian
  deaths were below 1,491, the casualty rate (i.e. the number of casualties
  as a proportion of the population) was significantly higher.



190. Secondly,  UNHCR  appears  to  place  significant  weight  on  what  it
  describes as "negative trends" in the security situation  for  civilians.
  However, review of the UNAMA figures does not support  this  description,
  as the figures indicate a relatively stable level of civilian  casualties
  as a proportion of the population in Kabul (see paragraphs 91  and  207).
  UNHCR has only cited recent data and does not adequately explain  why  it
  considers there to be a negative trend. It may be that UNHCR has in  mind
  a longer term trend, which takes into account casualty figures  prior  to
  2016 (which are not available to us). However, there is nothing in any of
  the UNHCR Documents to indicate this.



191. Thirdly, UNHCR appears to have  relied  on  UNAMA  casualty  statistics
  from short periods (such as a single month or a three-month period)  when
  casualty figures were particularly high without taking into consideration
  that  the  periods  chosen  were  not  necessarily  representative.   For
  example, the 2019 COI UNHCR Report  states  that  2019  saw  the  highest
  single quarter of civilian casualties since records began. However, UNHCR
  did not mention that, as recorded in the UNAMA midyear  report  dated  30
  July 2019, between 1 January and  30  June  2019  UNAMA  recorded  a  27%
  decrease in civilian casualties compared to the same period in  2018  and
  the lowest total of civilian casualties for the first  6  months  of  the
  year since 2012. Similarly, the 2019 COI UNHCR Report highlights a report
  by Action on Armed  Violence  describing  the  high  number  of  civilian
  casualties in Kabul in July 2019 but  does  not  mention  that  the  same
  report referred to a decrease in casualties earlier in  the  year.  UNHCR
  has not explained why it considers a figure for a single month relevant.



192. Fourthly, a significant emphasis is placed  on  what  is  described  as
  "rapid [population] growth in the wake of  the  large  scale  returns  to
  Afghanistan from Iran and Pakistan" without engaging with the  statistics
  produced by IOM which indicate that IDPs and  returnees  make  up  8%  of
  Kabul's inhabitants compared to 18% for Afghanistan as a whole.



193. Fifthly, it is unclear from the 2018  UNHCR  Guidelines  and  2019  COI
  UNHCR Report if UNHCR's position is that internal relocation  is  not  an
  option (i.e. not "relevant") because of the security situation  in  Kabul
  or is not generally reasonable. We are left  uncertain  because  although
  UNHCR reminds the reader  that  the  assessment  of  internal  relocation
  should be in terms of relevance and reasonableness, their conclusion says
  only that it is "generally not available". The lack of clarity  is  added
  to by the 2019 UNHCR Submissions,  as  these  give  the  conclusion  that
  internal relocation is not "available" but state in the body of the  text
  (at para. 4.9) that the 2019 COI UNHCR Report concludes  that  "Kabul  is
  still not a relevant IFA". This is confusing because  (a)  the  2019  COI
  UNHCR Report does not in fact contain within it any such conclusion;  (b)
  the statement at paragraph 4.9 of the 2019  UNHCR  Submissions  does  not
  match the overall conclusion, which is only that internal  relocation  is
  not available; and (c) there is no explanation as to the basis upon which
  it has been found that internal relocation is not relevant. UNHCR  has  a
  well established series of conditions, set out in the 2003 Guidance, that
  must be met  for  internal  relocation  to  be  relevant.  See  above  at
  paragraph 25 where the conditions of the  "relevance  analysis"  are  set
  out. However, although the conditions are summarised in  the  2019  UNHCR
  Submissions (at paras. 3.2.1 and  3.2.3),  the  statement  that  internal
  relocation  is  not  relevant  is  made  without  stating  which  of  the
  conditions are not met. Mr Singh described this as "opaque". We agree.




G. EASO'S legal analysis and recommendations




194. EASO has also expressed a view on internal relocation. This is set  out
  in the 2019 EASO Guidance.




195. The 2019 EASO Guidance is described by EASO as  representing  a  common
  assessment of the situation in Afghanistan  by  senior  policy  officials
  from EU member states in  accordance  with  current  EU  legislation  and
  jurisprudence  of  the  CJEU,  and  as  being  intended  as  a  tool  for
  policymakers and decision-makers. The guidance  states  that  it  is  the
  result of the joint assessment by the  Country  Guidance  Network,  whose
  work was supported by a drafting team of selected national experts and by
  EASO, with the European Commission and UNHCR providing valuable input  in
  this process.



196. The 2019 EASO Guidance concludes that:




        a. indiscriminate violence is taking place in Kabul, however not at
           a high level and, accordingly,  a  higher  level  of  individual
           elements is required in order to show  substantial  grounds  for
           believing that a civilian, returned to the territory, would face
           a real risk of serious harm in the meaning of Article  15(c)  of
           the Qualification Directive;




        b. the general security situation does not  preclude  consideration
           of Kabul as an internal relocation  alternative  but  a  careful
           examination of the safety requirement needs to take place;




        c. a person can access Kabul without serious risk;




        d. the general circumstances prevailing in Kabul,  assessed  having
           regard to food security, housing and shelter, hygiene (including
           water and sanitation),  basic  healthcare  and  means  of  basic
           subsistence do not preclude reasonableness to settle in the city
           for a single able-bodied man;




        e. when assessing  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  for  a
           single able-bodied man, the following  individual  circumstances
           should be considered:  age,  gender,  family  status,  state  of
           health,   ethnicity   and   linguistic   background,   religion,
           documentation, local  knowledge,  professional  and  educational
           background and financial means, and support network; and



        f. the circumstances of a single able-bodied man are contrasted  to
           other categories of person, such as families with  children  and
           the elderly, in respect of whom internal relocation would not be
           reasonable unless the returnee has sufficient financial means or
           a support network in Kabul.



197.  Mr Singh  submitted  that  although  he  agreed  with  the  conclusion
  reached by EASO we should not give any  deference  to  their  opinion  on
  internal relocation as it was for us to decide that issue ourselves based
  on the up-to-date country evidence itself, including that referred to  by
  EASO. He was critical of EASO's legal analysis as  they  appear  to  have
  conflated Article 3 with reasonableness and to have  not  compared  Kabul
  with the rest of Afghanistan.




198. Ms Naik agreed that  no  weight  should  be  given  to  EASO's  opinion
  because  she  agreed  they  conflated  Article  3  with   reasonableness.
  Accordingly, whilst we will give consideration to the  evidence  referred
  to by EASO in its assessment of the circumstances in Kabul, we  will  not
  give any weight to their legal analysis and recommendation about internal
  relocation to Kabul.



H. Analysis and Decision in relation to Internal Relocation

(a) The first limb: real risk of serious harm

199. There are several ways in which the first limb of  Article  8(1)  could
  be met, depending on the facts. These include a person being exposed,  in
  Kabul, to the original risk of being persecuted; that he or she would  be
  exposed to a new risk of being persecuted in Kabul; that Kabul would  not
  be practically, safely and legally accessible; or that there would  be  a
  risk of serious harm for a reason other than persecution in Kabul. It  is
  only the last of these - that he would be at risk of serious harm - which
  the appellant has argued is relevant to him.




200. Serious harm can take several forms, as set out in Article 15  QD,  but
  it is only one of these (a threat to his life  or  person  by  reason  of
  indiscriminate violence) in respect of which the appellant claims  to  be
  at real risk in Kabul. Accordingly, our assessment of the first  limb  of
  Article 8(1) is limited to the question of whether there is a  real  risk
  of there being a serious and individual threat to the appellant's life or
  person by reason of indiscriminate violence in Kabul.




201. Kabul (both  the  city  and  province)  is  significantly  affected  by
  widespread and longstanding conflict-related violence and has been - at a
  relatively consistent level - since at least 2016. Some of  the  violence
  is targeted (e.g. at police, embassies or ethnic groups) but much  of  it
  is indiscriminate. Even the targeted violence  affects  civilians  in  an
  indiscriminate  way,  because  people  can  be  killed  or   injured   as
  bystanders. There is also a significant problem of violent crime.



202. We agree with Dr Schuster (and Ms Naik) that  not  all  inhabitants  of
  Kabul face the same risk. A person who stays at home  most  of  the  time
  will face a lower risk than an economically active person who spends time
  in crowded locations. Likewise, someone who has an understanding  of  the
  culture and society will be more adept at avoiding violence than  someone
  who is ignorant of societal norms.



203. We  also  agree  with  Dr  Schuster  that  casualty  rates  (number  of
  casualties as a proportion of the population)  do  not  convey  the  full
  picture of the risk of serious harm in Kabul. In particular, they do  not
  take into account the indirect effect of violence (such as the impact  on
  a family of a breadwinner being killed  or  injured),  the  psychological
  impact on individuals who  witness  or  worry  about  violence,  and  the
  cumulative impact of violence (or the threat of violence) persisting over
  many years. Whilst we accept these points, we are nonetheless of the view
  that casualty rates, although they must be treated with caution,  provide
  a good indication of the risk  of  violence  faced  by  individuals,  and
  enable comparisons to be made over time and between provinces.



204. Both parties estimated the  risk  of  a  person  with  the  appellant's
  profile being injured or killed as a result of conflict -related violence
  in Kabul, based on UNAMA figures. The respondent proposed that  the  risk
  is 37 out of 100,000. This is based on the number of casualties  recorded
  by UNAMA in 2018 (1,866) and an assumed population of 5 million.




205. The appellant, in contrast, proposed a figure of 170  out  of  100,000.
  This figure was derived from 5,000 casualties a year in a population of 3
  million. Ms Naik justified using a population of 3 million on  the  basis
  that the majority of security incidents occurred in Kabul City (and it is
  in the city, or its environs, that the appellant  would  be  expected  to
  live). She justified the figure of 5,000 casualties  on  the  basis  that
  this had been used by the  respondent  before  the  previous  Panel  when
  calculating the risk an individual would face and  that  it  included  an
  appropriate allowance for the under reporting of casualties by UNAMA.




206. It is difficult to draw conclusions from  the  UNAMA  statistics  about
  the risk a person with the appellant's profile will face  given  (i)  the
  under-reporting by UNAMA, (ii) that relocation will be to Kabul City  and
  we are looking at data concerning Kabul Province,  (iii)  that  there  is
  uncertainty as to the total population in Kabul Province (or  City),  and
  (iv) that economically active male returnees without previous  experience
  living in Kabul face an elevated risk. That said,  we  have  reached  the
  conclusion that the risk to an economically active male returnee who  has
  not previously lived in Kabul City  of  being  a  casualty  of  conflict-
  related violence is in the region of one in a thousand, which corresponds
  to 100 out of 100,000. This is based on  an  estimated  population  of  4
  million, which is at the lower end of estimates we have  seen  for  Kabul
  City, and 4,000 casualties, which is over double the amount  recorded  by
  UNAMA in any given year for Kabul Province.



207. We are able, based on the UNAMA  figures,  to  compare  casualty  rates
  across Afghanistan and over time. This is because the same methodology is
  used throughout Afghanistan and has been used  by  UNAMA  over  the  last
  several  years  whilst  casualty  figures  have   been   collected.   The
  conclusions that we draw from the data are as follows.



     a. There are parts of Afghanistan where a civilian is at substantially
        higher risk than in Kabul.




     b. The number of casualties in  Kabul  has  been  relatively  constant
        between 2016 (which are the earliest figures we have for Kabul) and
        2019 (we have only partial figures for 2019 but these indicate  the
        overall figure for 2019 is likely to be  similar  to  the  previous
        years). The UNHCR data shows an increase of 108 casualties  between
        2016 and 2018. However, this was a period of substantial population
        growth in Kabul, and therefore this  increase  in  absolute  terms,
        which in any event is small, may not indicate an  increase  in  the
        number of casualties as a proportion of the inhabitants of Kabul.



     c. We do not have data prior to 2016 on casualties in  Kabul  but  the
        total number of casualties in Afghanistan  in  2014  and  2015  was
        similar to 2016-2019. The number of casualties in  Afghanistan  was
        significantly lower in 2013.



208. There is not a benchmark, or a scale, against which to  decide  whether
  a particular level of risk is high or low. We also recognise that  people
  do not have the same perception of  what  constitutes  a  real  risk  (or
  tolerance  for  taking  a  risk).  That  said,  our  assessment,   taking
  everything into account, is that the risk from indiscriminate violence in
  Kabul is low and that since 2016 the level of  risk  has  remained  at  a
  steady level.



209. Although violent crime is prevalent, the evidence does not point to  it
  being at such a high level that the  appellant  would  be  at  real  risk
  merely on account of his presence in Kabul. We note that  the  2019  Asia
  Foundation  Survey  recorded  that  only  15%  of  respondents   in   the
  Central/Kabul region reported that they or someone in  their  family  had
  suffered from violence or a criminal act in the past year.



210. We recognise that we have reached a conclusion  that  is  different  to
  that expressed by UNHCR in the 2019 UNHCR Submissions where (in  contrast
  to the 2018 UNCHR Guidelines and 2019 UNHCR COI Report) it is  stated  in
  terms that UNHCR believes Kabul is not "a relevant IFA".  We  have  based
  our assessment on the same statistical  evidence  relied  upon  by  UNHCR
  (casualty rates recorded by UNAMA). However, our approach  to  the  UNAMA
  casualty figures appears to differ to UNHCR in two significant ways.



        a. Firstly, it appears that UNHCR have looked at the  total  number
           of  casualties,  comparing  these  over  time,  but   have   not
           considered the casualty rate. We note that the approach we  have
           adopted, of  relying  on  the  casualty  rate  rather  than  the
           absolute number of casualties, was also used by EASO, who in the
           2019  EASO  Guidance  contextualized  the  number  of   civilian
           casualties in 2018  by  noting  that  the  total  of  1,866  (as
           reported by UNAMA) corresponded to 38 per  100,000  inhabitants.
           In our view, once the total number of casualties in Kabul is set
           against the size of the population, the conclusion that the risk
           is at a level where internal relocation is not an  option  (i.e.
           not relevant) becomes untenable.




        b. Secondly, UNHCR appears to have interpreted the UNAMA figures as
           showing an upward trend, over the last  several  years,  in  the
           number of casualties in Kabul. However, as explained  above,  we
           do not agree that the data supports such  a  conclusion,  as  it
           appears to us that, since 2016,  there  has  been  a  relatively
           steady and consistent number of casualties each year.



(b) The second limb: reasonableness

211. In accordance with the 2019 Court of Appeal decision, we have made  new
  findings on the extent of the risk the appellant will face from  security
  incidents and the relevance of this risk to the reasonableness  of  Kabul
  as an internal relocation alternative.




212. The other findings of the Panel in the 2018 UT decision were  preserved
  by the Court of Appeal. We have  considered  whether  developments  since
  December 2017 (which is the date until which evidence was  considered  in
  the 2018 UT decision) justify our  reaching  a  different  finding.  This
  consideration has involved a review of  a  very  considerable  number  of
  reports, articles and other documents (including the UNHCR Documents)  as
  well as the expert evidence, as summarised above.

Safety and Security

213. The evidence indicates that although  Kabul  and  its  inhabitants  are
  affected by armed conflict, in particular as a result of violent  attacks
  by Taliban and ISIS, the city and province are - and are likely to remain
  - under the control of  the  Afghan  authorities.  We  therefore  do  not
  consider there to be a real risk that Kabul will fall under  the  control
  of anti-government elements or become a site of active conflict.




214. As explained above in paragraphs 85 - 104, violence connected to  armed
  conflict is widespread and persistent in Kabul. However,  the  likelihood
  of the appellant being killed or injured is small - approximately one  in
  a thousand. See the analysis of the first limb  of  Article  8(1)  QD  at
  paragraphs 199 - 210.



215. The evidence points to there being a  problem  with  violent  crime  in
  Kabul. However, we have not been presented with evidence on the number of
  victims, and the results of the 2019 Asia Foundation Study indicate  that
  the vast majority of Kabul's inhabitants are not affected.



216. We find that safety and security issues in Kabul  are  highly  relevant
  to the reasonableness of return but are not by themselves determinative.

Population growth and absorption capacity

217. The Panel in  the  2018  UT  decision  found  that  there  had  been  a
  significant increase of population in Kabul in 2016  but  since  December
  2016 the inflow had not continued at the high level seen in that year.




218. Kabul has a fast growing population. It has grown fourfold  since  2001
  and the annual growth rate of 4.74% makes it one of the  fastest  growing
  cities in the world.



219. There has been a huge influx of  returnees  (primarily  from  Iran  and
  Pakistan) and IDPs into  Afghanistan  over  the  last  decade.  2016,  in
  particular, saw a very large number of returnees:  over  1  million  from
  Iran and Pakistan.



220. The evidence from IOM shows that the vast  majority  of  returnees  and
  IDPs settle in other parts of the country  and  that  the  proportion  of
  Kabul's population who are returnees  and  IDPs  is  only  8%,  which  is
  significantly less than the national average of 18%.



221. We do not doubt that even 8% is highly significant. UNHCR, EASO,  Human
  Rights Watch and others have all  expressed  concern  about  the  influx.
  Their concern, which is shared by Dr Schuster, is that the influx of IDPs
  and refugees has put a huge strain on Kabul's  infrastructure,  and  that
  the city is, or is close to being, at  the  limits  of  its  capacity  to
  absorb any further people.



222. Whilst we recognise the significance of the growth in  population,  and
  the cumulative effect of the  city  growing  year  on  year  without  the
  infrastructure keeping pace, the evidence indicates that  the  influx  of
  returnees peaked in 2016 and Dr Schuster's evidence was that the pool  of
  potential returnees has reduced significantly,  as  so  many  Afghans  in
  Pakistan and Iran have already returned.



223. We do not consider that there has been  a  material  change  since  the
  2018 UT decision that would justify a different conclusion being reached.



Poverty and humanitarian conditions

224. The  Panel  in  the  2018  UT  decision  found  that  much  of  Kabul's
  population lives in inadequate informal housing with  limited  access  to
  basic services such as sanitation and  potable  water.  They  noted  that
  healthcare provision, although poor, is better in Kabul than elsewhere.




225. The evidence before us indicates that the  position  is  unchanged.  As
  was the case when the Panel made its findings in the  2018  UT  decision,
  most of Kabul's population is poor,  lives  in  inadequate  housing  with
  inadequate sanitation, lacks access to potable water,  and  struggles  to
  earn sufficient income to sustain itself in a society without any  safety
  net.



226.  However,  it  is  also  apparent,  most  notably  from   OCHA's   2020
  Humanitarian Needs Overview of Afghanistan, that, in terms of  people  in
  need, the situation in Kabul is significantly better  than  much  of  the
  rest of Afghanistan.



227. The position  today  is  comparable  to  2017.  A  departure  from  the
  findings of the Panel in the 2018 UT decision cannot be justified.





Family and other networks

228. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision found that although support  networks
  are very important - and a returnee with one will be in  a  significantly
  stronger position - they are not essential  to  obtain  accommodation  or
  employment. The Panel also found that networks  can  be  reactivated  and
  established, including through  a  person's  wider  community  or  ethnic
  connections.




229. The evidence before us is not substantially different from that  before
  the Panel and supports the same  conclusion.  Networks,  whether  through
  family, ethnicity, or  other  connections,  are  very  important  in  all
  aspects of life in Kabul  and  a  person  without  any  network  will  be
  disadvantaged. However, as set out in EASO's COI  Report:  Afghanistan  -
  Networks, dated February 2018, Afghans are in general  good  at  building
  networks and networks can be built and developed. A person without family
  or connections in Kabul may therefore be able to create connections  that
  will, in time, develop into a network. Even a person  who  is  unable  to
  form any such connections, and who must survive without the benefit of  a
  network, will ordinarily be able to find inexpensive accommodation  in  a
  "chai khana" and (depending  on  physical  abilities,  health  and  other
  individual characteristics) be  able  work  as  a  day  labourer  in  the
  informal labour market in Kabul.



230. A returnee with a support network or specific connections in Kabul  may
  be in a significantly stronger position than others and in some cases the
  availability of a network will counter a particular vulnerability  of  an
  individual on return.

Accommodation

231. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision found that around 74%  of  people  in
  Kabul live in informal settlements which have  very  limited  sanitation,
  drainage or access to potable water. It found that a single male returnee
  without support from a network or financial resources would have  limited
  options but would be able to find some sort  of  accommodation  which  is
  comparable to that available for the majority of the population in Kabul.






232. The evidence before us supports the same conclusion, as a  single  male
  would be able to reside in a "chai khana" and in due course, once he  has
  established himself, find a more permanent place to  reside.  Whilst  the
  chai khana would involve sharing a (dirty and unlocked) room and  washing
  facilities-  and  would  lack  privacy  -  a  single  man   without   the
  responsibility of a family would have an adequate place in which to sleep
  and base himself. The evidence before us is that  such  accommodation  is
  commonplace, inexpensive and widely available.




233. In these circumstances, we  can  see  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
  preserved findings of the Panel about the availability  and  adequacy  of
  accommodation in Kabul for a returnee in the appellant's circumstances.



Employment

234. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision found that unemployment in  Kabul  is
  high and that without connections stable and secure employment  would  be
  virtually impossible to obtain. However, it found  that  work  as  a  day
  labourer, though precarious and without guarantee of regular work,  would
  be available, and would  result  in  earnings  sufficient  to  adequately
  sustain a single man.




235. The evidence before us is similar to that which was  before  the  Panel
  and does not justify a departure from the Panel's findings. The  evidence
  indicates that a returnee without connections would be unlikely  to  find
  work in the formal economy and would be dependent on the informal  sector
  and in particular manual day labourer work.



236. Whether a particular returnee would be able to earn  sufficient  income
  from this type of work will depend on the  individual  circumstances.  As
  the available work would mostly be manual in nature, it is  necessary  to
  consider whether an individual would be capable (e.g. in the light of his
  age, health, physical capabilities and other factors) of undertaking such
  work and would be able to present himself in a  way  that  would  attract
  employers, who frequently will be selecting individuals from  a  pool  of
  men (some bringing their own  tools)  who  congregate  at  known  meeting
  points.

Identity Document (Tazkera)

237. The Panel in the  2018  UT  decision  did  not  make  any  findings  in
  relation to Tazkeras. We therefore make our own findings,  based  on  the
  evidence before us,  as  to  their  significance  in  the  assessment  of
  reasonableness of relocation.




238. A person relocating to Kabul will  generally  be  unable  to  obtain  a
  Tazkera in Kabul and will need to travel to his home area. If  travelling
  to his home area is not safe or possible, there is a  real  risk  that  a
  returnee will not be able to obtain a Tazkera.



239. Lack of a Tazkera in Kabul will prevent a returnee from accessing  many
  government services and obtaining formal employment. It will  also  leave
  the returnee more exposed to potential harassment from  the  authorities.
  That said, the absence of a Tazkera will  not  prevent  a  returnee  from
  obtaining accommodation in a "teahouse" or in informal  settlements/slums
  (which make up most of Kabul's accommodation), and it will not prevent  a
  person obtaining informal work, such as a day  labourer.  A  person  will
  still be able to function, and meet his basic needs, in Kabul.



240. We find that a person without a Tazkera will be disadvantaged, but  not
  to the extent that this, in and of itself, would make internal relocation
  to Kabul unreasonable.

Mental Health

241. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision noted that  EASO  had  recorded  very
  high  levels  of  mental  health  problems   in   Afghanistan,   creating
  significant needs, but that there was a lack of trained professionals and
  inadequate infrastructure. It was noted that there was only one dedicated
  mental health hospital in Kabul.




242. The evidence before us is consistent with  the  Panel's  findings:  the
  conflict has resulted in mental health problems for many  inhabitants  of
  Kabul, but there is a lack of facilities (and professionals) available to
  provide treatment. There is no new evidence on this issue  to  warrant  a
  departure from the findings of the Panel.

Experience of returnees and returnee assistance



243. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision found that there was  a  basic  level
  of  support  for  returnees  which  included  the  offer   of   temporary
  accommodation, travel expenses and either cash or  support  in  kind  for
  those with a plan  to  establish  themselves  in  Kabul.  They  observed,
  however, that there was a lack of take-up of assistance.




244. The Panel found that even if assistance would last  for  only  4  to  6
  weeks (or less if a person is not astute and  lacks  knowledge  of  local
  prices) it would make a material, even if only  marginal,  difference  to
  the reasonableness of return for a single healthy male.




245. The evidence before us is similar. A returnee will be able to  stay  in
  the hotel identified by Dr Schuster for up to two weeks.  Thereafter,  he
  could stay in inexpensive "teahouse"  dormitory  accommodation  utilising
  the cash (125) received at the airport. We see no reason to depart  from
  the finding of the Panel that a returnee,  generally,  will  be  able  to
  access sufficient assistance and funds so as  to  be  in  a  position  to
  accommodate and feed himself for the first 4 - 6 weeks in  Kabul  without
  earning an income.



246. UNHCR, in the 2019 COI UNHCR Report, cites extensively  from  a  recent
  German study which found that returnees to Kabul from Germany have  faced
  violence, suspicion and hostility. This study (which we  have  not  seen)
  was based on only 55 individuals, and therefore caution must be exercised
  before drawing generalised conclusions  from  it.  We  accept  that  some
  people in Kabul are suspicious of and hostile towards returnees. However,
  the evidence before us, considered together and as  a  whole,  points  to
  returnees facing challenging circumstances not because they have returned
  from the west (risk from westernisation was categorically rejected in the
  2018 UT decision (at para. 187) and this finding was not  appealed),  but
  primarily because of poverty, lack of accommodation and  the  absence  of
  employment opportunities, as well as the  security  situation.  The  mere
  fact  of  being  a  returnee  does  not  prevent   a   person   accessing
  accommodation (the evidence is that  the  "tea  house"  accommodation  is
  available to all males) or being taken on for  day  labour  work  in  the
  informal market. Nor does  it  prevent  a  person  establishing,  or  re-
  establishing, a network, although care would need to be  taken  to  avoid
  people who are hostile to returnees.

Comparison to other parts of Afghanistan



247. The evidence from UNAMA indicates that the security situation,  and  an
  individual's risk from indiscriminate violence, is worse  in  many  other
  parts of Afghanistan than it is in Kabul (see above at  paragraphs  94  -
  95).




248. The evidence from OCHA and IOM indicates that many other  provinces  in
  Afghanistan are hosting a substantially higher number  of  returnees  and
  IDPs as a percentage of their population than Kabul. However, we  do  not
  have sufficient evidence to draw any conclusions about how the impact  of
  refugee/IDP inflows compares between provinces.



249. It is also apparent that, although  there  is  significant  poverty  in
  Kabul, it is less prevalent than in many other parts of Afghanistan  (see
  paragraph 118).



250. According to EASO in its 2019 Key socio-economic indicators  (focus  on
  Kabul  City,  Mazar-e  Sharif  and  Herat  City),  dated  April  2019,  a
  significant reason many Afghans are drawn to Kabul is that the city:

      "stands out as the main  gravitational  centre  for  migrants  in  the
      country...[and] Many returnees end up in Kabul because  of  relatively
      higher security than in  their  regions  of  origin,  and  because  of
      expectations of more job  opportunities  and  support  facilities  for
      returnees"

Age

251. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision identified  that  a  returnee's  age,
  including  the  age  at  which  he  left  Afghanistan,  is  relevant   to
  reasonableness. We agree. Returnees of any age  without  a  network  will
  face significant challenges establishing themselves in  Kabul.  A  person
  who left  Afghanistan  at  a  young  age  may,  depending  on  individual
  circumstances, be less able than someone who spent their formative  years
  in Afghanistan to navigate the challenges of the city  by,  for  example,
  finding work and accommodation.

Conclusion on reasonableness



252. Taking a holistic  view,  and  considering  all  of  the  circumstances
  together, we are satisfied that generally it would  not  be  unreasonable
  for a single healthy man to relocate to Kabul, even if he does  not  have
  any family or network in the city and lacks a Tazkera.  However,  in  all
  cases an individualised case-by-case assessment is required, taking  into
  account an individual's personal circumstances including factors such  as
  his  age,  health,  disability,   languages   spoken,   educational   and
  professional  background,  length  of  time   outside   of   Afghanistan,
  connections  to  and  experience  of  Kabul  and  family  situation   and
  relationships.




(c) Country Guidance

253. We give the following country guidance:

    Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban

     i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a
        senior government or security services official, or a spy)  is  not
        at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.


    Risk of serious harm in Kabul


    ii) There is widespread and  persistent  conflict-related  violence  in
        Kabul. However,  the  proportion  of  the  population  affected  by
        indiscriminate violence is  small  and  not  at  a  level  where  a
        returnee, even one with no family or other network and who  has  no
        experience living in Kabul, would face  a  serious  and  individual
        threat  to  their  life  or  person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate
        violence.


    Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul

   iii) Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul
        as well as the difficulties faced by the  population  living  there
        (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other returnees,  which
        are not dissimilar to the conditions faced  throughout  many  other
        parts of Afghanistan) it will not, in general, be  unreasonable  or
        unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health to relocate  to
        Kabul even if he does not have any specific connections or  support
        network in Kabul and even if he does not have a Tazkera.



    iv) However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual  applicant
        must be taken into account in the  context  of  conditions  in  the
        place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
        of  support  network/connections  with   Kabul/Afghanistan,   their
        physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,  education  and
        vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
        the general position set out above. Given the limited  options  for
        employment, capability to undertake manual work may be relevant.



     v) A person with a support network or specific connections in Kabul is
        likely to be in a more advantageous position on return,  which  may
        counter a particular vulnerability of an individual  on  return.  A
        person without a network may  be  able  to  develop  one  following
        return. A person's familiarity with the cultural and societal norms
        of Afghanistan (which may be affected by the age at which  he  left
        the country and his length of absence) will be relevant to whether,
        and if so how quickly and successfully, he will be able to build  a
        network.



    Previous Country Guidance

    vi) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive remains unaffected by this decision.



   vii) The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the  (un)reasonableness  of  internal
        relocation  to  Kabul  (and  other  potential  places  of  internal
        relocation) for certain categories of women remains  unaffected  by
        this decision.



  viii) The country guidance in AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
        [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also remains unaffected by this decision.


(d) The Appellant's Case

254. The preserved finding of the First-tier Tribunal is that the  appellant
  cannot return to his home area of Laghman Province because he would be at
  risk from the Taliban.




255. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision found that the  appellant  would  not
  be at risk from the Taliban  in  Kabul.  This  was  not  challenged.  The
  appellant submits that it would nonetheless be unsafe for him to relocate
  to Kabul because  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  from
  indiscriminate violence. For the reasons set out  above  we  reject  this
  argument on the basis that  the level of indiscriminate violence in Kabul
  is not sufficient to meet the threshold in Article 15(c) QD and there  is
  not a real risk of  the  appellant  suffering  serious  harm  within  the
  meaning of the first limb of Article 8(1) QD.



256.  We  therefore  must  assess  the  reasonableness  of  the  appellant's
  internal relocation to Kabul. The relevant facts, for the  assessment  of
  reasonableness, are that:



        a. The appellant is from a village in Laghman Province.




        b. He is a single male with no children, born  in  1986,  who  left
           Afghanistan in 2008, aged 22.




        c. He has no identified  vulnerabilities  or  health  (physical  or
           mental) problems.



        d. He speaks Pashto.



        e. He has lost contact with his family and does not know anyone  in
           Kabul.



        f. He does not have a Tazkera (identity document).



        g.   He  has  9  years  of  schooling  and  worked  in  farming  in
           Afghanistan.



257. Upon arriving in Kabul the appellant  will  able  to  obtain  a  modest
  amount of financial support, which is in general available  to  returnees
  from the UK, that will sustain him for several weeks.




258. The appellant will be significantly disadvantaged  by  the  absence  of
  family or other support network, who could be expected to assist him with
  accommodation, work and navigating an unfamiliar city. It will also be to
  his disadvantage that he does not have a Tazkera.



259. On the other hand, the appellant  has  the  advantage  of  having  left
  Afghanistan as an adult. Even though  he  does  not  have  experience  of
  living in Kabul, he has spent most of his life, and his formative  years,
  in Afghanistan and therefore has a familiarity with  the  societal  norms
  and culture. He also has the advantage of being healthy.



260. Even without the  support  of  family  or  a  network,  and  without  a
  Tazkera, the appellant, as a healthy man who is familiar with the culture
  and norms of Afghanistan and who has no impairments (physical or  mental)
  preventing him from undertaking manual work or forming  connections  with
  other inhabitants of Kabul:



        a. will be able to  obtain  inexpensive  accommodation  in  a  chai
           khana/tea house. The accommodation will be  basic  (with  shared
           rooms and washing facilities, and a lack of locks) but  it  will
           enable him to avoid destitution and provide him with  a  quality
           of accommodation that is at a  similar  level  to  much  of  the
           population of Kabul;



        b. will be able to obtain work as  a  day  labourer.  He  will  not
           receive  a  regular  or  guaranteed  income  but  the   evidence
           indicates that he will earn a  sufficient  amount  to  feed  and
           accommodate himself; and



        c. will be able to make connections  and  create  his  own  network
           which will,  in  due  course,  increase  his  opportunities  for
           accommodation and employment.



261. The appellant will be living in a city where violence is prevalent  but
  the chance of him personally  being  a  casualty  (either  of  the  armed
  conflict or crime) is small.



262. The evidence indicates that the appellant will be in a better  position
  - in terms of security risk, poverty and  availability  of  accommodation
  and work - in Kabul than he would be in many other parts of  Afghanistan.
  We do not have sufficient evidence before  us  to  form  a  view  on  how
  circumstances in Kabul compare to those in Laghman Province.



263. Taking a holistic view and having regard to all relevant  circumstances
  pertaining to the appellant in Afghanistan we are satisfied  that  it  is
  reasonable, and not unduly harsh, to expect him to relocate to Kabul. The
  appellant's asylum appeal is therefore dismissed.



(I)  Article 8 ECHR

264. The appellant submits that his removal would breach  his  rights  under
  article 8 ECHR. Mr Singh argued that this is outside  the  scope  of  the
  appeal as the issue was not remitted by the  Court  of  Appeal.  Ms  Naik
  argues that it is within scope because the appellant raised article 8  in
  his original grounds to the First-tier Tribunal and the only  reason  the
  Panel in the 2018 UT decision refused to consider the matter was that  it
  was raised at a late stage in the proceedings.




265. We agree with Mr Singh. The scope of this appeal is as decided  by  the
  Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal did not provide for article 8  to
  be considered. We therefore decline to do so. However,  in  case  we  are
  wrong, we set out below what we would have decided  if  we  had  accepted
  that article 8 is within the scope of the appeal.




266. We have not been provided with any evidence, or submissions, about  the
  appellant's private  and  family  life  in  the  UK.  Ms  Naik's  written
  submissions note that over four years have elapsed since the  appellant's
  article  8  rights  were  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
  submissions  do  not,  however,  provide  any   information   about   the
  appellant's life, and the relationships he has formed, during  this  four
  year period. In the absence of any evidence to indicate the contrary,  we
  find that the appellant does not have any relationships in  the  UK  that
  engage article 8 ECHR. However, given he has lived in the UK for  over  a
  decade, we are prepared to accept, despite the lack of evidence, that the
  appellant has a private life in the UK that engages article 8(1) ECHR.



267. The only argument advanced by the  appellant  as  to  why  his  removal
  would not be proportionate under article 8(2) ECHR is that there would be
  very significant obstacles to integration into Afghanistan and  therefore
  the conditions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) are met.



268. In Kamara v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  Sales  LJ  (as  he  then  was)
  explained that the concept of integration is a broad one.  He  stated  at
  paragraph 14 that:


         "The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day by day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life".


269. We do not doubt that life will be challenging for the  appellant  given
  he has not previously lived in Kabul and does not have family or  another
  support network in the city. However, he has spent most of  his  life  in
  Afghanistan, where he lived until he was 22; he has experience working in
  Afghanistan;  and  he   does   not   have   any   medical   problems   or
  vulnerabilities. He has also not identified  any  beliefs,  attitudes  or
  values that would put him outside  the  norm  in  Afghanistan.  In  these
  circumstances, we are satisfied that the appellant will be  an  "insider"
  in the sense that he will have an understanding of how  life  is  carried
  on, and will be able, over time, to build relationships  and  participate
  in the society. The appellant therefore does not meet the  conditions  of
  paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).




270. In considering whether  the  appellant's  removal  is  justified  under
  Article 8(2), we have had regard to the considerations listed in  Section
  117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  appellant's
  removal is in the public interest of  maintaining  effective  immigration
  control (Section 117B(1)) and only little weight should be given  to  his
  private life established in the UK (Section 117B(5)). We  have  not  been
  provided with evidence in relation to a qualifying partner or  child  and
  therefore Sections 117B(4) and (6) are  not  relevant.   No  evidence  in
  relation to Sections 117B(2) and (3) has been adduced but we will assume,
  for the purposes of this assessment, that these do not weigh against him.






271. The appellant has not made submissions, or  adduced  any  evidence,  to
  show that, aside from the difficulties he would face in Kabul  (which  we
  have found do not meet the threshold  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)),  his
  removal would give rise to unjustifiably harsh consequences for  him  (or
  anyone else). In the absence  of  any  such  evidence  -  or  indeed  any
  evidence about his private life in the UK -  and  having  regard  to  the
  considerations in Section 117B - we conclude that the  interference  with
  the appellant's private life arising from his removal is justified  under
  Article 8(2) ECHR.

Notice of Decision




272. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  aside  by  Upper
  Tribunal Judge O'Connor (Appendix B).




273. We remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.








Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008




274. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
  is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or
  indirectly identify him or any member  of  his  family.   This  direction
  applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply
  with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:





|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 28 April 2020           |






































                 Appendix A: Summary of Documentary Evidence



UNAMA Reports

1. We have considered UNAMA annual reports from  2017  and  2018,  two  2019
  Quarterly Reports, a mid-year report from 2019,  and  a  2019  report  on
  election-related violence.




2. Since 2009 UNAMA has been systematically documenting civilian  casualties
  attributed  to  the  conflict  in  Afghanistan.  When  UNAMA  refers   to
  casualties they include both  deaths  and  injuries.  A  person  is  only
  counted as a civilian casualty in its statistical reporting if there  are
  at least three different and independent types of sources. UNAMA does not
  presume fighting age men are either civilians or  fighters  but  assesses
  claims on the facts available in relation  to  each  casualty  and  where
  insufficient  information  is  available  such  casualties  will  not  be
  included in the statistical reporting. UNAMA acknowledges that there is a
  possibility of under reporting of civilian casualties  because  of  their
  methodology.




3. The UNAMA Quarterly Report dated 17 October 2019 expressed grave  concern
  about the unprecedented levels of violence harming civilians  during  the
  third quarter of 2019. It observed that, although during the  first  half
  of 2019 it had documented a decrease in civilian casualties in comparison
  to previous years, in July, August and September 2019 extreme  levels  of
  violence brought the civilian casualties levels back to unacceptably high
  levels.




4.  The  2018  annual  report  similarly   expressed   concern   about   the
  unacceptably high level of harm to civilians. It  noted  that  there  had
  been a significant increase in casualties from suicide attacks as well as
  from aerial operations, with Kabul remaining the province most affected.




5. Multiple figures for  numbers  of  casualties  are  given  in  the  UNAMA
  reports. The most relevant to our assessment are as follows:




      Casualty rates across Afghanistan




6. Civilian deaths and injuries by year are documented in  the  2018  annual
  report as follows:




      |2013              |8,638            |
|2014              |10,535           |
|2015              |11,035           |
|2016              |11,452           |
|2017              |10,459           |
|2018              |10,993           |



7. The UNAMA Quarterly Report dated 17 October 2019 records that there  were
  8,239 civilian deaths and injuries between 1  January  and  30  September
  2019 (of which 923 were women and 2,461 were  children).  The  comparable
  figures for previous years are 8,240 (2018), 8,084 (2017), 8,540  (2016),
  8,487 (2015) and 8,034 (2014)




      Casualty rates in Kabul Province




8. The 2018 annual report records  1,866  civilian  casualties  in  2018  in
  Kabul Province. The report lists 34  provinces  in  order  of  number  of
  civilian casualties (in absolute terms). Kabul has the highest number  of
  casualties. The second highest is Nangarhar  with  1,015  and  the  third
  highest is Helmand with 880.




9. The 2017  annual  report  records  1,831  civilian  casualties  in  Kabul
  Province.




10. The UNAMA Quarterly Report dated 17  October  2019  records  that  there
  were 1,491  civilian  deaths  and  injuries  between  1  January  and  30
  September 2019 in Kabul Province.



Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan  and  its
implications for international peace and security, 3 September 2019

11.  The  report  discusses  political  developments  in  respect   of   the
  presidential election (for 28 September 2019) and the peace process.  The
  security situation is described  as  volatile,  with  a  high  number  of
  security incidents.




12. The report states  that  the  protracted  conflict  continues  to  cause
  extreme levels of physical and psychological  harm  and  high  levels  of
  displacement,  further  compounded  by  political  instability,  drought,
  sudden onset natural disasters, food insecurity  and  poverty.  Conflict-
  related displacement (throughout Afghanistan) increased by 2% compared to
  the same period in  2018  and  internally  displaced  persons  living  in
  temporary settlements continue to face difficult conditions, including  a
  lack  of  basic  essential  services  beyond  the  initial  provision  of
  humanitarian assistance.




13.  The  report  documents  that  the  humanitarian  drought  response   to
  displaced people ended in June 2019 and that 5.2 million people have been
  provided with food assistance, agricultural inputs  and  other  forms  of
  humanitarian assistance. It states that the most recent nutrition  survey
  in Afghanistan showed that 22 of the 34 provinces are above the emergency
  level threshold for acute malnutrition and that through the summer months
  the ongoing agricultural harvest is expected to improve  the  nutritional
  situation, although chronic food insecurity issues will persist  in  many
  parts of the country.




14. It is stated that the return  of  undocumented  Afghans  from  Iran  and
  Pakistan has decreased by more than one third  compared  with  2018,  but
  that the number of Afghans returning from Turkey has increased.




15. It is noted that in the humanitarian response plan for 2018 - 2021,  6.3
  million  people  were  identified  as  being  in  need  of   humanitarian
  assistance in 2019 and humanitarian partners had been able to  reach  2.7
  million people with assistance as at the end of March.




16.  The  report  expresses  concern  about  the  high  level  of   civilian
  casualties (although noting the lower amount during  the  first  half  of
  2019 compared to the same period in 2018)  and  states  that  Afghanistan
  remains one of the most dangerous countries in the world for humanitarian
  workers, who continue to face unacceptable risks.



Report of the UN Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan  and  its
implications for international peace and security, dated 14 June 2019




17. The report is similar to the report in September 2019.




18. Concern is expressed at the armed conflict continuing  to  take  a  high
  toll on the lives of Afghan civilians. Reference is  made  to  levels  of
  displacement remaining high and being compounded by chronic  poverty  and
  lack  of  basic  services   and   livelihood   opportunities   throughout
  Afghanistan.




19. It is stated  that  between  21  January  and  30  April  2019,  140,381
  undocumented persons and refugee returnees arrived in Afghanistan.




Minority Rights International: peoples under threat 2019

20. This report is not specific to Afghanistan.  Amongst  other  things,  it
  discusses the role of social media  in  stigmatising  target  groups  and
  legitimising violence. Afghanistan is ranked  as  the  country  with  the
  fourth greatest risk to minorities, with the groups  under  threat  being
  Hazara, Pushtun, Tajiks, Uzbeks, Turkmen, and Baluchis. No explanation is
  given for why these particular groups are said to be at risk.




21. A short section on Afghanistan states that the civilian  death  toll  in
  2018 reached an all-time yearly high of 3,804 killed and  7,189  injured,
  with a spike in fighting and government-controlled territory shrinking to
  its lowest level since 2001.




EASO country of origin information report: Afghanistan  security  situation,
June 2019




22. The report includes a section on Kabul.




23. The population of Kabul City is estimated as 4,117,414  inhabitants  for
  2018/19 but it is  noted  the  figure  is  disputed,  with  some  sources
  claiming that it should be almost 6 million.




24. Kabul is described as a melting pot for various ethnic,  linguistic  and
  religious groups, with each settled in specific places. It is stated that
  in the most recently settled areas residents depend mostly  on  qawmi  (a
  social unit based on kinship, residence and occupation) networks in order
  to  find  shelter,  jobs  and  collectively  advance   their   settlement
  conditions. However, in the central areas of the  city  the  movement  of
  residents is more common with a disruptive effect on social networks.




25. The picture of conflict in Kabul City is said  to  be  characterised  by
  asymmetric tactical warfare with suicide bombers  and  IEDs.  The  report
  states that in 2018 UNAMA documented 1,686 civilian casualties  in  Kabul
  City. It is stated that out of 65 suicide and complex attacks across  the
  country in 2018, 28 occurred in Kabul City, an increase of 5% compared to
  2017.




26. Between 1 January 2018 and 28 February 2019, there were said to  be  288
  incidents relating to insurgents in Kabul City with  a  wide  variety  of
  targets.




27. It is stated that as many as two-thirds of Afghans displaced from  their
  province have moved towards  the  five  regional  capitals,  and  Kabul's
  growth has been particularly significant although  the  total  number  of
  IDPs in Kabul is not known and movement to and within the city is  fluid.
  IDPs often settle in the  outskirts  and  frequently  mingle  with  other
  vulnerable  groups  such  as  the  urban  poor,  returnees  and  economic
  migrants. Due to lack of adequate land and affordable housing,  most  new
  and protracted IDPs in Kabul reside in one of the 60 to 70  informal  and
  illegal settlements around the city.




28. The report refers to worrying indications of rising poverty in  informal
  settlements, contributing to street begging,  overcrowded  accommodation,
  heightened risk of gender-based violence and perceived isolation  of  IDP
  families from surrounding communities.




29. IDPs arriving and residing in Kabul are described as adding pressure  to
  the  community,  basic  services  and  social  infrastructure,   strongly
  affecting the absorption capacity of the city. Reference  is  made  to  a
  Norwegian study published in January 2018 in which more than 80%  of  the
  Kabul IDP respondents  listed  access  to  food  and  water  as  a  major
  challenge in their daily lives. It is noted that Kabul is facing a severe
  water shortage, which seriously affects already  vulnerable  groups  like
  displaced people.




30.  Challenges  said  to  face  displaced  persons  include   limited   job
  opportunities, few or no social  protection  nets,  poor  shelter/housing
  conditions, impeded access to education and  healthcare,  and  continuous
  fear of  eviction.  IDPs  are  said  to  mostly  work  as  unskilled  day
  labourers, competing for low-paid and precarious jobs in the construction
  sector and to a lesser extent in agriculture.




31. The report  notes  that  Kabul  City  sees  large  inflows  of  refugees
  returning from Pakistan and Iran, putting further strain  on  the  city's
  services. Reference is made to an Oxfam study among  returnees  in  Kabul
  City which found that most depend  on  relatives  for  accommodation  and
  other in-kind support and report a deterioration  in  the  situation  for
  returnees.




32. The report states that  the  World  Bank  reports  about  80%  of  Kabul
  inhabitants living in informal settlements and  that  returnees  find  it
  hard to integrate in the city and find stable employment.



EASO country of origin information report:  Afghanistan  Key  socio-economic
indicators: focus on Kabul City, Mazar-e Sharif and Herat City, April 2019




33. An estimate for the population of Kabul City is given as being from  3.5
  to 5.5 million and Kabul is described as being one of the world's fastest
  growing cities, its population increasing fourfold since 2001.




34. It is stated that Kabul is a destination for a large number  of  Afghans
  returning to the country, with many returnees ending up in Kabul  because
  of relatively higher security  than  in  their  regions  of  origin,  and
  because of expectations of more job opportunities and support facilities.






35. More than one third of residents of Kabul Province were born  abroad  or
  elsewhere in Afghanistan, with most returnees living outside the  centre,
  often in remote areas, where recent immigrants  from  the  same  regional
  background perpetuate a village society.




36. The large number of returnees has challenged the absorption capacity  of
  the government and NGOs. According to IOM data  until  June  2018,  Kabul
  Province has 178,835 returnees.




37. The total number of IDPs in Afghanistan in September 2018 was  at  least
  2 million, and Kabul is a destination for many regardless of their  place
  of origin in Afghanistan. One third of Kabul residents were  born  abroad
  or elsewhere in Afghanistan.




38. In 2016 there were about 60 recognised  informal  settlements  in  Kabul
  housing 65,000 registered returnees and IDPs, with  residents  living  in
  partial or whole mud houses. Nearly half of settlements were provided for
  free by the government, but these small sites  were  no  longer  able  to
  expand, driving households arriving after 2010 to rent properties in  the
  host community. Many IDPs without family connections or  the  ability  to
  rent a house ended up in camps.




39. The report describes the role of a Tazkera, which  is  said  to  be  the
  most important identification document in Afghanistan. It is required  to
  access a  range  of  public  services,  such  as  education,  employment,
  healthcare and official loans provided by a  bank;  and  is  particularly
  important in urban areas in order to access basic  services  and  credit.
  The lack  of  a  Tazkera  could  increase  a  person's  vulnerability  to
  harassment from the authorities. Generally, in order to obtain a  Tazkera
  IDPs need to travel to their district of origin.




40. Kabul is a  "magnet"  for  labourers  as  it  is  the  major  trade  and
  employment hub in Afghanistan. Salaries  are  generally  higher  than  in
  other   provinces,   particularly   for   those   working   for   foreign
  organisations.




41. It is stated that according to a  report  from  Oxfam,  extended  family
  networks are vital for returnees in finding employment and housing. Oxfam
  recorded Kabul having a total inflow of 628,260  returnees  and  IDPs  by
  June 2017 with most living outside the City centre, often in remote areas
  and camps. Oxfam's research noted that returnees can generally work  only
  from time to time in Kabul as daily wage workers  and  most  cannot  find
  jobs everyday making earnings unstable.




42. The report comments on the high number of households  living  below  the
  poverty line in Kabul - noting that even though there may be a better job
  market, the  cost  of  living  is  significantly  higher  than  in  other
  provinces, particularly  for  housing  but  also  for  some  food  items.
  Residents of Kabul tend to rely more on credit than  other  urban  areas,
  given the expense of food and accommodation.




43. Food insecurity is highlighted as a problem in Kabul,  particularly  for
  IDPs and returnees. In December 2018, the Famine Early  Warnings  Systems
  labelled Kabul as "stressed" meaning that at least one in five households
  had minimally adequate food consumption but was  unable  to  afford  some
  essential non-food expenditures. Herat, in contrast, was  categorised  as
  being in "crisis", meaning that at least one in five households had  food
  consumption gaps or above usual acute malnutrition or was only marginally
  able to meet minimum food needs.




44. Kabul is ranked as the fifth fastest growing city in the world  with  an
  average annual growth rate of 4.74%.




45. An estimated 70% of the population  live  in  informal  settlements  and
  most new construction  is  in  this  category.  The  growth  in  informal
  settlements has prevented a major homelessness crisis, but  has  worsened
  existing problems such as lack of sewerage system and  inefficient  waste
  disposal.




46. In 2017, the price of formal  housing  in  Kabul  was  around  35,000  -
  500,000 USD whilst average monthly household income was estimated at  208
  USD. Renting is on the increase in urban areas, and is considered  common
  practice in Kabul, where 27.6% of households rent  the  unit  where  they
  live. It is common for new settlers in Kabul to settle according to their
  place of origin, allowing them to benefit from social networks  in  order
  to occupy  and  enclose  land,  and  many  urban  households  accommodate
  extended family members from rural areas.




47. The report records a 2017 Asia Foundation's survey recording that  23.7%
  of Afghans living in Kabul and other central areas reported  issues  with
  drinking water as one of the biggest local problems.




48. Kabul City is one  of  the  world's  few  national  capitals  without  a
  central sewerage system, and as a result there are health problems  which
  are compounded by  the  increase  in  population  and  various  types  of
  pollution.




49. Kabul is regarded as one  of  the  world's  most  stressed  cities.  The
  majority of shared water points and wells are contaminated, posing  grave
  health concerns. It is estimated that only  32%  of  the  population  has
  access to running water, and only 10% receive potable water.




Country  of  Origin  Report  by  the  Department  for  Country   of   Origin
Information Reports, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the  Netherlands,  dated
1 March 2019




50. The report discusses  the  political  and  military  situation,  stating
  that, at the end of July 20,  65%  percent  of  Afghanistan's  population
  lived in areas under the Afghan government's control or influence,  which
  is unchanged since October 2017. Kabul is an area under Afghan government
  control. The report noted that even areas under government control suffer
  security incidents.




51. The report refers to the continued high-level  of  civilian  casualties,
  relying on UMAMA figures. It states that citizens of Kabul City were  hit
  relatively hard by suicide and complex attacks.




52. The report cites casualty figures reported  by  SIGAR  showing  civilian
  casualties between January and August 2018 of 1,225  in  Kabul  province,
  corresponding to 0.22 casualties  per  thousand  (on  the  basis  of  the
  population being 5,452,652). Nine provinces had higher casualty rates per
  thousand, the highest being Nangarhar with 0.50 per  thousand  and  Kunar
  with 0.39 per thousand.




53. The report notes that, out of an estimated population of  32.5  million,
  at the end of 2017 there were more than 2  million  internally  displaced
  persons, and in January 2019 10.2 million Afghans were  affected  by  the
  food crisis brought about by drought. It is stated that nearly 16 million
  Afghans live in poverty and an estimated 10 million  have  little  or  no
  access to essential healthcare.




54. It is stated that around Kabul City there are more than  50  slums  with
  an estimated 55,000 displaced Afghans  living  in  them  and  that  Kabul
  attracts the most migrants in the country.




55. The report states that  in  2018  nearly  806,000  undocumented  Afghans
  returned from Pakistan and Iran, with most of those returning  travelling
  via  border  crossings  in  Herat  Province  and  Nimroz  Province.  Most
  returnees settle in urban areas such as Kabul, with many facing  problems
  such as housing, inadequate access to water,  food  and  healthcare,  and
  lack of regular work and income. The report  states  that  returnees  are
  almost entirely dependent on extended family networks  and  international
  assistance on arrival.




Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR) reports

56.  SIGAR  reports  to  the  United  States  Congress  on  the  status   of
  reconstruction in Afghanistan, the focus being on the risk to the  United
  States reconstruction investment in Afghanistan. We reviewed several 2019
  quarterly reports as well as a 2019 "high risk list" report.




57. The reports discuss, amongst other things, the widespread insecurity  in
  Afghanistan in the light of the ongoing  and  resilient  insurgency,  the
  inadequacy of civil policing, the endemic corruption,  and  the  sluggish
  economic growth.




58. Reference is made to  the  significant  drought  in  2018,  followed  by
  flooding. The UN Deputy Special Representative of the Security General is
  quoted as describing the level of suffering in 2018/9 as being as bad  as
  he has ever seen, following the drought and in light of the  high  levels
  of violence and general poverty level. Most Afghan households are said to
  face acute food insecurity.




59. SIGAR states that Afghanistan is notably insecure and that the US  State
  Department advises against travel to the country as all areas are unsafe.
  The 30 January 2019 report states that SIGAR and  US  embassy  staff  are
  forbidden to travel in the country without armed escorts and cannot  even
  get to the international airport from  the  centre  of  Kabul  except  by
  taking an embassy helicopter.




60. When discussing civilian deaths and injuries, SIGAR  refers  to  figures
  reported  by UNAMA (summarised above) as well as "RS  [Resolute  Support]
  civilian casualty data", whose methodology is described as  relying  upon
  operational reports from RS's Train,  Advise,  and  Assist  Command,  the
  Coalition  force  headquarters,  and  ANDSF  reports  from   the   Afghan
  presidential information command  centre  to  collect  civilian  casualty
  data.




61. RS reports cited in the SIGAR report state the following in  respect  of
  civilian casualties between 1 January - 16 November 2018:




        a. Total casualties in Afghanistan of 8,260, corresponding to  0.25
           casualties per thousand (based on a population of 33,329,050).

        b. Total casualties in Kabul Province of  1,703,  corresponding  to
           0.31  casualties  per  thousand  (based  on  a   population   of
           5,452,652).

        c. There are several provinces  with  casualty  rates  higher  than
           Kabul, such as Nangarhar (0.81 per thousand),  Kunar  (0.52  per
           thousand), Uruzgan (0.51 per thousand)  and  Paktiya  (0.48  per
           thousand).

        d. In absolute terms, Kabul has the highest  number  of  casualties
           (1,703). The only other province where there were more than  500
           casualties  is  Nangarhar,  where  the  total  is   1,517.   The
           population in Nangarhar is 1,864,582  (in  contrast  to  over  5
           million in Kabul province), which explains why the casualty rate
           per thousand of the population is higher than Kabul.




62. The report compares the number of enemy initiated attacks  in  different
  provinces between 1 January and October 2018. The figure in Kabul is 556.
  There are 11 provinces with a higher figure (including 8 where it is over
  a thousand).




Human Rights Watch: Afghanistan, Events of 2018




63. The report refers to more than 10,000 civilians being killed or  injured
  in 2018, as well as a sharp escalation in attacks in urban areas  by  IS,
  particularly targeting the  Shia  population.  It  also  notes  that  the
  Taliban,  despite  claiming  to  target  only  government  and   military
  facilities, uses  indiscriminate  means  that  have  killed  and  injured
  hundreds of civilians in 2018.



Report by the Swedish migration  agency,  dated  4  December  2018  (English
summary only)

64. The report provided to us is in Swedish, but the summary is in  English,
  and we refer only to this.




65. The summary states that in July 2018 the government of  Afghanistan  had
  control/influence over approximately  65%  of  the  population.  It  also
  states that there has been no significant change in the situation in  the
  country as a whole in 2018 but violence between conflicting  parties  has
  intensified  and  the  Uppsala  conflict  data  programme  has   recorded
  significantly more conflict-related deaths (civilians and combatants)  in
  the first 8 months of 2018 than in the corresponding period of 2017.  The
  report also states that the number  of  new  conflict-related  internally
  displaced persons as  well  as  the  number  of  security  incidents  has
  decreased in 2018 in comparison to 2017, but this cannot be explained  by
  improved conditions for civilians.




66. The report states that there is  an  increased  risk  for  civilians  to
  suffer from targeted violence and  the  Shia  minority  has  increasingly
  become a target of attacks, with Shi'ites in the  western  the  parts  of
  Kabul particularly affected by targeted violence.




67.  The  security  situation  in  Kabul  City   is   described   as   being
  characterised by increased violence and increased  frequency  of  suicide
  bombings. It is stated that although  the  incident  level  in  Kabul  is
  relatively low, each individual attack  can  potentially  claim  a  large
  number of casualties, and  although  Kabul  is  under  stable  government
  control the frequent attacks have a great impact  on  people's  perceived
  security and many residents limit their movement  in  the  city  to  only
  necessary travel.




The Asia Foundation: Afghanistan in 2018: A Survey of the Afghan People

68. The Asia Foundation Survey is based on a total  of  15,012  face-to-face
  interviews with Afghans over 18 years old. Most of the figures  given  in
  the report are for Afghanistan generally,  rather  than  Kabul.  We  have
  highlighted in this summary data specific to Kabul where this is given in
  the report.




69. 32.8%  of  respondents  stated  that  they  were  optimistic  about  the
  direction of the country (which is the same as the previous survey);  and
  61.3% were pessimistic (which is almost the same as  the  previous  year,
  where the figure was 61.2%).  The  proportion  who  were  optimistic  was
  higher amongst Pashtuns (42.5%) than other ethnic  groups.  It  was  also
  higher amongst those  living  in  rural  areas  (34.8%  for  rural  areas
  compared to 26.5% for  urban  areas).  Over  two  thirds  of  respondents
  (70.2%) in the Central/Kabul region reported a pessimistic outlook.




70. Respondents were asked to give two reasons why they thought the  country
  was either moving in the right, or the wrong, direction.




        a. For the 32.8% who thought the country was moving  in  the  right
           direction, the  most  frequently  given  reasons  were  improved
           security and rebuilding/reconstruction.




        b. For the 61.3% who thought the country was moving  in  the  wrong
           direction, the most frequently cited reason,  by  a  significant
           margin,  (both  in  Kabul  and  in  Afghanistan  generally)  was
           insecurity.




71. When asked about local problems, the most common  response  was  concern
  about utilities and public services, in particular the lack  of  drinking
  water and problems with electricity. In the Central/Kabul region, 47%  of
  respondents cited lack of  utilities/public  services  as  their  biggest
  problem, 30% cited  lack  of  employment  opportunities,  and  28%  cited
  security/crime issues.




72. In response to a question asking about  personal  safety  and  security,
  71.1% of respondents (and 75.3% in urban areas) said  that  they  always,
  often, or sometimes fear for their or their family's safety.




73. 12.5% of respondents in the Central/Kabul region reported that  they  or
  their family had suffered from an act of violence or criminality  in  the
  past year. The figure was  18.6%  for  Afghanistan  as  a  whole.  Across
  Afghanistan, physical attacks or beatings were the most reported  violent
  or criminal act (41.3%), and this  was  higher  for  males  (43.5%)  than
  females (39.1%)




74. The survey shows that a frequent reason for pessimism about  Afghanistan
  is unemployment and a poor performing economy. 75.2%  of  respondents  in
  Kabul stated that their employment opportunities have gotten worse.




75.  The  survey  notes  that,   according   to   the   Central   statistics
  organisation, the current  unemployment  rate  in  Afghanistan  is  23.9%
  (18.3% for men). Respondents in the Central/Kabul region were  the  least
  likely to report earning income (41.6%, compared to 46.3% for Afghanistan
  as a whole).




76. 62.2% of households report an average monthly income between  AFN  5,001
  and 20,000.




77.  Nationally, 29.3% of respondents reported having access to  electricity
  16 - 24 hours a day. The figure was  54.6%  for  urban  respondents,  and
  those in the Central/Kabul region and in the  north-west  were  the  most
  likely to report 16 - 24 hours of electricity per day.




78. The survey observes that water is of greater concern today than  at  any
  time in the past. It states that respondents in the Central/Kabul  region
  and in  particular  in  Kabul  City  had  experienced  a  sharp  drop  in
  groundwater levels, and scientists are  becoming  increasingly  concerned
  about  underground  water  reserves  in  the  next  10  years.  46.6%  of
  respondents in central/Kabul reported that access to clean drinking water
  for their household had gotten worse in the last year.




79. 36.8% (38.4% in central/Kabul) of respondents  stated  that  they  would
  leave Afghanistan if given the opportunity. Amongst those who  said  they
  would leave if given the opportunity, the most frequent reason given  was
  insecurity. Further, when asked what the government could do to make them
  want to  stay,  the  most  frequent  response  was  to  improve  domestic
  security/ prevent crime.



The Asia Foundation: Afghanistan in 2019: a survey of the Afghan people

80. Most of the figures given in the report are for  Afghanistan  generally,
  rather than Kabul. We have highlighted in this summary data  specific  to
  Kabul where this is given in the report.




81. From a survey sample of 17,812 Afghan  respondents,  36.1%  stated  that
  they were optimistic about the direction of the country (an increase from
  the previous survey, where the figure was  32.8%);  and  58.2%  said  the
  country is going in the wrong direction (down slightly from 61.3% in  the
  2018 survey). In the central/Kabul region, 30.3% were optimistic.




82. The most common reason given for being optimistic about the  future  was
  improved security. Insecurity/crime was the most common reason  given  by
  those who think the country is moving in the wrong direction.




83. In the Central/Kabul  region,  lack  of  utilities/public  services  was
  given most frequently as the biggest problem in the local  area,  closely
  followed by insecurity/crime issues.




84. The report states that 74.5% of respondents stated that they often  fear
  for their personal safety, which is the highest  rate  since  the  survey
  began. It is recorded that 84.6% of respondents in Kabul reported some or
  a lot of fear when travelling from one part of the country to another.




85. The report found that 15% of respondents  in  the  Central/Kabul  region
  reported an experience of violence or crime, which was 2.5%  higher  than
  in 2018.




86.  Across  Afghanistan,  55%   of   respondents   said   that   employment
  opportunities for their household had worsened. The figure in  Kabul  was
  significantly higher than this, at 71.7%.




87. Most respondents in Kabul/Central region reported an income  of  between
  AFN 5000 and 20,000.



Human Rights Watch: "No Safe Place" -  Insurgent  Attacks  on  Civilians  in
Afghanistan, May 2018




88. The  report  states  that  since  2016  insurgent  groups  have  sharply
  increased attacks in Kabul. The report states that the cost to  civilians
  is  far  greater  than  the  numbers  killed  or  injured,  due  to   the
  psychological trauma for relatives, the devastating financial impact  for
  families who lose a breadwinner, the social consequences  for  women  who
  become widows, and the impact on children who often need to leave  school
  to supplement family income. The problems are compounded because many  of
  those who  are  injured  are  unable  to  access  suitable  treatment  or
  medication, and there is inadequate state support for victims  and  their
  families.



Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre webpage printout on Afghanistan,  21
October 2019




89. It is  reported  that  there  were  435,000  new  displacements  due  to
  disasters and 372,000 new displacements due to conflict and  violence  in
  2018; and that the total number of IDPs from conflict and violence as  of
  31 December 2018 was 2,598,000. It  states  that  there  were  a  further
  319,000 new displacements in the first half of  2019,  of  which  213,000
  were associated with conflict and 106,000 associated with disasters.




90. It is stated that more than a million Afghans returned in  2016,  mostly
  from Iran and Pakistan, and 610,000 returned in 2017. In 2018 the  number
  of returnees from Iran reached an all-time high of over 750,000  but  the
  returns from Pakistan were at an all-time low.




Weekly  situation  reports  in  2019  from  the  IOM  concerning  return  of
undocumented Afghans



91. A report for 6 - 12 October 2019 records total  returns  from  Iran  and
  Pakistan since 1 January 2019 of 384,136.  367,175  were  from  Iran  and
  16,961 from Pakistan.



IOM Displacement Tracking Matrix Afghanistan, Baseline  Mobility  Assessment
October - December 2018

92. This report notes that  between  2012  and  2018  there  were  3,225,380
  returnees from abroad and 3,529,971 IDPs.




93. Between 2012 and 2018, 192,278 returnees from abroad  and  177,563  IDPs
  moved to Kabul Province, resulting in  a  total  inflow  (returnees  plus
  arrival IDPs) of 369,841. This is recorded as being 7% of the population.
  The  percentage  of  the  population  who  are  returnees  and  IDPs   is
  significantly higher in other parts  of  the  country,  such  as  Badghis
  (41%), Nangarhar (33%), and Jawzjan (42%) and Herat (24%). 31  out  of  a
  total of 33 provinces had a greater  percentage  increase  in  population
  than Kabul as a result of returnee and IDP inflows.




IOM Community-Based Needs Assessment May - June 2018

94. This report recorded that the  greatest  proportion  of  the  population
  affected by safety and security in the last 3 months was in Takhar  (17%)
  and Nangarhar (15%). A comparison of fatalities and injuries due  to  the
  conflict in the last 3 months showed 1,579 in Nangarhar,  604  in  Kunduz
  and 151 in Kabul.




95. The report showed average monthly  household  income  in  Kabul  of  AFN
  5,599, average monthly expenses of AFN 7,405, and average household  debt
  of AFN 5,506.




96. The report referred to the unemployment rate  for  men  in  Kabul  being
  59%, and to 18% of households in Kabul being unable to afford rent in the
  last 6 months.







OCHA Afghanistan weekly and monthly humanitarian updates, and bulletins




97. The weekly report for 7 - 13 October  2019  records  that,  during  2019
  until 5 October, there were 373,700  returnees  from  Iran,  21,120  from
  Pakistan and 16,730 from other countries. The total  number  of  IDPs  in
  2019 until 13 October were 314,200.




98. The monthly update for August 2019 notes the grave impact  on  civilians
  of the highly unpredictable and politicised situation in Afghanistan, and
  that there has been a marked increase in airstrikes and complex  attacks.
  The update describes how years  of  continuous  hostilities  have  caused
  extreme levels of physical and psychological harm; and that  poverty  and
  high levels of debt have reduced people's ability  to  cope  with  sudden
  shocks. Rapid population growth and continued  displacement  is  said  to
  further compound the stress on urban centres and increase competition for
  local resources. A further point raised is that substantial returns  from
  Iran and Pakistan are  likely  to  continue  due  to  the  political  and
  economic situation in those countries along with the perceived durability
  of peace in Afghanistan.




99. The  humanitarian  bulletin  1  April  -  30  June  2019  observes  that
  Afghanistan is recovering from the worst drought in a decade.  The  World
  Food Programme assisted 2.7 million people in 2018 and 1.9 million in the
  first 3 months of 2019.  However,  in  April  2019  the  programme  began
  scaling down and people have high hopes  for  the  next  harvest  season.
  There has also been flooding, killing  147  people  and  destroying  over
  24,653 homes between 3 January 2019 and 23 June 2019.




100. The humanitarian response plan (2018 - 2021) dated 3  May  2019  refers
  to Afghanistan being susceptible to recurrent,  extreme  climatic  shocks
  and highlights the devastating impact of the drought in 2018.  Even  with
  the drought, ongoing hostilities and the conflict  remained  the  largest
  driver  of  humanitarian   need   throughout   2018.   Conflict   induced
  displacement in 2018 is recorded as affecting 382,627 people, whereas  in
  2017 the figure was 483,946 people. Humanitarian need was exacerbated  in
  2018 by the large number of returnees from Iran (775,000) and the chronic
  poverty, lack of development and access to quality basic  services,  with
  an estimated 55% of Afghans living below the  national  poverty  line  in
  2016/17.




Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  of  the  United  Nations:  Afghanistan
Emergency Livelihoods Response Plan 2019




101. This report states that the  lengthy  conflict  and  recurrent  natural
  disasters have debilitated institutions and weakened  the  resilience  of
  the population, making it nearly impossible for communities to adequately
  cope with further shocks.  The  2018  drought  was  the  most  severe  in
  decades, and compounded by conflict,  economic  downturn,  pests,  animal
  diseases,  and  internal  and  cross-border  movements.  Afghanistan   is
  described as experiencing a major food security and  livelihoods  crisis,
  with  an  estimated  13.5  million  people  facing  severe   acute   food
  insecurity, an increase of 6 million over the previous year. 14.3 million
  Afghans (out of 35.7 million) are said to live below  the  poverty  line.
  The report notes that Afghanistan is ranked 8 out of  170  countries  for
  vulnerability to the impact of climate change over the next 30 years.



Finnish Immigration Service: Afghanistan Fact-Finding Mission  to  Kabul  in
April 2019

102. This report follows a fact-finding mission to Kabul in  April  2019  to
  collect information on the living conditions of returnees in Kabul City.




103. The population of Kabul  is  estimated  as  being  between  3.5  and  5
  million. It is stated that almost one third of residents have lived parts
  of their lives somewhere else.




104. The  security  situation  is  described  as  the  biggest  concern  for
  returnees and civilians  in  general,  with  the  random  nature  of  the
  violence meaning that everyone is at risk. It is said that life tends  to
  return to normal very quickly after a security incident. It is also noted
  that Kabul is affected by criminal gangs, with kidnapping being  a  major
  concern for many citizens of the city.




105. The report describes high  levels  of  urbanisation  in  Kabul  without
  proper planning resulting in multiple problems, such as air pollution and
  inadequate access to clean water and waste management. In 2016/17 55%  of
  the population were living below the national poverty line, a significant
  increase from 2007/8 when it was 34%.




106. Migrant returns have been  increasing  in  2018  and  2019,  with  over
  770,000 undocumented returnees from Iran (along with about 2000 refugees)
  and 32,000 undocumented returnees from Pakistan (along with about  13,600
  refugees) in 2018. The top provinces  for  refugee  returns  were  Kabul,
  Nangarhar and Kunduz. For undocumented returnees from Pakistan,  the  top
  destinations were Kandahar, Nangarhar and Kunduz, and for those from Iran
  were Herat, Takhar and Ghor.




107. Many of those returning to Kabul are not from the City and do not  have
  a safety  net  or  extended  family.  Such  people  become  lost  in  the
  environment as there are no governmental services on which they can rely.




108. The report describes a  circular  migration  occurring  from  Iran,  as
  people are repeatedly deported and then the same people migrate  back  to
  Iran. It is suggested that the number of returnees is extremely high from
  Iran because the same people come and go dozens of times.




109. The report states that there are hardly any places  available  to  rent
  for people living on their  own,  as  landlords  require  connections  to
  people they trust;  and  Afghanistan  is  all  about  networks  based  on
  relatives and extended family ties.




110. The report states that the most common job in Kabul is  casual  or  day
  labourer, where there is very high job insecurity.




111. Many returnees from Europe have problems with their family because  the
  family has sold all their resources to send the family member  to  Europe
  and if he fails, the family are unable to pay  their  debts.  Return  can
  also be perceived as a kind  of  shame  or  indication  that  the  person
  committed a crime (and therefore was deported).




OCHA Afghanistan Humanitarian Needs Overview 2018, issued December 2017

112. This report records a total population of 34.5 million,  of  which  3.3
  million have acute  humanitarian  needs.  Further  statistics  about  the
  population of Afghanistan include: 1.9  million  are  conflict  affected,
  405,000 are conflict displaced, 944,000 are food insecure and 286,000 are
  affected by natural disaster. (The categories are not identical to  those
  in the 2019 UNOCHA overview).




113. In respect of Kabul, the report  states  that  there  are  0.6  million
  people with acute humanitarian needs and 1.7 million with chronic  needs.
  21,000 are conflict displaced, 394,000 are conflict affected, and  20,000
  natural disaster affected.




114. The report states that  because  of  the  deepening  conflict,  the  UN
  recently reclassified Afghanistan from a country in post conflict to  one
  in active conflict. Afghanistan is said to  be  in  a  protracted  crisis
  suffering from deep-rooted poverty and decades of  conflict.  The  report
  highlights the huge impact of the conflict/insecurity, natural  disasters
  and population influx.



OCHA Afghanistan Humanitarian Needs Overview 2019, issued November 2018




115. The security situation is described as chaotic and unpredictable,  with
  the  ongoing  hostilities  causing  extreme  levels   of   physical   and
  psychological harm to the population.




116. The report states that out of a population of 35.7 million:

        a. 6.3 million have acute humanitarian needs.

        b. 1.4 million are conflict affected.

        c. 700,000 are internally displaced.

        d. 270,000 are returnees and refugees.

        e. 140,000 suffer from sudden onset natural disasters.

        f. 3.9 million suffer from slow onset natural disasters.

        g. 2.6 million lack access to basic services

        h. 4 million are food insecure




117. The report compares need across the country. In Kabul, it is said  that
  there are 0.4 million people in need. This is broken down as 0.15 million
  conflict  affected,  0.02  million  conflict  displaced,   0.05   million
  returnees, 0.01 million suffering sudden onset natural  disasters,  0.004
  million slow onset natural disasters, and 0.24 million lacking access  to
  basic services.




118. Afghanistan is described as being in  a  pervasive  protection  crisis,
  causing  extreme  levels  of  physical  and  psychological  harm.  It  is
  estimated that in 2019 as many as 250,000 Afghans will require  emergency
  medical treatment as a result of continued conflict.




119. Population movement and enforced displacement is expected  to  increase
  due to the uncertain political climate in Pakistan and Iran,  where  most
  Afghans return from, and it is estimated that 1 million displaced  people
  will require life-saving humanitarian assistance in 2019.




120. Returning flows have accelerated since 2014, with a surge from Iran  of
  more than 670,000 in 2018. It is noted that there is a higher  prevalence
  of especially vulnerable individuals among returnees, but limited funding
  for IOM programs means that only 4% of  returnees  from  Iran  have  been
  assisted this year.  In  previous  years,  a  significant  proportion  of
  returnees would leave again shortly afterwards, but  the  trend  on  this
  seems to be changing with recent data showing a net return rather than  a
  circular migration pattern.




121. The drought in 2018 is described as affecting more than two  thirds  of
  Afghanistan   and   exacerbating   problems   in   already   impoverished
  communities.




122. The report describes the  invisible  toll  of  the  conflict  being  as
  severe as the physical, with the ever present threat of violence  turning
  daily activities into a potentially life-threatening affair. A report  is
  cited stating that 70% of men do not feel safe travelling  to  work,  the
  mosque, health and education facilities or the market,  and  that  people
  have restricted their movement as a consequence.




123. The report records that in October 2018  healthcare  workers  estimated
  that 41% of  trauma  cases  were  caused  by  events  related  to  active
  conflict.



OCHA Afghanistan Humanitarian Needs Overview 2020, issued December 2019

124. We  note  that  in  this  report  a  revised,  broader,  definition  of
  humanitarian action was  used.  This  makes  some  comparisons  with  the
  earlier humanitarian overview reports difficult.




125. The  report  describes  Afghanistan  as  the  scene  of  the  deadliest
  conflict on earth, with mass displacement choking the country's  unstable
  economy. It states that the  political  and  security  environments  have
  become more unstable over the past year.




126. The report records  a  total  population  of  37.6  million,  with  6.3
  million people in need in 2019, and  states  that  poverty  is  climbing,
  especially among the IDP population.




127. It is said that in 2018 and 2019 drought affected more than two  thirds
  of Afghanistan, devastating  the  agricultural  sector  and  leaving  3.9
  million people in need of food and livelihoods support.




128. The report states  that  ownership  of  identity  documents  is  a  key
  determinant of a  person's  ability  to  access  the  limited  government
  services which do exist. IDPs and returnees are  said  to  be  especially
  disenfranchised due to either their loss or  lack  of  appropriate  civil
  documentation. That said, the report also states that a Tazkera (identity
  document) is not required for  accessing  services  such  as  health  and
  education although is necessary to get a registered mobile  phone  which,
  in turn, is required to open a mobile banking account.




129. It is reported that in 2019 (up to the end of November)  a  significant
  number (430,000) of Afghans returned from Iran. There  were  also  25,000
  from Pakistan and 16,000 from Turkey. The report provides figures for the
  number of returnees from Iran and Pakistan by year, as follows:




      |                   |No. of cross border   |
|Year               |returnees from Iran   |
|                   |and Pakistan          |
|2013               |522,000               |
|2014               |563,000               |
|2015               |722,000               |
|2016               |1,064,000             |
|2017               |617,000               |
|2018               |821,000               |
|2019               |453,000               |






130. The report highlights the extent of mental health issues  arising  from
  the conflict, which is compounded by lack of support services. It  states
  that people's capacity to cope with repeated shocks has continued  to  be
  eroded.




131. The report gives a population of "the Capital" as  7.98  million,  with
  1.07 million people in need (representing 13%  of  the  population).  The
  percentage of the population  in  need  is  substantially  lower  in  the
  Capital than in the country as a whole (where it is 25%).






   Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey 2016 - 17

132. This report  was  prepared  by  the  Central  Statistics  Organisation,
  funded by the European Commission.




133. The report records numerous indicators, including:




        a.  unemployment rate: 23.9%

        b. population living below the national poverty line:  54.5%  (this
           is an increase from  34%  in  2007/8).  The  percentage  of  the
           population living below the poverty  line  is  higher  in  rural
           areas (58.6%) than urban areas (41.6%).

        c. food insecure: 44.6% (increasing from 30% in 2011/12)

        d. severely or very severely food insecure: 27.5%

        e. adult literacy rate: 34.8%

        f. urban  population  living  in  slums,  informal  settlements  or
           inadequate housing: 72.4%




134. The report states that it would be a serious misunderstanding to  think
  that unemployment is the only, or even the main, problem  of  the  labour
  market. It highlights the generally poor quality of  work,  characterised
  by vulnerable, low productivity and low-paid jobs that prevent households
  from escaping poverty. 80% of  all  jobs  are  classified  as  vulnerable
  employment and only 13% of the working population can  be  considered  to
  have decent employment.




135. Access  to  clean  water  and  adequate  sanitation  and  hygiene  have
  improved, but only 36% of the  population  use  safely  managed  drinking
  water and 41% use safely managed sanitation services.




136. In Kabul, 27.6% of households are  renting  the  units  in  which  they
  live. The report describes this as "showing a more 'modern' attitude than
  in other provinces".




137. Kabul is described as a gravitational centre for migrants - both  those
  moving internally and returning from abroad.




2018 and 2019 Global Peace Index




138. In both the 2018 and  the  2019  reports  Afghanistan  was  the  lowest
  ranked country in the world for  safety  and  security,  and  the  second
  lowest (after Syria) for ongoing conflict.










World Bank: Afghanistan Development Update, July 2019.

139. The report states that Afghanistan had slow growth  of  1.8%  in  2018,
  reflecting the impact of  severe  drought  and  intensifying  insecurity.
  Although real GDP growth is expected to have accelerated during the first
  half of 2019, mainly driven by  the  easing  of  drought  conditions  and
  improved agricultural production,  intensifying  political  uncertainties
  are expected to have continued to dampen private  sector  confidence  and
  investment.




140. Poverty  has  increased  and  deepened,  with  the  drought  negatively
  impacting livelihoods. From 2007/8 to 2011/12 the poverty rate  increased
  only slightly (from 34 to 38%). However, it surged  between  2011/12  and
  2016/17 to 54.5%, driven by declining income  in  both  rural  and  urban
  areas. Poor agricultural production has forced migration to urban centres
  looking for employment opportunities,  further  stressing  limited  urban
  employment opportunities.




141. 805,850 undocumented Afghans returned from Iran and Pakistan  in  2018;
  and growing numbers of returning refugees and internally displaced people
  have  increased  pressure  on  services,  employment  opportunities,  and
  available humanitarian assistance.




142. The  report  states  that  political  uncertainties  have  intensified,
  compounded by uncertainty about international security  support  and  the
  uncertainty of peace negotiations with the Taliban.




143. GDP per capita has declined, from US$559 in 2016 to (projected)  US$485
  in 2019.




144. Employment of working age males  between  25  and  50  is  recorded  as
  84.3%.




Afghanistan Statistical Yearbook 2017 - 18, from  the  Islamic  Republic  of
Afghanistan National Statistics and Information Authority

145. The population of Kabul Province  is  listed  as  4,679,648,  of  which
  3,984,343 are urban and 695,305 rural.




Access to Tazkera and Other Civil Documentation  in  Afghanistan,  Norwegian
Refugee Council, June 2012

146.  This  report  explains  that  a  Tazkera  is  the   primary   personal
  identification document and is needed, inter alia, to  access  government
  services as well as to obtain other identity documents.  It  states  that
  whilst progress has been made to allow IDPs to obtain  their  Tazkera  in
  Kabul, in many cases the procedure requires travel  to  the  province  of
  origin, and the process can be made more complicated where  records  have
  been lost.





Washington Post article dated 21 May 2018




147. This article, as do several others, paints a picture of the  population
  of Kabul living in fear of terrorist attacks, and highlights  the  mental
  health impact of the violence, and in particular of not knowing where the
  next attack will be. It is said that people are changing their habits  to
  avoid attack-prone locations.



International  Growth  Centre:   Policy   Options   for   Kabul's   Informal
Settlements, January 2018

148. This report refers to population growth outpacing capacity  to  provide
  necessary infrastructure, services  and  jobs,  resulting  in  widespread
  informal settlements housing an estimated 70% of the population.




149. The report estimates that Kabul City has a population of 6 million.




150. The report states that informal settlements represent  a  vital  source
  of housing and  their  dense  social  and  economic  networks  can  offer
  important mechanisms of urban integration for rural - urban migrants. The
  report explains, however, that the illegality of the settlements  in  the
  absence of planning has resulted in problems of poor  infrastructure  and
  weak land rights.



Human Rights Watch: Pakistani  Coercion,  UN  Complicity:  the  mass  forced
return of Afghan refugees, February 2017

151. The report documents that in the second half of  2016  565,000  Afghans
  (365,000 refugees and 200,000 undocumented) returned to Afghanistan  from
  Pakistan. It notes that UNHCR warned that the massive number  of  returns
  from Pakistan could "develop into a major humanitarian crisis".




152. The report documents  that  many  returnees  from  Pakistan  have  been
  unable to return to their home  areas  due  to  lack  of  security,  work
  opportunities and basic social services, and become IDPs.  It  is  stated
  that, based on its interviews in Afghanistan,  UNHCR  estimates  that  at
  least 25% of refugees returning from Pakistan since early July 2016  will
  try to settle in Kabul.




153. It is stated that Kabul is one of the world's  fastest-growing  cities,
  with population increasing at an estimated annual rate of 10%,  and  with
  new arrivals putting tremendous pressure on the city.




154. The report quotes the head of IOM in Kabul stating  in  November  2016:
  "with all these returns from Pakistan  and  Iran  as  well,  and  looming
  returns from Europe, it is a perfect recipe for a perfect  storm  because
  that puts a strain on the capacity of the government to respond".




155. Also  quoted  is  a  2016  UNHCR  document  stating:  "Kabul  has  been
  significantly affected by the surge in returns from Pakistan, with almost
  a quarter... settling in Kabul's overcrowded settlements. In light of the
  well documented contraction of Kabul's economy following  the  withdrawal
  of international forces in 2014, the city's absorption capacity has  been
  extremely  limited  due  to  the  low  availability   of   livelihoods...
  appropriate shelter, and access to basic  services,  particularly  health
  and education."




EASO Country of Origin Information Report:  Afghanistan  Networks,  February
2018

156. The report discusses  the  importance,  and  prevalence,  of  networks.
  Networks can be based on  extended  families,  tribes,  clans  and  local
  communities, as well as professional and political connections.  Networks
  are said to be important for gaining access to  the  labour  market.  The
  report states that "Afghans in general are good at building networks, and
  those who settle in a place in which they do not  already  have  existing
  networks need to develop them." The report cites  a  study  where  it  is
  stated that the  consensus  among  people  spoken  to  was  that  it  was
  difficult to imagine an Afghan who is completely alone,  who  is  not  in
  contact with his or her family and does not have any other network.




157. The report notes the influx of  Afghans  from  Pakistan  (600,000)  and
  Iran (400,000) in 2016, with only a small number returning to their place
  of origin.




158. It is said that Afghans abroad  usually  maintain  close  contact  with
  relatives in Afghanistan. The report describes  a  study  of  25  Afghans
  returned from the UK. Of these, 8 were not successful in getting in touch
  with extended family.




159. The process of obtaining day-labour work  is  not  said  to  depend  on
  networks. It is described as involving going to certain meeting points in
  specific areas early in the morning where unskilled  manual  labour  work
  can be obtained. Many people turn up and  not  everyone  gets  work.  The
  salary is about AFN 300 (approximately USD 4.3)  for  unskilled  workers,
  and skilled workers can earn up to AFN 1000 (USD 14.5) per day.




160.  The  report   describes   inexpensive   "tea   rooms"   that   provide
  accommodation at a cost of AFN 30- 100  (USD  0.4  -1.4)  a  night  being
  commonplace in Kabul and it not being necessary to know anyone to get in.
   These tea rooms are described as an important meeting  point  and  arena
  for socialisation.











                      Appendix B: Error of law decision



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03491/ 2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House, London             |                            |
|on 27 April 2017                          |                            |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |.....                       |


                                   Before



                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     AS

                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]

                                                                   Appellant

                                    -and-



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity Direction

I make an anonymity order, pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper   Tribunal   or   other
appropriate  Court  or  Tribunal  orders  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the Appellant. This prohibition applies  to,  amongst  others,  the
parties and their representatives.



                          DECISION AND REASONS FOR

              SETTING ASIDE THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL'S DECISION



Introduction



   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born  in  Kardai  village,
      Laghman Province, in 1986. For the purposes of this  decision  I  need
      not set out the circumstances of the appellant's time in  Afghanistan,
      save to say that they are accurately reflected in paragraphs 2 to 7 of
      the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



   2. The appellant arrived  in  United  Kingdom  on  an  unidentified  date
      accepted to  be  "towards  the  end  of  2008".  He  was  detained  by
      immigration officers on 24 January 2014 and claimed asylum  five  days
      later. In a decision of 12 February 2015 the respondent  refused  such
      application concluding, in the same decision  letter,  that:  (i)  the
      appellant had not shown there to be substantial grounds for  believing
      that he faces a real risk of suffering serious  harm  upon  return  to
      Afghanistan such as to qualify for humanitarian protection; and,  (ii)
      the appellant's removal would not breach article 3 or article 8  ECHR.
      On the 13 February 2015 the respondent made a decision to  remove  the
      appellant.


   3. The appellant's subsequent  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      dismissed in a decision promulgated on 31 July 2015. The appellant now
      appeals to the Upper Tribunal with the permission  of  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Taylor, granted on 2 October 2015.


Decision and Reasons



   4. At the outset of the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Jarvis
      accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error  of
      law such that it should be set aside. Given this concession, I  do  no
      more herein than summarise why I concur that it is appropriate to  set
      aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted, inter alia, that there exists a real
      risk that the appellant would suffer persecutory  treatment  from  the
      Taliban if he were to return to his home area in Afghanistan [27].  It
      thereafter considered the issue of internal relocation, in the context
      of the Refugee Convention, at [33] of its decision.


   6. In both written and oral submissions made on behalf of  the  appellant
      to the First-tier Tribunal, albeit made within the context of internal
      relocation viewed through the  lens  of  Article  15(c)  and  not  the
      Refugee Convention, it was  submitted  to  be  of  significance,  when
      assessment was being given to the question whether relocation  of  the
      appellant  would  be  unduly   harsh,   that   the   "assistance   and
      reintegration" packages ("assistance packages") previously provided to
      refused asylum seekers upon return to Kabul  had  been  withdrawn  and
      would not be available to the instant appellant.  Paragraph 224 of the
      country guidance decision of AK (Afghanistan) [2012]  UKUT  00163  was
      prayed in aid of such submission.


   7. This feature of the appellant's case is not  explicitly  addressed  by
      the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  it  cannot  be  ascertained  from  its
      decision whether its conclusion at [33] was correctly premised on  the
      fact of the appellant not having have access  to  such  an  assistance
      package.


   8. Furthermore, in my conclusion it cannot be inferred from the fact that
      FtT found, in [36], that "there is nothing cogent or compelling before
      [it] to suggest that AK (sic) no  longer  valid  and  (sic)  regarding
      removal to  Kabul",  that  it  was  therein  seeking  to  address  the
      relevance of the withdrawal of assistance packages to the  application
      of the guidance given in AK.  In any  event,  such  consideration  was
      itself flawed by legal error  in  that  (i)  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      failed to direct itself to, or lawfully apply the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
      Practice Direction (paragraphs 12.2 and 12.4) and the  Upper  Tribunal
      (IAC) Guidance Note 2011 No. 2 (paragraphs 11 and 12); and, (ii) there
      is no  indication  in  [36]  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  lawfully
      addressed  itself  to  the   correct   threshold   applicable   to   a
      consideration of  internal  relocation  under  Article  15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive.


Decision

   9. For these  reasons,  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  10. The Decision on this appeal will be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. The
      findings of primary fact made by the First-tier Tribunal have not been
      the subject of challenge and are preserved, as is  the  conclusion  at
      [27] that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  suffering  persecutory
      treatment in his home area.


Signed:

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

