

ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL | |
|RS (Funding - meaning of 'significant prospect') Iran [2005] UKAIT|
|00138                                                             |
|                                   |                             |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  21 September 2005           |6th October 2005                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Senior Immigration Judge)                            |
|Mr S L Batiste (Senior Immigration Judge)                         |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:
For the appellant :  Mr S Rossier,  a  legal  representative  of  the   IAS
                 (Tribunal Unit)
For the respondent: Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

This is a reported decision considering whether there is  a  difference  of
interpretation of the phrase 'significant prospect' in regulation  6(3)  of
The Community Legal Services (Asylum and Immigration  Appeals)  Regulations
2005 and of 'real possibility' in rule 26(6) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. Held: in the majority of cases there is no
difference in practice and the making of  the  reconsideration  order  will
usually satisfy the requirements of regulation 6(3) of the Regulations   in
favour of making a fiunding order (paragraphs 12 to 15); but, there will be
occasions when different criteria will  apply  and  the  term  'significant
prospect' may be applied in a more restrictive way; there is a  requirement
of good faith on the representative's part  -  see  paragraph  16  and  the
examples given in paragraph 17 of the determination.

                      FUNDING DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    At the conclusion of the substantive reconsideration  hearing,  which
      we have subsequently dismissed in a  reserved  determination  on  the
      basis that the appellant made out no material error  of  law  on  the
      part of the Immigration Judge, Mr Rossier made an application for  an
      order under s.103D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 for his costs to be paid out of the relevant fund, the Community
      Legal Service Fund established under s.5 of the Access to Justice Act
      1999.  Miss Brown said she did not wish to make  any  submissions  on
      this issue.

Relevant provisions of primary and secondary legislation

2.    The relevant provisions in s.103D for our purposes are as follows:

      (1)         On the application of an appellant  under  section  103A,
           the appropriate court may order that the  appellant's  costs  in
           respect of an application under section 103A shall be  paid  out
           of the Community Legal Servoice Fund established under section 5
           of the Access to Justice Act 1999 (c.22).


      (2)   Subsection (3) applies where the Tribunal has decided an appeal
           following reconsideration pursuant to an order made -

           (a)   under section 103A(1) and,
           (b)   on the application of the appellant.


      (3)   The Tribunal may order the appellant's costs -


           (a)   in respect of the application  for reconsideration and,
           (b)   in respect of the reconsideration, shall be  paid  out  of
                 that Fund.


      For the reasons that will appear hereafter we are not in the  present
      application concerned with any application  for  an  order  that  the
      appellant's costs in respect of the application under s.103A shall be
      paid pursuant to s.103D(1).


3.    Section 103 provides that the Secretary of State may make regulations
      about the exercise of the powers in both subsections (1) and (3)  and
      he  has  done  so  in  The  Community  Legal  Services  (Asylum   and
      Immigration Appeals) Regulations 2005 (SI 2005,  No. 966).

4.    Paragraph 6 of those regulations sets out  the  criteria  for  making
      orders under s.103D(3) as follows:

             '6(1)  The  Tribunal  must  exercise   the   power   to   make
                     an order  under  s.103D(3)  in  accordance  with   this
                 regulation.


                (2) If the Tribunal allows an appeal on reconsideration, it
                 must make an order under s.103D(3).


               (3) If the Tribunal does not allow an appeal,  it  must  not
                  make an order under s.103D(3) unless it is satisfied that,
                  at  the  time  when  the   appellant   made   the   s.103A
                  application, there was a  significant  prospect  that  the
                  appeal would be allowed upon reconsideration.


               (4) If, where paragraph (3) applies the Tribunal decides not
                  to make an order under s.103D(3), it must give reasons for
                  its decision.'


5.    These regulations are silent as to the  mode  of  application  for  a
      funding order which is the  subject  of  specific  provision  in  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  at  Rule  33.
      The only part of those rules which  relates  to  the  making  of  the
      application is that contained in subparagraph  1  of  rule  33  which
      provides as follows:

        '(1)     This rule applies where -


           (a)  The Tribunal has reconsidered an appeal following a  s.103A
                application made by the appellant in relation to  an  appeal
                decided in England, Wales or Northern Ireland;  and


           (b) The appellant's representative has specified that  he  seeks
                an order under s.103D of the 2002 Act for his  costs  to  be
                paid out of the relevant fund.'

Time for notifying intended funding order application

6.    The only other document relevant to the making of such an application
      is form  AIT/103A, the application  for  reconsideration  of  an  in-
      country application under s.103A of the 2002 Act.   The  headnote  to
      the application  notice  makes  reference  to  Civil  Procedure  Rule
      54.29(1) but there is nothing in  the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  which
      appears to make this a prescribed form nor is there  any  mention  in
      the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  of  any  requirement  in  relation   to
      applications for a funding order under s.103D of the  2002  Act  save
      for the provision in rule 54.35 that no order as to the costs  of  an
      application  under  this  section  is  to  be  made   except,   where
      appropriate, an order under s.103D(1) of the 2002 Act.

7.    Part D of Form AIT/103A asks:

            'Is an order for the payment of costs from the Community  Legal
            Service  Fund  sought  under  s.103D   of   the    Nationality,
            Immigration and Asylum Act 2002?


            Yes/No/Not Applicable


            Note:


            If an order for costs is sought you must answer 'Yes' to ensure
            that consideration is given to whether or not an  order  should
            be made.


            Unrepresented  parties,  if   you   do   not   have   a   legal
            representative acting for you, or you do not have a not charity
            or not for profit organisation assisting you, you  must  answer
            'Not Applicable'.


            If you were the respondent to the  original  appeal,  you  must
            also answer 'Not Applicable'.

8.    In this case the application for reconsideration was made  in  person
      by the appellant and the three alternative responses in  part  D  were
      left undeleted although, according to the note, the first  two  should
      have been deleted as the seeking of  a  funding  order  was  not  then
      applicable. It follows therefore that no funding order can be made  by
      us relating to the making of the application  for  reconsideration  as
      opposed  to  appearance  at  the  reconsideration  hearing  before  us
      following the order for  reconsideration  by  the  Senior  Immigration
      Judge who considered the application.

9.    It does not appear to us, having regard to  the  provisions  of  rule
      33(1) of the 2005 Procedure Rules, that there  is  any  limitation  in
      point of time as to the making of an application for a funding  order.
       All that  is  required  is  for  the  appellant's  representative  to
      'specify' that he seeks such an order under s.103D of the 2002 Act.

10.   Although it  is  not   directly  in  point  in  this  reconsideration
      application, because the appellant was unrepresented when he made  the
      application, it does not seem to us that a failure to complete part  D
      of form AIT/103A would preclude the making of such an application at a
      later date although the Tribunal  would  no  doubt  require  a  cogent
      explanation  for the failure of a representative properly to  complete
      that part of the form. It should not be assumed  that  this  would  be
      regarded simply as a formality by the Tribunal.  We note  the  wording
      of the note which  makes  it  clear  that  an  affirmative  answer  is
      required 'to ensure' that consideration is given to the  making  of  a
      funding order. But, we do not read that as  a  prerequisite  or  as  a
      matter which in any way fetters the natural meaning of  rule  33(1)(b)
      which may, subject to the note of caution which we have sounded above,
      in our view be satisfied if the application is made at any time up  to
      the end of the reconsideration hearing (see rule 15(5) of the  current
      Practice Directions of the Tribunal).

11.   We are satisfied that we have the power to consider  the  application
      made by Mr Rossier in respect of the costs  of  the  hearing  and  the
      preparation for it under rule 33(2)(b).

The meaning of 'significant prospect' in the 2005 Regulations

12.   We now turn to consider the effect of Regulation 6 of  the  Community
      Legal Service (Asylum and Immigration Appeals)  Regulations  2005  and
      note the limitation on the power to make such an  order  contained  in
      regulation 6(3) in circumstances where,  as  in  this  case,  we  have
      refused the application for reconsideration  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant has not demonstrated a material error of law on the part  of
      the Immigration Judge.   We are required not to  make  such  an  order
      unless satisfied that at the time of the application by the  appellant
      'there was a significant prospect that the appeal would be allowed  on
      reconsideration'.

13.   When that application was considered by a  Senior  Immigration  Judge
      and he ordered reconsideration on 12  May  2005,  he  did  so  in  the
      following terms:

             'There  is  nothing  in  the  grounds   of   appeal   of   the
             determination to indicate any error of law by the  Immigration
             Judge so far as concerns whether the appellant will  face  any
             real risk of persecutory or  Article  3  infringing  treatment
             from his uncles.


             It  is  however  reasonably  arguable  as   to   whether   the
             Immigration Judge may have erred in law in  omitting  to  make
             clear what (if any) findings of fact he was making in relation
             to the claim that false reports  had been made to the  Iranian
             authorities that the appellant was involved with the KDPI  and
             that security agents were said still to be looking for him  in
             March 2004.  Arguably paragraph 17 of the  determination  does
             not make sufficiently clear what precisely is the  Immigration
             Judge's  analysis  on  this  point  and   for   what   reason.
             Reconsideration is ordered on this point.'

  14. The regulations require us to consider  the  past  situation  of  the
      prospect that the appeal would be allowed  as  at  the  date  of  the
      application. It  seems  to  us  in  principle  that  where  a  Senior
      Immigration Judge makes an order for  reconsideration,  it  can  only
      have been because he took the view that there was a real  possibility
      that the appeal  would  be  allowed  upon  reconsideration.  This  is
      derived from the  2005  Procedure  Rules  which  deal  with  deciding
      applications for review at rule 26. Rule 26(6) provides as follows:


           (6) The immigration judge may make an order for  reconsideration
           only if he thinks that -


           (a)the Tribunal may have made an error of law; and


           (b)  there is a real possibility that the Tribunal would  decide
           the appeal differently on reconsideration.

  15. We do not consider that in the majority of  reconsideration  hearings
      there will be any  material  difference  between  the  tests  of  the
      'significant  prospect'  under  the   Regulations   and   the   'real
      possibility' under  the  Procedure  Rules.  Although  it  is  perhaps
      unfortunate that uniform wording could not have been adopted by those
      responsible for drafting the Regulations and the Rules, we must  take
      note of the different wording adopted  and  we  have  looked  at  the
      relevant records of the Parliamentary proceedings  to  see  if  these
      will provide elucidation of the proper approach to interpretation  of
      the two different phrases. The first  record is of the proceedings of
      the First Standing Committee on Delegated  Legislation  on  21  March
      2005 from which it appears that the Government  may  originally  have
      intended the test under the Regulations to  be  more  stringent  than
      that   prescribed   under   the   Procedure   Rules   for    ordering
      reconsideration. By the time of the proceedings before the Committee,
      however,  the   Parliamentary   Under-   Secretary   of   State   for
      Constitutional Affairs (Mr David Lammy) is recorded as saying this:

           "It will therefore  be  for  the  judiciary  to  determine  what
           "significant" means in practice but the  Government's  intention
           is  that  if  a  case  is  pursued  in  good  faith  through  to
           reconsideration funding should be awarded. ... the judiciary  is
           best placed to make retrospective decisions precisely because it
           has built up a body  of  expertise  in  the  Immigration  Appeal
           Tribunal.  ...  we  are   not   providing   guidance   on   what
           "significant" means, because it would be most  unusual  for  the
           Government to interpret something before an  interpretation  has
           been made by the judiciary."

      Before  the  House  of  Lords,  in  proposing  that  the  Regulations
      previously laid before the House be approved, the Parliamentary Under-
      Secretary of State  for  the  Department  of  Constitutional  Affairs
      (Baroness Ashton of Upholland) is recorded as saying:


           "It will be for the judiciary to interpret the  regulations  and
           what "significant prospect" means, and I  cannot  pre-empt  what
           that  interpretation  might  be.  However,  I  can  clarify  the
           Government's intention. The purpose of the scheme is  to  reduce
           the number of weak cases moving through the appeals process  and
           to discourage unmeritorious challenges to tribunal decisions. If
           an application is unsuccessful at  the  review  stage,  it  will
           usually be because it lacked merit. And therefore we  would  not
           expect costs to  be  awarded.  However,  if  an  application  is
           successful and the representative has acted in good faith,  that
           would mean that the case had merit. In those  circumstances,  we
           should expect  costs to be awarded. Every  case  must  be  dealt
           with on an individual  basis,  but  representatives  who  pursue
           meritorious cases can expect to be paid.


           I also assure noble Lords that an unsuccessful  outcome  at  the
           reconsideration will  not  automatically  lead  to  costs  being
           refused. That is not how the scheme has been designed. The  test
           that the tribunal must apply will be based on the  prospects  of
           success  and  the  information  that  was   available   to   the
           representative when the application was made. That is a specific
           requirement of the test in Regulation 6(3), because  we  realise
           that representatives cannot  make  an  assessment  of  a  case's
           prospects of success based  on  information  that  they  do  not
           have."

The difference between the tests in the Procedure Rules and the Regulations

  16. In our judgment the primary guide to the exercise of  our  discretion
      should be the fact of the making of  the  order  for  reconsideration
      which will have been made with due consideration of the  requirements
      of the Procedure Rules. In the majority of cases, there will,  as  we
      say above, be no material difference  between  the  equation  of  the
      "significant prospect" test  under  regulation  6(3)  and  the  "real
      possibility" test under the Procedure Rules which  has  been  already
      applied by the Senior Immigration Judge who  ordered  reconsideration
      at the application stage. We emphasise, however, that we  speak  here
      only of the majority of cases and there will, in our judgment, remain
      a potentially significant group of cases where the  preliminary  view
      formed by the Senior Immigration Judge will require to  be  revisited
      for the  purposes  of  the  funding  order  application.  These  will
      usually, but not necessarily exclusively,  involve  consideration  of
      the good faith of the pursuit of the  reconsideration  challenge  and
      the  examples  which  we  give  below,  whilst  intended  to   assist
      representatives, must  not  be  regarded  as  exhaustive  since  each
      application will have to be decided on its own facts. In so doing the
      Tribunal will also take into account that the  time  constraints  for
      the making of the reconsideration application are such that it may be
      impossible  for  the  representative  to  take  full  instructions  -
      particularly  where  newly  instructed  for  the   purpose   of   the
      application - and that the true position as to the  strength  of  the
      challenge may  not  become  apparent  until  at  least  some  of  the
      preparation for hearing has taken place.

17.       The  first  example  is  where  it  subsequently   appears   that
      reconsideration  has  been  ordered  because  the   grounds   of   the
      application were materially misleading in a way which should have been
      apparent to the draftsman of the grounds. The second example is  where
      the order for  reconsideration  was  made  inadvertently  because  the
      grounds failed to draw attention  to  and  lay  arguable  grounds  for
      challenge of existing binding precedents whether  of  law  or  country
      guidance or to statutory provisions which  significantly  damaged  the
      prospect of success on reconsideration. Representatives  are  expected
      to keep themselves up-to-date with relevant case law and  primary  and
      secondary legislation. Representatives have  a  general  duty  to  the
      Tribunal, as to any other court, to put all  relevant case law  before
      the court. The third example we would give is where the nature of  the
      challenge is bias or impropriety on the part of the Immigration  Judge
      whose decision is sought to be challenged. In such  cases,  we  accept
      that  the  time   constraints   may   bite   particularly   hard   but
      representatives should bear in mind that the Tribunal and  the  former
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal have on numerous occasions made  it  clear
      that any such challenge must be  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the
      former advocate supplemented by transcripts of the  contemporary  case
      notes, usually of both advocates before the  Immigration  Judge.  Such
      information  should  normally  be  available  at  an  early  stage  of
      preparation and careful consideration will need  to  be  given  as  to
      whether it supports the initial grounds on which  reconsideration  was
      ordered. Fourthly, and finally for these purposes, there will be cases
      where it becomes  pointless  to  pursue  the  reconsideration  hearing
      because of clarification by way of later binding precedents. This  may
      occur frequently with pending hearings which are awaiting promulgation
      of  definitive Country Guidance cases. Representatives should bear  in
      mind that subsequent judgments and determinations  are  likely  to  be
      simply declaratory of the position  which  existed  at  the  time  the
      application was made and to consider whether it  would  be  proper  to
      continue with  the  reconsideration  hearing  in  the  light  of  such
      subsequent clarification.

18.   In the present case we heard full submissions both  from  Mr  Rossier
      and Miss Brown in relation to the substantive issue of material  error
      of law and, although in the event we were satisfied  that  Mr  Rossier
      failed to demonstrate such a material error of law on the part of  the
      Immigration Judge, it was certainly an  issue  which  we  regarded  as
      properly arguable      before us. It clearly fell into  what  we  have
      categorised as the majority of cases where the initial  views  of  the
      Judge who ordered reconsideration should be regarded as  the  decisive
      factor in determining whether the funding order should be made  within
      the terms of regulation 6(3).

19.   For those reasons we are  satisfied  that  there  was  a  significant
      prospect that the appeal would be allowed upon reconsideration at  the
      time when the appellant made his application and we accordingly order,
      pursuant to section 103D(3) of the  2002  Act,  that  the  Appellant's
      costs in respect of the reconsideration  shall  be  paid  out  of  the
      prescribed Fund.






                                  J. BARNES
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE

                                                              3 October 2005








