
                                    [pic]


      Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


      KK and RS (Sur place activities: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2021] UKUT  00130
      (IAC)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




      |Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 September 2020       |                              |
|With further written submissions on 7       |27 May 2021                   |
|December 2020 and 12 January 2021           |                              |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR




                                   Between


                                     kk
                                     rs
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



          Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
          Rules 2008, we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
          or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings  or
          any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
          identify the  appellants  or  members  of  their  families.  This
          direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
          comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
          proceedings.  We make this order owing to the content and  nature
          of the proceedings.




      Representation:
      For the appellant KK:  Mr A Mackenzie and Ms A Benfield, of Counsel,
                          instructed by Birnberg Peirce Solicitors
      For the appellant RS:  Mr A Mackenzie and Mr A Bandegani, of Counsel,
                          instructed by the Joint Council for the Welfare of
                          Immigrants
      For the respondent:    Ms N Patel, Mr T Tabori, and Ms H Higgins, of
                          Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal
                          Department


COUNTRY GUIDANCE


In broad terms, GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
[2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  still  accurately  reflects  the  situation  facing
returnees to Sri Lanka. However, in material respects, it is appropriate  to
clarify and supplement the existing guidance, with particular  reference  to
sur place activities.

The country guidance is restated as follows:

(1)   The current Government of  Sri  Lanka  ("GoSL")  is  an  authoritarian
regime whose core  focus  is  to  prevent  any  potential  resurgence  of  a
separatist movement within Sri Lanka which has  as  its  ultimate  goal  the
establishment of Tamil Eelam.

(2)   GoSL draws no material distinction  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the
avowedly violent means of the LTTE in furtherance of Tamil Eelam,  and  non-
violent political  advocacy  for  that  result  on  the  other.  It  is  the
underlying aim which is  crucial  to  GoSL's  perception.  To  this  extent,
GoSL's interpretation of separatism is not limited to the pursuance  thereof
by violent means alone; it encompasses the political sphere as well.

(3)   Whilst there is limited space for  pro-Tamil  political  organisations
to operate within Sri Lanka, there is no  tolerance  of  the  expression  of
avowedly separatist or perceived separatist beliefs.

(4)   GoSL views the Tamil diaspora with a generally  adverse  mindset,  but
does not regard the entire cohort as  either  holding  separatist  views  or
being politically active in any meaningful way.

(5)   Sur place activities on behalf of  an  organisation  proscribed  under
the 2012 UN Regulations is a  relatively  significant  risk  factor  in  the
assessment of an individual's profile, although its existence or absence  is
not determinative of risk. Proscription  will  entail  a  higher  degree  of
adverse interest in an organisation and, by extension, in individuals  known
or perceived to be associated with it. In  respect  of  organisations  which
have never been proscribed and the organisation that remains  de-proscribed,
it  is  reasonably  likely  that  there  will,  depending  on  whether   the
organisation in question has, or is perceived to have, a separatist  agenda,
be an adverse interest on  the  part  of  GoSL,  albeit  not  at  the  level
applicable to proscribed groups.

(6)   The Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam ("TGTE")  is  an  avowedly
separatist organisation which is currently proscribed. It is viewed by  GoSL
with a significant degree of hostility and is perceived  as  a  "front"  for
the LTTE. Global Tamil Forum ("GTF") and British  Tamil  Forum  ("BTF")  are
also currently proscribed and whilst only  the  former  is  perceived  as  a
"front" for the LTTE, GoSL now views  both  with  a  significant  degree  of
hostility.

(7)   Other non-proscribed diaspora organisations which pursue a  separatist
agenda,  such  as  Tamil  Solidarity  ("TS"),  are  viewed  with  hostility,
although they are not regarded as "fronts" for the LTTE.

(8)   GoSL continues to operate an extensive  intelligence-gathering  regime
in the United  Kingdom  which  utilises  information  acquired  through  the
infiltration of diaspora organisations, the photographing  and  videoing  of
demonstrations, and the monitoring of the Internet  and  unencrypted  social
media. At the initial stage of monitoring and information gathering,  it  is
reasonably likely that the Sri Lankan authorities will wish to  gather  more
rather than less information on organisations in which there is  an  adverse
interest and individuals connected thereto. Information  gathering  has,  so
far as possible, kept pace with developments in communication technology.

(9)   Interviews at the  Sri  Lankan  High  Commission  in  London  ("SLHC")
continue to take place for  those  requiring  a  Temporary  Travel  Document
("TTD").

(10)  Prior to the return of an individual traveling  on  a  TTD,   GoSL  is
reasonably likely to have obtained information on the following matters:

      i.     whether  the  individual  is  associated  in  any  way  with  a
      particular diaspora organisation;

      ii.   whether they have attended meetings and/or demonstrations and if
      so, at least approximately how frequently this has occurred;

      iii.  the nature of involvement in these events, such as, for example,
      whether they played a prominent part or have  been  holding  flags  or
      banners displaying the LTTE emblem;

      iv.    any  organisational  and/or  promotional   roles   (formal   or
      otherwise) undertaken on behalf of a diaspora organisation;

      v.    attendance at commemorative events such as Heroes Day;

      vi.   meaningful fundraising on behalf of or  the  provision  of  such
      funding to an organisation;

      vii.  authorship of, or appearance in, articles, whether published  in
      print or online;

      viii. any presence on social media;

      ix.   any political lobbying on behalf of an organisation;

      x.    the signing of petitions perceived as being anti-government.

(11)  Those in possession of a valid passport are  not  interviewed  at  the
SLHC. The absence of an interview at  SLHC does not, however,  discount  the
ability of GoSL to obtain information  on  the  matters  set  out  in  (10),
above, in respect of  an  individual  with  a  valid  passport  using  other
methods employed as part of its intelligence-gathering regime, as  described
in (8). When considering the case of an individual in possession of a  valid
passport, a judge must assess the range of matters listed  in  (10),  above,
and the extent of the authorities' knowledge reasonably likely to  exist  in
the context of a more restricted information-gathering apparatus.  This  may
have a bearing on, for example, the question of  whether  it  is  reasonably
likely that attendance at one or two demonstrations or  minimal  fundraising
activities will have come to the attention of the authorities at all.

(12)  Whichever form of documentation is in place, it will be for the  judge
in any given case to determine what activities the individual  has  actually
undertaken and make clear findings on what the  authorities  are  reasonably
likely to have become aware of prior to return.

(13)  GoSL operates a general electronic database which stores all  relevant
information held on an individual, whether this has been obtained  from  the
United Kingdom or from within Sri Lanka itself. This database is  accessible
at the SLHC, BIA and anywhere else within Sri Lanka. Its  contents  will  in
general determine the immediate or short-term consequences for a returnee.

(14)  A stop list and watch list are still in use. These  are  derived  from
the general electronic database.

(15)  Those being returned on a TTD will be questioned on  arrival  at  BIA.
Additional questioning over and above the confirmation of identity  is  only
reasonably likely to occur where the individual is  already  on  either  the
stop list or the watch list.

(16)  Those in possession of a valid passport will  only  be  questioned  on
arrival if they appear on either the stop list or the watch list.

(17)  Returnees who have no entry on the general database,  or  whose  entry
is not such as to have placed them on either the  stop  list  or  the  watch
list, will in general be able to pass through  the  airport  unhindered  and
return to the home area without being subject to any further action  by  the
authorities (subject to an application of the HJ (Iran) principle).

(18)  Only those against whom there is an extant  arrest  warrant  and/or  a
court order will appear on the stop  list.  Returnees  falling  within  this
category will be detained at the airport.

(19)  Returnees who appear on the watch list will fall into one of two  sub-
categories: (i) those who, because of their existing profile, are deemed  to
be of sufficiently strong adverse interest to  warrant  detention  once  the
individual has travelled back to their home area  or  some  other  place  of
resettlement; and (ii) those who are of interest, not at a level  sufficient
to justify detention at that point in time, but will  be  monitored  by  the
authorities in their home  area  or  wherever  else  they  may  be  able  to
resettle.

(20)  In respect of those falling within sub-category (i), the  question  of
whether  an  individual  has,  or  is  perceived  to  have,   undertaken   a
"significant role" in Tamil separatism remains the  appropriate  touchstone.
In making this evaluative judgment, GoSL will seek to  identify  those  whom
it perceives as constituting a threat to the integrity  of  the  Sri  Lankan
state  by  reason  of  their  committed  activism  in  furtherance  of   the
establishment of Tamil Eelam.

(21)  The term "significant role" does not require  an  individual  to  show
that they have held a formal position in an organisation, are  a  member  of
such, or that their activities have been "high profile" or "prominent".  The
assessment of their profile  will  always  be  fact-specific,  but  will  be
informed by an indicator-based approach, taking into account  the  following
non-exhaustive factors, none of which will in general be determinative:

      i.    the nature of any diaspora organisation on behalf  of  which  an
      individual has been active. That an organisation has  been  proscribed
      under the 2012 UN Regulations will be relatively significant in  terms
      of the level of adverse interest reasonably likely to be attributed to
      an individual associated with it;

      ii.   the type of activities undertaken;

      iii.  the extent of any activities;

      iv.   the duration of any activities;

      v.    any relevant history in Sri Lanka;

      vi.   any relevant familial connections.

(22)  The monitoring undertaken by the authorities in respect  of  returnees
in sub-category (ii) in  (19),  above,  will  not,  in  general,  amount  to
persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

(23)  It is not reasonably likely that  a  returnee  subject  to  monitoring
will be sent for "rehabilitation".

(24)  In general, it is not reasonably likely that  a  returnee  subject  to
monitoring will be recruited as an informant or prosecuted for a refusal  to
undertake such a role.

(25)  Journalists  (whether  in  print  or  other  media)  or  human  rights
activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri  Lankan  government,
in particular its human rights record, or are associated  with  publications
critical of the government, face a reasonable likelihood of  being  detained
after return, whether or not they continue with their activities.

(26)  Individuals who have given evidence to the LLRC  implicating  the  Sri
Lankan security forces, armed forces,  or  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in
alleged war crimes, also face a  reasonable  likelihood  of  being  detained
after their return. It is for the individual  concerned  to  establish  that
GoSL will be aware of the provision of such evidence.

(27)  There is a reasonable  likelihood  that  those  detained  by  the  Sri
Lankan authorities will be subjected to  persecutory  treatment  within  the
meaning of the Refugee Convention and ill-treatment contrary  to  Article  3
ECHR.

(28)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person  at
risk from the authorities.

(29)  In appropriate cases, consideration  must  be  given  to  whether  the
exclusion  clauses  under  Article  1F  of  the   Refugee   Convention   are
applicable.



APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE IN HJ (IRAN)

It is essential, where  appropriate,  that  a  tribunal  does  not  end  its
considerations with an application of the facts  to  the  country  guidance,
but proceeds to engage with the principle established by  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
UKSC 31; [2010] 1 AC 596  ,  albeit  that  such  an  analysis  will  involve
interaction with that guidance.

When applying the step-by step approach  set  out  in  paragraph  82  of  HJ
(Iran), careful findings of fact must  be  made  on  the  genuineness  of  a
belief in Tamil separatism; the future conduct of an  individual  on  return
in relation to the expression of  genuinely  held  separatist  beliefs;  the
consequences of such expression; and, if the  beliefs  would  be  concealed,
why this is the case.





      CONTENTS    PARAGRAPHS


      Introduction     1-6


      Glossary    7-8


      General approach to country guidance cases   9-15


      The current country guidance 16-19


      Procedural matters     20-28


      Summary of the evidence      29-32


            Dr Smith   33-82


            Dr Nadarajah     83-115


            Professor Gunaratna    116-135


            Mr Yogalingam    136-146


            Mr Uthayasenan   147-153


            TGTE  154-158


            Mr Stares  159-175


            FFM   176-184


            DFAT  185-187


            Other relevant country
            information      188-192


            CPIN  193


            KK    194-204


            RS and ST  205-217


      The parties' submissions     218


            The appellants' submissions 219-237


            The respondent's submissions      238-258


            Post-hearing matters   259-261


      General comments on the evidence


            The expert evidence    262-268


            Dr Smith   269-271


            Dr Nadarajah     272-276


            Professor Gunaratna    277-281


            The FFM and Mr Stares' evidence   282-300


            The CPIN   301


            The DFAT   302-305


            Other country evidence 306


            Mr Yogalingam    307-309


            Mr Uthayasenan   310-312


      Analysis and conclusions


            Preliminary observations    313-314


            Detention and the risk of
            persecution and serious harm      315-323


            The current political landscape
            in Sri Lanka     324-328


            Separatism in the Sri Lankan
            context    329-349


            GoSL attitudes to the Tamil diaspora
            in general 350-358


            Proscription under the
            2012 UN Regulations    359-374


            The TGTE   375-387


            Tamil Solidarity 388-391


            Other diaspora organisations      392-402


            Monitoring and information gathering
            in the United Kingdom  403-418


            Information processing and storage     419-432


            The assessment of an individual's profile    433-502


            The position of returnees at the
            airport    503-515


            Beyond the airport: monitoring,
            "rehabilitation", and recruitment as
            an informant     516-534


      The country guidance   535-536


      The HJ (Iran) principle      537-555


      The two individual appeals   556


            KK's case in outline   557


            Decision of the First-tier Tribunal    558


            Error of law decision  559


            The parties' submissions    560-565


            Findings of fact 566-591


            Conclusions      592-602




            RS's case in outline   603-604


            Decision of the First-tier Tribunal    605-606


            Error of law decision  607


            The parties' submissions    608-614


            Findings of fact 615-642


            Conclusions      643-657


            Notice of Decision     658-661


      Appendices


            A: the country information


            B: error of law decision in KK's appeal


            C: error of law decision in RS' appeal






                            DECISION AND REASONS




      A: INTRODUCTION


       1. These linked appeals provide the vehicle for country guidance  on
          the following issue:

                 "The extent of the risk in Sri Lanka to individuals on  the
                 basis of sur  place  political  activities  in  the  United
                 Kingdom which are (or are perceived to be) in opposition to
                 the government in Sri Lanka."

       2. The appeals also involve the determination of  protection  claims
          made by two individuals. KK is of Tamil ethnicity and  originates
          from the north of Sri Lanka. He  arrived  in  United  Kingdom  in
          January 2009 with entry clearance  as  a  student.  Following  an
          extension of leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Migrant), he
          sought further leave as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  This  application
          was refused. On 6 March 2016 KK made his asylum claim.  This  was
          based  on  two  elements:  a  claimed  fear  of  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities owing to  previous  detention  and  ill-treatment  in
          consequence  of  suspected  LTTE   assistance;   and   activities
          undertaken in the United Kingdom. The claim was  refused  and  an
          appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
          Tribunal. That decision was challenged and set aside by the Upper
          Tribunal. The appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  and
          once again dismissed. A further appeal  was  brought  before  the
          Upper Tribunal. By a decision  promulgated  on  7  January  2020,
          Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  set   aside   the   First-tier
          Tribunal's decision and retained the appeal in the Upper Tribunal
          for a resumed hearing to redetermine the issue on the appellant's
          sur place activities.

       3. RS is a woman of Tamil ethnicity who lived in the eastern  region
          of Sri Lanka. She entered the United Kingdom in October 2007  and
          claimed asylum on the same day. Her claim was that she  had  been
          detained and  mistreated  by  the  Sri  Lankan  army  because  of
          suspected  LTTE  assistance.  Her  claim  was  rejected  by   the
          respondent. An appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in
          May  2008.  Over  the  course  of  time,  RS  submitted   further
          submissions which were rejected by  the  respondent.  Eventually,
          the respondent accepted that further submissions put  forward  in
          2018 constituted a fresh claim pursuant to paragraph 353  of  the
          Immigration Rules. The claim was refused  and  RS  appealed.  The
          appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  September
          2019. On appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  set  the  First-
          tier Tribunal's decision aside and ordered that the  decision  be
          re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

       4. These two appeals were considered  to  be  appropriate  cases  in
          which the Upper  Tribunal  could  address  the  existing  country
          guidance on Sri Lanka and the specific issue set out in paragraph
          1, above. There  followed  intensive  case  management  over  the
          course of several months involving a very substantial  amount  of
          correspondence between the parties and with the  Upper  Tribunal.
          A series of case management directions were issued  and  hearings
          conducted with the aim of ensuring that both parties had  a  fair
          opportunity  to  obtain  relevant  evidence  and  present   their
          respective cases in a thorough and efficient manner.

       5. Before moving on, we wish to express our gratitude to  the  legal
          teams on both sides for the enormous amount of work put into  the
          preparation and presentation of these cases. At  any  other  time
          their collective effort would be commendable. However,  in  light
          of the exceptional circumstances brought about  by  the  Covid-19
          pandemic, what they have done deserves all the more appreciation.

       6. It is also appropriate, perhaps unusually, to  offer  a  word  of
          gratitude to the administrative staff of the Upper  Tribunal  for
          the exceptional effort that  they  put  into  the  processing  of
          correspondence and in respect of the logistical  issues  involved
          in the hearing itself.




      B: GLOSSARY


       7. As in other country guidance cases, we deem it appropriate to set
          out a glossary of  the  terms  and  abbreviations  that  we  have
          employed most often when referring to the evidence presented  and
          the arguments made thereon.

          Abbreviation Full description

          2012 UN Regulations     The United Nations Regulations Nos. 1 and
                                            2 made respectively on  13  May
                                            and 30  May  2012  by  the  Sri
                                            Lankan  Minister  of   External
                                            Affairs under section 2 of  the
                                            United Nations Act 1968

          BIA    Bandaranaike International Airport, the only international
                                            airport in Sri  Lanka  and  the
                                            point of return for all failed-
                                            asylum seekers

          BTC    British Tamil Conservatives

          BTF    British Tamil Forum

          CID    Sri Lankan Criminal Investigation Department

          CPIN    Country  Policy  Information  Note   Sri   Lanka:   Tamil
                                            Separatism,  version  6.0,  May
                                            2020

          DFAT   Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  report
                                            entitled  Country   Information
                                            Report on Sri  Lanka,  dated  4
                                            November 2019

          DIE    Department of Immigration and Emigration

          FCO    The United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office

          FFM    Report of a Home Office fact-finding mission to Sri Lanka,
                                            conducted between 28  September
                                            and   5   October   2019    and
                                            published on 20 January 2020

          GoSL   The current Government of Sri Lanka

          GTF    Global Tamil Forum

          ICPPG  International Centre for the Prevention and Prosecution of
                                            Genocide

          IOM    International Organisation for Migration

          ITAK   Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi (also known  as  the  Federal
                                            Party)

          LLRC   Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation  Commission  set  up  by
                                            former    President     Mahinda
                                            Rajapaksa, in 2010.

          LTTE   Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam

          President Gotabaya President  Gotabaya  Rajapaksa:  for  ease  of
                                            reference,  as   his   brother,
                                            Mahinda     Rajapaksa,      had
                                            previously been President

          Proscribed   The status of an individual or organisation formally
                                            designated under  the  2012  UN
                                            Regulations.  Proscription   is
                                            the act  of  proscribing  under
                                            those Regulations

          PTA     Prevention  of  Terrorism  (Temporary  Provisions)   Act,
                                            originally enacted on  24  July
                                            1979.

          SIS    Sri Lankan State Intelligence Service

          SLHC   Sri Lankan High Commission in London

          Tamil Eelam  A proposed separate and independent Tamil  State  on
                                            the island of Sri Lanka

          TFL    Tamils for Labour

          TFLD   Tamils Friends of Liberal Democrats

          TGTE   Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam

          The Constitution   The Constitution of the  Democratic  Socialist
                                            Republic  of  Sri   Lanka,   as
                                            amended up to 15 May 2015.

          The Gazette  The Gazette of the Democratic Socialist Republic  of
                                            Sri Lanka Extraordinary

          TID    Sri Lankan Terrorist Investigation Department

          TMTK   Thamizh Makkal Tesiya  Kootani  (Tamil  People's  National
                                            Alliance)

          TNA    Tamil National Assembly

          TNPF   Tamil National People's Front

          TS     Tamil Solidarity

          TTD    Temporary Travel Document (formerly known  as  an  ETD  or
                                            Emergency Travel Document)

          UN OISL      The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
                                            Investigation  on  Sri   Lanka,
                                            established in 2014.

          UN Resolution 1373 United  Nations  Security  Council  Resolution
                                            1373  (2001),  adopted  on   28
                                            September 2001.

       8. Other terms of less frequent occurrence will be explained as  and
          when they arise.




      C: GENERAL APPROACH TO COUNTRY GUIDANCE CASES


       9. The parties are in broad agreement on the general approach to  be
          adopted where the Upper Tribunal is considering  whether  to  re-
          affirm, amend, or entirely depart from existing country guidance.
          That  guidance  is  the  starting  point   for   the   Tribunal's
          assessment, a position consistent with  the  status  afforded  to
          such decisions, as identified in Direction  12  of  the  Practice
          Directions (Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal), dated 10 February 2010:

                 "12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or
                 the IAT bearing the letters 'CG' shall  be  treated  as  an
                 authoritative  finding  on  the  country   guidance   issue
                 identified in the determination, based  upon  the  evidence
                 before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that
                 determined the appeal. As a  result,  unless  it  has  been
                 expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by  any   later   'CG'
                 determination, or is inconsistent with other authority that
                 is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case is
                 authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as  that
                 appeal:-

                         a)  relates  to  the  country  guidance  issue   in
                            question; and

                         b) depends upon the same or similar evidence."

      10. The effect of Direction 12 was considered and  confirmed  by  the
          Upper Tribunal in EM and Others (returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
          UKUT 98 (IAC) (hereafter, "EM"), at paragraph 71  (this  decision
          was subsequently quashed by the Court of Appeal for  reasons  not
          affecting the issue set out below):

                 "71.  The proposition that a country guidance  case  should
                 provide the "starting point" for  a  subsequent  case  that
                 relates to the country guidance issue is  inherent  in  the
                 Practice Direction (and its AIT predecessor).  Whether  the
                 subsequent case is  being  "set  down  to  review  existing
                 country guidance" or not, the effect of Practice  Direction
                 12 and section 107(3) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
                 Asylum Act 2002 is to require the existing country guidance
                 case  to  be  authoritative,  to  the   extent   that   the
                 requirements in Practice Direction 12.2(a) and (b) are met.
                 This is fully in accord with what the House of  Lords  (per
                 Lord Brown) held in R (Hoxha) v Special Adjudicator  [2005]
                 UKHL 19. If the existing country guidance  is  such  as  to
                 favour appellants (to a greater or lesser extent), it  will
                 in practice be  for  the  respondent  to  adduce  before  a
                 subsequent Tribunal "sufficient material to  satisfy  them"
                 that the position has changed" (Paragraph 66)."

      11. In a passage subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal  in  MP
          (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ  829,  at  paragraph  72  of  EM  the
          Tribunal observed that:

                 "...where  a  previous  assessment  has  resulted  in   the
                 conclusion  that  the  population  generally   or   certain
                 sections of it may be at  risk,  any  assessment  that  the
                 material  circumstances  have   changed   would   need   to
                 demonstrate  that  such  changes   are   well   established
                 evidentially and durable."

      12. As made clear in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG
          [2013] UK UT 59 (IAC), at paragraph 118, what was said in EM  did
          not constitute a rule of law, but simply an appropriate method of
          approaching  changes  in  the  evidential  landscape  which   was
          consistent with "...an application of the precautionary principle
          relating to the assessment of reasonable likelihood of harm..."

      13. In TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049,  the
          Tribunal made the point that where existing country guidance  was
          being reviewed, the process is "incremental" in  the  sense  that
          the guidance was valid at the time given,  but  that  it  may  be
          altered in light of current evidence and there is  no  place  for
          the wholesale  reiteration  of  evidence  which  was  before  the
          previous Tribunal (see paragraph 13(ii)).

      14. We have taken account of the matters set out above and sought  to
          abide by them when assessing the evidence in these appeals.

      15. In the context of the present cases and the  way  in  which  they
          have been presented to us,  there  arises  the  slightly  unusual
          issue of whether  we  should  simply  "clarify"  the  meaning  of
          aspects of the existing country guidance, or, in the alternative,
          actually amend and/or add to it. Where the line is  to  be  drawn
          between clarification on one hand and amendment  and/addition  on
          the other, is a question with which we shall have to grapple.




      D: THE CURRENT COUNTRY GUIDANCE


      16. The current country guidance on risk on return to  Sri  Lanka  is
          contained within GJ and Others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
          Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) (hereafter  "GJ").  GJ  replaced
          the previous country guidance contained in LP (LTTE area - Tamils
          - Colombo - risk?)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00076  and  TK
          (Tamils, LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049.

      17. The Tribunal in GJ set out its country guidance at paragraph 356:

                 "356. Having considered  and  reviewed  all  the  evidence,
                 including the latest UNHCR guidance, we consider  that  the
                 change in the GOSL's approach is so significant that it  is
                 preferable to reframe the risk  analysis  for  the  present
                 political situation in Sri Lanka.  We  give  the  following
                 country guidance:

                 (1)   This  determination  replaces  all  existing  country
                 guidance on Sri Lanka.

                 (2)   The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has
                 changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in
                 Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there  have  been  no
                 terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

                 (3)   The government's present  objective  is  to  identify
                 Tamil activists in the diaspora who are working  for  Tamil
                 separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state
                 enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan  Constitution
                 in 1983, which  prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                 integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is  on  preventing  both
                 (a) the  resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil
                 separatist organisation and (b) the revival  of  the  civil
                 war within Sri Lanka.

                 (4)   If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security
                 services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm
                 requiring international protection.

                 (5)    Internal relocation is  not  an  option  within  Sri
                 Lanka for a  person  at  real  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities, since the government now controls the whole of
                 Sri Lanka and Tamils are required  to  return  to  a  named
                 address after passing through the airport.

                 (6)   There are no detention  facilities  at  the  airport.
                 Only those whose names appear on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
                 detained from the airport.  Any risk for those in whom  the
                 Sri Lankan authorities are or become interested exists  not
                 at the airport, but after arrival in their home area, where
                 their arrival will be verified by the CID or police  within
                 a few days.

                 (7)   The current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of
                 persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether
                 in detention or otherwise, are:

                 (a)   Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                 to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a  single  state  because
                 they are, or are perceived to have a  significant  role  in
                 relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                 diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                 (b)   Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                 human  rights  activists,  who,  in   either   case,   have
                 criticised the Sri Lankan  government,  in  particular  its
                 human  rights  record,   or   who   are   associated   with
                 publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

                 (c)   Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                 Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating  the  Sri
                 Lankan security forces, armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities in alleged war crimes.   Among  those  who  may
                 have witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly
                 in the No-Fire Zones in  May  2009,  only  those  who  have
                 already identified themselves by giving such evidence would
                 be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only
                 they are at real risk of adverse attention  or  persecution
                 on return as potential or actual war crimes witnesses.

                 (d)   A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                 list accessible at the airport, comprising a list of  those
                 against whom there is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                 warrant. Individuals whose name appears on  a  "stop"  list
                 will be stopped at the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                 appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in  pursuance  of  such
                 order or warrant.

                 (8)   The Sri Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based  on
                 sophisticated intelligence, both as  to  activities  within
                 Sri Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri  Lankan  authorities
                 know that  many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
                 economic migrants and also that everyone  in  the  Northern
                 Province had some level of involvement with the LTTE during
                 the civil war. In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an  individual's
                 past history will be relevant only to the extent that it is
                 perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
                 present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri
                 Lankan Government.

                 (9)   The authorities maintain a computerised intelligence-
                 led "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a  "watch"
                 list is not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport
                 but will be monitored by the security services after his or
                 her return. If that monitoring does not indicate that  such
                 a person is a Tamil activist  working  to  destabilise  the
                 unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  revive  the  internal  armed
                 conflict, the individual in question is  not,  in  general,
                 reasonably likely to be detained by  the  security  forces.
                 That will be a question of fact in each case, dependent  on
                 any diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

                 (10)  Consideration must always be given to whether, in the
                 light of an individual's  activities  and  responsibilities
                 during the civil war, the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
                 (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2)  of
                 the Qualification Directive). Regard should be had  to  the
                 categories  for  exclusion  set  out  in  the  "Eligibility
                 Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs
                 of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR on 21
                 December 2012."

      18. Inevitably, a number of other passages in GJ have  been  referred
          to by the parties and we shall set them out  at  the  appropriate
          points in our analysis and conclusions, below.

      19. The country guidance given by GJ was subsequently found  to  have
          accurately reflected the evidence considered by the  Tribunal  in
          that case (see KK (Application of GJ) Sri Lanka [2013]  UKUT  512
          (IAC)) and it then survived a challenge to the Court of Appeal in
          MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ 829.




      E: PROCEDURAL MATTERS


      20. As mentioned previously, much case management was  undertaken  in
          the run-up to the hearing. It would serve no useful  purpose  for
          us to set out the details of this.  One issue, however, does bear
          mentioning.

      21. One of the  expert  witnesses,  Professor  Gunaratna,  gave  oral
          evidence from Singapore, where he lives  and  works.  During  the
          course of the hearing and prior to  his  scheduled  evidence,  we
          raised a procedural issue arising from the decision of the  Upper
          Tribunal in Nare (evidence by electronic means)  Zimbabwe  [2011]
          UKUT 00443 (IAC). This case dealt with  the  situation  in  which
          evidence is proposed to be given by electronic means. There is  a
          discussion of general principles relating to such evidence,  with
          reference to CPR 32.3 and 32PD.33. At paragraph 21, the  Tribunal
          provided guidance as to the processes to be adopted. Although ten
          points are set out, for present purposes, only what  is  said  at
          paragraph 21d is relevant:

                 "If the proposal is to give evidence from abroad, the party
                 seeking permission must be in  a  position  to  inform  the
                 Tribunal that the relevant  foreign  government  raises  no
                 objection to live evidence  being  given  from  within  its
                 jurisdiction, to a Tribunal or court in the United Kingdom.
                 The vast  majority  of  countries  with  which  immigration
                 appeals (even asylum appeals) are concerned  are  countries
                 with which  the  United  Kingdom  has  friendly  diplomatic
                 relations, and it  is  not  for  an  immigration  judge  to
                 interfere  with  those  relations  by  not  ensuring   that
                 enquiries of this sort have been made, and that the outcome
                 was positive. Enquiries of this nature may be addressed  to
                 the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  (International  Legal
                 Matters Unit, Consular Division). If evidence is given from
                 abroad, a British Embassy, High Commission or  Commonwealth
                 may be able to provide suitable facilities."

      22.  The  guidance  as  a  whole  was  subsequently   cited   without
          disapproval  or  qualification  in  the   Kiarie   and   Byndloss
          litigation (see the judgment of the Court of Appeal  [2015]  EWCA
          Civ 1020; [2016] 1 WLR 1961, at paragraph 56,  and  that  of  the
          Supreme Court [2017] UKSC 42; [2017] 1  WLR  2380,  at  paragraph
          69).  The latter was quoted in the  subsequent  decision  of  the
          Upper Tribunal  in  AJ  (s94B:  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  questions)
          Nigeria [2018] UKUT 115 (IAC)).

      23. Whilst it was not brought to our attention  at  the  hearing,  we
          note too the Presidential Guidance  Note  No.2  of  2013  on  the
          subject of video link hearings. Among the various matters  to  be
          addressed by a party  seeking  to  have  video  link  taken  from
          overseas is the need to ensure, where appropriate, that there are
          no objections by the foreign government to this  procedure  being
          conducted from its jurisdiction (see paragraphs 13(g) and 14).

      24. It was apparent that neither of the parties  had  approached  the
          Singaporean authorities in order to ascertain whether or not they
          had any objections to Professor Gunaratna providing his  evidence
          from  within  their  jurisdiction.   Ms  Patel   confirmed   that
          enquiries would be made through the appropriate  channels  as  to
          whether there were any objections or stipulations regarding  this
          issue. Following what was no doubt a flurry  of  activity  behind
          the  scenes,  we  were  duly  informed   that   the   Singaporean
          authorities had no objections, but had requested  that  Professor
          Gunaratna state for the record that he was not speaking on behalf
          of its government and that he would be giving his  evidence  from
          his own private residence. At the outset of  his  oral  evidence,
          Professor Gunaratna duly complied with these two requests.

      25.  This  procedural  matter  did  not  ultimately  result  in   any
          insuperable difficulties. The issues of another state  purporting
          to refuse to permit a witness from giving evidence remotely  from
          within its jurisdiction, or seeking to set conditions with  which
          compliance is not possible, have not arisen and  do  not  require
          consideration here. However, this is a timely reminder that in  a
          landscape in which technology permits easier access  to  evidence
          provided remotely from overseas, parties must be fully  cognisant
          of the relevant procedural steps which may accompany such trends.



      26.  The   second   procedural   issue   which   arose   related   to
          confidentiality. In drafting his report for these proceedings, Dr
          Smith included a number of case  studies  concerning  individuals
          said to have encountered problems from the Sri Lankan authorities
          by virtue of their sur place activities. Six of these individuals
          were named. The respondent undertook enquiries  and  subsequently
          sought to adduce decisions of the First-tier Tribunal relating to
          three of the named individuals, together with  relevant  evidence
          which had been relied on in the  appeals.  These  matters  raised
          obvious difficulties as regards the need to protect the anonymity
          of the named individuals. Dr Smith's disclosure of the names  and
          other relevant information was dealt with by the production of an
          amended version of his report with appropriate redactions. It  is
          this version which was included in the main hearing  bundle.  The
          First-tier Tribunal  decisions  and  accompanying  evidence  were
          admitted and made subject to a confidentiality ring; that being a
          list of named individuals directly involved in these  proceedings
          who signed an undertaking confirming their  obligations  of  non-
          disclosure of the confidential material.

      27. The unredacted version of Dr Smith's report and the  confidential
          material were  placed  into  separate  bundles,  subject  to  the
          confidentiality  ring.  At  the  hearing,   this   evidence   was
          considered in closed sessions during the  course  of  Dr  Smith's
          oral evidence and at the submissions stage.

      28. The confidentiality ring remains in place.




      F: THE EVIDENCE


      29. We have been presented with a vast amount of  evidence  in  these
          appeals. That is not to be taken as a criticism of  the  parties;
          it is simply a reflection of the variety of issues with which  we
          are concerned. We have considered with care all of  the  evidence
          to which we have been specifically referred,  together  with  any
          other materials before us we deem  to  bear  relevance  to  these
          appeals.

      30. Given the time taken to  produce  our  decision,  it  is  perhaps
          inevitable  that  further  country  information  will  have  been
          published since the hearing. In the event, additional evidence in
          the form of the annual report on the situation in Sri Lanka  from
          the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights was  served
          on the Tribunal on 3 March 2021. We have of course borne in  mind
          the need to conduct  our  assessment  on  the  basis  of  current
          evidence. However, this must be balanced against  the  importance
          of achieving finality and avoiding  extending  these  proceedings
          yet further by admitting additional country reports  put  forward
          by one party which do not disclose a significant  change  in  the
          issues with which we are concerned and would entail responses and
          potentially yet more evidence from the other party. In  light  of
          these considerations, we declined to address the recent report.

      31. One matter involving new evidence of  some  factual  significance
          has arisen. On 25 February 2021, GoSL published a new Gazette  in
          which certain diaspora organisations were proscribed (or, to  put
          it more accurately, re-proscribed) under the 2012 UN Regulations.
          Two of the organisations, GTF  and  BTF,  have  featured  in  the
          evidence and submissions before us. By an application made on  31
          March 2021,  the  appellants  sought  to  have  further  evidence
          consisting of the Gazette itself and two  online  media  articles
          admitted in evidence. On 1 April 2021, the  respondent  consented
          to that application. In light of the common  ground  between  the
          parties and the need to ensure factual accuracy in  our  decision
          in so far as is possible, we admitted the evidence. The effect of
          that evidence will be considered at the appropriate points in our
          decision.

      32. What follows is a summary of the  key  aspects  of  the  evidence
          which has informed our analysis and conclusions  on  the  country
          guidance issues and our findings of fact and conclusions  on  the
          appeals of KK and RS.




      Dr Chris Smith

      33. Dr Smith is well-known to the Tribunal,  having  provided  expert
          evidence in a number of previous country guidance cases including
          of course GJ. For the past two decades he has worked on conflict,
          security, and development issues,  both  as  an  academic  and  a
          consultant. There is no dispute between the  parties  as  to  his
          suitability and experience as an expert in respect of the  issues
          upon which he has been asked to provide his opinion.

      34. Dr Smith's original  report  is  dated  9  June  2020.  Following
          changes made to that report, an amended report was provided on  6
          August 2020. In addition, Dr Smith, like the other  two  experts,
          was asked to  respond  to  supplementary  questions  put  by  the
          parties. The responses to these questions are also dated 6 August
          2020. It is the amended report (referred to by the parties as the
          "main report") and the responses to the questions which Dr  Smith
          expressly sought to rely on before us.




      The main report

      35. Although Dr Smith's main report pre-dates the outcome of the  Sri
          Lankan parliamentary  elections  in  August  2020,  he  correctly
          predicts that the party of  President  Gotabaya  would  obtain  a
          significant majority. In  the  section  of  his  report  entitled
          "country update", Dr Smith states that in light  of  the  current
          political landscape in Sri Lanka, the  outlook  for  the  country
          (and the Tamil population in particular) is "bleak". The presence
          of the Rajapaksa family at the apex of  power  indicates  a  move
          away from any conciliatory tendencies which the  previous  regime
          may have  displayed  and  towards  what  Dr  Smith  describes  as
          "disconcerting"    steps    towards     "authoritarianism     and
          militarisation". It  is  likely  that  the  President  and  Prime
          Minister will "develop a regime whose excesses  lie  beneath  the
          radar that will prompt international concern and sanction."

      36. Dr Smith's view is that the "politicised elements  of  the  Tamil
          diaspora" were still viewed by the government through "a lens  of
          both profound enmity and intense suspicion." Notwithstanding  the
          end of the civil war in May 2009  and  what  is  described  as  a
          "veneer of co-operation"  with  the  international  community  as
          regards accusations of  war  crimes  by  political  and  military
          leaders,  the  current  political  hierarchy  has   a   populist,
          nationalist agenda which does not bode well. In light of this and
          the history of conflict over the decades, the government fears  a
          return  to  violence.  Whilst  the  LTTE   were   comprehensively
          defeated, there is a sharp focus  on  the  Tamil  diaspora  as  a
          known, or perceived, source of  support  for  the  resurgence  of
          support and action for Tamil Eelam. The government believes  that
          the separatist network remains in place in one  form  or  another
          and that this national security threat  must  be  addressed  both
          within Sri Lanka and overseas. Dr Smith cites sources  (including
          former President Sirisena) which in his view show that there is a
          factual  basis  for  the  government's  concern   that   diaspora
          activities represent a "nascent threat" from the remnants of  the
          LTTE. In the perception of the  government,  the  Tamil  diaspora
          constitutes  a  "holistic  entity"  and  raises  a  "commensurate
          security concern to the territorial integrity of the  Sri  Lankan
          state." Dr Smith acknowledges that there are few examples  of  an
          LTTE revival within Sri Lanka itself.

      37. Dr Smith emphasises the government's  concern  with  identifying,
          monitoring, and seeking to suppress any resurgence of  the  LTTE.
          This has manifested  itself  in  the  growth  and  refinement  of
          intelligence-gathering.  There  is  reference  to  the   use   of
          "catchers"  or  informants  within  Sri  Lanka,  recruited  from,
          amongst others, rehabilitated LTTE cadres and those  disabled  as
          result of the  civil  war.  Informants  may  be  paid  for  their
          "services". Dr Smith reports that all police stations within  Sri
          Lanka  appear,  as  of  2016,  to  have   become   electronically
          networked. SIS has developed its own parallel electronic network.
          The state's overall intelligence sector is described  as  "vastly
          improved", with this process ongoing during and since the end  of
          the civil war. In summary, Dr Smith states that:

                 "Both within Sri Lanka  and  further  afield,  intelligence
                 gathering is now  at  the  heart  of  security  policy  and
                 posture. The primary aim is, without doubt, to identify and
                 thwart any attempt by the LTTE to rebuild its capacity  for
                 armed insurgency within Sri Lanka. Thus far, it  seems,  it
                 has succeeded. However, any attempt to rebuild the LTTE and
                 the networks necessary to  support  an  insurgency  revival
                 will require the support of the diaspora.  As  such,   GoSL
                 remains extremely focused on diaspora activities  and  will
                 likely remain so in the future."

      38. As to  whether  an  individual  falling  within  the  first  risk
          category under GJ (para 356(7)(a))  is  still  at  real  risk  of
          persecution or serious harm on return  to  Sri  Lanka,  Dr  Smith
          cites evidence relating to the  treatment  of  detainees  by  the
          authorities. Dr Smith states that, based on a source  within  the
          SIS, the electronic database which underlies the stop  and  watch
          lists contains many thousands of  names.  That  database  can  be
          consulted at the airport and, if appropriate, an individual could
          be handed over to the SIS, the TID, or the CID.  The  latter  two
          maintain a permanent  presence  at  the  airport,  with  the  CID
          controlling the database in relation to arrivals. Dr Smith's view
          is that the wider database will not necessarily have  information
          on every individual, but will do so if they have previously  been
          "arrested or informed upon". Information can easily  be  obtained
          from other districts within Sri Lanka itself, given the networked
          capability referred to previously.

      39. Tamil returnees who have been "active in the diaspora"  would  be
          high, if not top, of the  "list",  and  if  on  the  government's
          radar, would be detained  and  at  risk  of  ill-treatment.  Such
          detention would be permitted by the  PTA,  and  its  wide-ranging
          powers would be used to cover  "[a]nybody  whom  the  authorities
          believe might be returning to assist the revival of the LTTE...".
          Dr Smith's report goes on to state:

                "The  Sri   Lankan   authorities   therefore   possess   the
                wherewithal to identify and  detain  members  of  the  Tamil
                diaspora who they perceive to be of  potential  or  existing
                adverse interest. Once identified they have the legal  right
                under the PTA to detain almost whomsoever  they  wish.  Once
                detained, Tamils associated with the diaspora are vulnerable
                and at risk of extreme ill-treatment that will violate their
                civil liberties and their human rights."

      40. The next part of Dr  Smith's  report  deals  with  the  issue  of
          proscribed organisations and the effect of  this  status.  In  Dr
          Smith's opinion, whilst it is "extremely difficult  to  calibrate
          the outcome of proscription", this classification "draws  a  line
          in the sand" as regards the government's perception that they are
          "front" organisations for the LTTE.  Proscribed  groups  are  not
          permitted to operate within Sri Lanka and known members might  be
          stopped on arrival or placed under surveillance. Dr Smith asserts
          that even organisations that have never been proscribed or  those
          that have been de-proscribed may still be  of  adverse  interest.
          Individuals considered to be working for the LTTE outside of  Sri
          Lanka would not be deemed foreign terrorists, but rather a threat
          to the territorial integrity of the state.

      41. Proscription allows the authorities to focus upon  the  group  in
          question, together with its supporters.  Relevant  names  can  be
          placed inside what  Dr  Smith  describes  as  "the  institutional
          memory" of the state, with the consequence that  "almost  anyone"
          involved in relevant sur place activities is  at  risk  of  being
          detained.

      42. Dr Smith considers organisations that have never been  proscribed
          or, if they had been, had then been de-proscribed by the previous
          government in November 2015. All diaspora organisations are  said
          to be in opposition to the government  to  a  greater  or  lesser
          extent. Support for Tamil nationalism is said to be on a "sliding
          scale", ranging from confederalism to  federalism.  In  terms  of
          political organisations within Sri Lanka, the TNA has  adopted  a
          strategy of cooperation with the  government,  a  move  that  has
          attracted criticism from the diaspora.

      43. Whether membership databases of particular diaspora organisations
          could be accessed by GoSL would, in Dr  Smith's  opinion,  depend
          upon infiltration and the means by which this  was  achieved.  He
          was unable to provide evidence that access to such databases  had
          in fact occurred.

      44. Any relevant information gathered through  intelligence-gathering
          is likely to  be  fed  into  the  electronic  database  and  then
          processed  "according  to  the  specifics   of   actual   adverse
          interest."

      45. Dr Smith then addresses the question of what level of activity or
          association with relevant organisations would give rise to a risk
          on return. In his opinion, all Tamil diaspora organisations  (and
          in particular those  currently  proscribed)  will  be  of  actual
          adverse interest. They will be considered to be "either  actively
          assisting or actively supporting the revival of the LTTE."  Known
          members or supporters of such organisations would be  of  "actual
          adverse interest" if returned. "Anyone" suspected of links to the
          LTTE is at risk of being detained. Dr Smith's view was that "any"
          organisation or individual perceived to  be  threatening  to  the
          state will be of adverse interest.

      46. In support of this  position,  Dr  Smith  provides  a  number  of
          examples  of  individuals  who,  it  is  said,  have  experienced
          problems in Sri Lanka by virtue of their sur place activities.

      47. Dr Smith remains of the view that the Sri Lankan authorities will
          be aware of all involuntary returnees prior to their  arrival  at
          Bandaranaike International Airport. The Secretary of  State  will
          inform the SLHC that an individual is to  be  returned  and  this
          information will be passed back to Colombo.  The  watch  list  is
          being   used   "extensively"   and   is   used   to    facilitate
          monitoring/surveillance once a returnee has passed to the airport
          and returns to their home area.

      48. In Dr Smith's opinion, "in all respects, all Tamil  diaspora  sur
          place activities are political and in opposition to GoSL." As  an
          example of how the government views sur place protests, Dr  Smith
          refers to  a  well-documented  incident  from  February  2018  in
          London, in which the former Defence Attach,  Brigadier  Priyanka
          Fernando, faced protesters and  ostentatiously  drew  his  finger
          across his throat whilst pointing towards the  national  flag  on
          his uniform.

      49. The procedures for identifying and "vetting" returning Tamils are
          said to be the same as when Dr Smith gave his evidence in GJ.  In
          the absence of evidence to the contrary, he assumes that progress
          continues to be made to improve intelligence gathering.

      50. On the basis of information provided to him by a security  source
          in 2018 and again in November 2019,  Dr  Smith  states  that  the
          authorities gather information on diaspora activities by the  use
          of infiltrators, informants, and other forms of surveillance such
          as taking photographs at demonstrations. All such intelligence is
          sent back to the Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  and  then  on  to
          relevant intelligence sections within the SIS, TID, CID, and  the
          Ministry of Defence. Information gathered by informants is handed
          over to the Defence Attach in the  SLHC  whose  job  description
          specifically includes, amongst other things, the  monitoring  and
          notification of anti-government activities in the United Kingdom.
          The Defence Attach files a weekly report back to  the  Chief  of
          National Intelligence in Sri Lanka whereupon further analysis  is
          conducted. Dr Smith assumes  that  all  information  gathered  by
          informants is provided to the Defence Attach who then  sifts  it
          prior to transmission to Sri Lanka. In  this  respect,  Dr  Smith
          believes that the SLHC is much more than a "post-box". As regards
          facial recognition technology, Dr Smith is unable  to  provide  a
          clear picture and he accepts that such a capability may have some
          distance to travel. In light of his recent trip to Sri Lanka,  he
          confirms that there  are  no  obvious  cameras  in  the  airport.
          However, there is a manual  face  recognition  process  by  which
          hardcopy photographs of individuals previously identified can  be
          matched to the faces of those detained at  the  airport.  He  was
          unable to provide further details.

      51. Dr Smith's security source informed  him  that  the  database  of
          information  on  individuals  remains  robust.  The   information
          contained on the electronic database remains in place for life.

      52. In respect of what takes place at the  airport  upon  return,  Dr
          Smith states that a  failed  asylum-seeker  will  be  questioned,
          whether they have been removed from the host country under escort
          or not. There is a stop list and a watch list maintained  at  the
          airport: the former ensures that those in  whom  the  authorities
          have "an existing adverse interest" are  detained  upon  arrival;
          the latter is used to trigger surveillance once an individual has
          passed to the airport and returns to the home area.

      53. Dr Smith takes the view that it would be "very unlikely"  for  an
          individual to engage in political  separatist  activities  within
          Sri Lanka without being detained and ill-treated.

      54. Dr Smith ends his report by citing examples  of  case-studies  in
          which it is said that  family  members  in  Sri  Lanka  had  been
          harassed (or worse) by the authorities on account of  a  relative
          engaging in diaspora activities.




      Answers to supplementary questions

      55. When asked to clarify the meaning of "adverse  interest"  in  his
          report, Dr Smith confirmed that is linked to whether  someone  is
          seen as a potential or actual threat to the existence of the  Sri
          Lankan state. Relevant activities might include "planning  for  a
          resurgence  of  terrorism  and/or  insurgency,   fundraising   or
          material procurement and shipping, and alerting the international
          community to the ethnic problems that endure within  Sri  Lanka."
          The term also refers to individuals who are already known to  the
          authorities through previous detentions and/or a presence on  the
          electronic database.

      56. In Dr Smith's view,  the  majority  of  the  Tamil  diaspora  are
          sympathetic to the aims of Tamil nationalism and, in broad terms,
          the objectives of the LTTE, at least in respect of  the  ultimate
          goal, if not the means to achieve this. The views of the diaspora
          are on a spectrum, ranging from committed separatists at one  end
          to confederalists at the other.

      57. Dr Smith clarifies his position on risk and states that those  on
          the watch list will not be  detained,  but  rather  placed  under
          surveillance. He questions whether only those considered to  have
          a "significant role" are at risk. In respect to those included on
          the electronic database, Dr  Smith  confirms  that  there  is  no
          hierarchical list as such, and that the stop list and watch  list
          are derived from that wider pool: "people  overseas  who  are  of
          existing adverse interest,  people  affiliated  to  organisations
          that support the LTTE are bound to be included."

      58. When asked about non-proscribed diaspora organisations, Dr  Smith
          is of the view that the BTF believes in working with GOSL towards
          self-determination, rather than seeking Tamil Eelam. The  BTC  do
          not take any stand on the separatist issue. It is  unlikely  that
          the government would differentiate between  a  person  advocating
          federalism and one who urged confederalism.

      59. Tamil nationalism and separatism are said to be "two sides of the
          same coin."

      60. Asked to comment on paragraph  2.4.33  of  the  CPIN,  wherein  a
          number of factors relevant to establishing risk  are  listed,  Dr
          Smith  recognised   that   they   appeared   to   be   "plausible
          assumptions".

      61. He considers the LTTE to be a spent force, especially within  Sri
          Lanka. However, the perceived threat of its re-emergence is  such
          that it is "axiomatic that any Tamil returning to Sri  Lanka  who
          is known to be  sympathetic  to  the  LTTE  will  be  of  adverse
          interest." The rehabilitation  programme  used  to  re-assimilate
          former LTTE cadres into society has "run its course."

      62. Dr Smith is asked to clarify whether he  believes  that  all  sur
          place activities will be treated in  the  same  way  by  the  Sri
          Lankan authorities. In response,  he  says  that  the  particular
          nature of activities will stand some individuals out for  adverse
          attention. For others, perhaps those at a lower-level, activities
          may act as a trigger to encourage the authorities to examine them
          to find out more. Events such as sports days are, in  Dr  Smith's
          view, perceived as being in opposition to the GoSL; they  provide
          opportunities for propaganda, fundraising, and networking amongst
          the Tamil diaspora.

      63. Dr Smith was not clear at what point a TGTE member might be  seen
          as "high profile" and whether the authorities would regard such a
          description as relevant in  any  event.  His  view  is  that  the
          response to an  individual's  TGTE  association  would  not  vary
          according to profile; a known member would face being detained or
          placed under surveillance.

      64.  When  asked  to  clarify  his  evidence  on  facial  recognition
          technology, Dr Smith acknowledges that the poor rates of  success
          in a pilot project conducted by the  police  in  London  suggests
          that the same would apply to any such technology that might exist
          in Sri Lanka.

      65. If a returnee is in possession of their own Sri Lankan  passport,
          they will be able to  pass  through  the  airport  without  being
          questioned unless they are picked at random due, for example,  to
          suspicious body language. The possession of a valid passport does
          not preclude  an  individual  from  being  on  the  database  and
          relevant agencies will  be  alerted  if  that  individual  is  of
          adverse interest. Relevant information on those  returning  on  a
          TTD will have been sent to Colombo in advance.




      Oral evidence

      66. Since GJ, Dr Smith had  visited  Sri  Lanka  on  four  occasions,
          although the last of these, in March 2020, was for  the  purposes
          of holiday only. The two previous visits, in  February  2018  and
          November 2019, involved information gathering.

      67. Dr Smith accepted that the primary focus of  GoSL  is  activities
          outside Sri Lanka in so far as the threat of an  LTTE  resurgence
          is concerned. With reference to a speech made by former President
          Sirisena in  May  2018,  the  primary  consideration  related  to
          extremist elements of the Tamil diaspora, although  the  net  was
          widely cast. Speeches made by leading politicians were very  much
          for public consumption. GoSL believes that it is on  top  of  the
          LTTE issue and expends a great deal of effort into ensuring  that
          this  remains  the  case.  The  main  concern  was   to   prevent
          international regrouping of the LTTE. When asked if GoSL would be
          interested in all groups described  as  "nationalist",  Dr  Smith
          stated that there were other considerations in play such  as  the
          desire to avoid  political  embarrassment  on  the  international
          stage and the avoidance of accountability for past  human  rights
          abuses.

      68. It was difficult, in Dr Smith's view, to say where GoSL drew  the
          line in terms of interest in those with "nationalist" sympathies.
          He  did  not  consider  the  BTC  to  be  threatening,   although
          particular individuals may have their own views that are regarded
          as such. The BTF was more  complicated,  as  their  position  had
          changed over the years. In respect  of  other  groups,  Dr  Smith
          stated that adverse interest would depend on what the group  said
          and its affiliations. A group might  not  have  strong  views  on
          Tamil Eelam, but individuals  within  it  could  hold  their  own
          opinions. GoSL spends a lot of time monitoring  and  infiltrating
          groups in a "major, major" way.

      69. Dr Smith described interviews at the SLHC as "rigorous", and that
          he would be "very, very surprised" if questions about  sur  place
          activities were not asked as a matter of course. He believed that
          representatives of the United Kingdom authorities were  sometimes
          present at interviews (on instructions, Ms Patel informed us that
          this was not routinely the case and that the respondent  was  not
          able to speak to the nature of questioning).

      70. Dr Smith was asked about the proscription  of  organisations.  He
          was not aware of the details of the legal effect of  proscription
          under the 2012 UN Regulations, but believed that it was to  close
          down  opposition  in  Sri  Lanka  and  send  a  message  to   the
          international community about its security concerns  relating  to
          the organisation in question.

      71. A large number of questions related to the issues of intelligence
          gathering and what is made of the information obtained. Dr  Smith
          was  confident  that  infiltration  of  Tamil   diaspora   groups
          occurred, but could not say whether all such groups were  subject
          to  this  method.  Nor  could  he  say  whether  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities  were  able   to   access   databases   of   relevant
          organisations.  His  views  on  infiltration  were   based   upon
          interviews conducted in  Colombo  in  2019  and  previously.  The
          United Kingdom was a "major area of endeavour" for GoSL.

      72. The electronic database operated by GoSL was "massive." Dr  Smith
          accepted that there would be a hierarchy of interest,  with  some
          names attracting "red flags", whilst others  being  of  "average"
          concern. An individual  may  have  a  low  profile  but  be  very
          effective for the separatist cause. Conversely, they may  have  a
          high profile but be ineffective.  He  believed  that  members  of
          proscribed organisations would be detained  on  return  if  known
          about and of sufficient adverse interest to be on the stop  list.
          Alternatively, they might be picked  out  of  the  queue  at  the
          airport by the CID, who maintain a "roaming presence"  there.  Dr
          Smith was pressed as to what criteria  might  be  used  to  place
          somebody on the stop list. He had never seen  any  document  that
          lists the trigger factors, but believed that the following  would
          be relevant:

                    i.  whether  they  were  a  member   of   a   proscribed
                       organisation;




                   ii. any fundraising activities;




                  iii. whether they had travelled a lot in the  West  and/or
                       South East Asia;




                   iv. what they had said and/or written.

      73. Dr Smith maintained his view that the person would be on the stop
          list if there was an extant warrant against them. He appeared  to
          go further and state that someone may still be on  that  list  in
          the absence of a warrant and that he held that view at  the  time
          of this evidence  in  GJ.  In  respect  of  the  watch  list,  an
          individual would still be allowed through the airport  and  their
          details would be sent on to the local  police  station  in  their
          area of residence. Local informants would be alerted. There would
          be reports on the surveillance conducted on  the  individual  and
          further action would be taken if necessary. The  watch  list  was
          used more than the stop list. His source for the lists issue  was
          a security officer that he had last spoken to in  November  2019.
          Dr Smith confirmed that he was unable to say who was on either of
          the lists.

      74. Ms Patel gave Dr Smith an example of an individual in the  United
          Kingdom who had attended a single  protest  and  had  handed  out
          leaflets. Would  this  person  be  subject  to  surveillance  and
          detention? Dr Smith  responded  that  it  would  depend  on  what
          information was passed back  to  Colombo,  what  other  acts  the
          individual  may  have  undertaken  or  be  suspected  of   having
          undertaken, and whether they would be placed on the stop list  or
          the watch list.

      75. Dr Smith confirmed that, to the best of his knowledge, there were
          no cameras at BIA when he last went down  in  November  2019.  He
          believes that whilst there is now a  manual  process  for  facial
          recognition, the authorities are working on an automated process.
          Names of individuals could be linked to photographs by virtue  of
          the infiltration process in the United Kingdom.

      76. As regards individuals  returning  to  Sri  Lanka  on  their  own
          passports, whether they be questioned at the airport would depend
          on what happens  when  the  passport  is  swiped  at  immigration
          control. The electronic database is  connected  to  the  passport
          scanning technology. Dr Smith could not recall an  example  of  a
          person returning on their own passport and being detained at  the
          airport.

      77. Dr Smith was then questioned about the specific case-studies  set
          out at certain passages of his report, the full details of  which
          are contained in the confidential bundle. In very general  terms,
          Dr Smith stated that a  solicitor  well-known  to  him  had  made
          contact with the individuals (many of whom were  the  solicitor's
          clients or former clients). Interviews  were  then  conducted  by
          telephone, with the solicitor acting  as  interpreter.  Dr  Smith
          accepted that he had not seen the  decisions  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal in respect of three of the individuals, and that some of
          them appeared to have had previous links to the LTTE which  might
          have impacted on the basis for any  adverse  attention  from  the
          authorities.

      78. The panel then asked questions. Dr Smith stated that he had  been
          monitored whilst in Sri Lanka. It was the case that  people  were
          very afraid of speaking to him when he was  in  the  country.  He
          could not comment on the TGTE's lack of record-keeping in respect
          of returnees.

      79. He stated that the Defence Attach analysed information  provided
          to him and filtered it before passing it to  Colombo,  making  an
          initial recommendation as to what names should be placed  on  the
          electronic database. This information then went through  relevant
          Ministries and was ultimately considered by the National Security
          Committee. This process had been  confirmed  by  Dr  Smith's  SIS
          contact whom he had last spoken to in November 2019.  When  asked
          for further clarification, Dr Smith stated that  the  information
          went from the Defence Attach to the army in Sri Lanka  who  then
          farmed it out on a need to know basis to the Ministry of Defence,
          the Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs,  the  Ministry  of  External
          Affairs, and other relevant agencies such as the  SIS,  TID,  and
          CID. It was at this stage that the decision would be made  as  to
          whether a name should be entered onto  the  electronic  database.
          Once this was done a further decision would be made as to whether
          the individual should be put onto the  stop  list  or  the  watch
          list.

      80. Dr Smith drew a distinction between how safe  people  thought  it
          was to contact the TGTE from Sri Lanka and how safe  it  actually
          was. The Sri Lankan authorities could monitor  social  media  and
          tap telephones, but they did not appear to be able to  hack  into
          WhatsApp messages yet. Dr Smith was not surprised if Tamils  were
          concerned about contacting organisations overseas.

      81. In Dr Smith's view, attendance at a single demonstration would be
          unlikely to go onto the electronic database.  If  the  individual
          was known as a Tamil separatist activist, the name would go on to
          the database, but he could not be sure what would then happen. He
          believed that actual members of the TGTE would be on the database
          and on either the stop list or the watch list. In  this  context,
          "members" meant the elected Members of Parliament.  The  presence
          on the watch list could lead to questioning, which in turn  could
          lead to detention.

      82. Dr Smith did not have any real knowledge about the BTC,  but  was
          of the view that they did not advocate for a separate Tamil state
          within Sri Lanka.  They  were  "fully  integrated"  into  British
          politics. As for TFL, they were  more  committed  to  Sri  Lankan
          issues.




      Dr Suthaharan Nadarajah

      83. Dr Nadarajah is an academic, researcher, and  consultant  working
          on international security, development, and Sri Lankan  politics.
          He is currently a Lecturer  in  International  Relations  at  the
          Department of Politics and International Studies at the School of
          Oriental and African Studies, University of London. He  was  also
          one of  the  expert  witnesses  in  GJ.  As  with  Dr  Smith,  Dr
          Nadarajah's  suitability  to  provide  expert  evidence  on   the
          relevant issues is not in dispute.

      84. Dr Nadarajah produced an initial report followed  by  an  amended
          report (referred to by the parties as the "main  report"),  dated
          10 August 2020.




      The main report

      85. Dr Nadarajah begins by providing a summary  of  how  he  believes
          GoSL perceives the Tamil diaspora. The  political  activities  of
          its members are  seen  as  a  "primary  threat"  to  Sri  Lanka's
          security and territorial integrity.  Reference  is  made  to  the
          views  publicly  stated  by  leading  governmental  and  military
          figures, to the effect that:

                 "... while the Tamil separatist cause is  seen  to  advance
                 through  the  activities   of   specific   Tamil   diaspora
                 organisations,   their   members   and   supporters,    the
                 capabilities  of  the  transnational   Tamil   independence
                 movement and thus its potency as a threat  to  Sri  Lanka's
                 territorial integrity and  national  security  is  seen  to
                 derive from the breadth  and  depth  of  Tamil  nationalist
                 sentiments ("separatist ideology") in  the  Tamil  Diaspora
                 community."

      86. Tamil separatism is effectively seen  as  the  same  as  diaspora
          support for a revival of the LTTE, and thus as a  threat  to  the
          national security and territorial integrity of Sri Lanka.  It  is
          said that GoSL views the concept of terrorism in a broader  sense
          than  that  employed  by  Western  governments.  The  pursuit  of
          separatism, even if by non-violent means, is  enough.  The  Tamil
          diaspora is seen as increasingly  effective  in  respect  of  its
          activities, both  in  respect  of  the  separatist  ideology  and
          seeking to hold GoSL to account for past human rights abuses.

      87. Dr Nadarajah places significant reliance upon a  speech  made  by
          the then Defence Secretary (now President) Gotabaya in 2012 and a
          related 2013 article published  in  the  United  States  military
          journal PRISM, together with other pronouncements by military and
          intelligence officials, which portrays the Tamil diaspora as part
          of a wider transnational separatist threat  to  Sri  Lanka.  This
          includes renewed violence within Sri Lanka, but also the goal  of
          a separate state, even if not  pursued  through  armed  struggle.
          Through public  pronouncements,  GoSL  effectively  treats  Tamil
          diaspora  groups  advocating  for   self-determination/separatism
          interchangeably with a return to armed struggle by a  potentially
          resurgent LTTE. A recurring theme in Dr Nadarajah's report is the
          concept  of  a  separatist  ideology,  perceived   by   GoSL   as
          representing an existential threat to Sri Lanka.

      88. The Tamil population within Sri Lanka itself  does  not  have  an
          appetite for renewed armed conflict, but it does not follow  that
          they  have  repudiated  support  for  the  nationalist/separatist
          cause. The TNA have vacillated between invocation of the struggle
          for Tamil liberation through non-violent means on  the  one  hand
          and interactions with GoSL on the  other.  This  has  led  to  an
          erosion of its popular support amongst the Tamil population.

      89. The decision of GoSL to withdraw from UNHRC Resolution 30/1 on 19
          February 2020 was prompted by its view that a  "false  narrative"
          had been created in respect of the civil war.

      90. In respect of the risk category described in paragraph  356(7)(a)
          of GJ, Dr Nadarajah's view is that GoSL "remain  committed  to  a
          general mobilisation against potential LTTE resurgence and  Tamil
          separatism... which... has also been  conflated  with  Tamil  and
          international advocacy campaigns which are perceived  as  serious
          threats to both Sri Lanka and its apex political and mid military
          leadership..."  GoSL's "expansive view" of Tamil separatism  fits
          in with the 6th amendment to the Sri Lankan Constitution and  the
          view that "major" Tamil  diaspora  organisations  involved  in  a
          range of advocacy campaigns are  LTTE  fronts  or  even  integral
          parts thereof. In Dr Nadarajah's opinion:

                 "... Tamils who  participate,  or  are  suspected  to  have
                 participated,  in  a  range  of  Tamil  diaspora  political
                 activities that are perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities
                 as working to advance the cause of Tamil  separatism,  and,
                 therefore,  as  supporting  or  facilitating   the   LTTE's
                 terrorism  against  the  country,  are  at  real  risk   of
                 persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether
                 in detention or otherwise."

      91. The recent consolidation of power by the  Rajapaksa  dynasty  has
          led to a "significant increase in the real risk of persecution or
          serious harm on return to Sri Lanka for individuals who  are,  or
          are perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities to  be,  involved  in
          Tamil diaspora activities that they consider to be in furtherance
          of Tamil separatism and therefore the LTTE."

      92. On the issue of proscription, it is said that such  status  would
          exacerbate the potential risk to those with links to  a  relevant
          organisation.  On  the   other   hand   de-proscription   or   no
          proscription at all does not necessarily mean that the Sri Lankan
          authorities do not consider the group or  its  members  to  be  a
          serious threat to national security. The example is given of  the
          LTTE itself. The organisation was only  proscribed  between  1998
          and 2002, and then from 2009 to the present day. The  years  when
          it was not proscribed  did  not  preclude  the  authorities  from
          having an obvious adverse interest in it.

      93. In relation to diaspora organisations in general, GoSL  perceives
          those that are engaged in "anti-Sri Lanka"  activities  as  being
          "LTTE fronts". The BTF continues to  be  perceived  as  one  such
          organisation. So too are the BTC, TFL and  TFLD  by  virtue,  for
          example, of their signing of  a  letter  to  the  United  Kingdom
          government calling for Brigadier Fernando  to  be  expelled  from
          this country following his "cut throat" gesture at a  protest  in
          2018. The perception of GoSL may be distorted  or  simply  wrong,
          but it is one that is genuinely held.

      94. In respect of the ability of  returnees  to  continue  to  engage
          openly in political activities once in Sri  Lanka,  Dr  Nadarajah
          states that  this  would  not  be  possible  without  a  risk  of
          persecution. This is to be seen in the context of the "repressive
          direction" engendered by the current regime.

      95. Reference is made to social media mapping  using  algorithms  and
          large amounts of accumulated data about individuals.  Information
          gathered by this method represents "actionable knowledge" once it
          has been collated, organised,  and  analysed.  The  TID  conducts
          surveillance of social media, in particular Facebook, in order to
          identify  suspected  separatists.  It  is   the   perception   of
          intelligence officers which is important.  The  authorities  have
          made efforts  to  expand  the  capability  to  monitor  encrypted
          platforms such as WhatsApp with the assistance  of  technological
          assistance from China.

      96. Dr Nadarajah addresses the issue of the use of informers  in  the
          diaspora and  within  Sri  Lanka  itself.  Information  from  the
          sources is used extensively by GoSL. He expresses  some  concerns
          about the quality of information passed on, given the  underlying
          pressures on individuals to provide something seem to be of value
          to their handlers, who in turn need to report to their superiors.




      Answers to supplementary questions

      97. When asked about perceived connections between the LTTE  and  the
          TGTE, Dr Nadarajah cites sources in which  the  latter  has  been
          described as a faction of the former.

      98. Dr Nadarajah is asked to comment upon passages  within  the  CPIN
          which relate to the risk profile of an individual.  His  response
          is that:

                "... Tamils with links or suspected links with the LTTE  and
                former and suspected former  LTTE  members  continue  to  be
                subject to surveillance and harassment  by  the  Sri  Lankan
                authorities; to be detained and sometimes  prosecuted  under
                the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA); and to be subject  to
                torture and ill-treatment in security forces' custody."

      99. Those diaspora activities of which Dr Nadarajah is aware are non-
          violent  in  nature.  Referring  back  to  his  main  report,  he
          emphasised that it is not simply the modality of activities,  but
          their content: "it is their involvement  in  activities  seen  as
          promoting Tamil  separatism,  on  the  view  of  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities,  that  leaves  the  authorities  to  view  them   as
          terrorists ("LTTE fronts")."

     100. In respect of the effect of  proscription  of  organisations,  Dr
          Nadarajah states that this status enables the authorities to take
          action against suspected members or supporters under the PTA.

     101. Dr Nadarajah is asked a number of  questions  about  whether  all
          members and/or supporters of a variety of diaspora  organisations
          and all signatories to a particular petition would be  considered
          a threat to the integrity of the Sri Lankan  state.  His  answers
          all include the caveat that it would "depend on his  or  her  own
          profile as perceived by the authorities".




      Oral evidence

     102. Dr Nadarajah stated  that  the  Tamil  population  is  viewed  as
          hostile. The militarisation of the north of Sri  Lanka  indicated
          that the population there as a whole is viewed adversely.  Whilst
          the Tamil diaspora does provide remittances, these normally go to
          relatives and community organisations.  GoSL  seeks  to  restrict
          land purchases to Sinhalese and applies pressure not to invest in
          Tamil businesses operating in the north of the country. Non-Tamil
          investment in the North and East is very limited.

     103. With reference to the  PRISM  article  from  2013,  Dr  Nadarajah
          stated that  GoSL  saw  about  10%  of  the  diaspora  as  active
          supporters  of  separatism,  with  the  rest  taking  a   passive
          approach. Given that the total  diaspora  constituted  1  million
          people, the active cohort was notable and represented the "tip of
          the spear". He accepted that the TGTE had renounced violence, but
          this was disputed by the Sri Lankan authorities: "the Tiger  does
          not change its stripes". Dr Nadarajah saw the  PRISM  article  as
          having the same effect as the 2012 speech  by  the  then  Defence
          Secretary.  When  asked  if  the  public  statements  represented
          rhetoric that did not necessarily reflect reality,  Dr  Nadarajah
          stated that there had been "remarkable consistency" on  the  part
          of government and military officials as to  the  perceived  links
          between  diaspora  organisations  and  the  LTTE.   The   primary
          connection is that of a separatist ideology. Military  units  had
          been positioned in the north of Sri Lanka in order to change  the
          mindset of the  Tamil  population  there.  In  respect  of  three
          incidents concerning potential terrorist attacks within Sri Lanka
          and the absence of evidence to show  a  link  between  these  and
          diaspora groups, Dr Nadarajah stated that GoSL believe these were
          encouraged or  instigated  by  individuals  and/or  organisations
          outside the country.

     104. It was accepted that not all members of the diaspora  will  share
          the same ideas about Sri Lanka's future or, for example, the need
          for accountability for past war  crimes.  However,  Dr  Nadarajah
          emphasised his opinion that GoSL saw all such views as "part  and
          parcel  of  one  overall  position",  what  the  government   had
          described as an "enabling environment for separatism".

     105. Dr Nadarajah was of the opinion that the TNA had not  necessarily
          rejected the aims of the LTTE. He was  unable  to  say  for  sure
          whether any of the  diaspora  organisations  described  as  "LTTE
          fronts" by the Sri Lankan authorities  were  in  fact  such.  The
          absence  of  evidence  provided  by  GoSL  resulted  in   Western
          governments not accepting the allegation.

     106. Dr Nadarajah was asked about diaspora  organisations  other  than
          TGTE. He  believes  that  the  BTF  campaigns  for  international
          pressure in  furtherance  of  self-determination  for  the  Tamil
          population. Even without advocating  for  Tamil  Eelam,  the  BTF
          could still be seen to be challenging the  territorial  integrity
          of Sri Lanka. Support for a referendum may be seen in this way as
          well. Whilst the BTC is not separatist, GoSL perceive it as  such
          because of its influence  with  the  Conservative  Party  in  the
          United Kingdom. TFL are also perceived as being separatist.

     107. Asked about how an individual might  be  treated  on  return,  Dr
          Nadarajah stated that it depended on a range of factors including
          the nature of the organisation with which  they  were  connected.
          There would then  be  an  assessment  of  various  factors.  This
          entailed an "indicator-based approach". In respect of a signatory
          of a petition on behalf of an organisation which was perceived as
          being anti-government, this act alone would not necessarily place
          the individual  at  any  risk.  The  more  indicators  that  were
          present, the greater the  possibility  of  the  individual  being
          perceived as a threat. Dr Nadarajah stated that  pieces  of  data
          would  be  stored  electronically  without   human   involvement.
          Subsequent  cross-checking  with  other  information   would   be
          automated. This opinion was based on his  view  of  technological
          capabilities  of  companies  who  could   provide   services   to
          governments  around  the  world.  He  acknowledged  that  country
          information on the use of  the  PTA  to  detain  people  did  not
          provide details of their profiles.

     108. Dr Nadarajah did not believe that  the  rehabilitation  programme
          had run its course.

     109. As to political activity within Sri Lanka, Dr Nadarajah  restated
          his view that the TNA does not espouse separatism  as  such,  and
          that it has  been  seen  to  have  a  tacit  agreement  with  the
          government. When asked by the panel  if  an  avowedly  separatist
          organisation could operate within the country, he said that there
          was "zero" possibility of this.

     110. On the issue of information gathering,  the  harvesting  of  open
          source material was possible. Social network mapping could  bring
          together existing information through an automated  process.  The
          monitoring of social media was not, in  Dr  Nadarajah's  view,  a
          manual process. He inferred this from his knowledge of  companies
          such  as  Google  and  their  ability  to  collect  and   collate
          statistics.

     111. As to whether GoSL could monitor encrypted communications such as
          WhatsApp, it was presumed that technological  assistance  had  in
          fact been given by the Chinese government in order to  facilitate
          this. Whilst there were no cameras  at  BIA,  facial  recognition
          software could be well-advanced in Sri Lanka.  Chinese  companies
          such as Huawei were involved  in  the  Sri  Lankan  technological
          infrastructure.

     112. The use  of  informants  by  the  authorities  was  described  as
          "standard practice".

     113. The panel asked Dr Nadarajah if he had knowledge of  any  returns
          to Sri Lanka  where  the  individual  had  been  detained  solely
          because of sur place activities. He had  no  such  knowledge  and
          told us that no data was available.

     114. In answer to questions from Mr Mackenzie, the witness  was  clear
          that various electronic  databases  would  be  integrated.  Basic
          information on individuals would be integrated with  intelligence
          obtained  covertly.  This  could  be  connected  to  open  source
          material as  well.  Dr  Nadarajah's  view  was  that  there  were
          separate databases which were linked together, with one that  sat
          on top of all the others. This view was based upon  his  sources,
          although he accepted that he was not  an  information  technology
          expert. As to the monitoring of social media,  he  believes  that
          analysis of this information went into the social network mapping
          process.

     115. Returning to the issue of when an individual would be  considered
          a threat and therefore at risk on return, Dr  Nadarajah  accepted
          that it was very difficult to give any precise answer. He  stated
          that "some level of profiling" was inevitable and that there  was
          always an element of judgment involved. There would  be  a  human
          assessment following any  automated  processing  of  information.
          This might involve assessing the role of the  individual  in  the
          broader Tamil movement; the benefit to GoSL  of  preventing  that
          individual from continuing their activities  for  the  separatist
          movement;  the  level  and  nature  of  social  media   activity;
          attendance at protests; the signing  of  petitions;  and  whether
          there is a family history of involvement with the LTTE.




      Professor Rohan Gunaratna

     116. Professor Gunaratna is  Professor  of  Security  Studies  at  the
          Nanyang Technology University, Singapore. He has a  long  history
          of researching the LTTE and played a central  role  in  designing
          the rehabilitation programme for ex-cadres following the  end  of
          the civil war in 2009. Along with  Dr  Smith  and  Dr  Nadarajah,
          Professor Gunaratna provided evidence in GJ, although he was  not
          called at the  hearing.  As  with  the  other  two  experts,  his
          suitability to provide evidence on  relevant  issues  is  not  in
          dispute.




      The main report

     117. Professor Gunaratna's main report is dated 1 May 2020. By way  of
          background, he provides information on the genesis  of  the  TGTE
          and its connections to the LTTE. The TGTE is described as "one of
          the four factions of the LTTE". It is said to have "promoted  the
          separatist ideology, glorified violence  against  India  and  Sri
          Lanka, and hailed Prabhakaran [the former leader of the LTTE]  as
          its central icon." Following the defeat of the  LTTE  within  Sri
          Lanka, the centre of gravity of the threat shifted  overseas  and
          the authorities' attention was focused on monitoring the remnants
          of the organisation and what are described as its  "front,  cover
          and  sympathetic  organisations".  The  proscription  of  sixteen
          groups in 2014 had the effect of prohibiting Sri Lankan nationals
          from   maintaining   links   with   members   of   the   relevant
          organisations. Whilst eight organisations were  de-proscribed  in
          2015, this was done for political reasons and monitoring of these
          groups  persisted.  The  "LTTE  front,  cover   and   sympathetic
          organisations"  exposed  the  Tamil  youth  to  an  ideology   of
          extremism, and de-proscription  of  certain  groups  reduced  the
          effectiveness of the government's ability to  combat  separatism.
          GoSL was reviewing the organisations that had been  de-proscribed
          by the previous government (that review has since concluded, with
          the  result  that  several  organisations  have  now   been   re-
          proscribed). Professor Gunaratna states that the  United  Kingdom
          remains a "major hub" for LTTE reorganisation and revival.

     118. As to which organisations and/or individuals will be viewed as  a
          threat by GoSL, Professor Gunaratna's opinion is that  the  scope
          is wide-ranging: "any  person"  associated  with  "any  terrorist
          organisation" and activities including, but not limited  to,  the
          dissemination   of   propaganda,   lobbying,   participation   in
          demonstrations, and the raising of funds, would fall  within  its
          ambit.  "Anyone  belonging  to  the  TGTE  or  perceived  to   be
          associated  with  the  TGTE  will  be  arrested,   detained   and
          investigated."

     119. On the issue of returns,  Professor  Gunaratna  states  that  the
          security and intelligence services maintain a robust presence  at
          BIA. Two forms of lists are maintained at the airport: an  arrest
          (stop)  list  and  a  watch   (surveillance)   list.   Proscribed
          individuals or "suspected  terrorists"  are  interviewed  at  the
          airport. An arrested returnee will be remanded in custody, whilst
          others will be permitted entry to the country and then monitored.
          Each case is considered carefully and the decision  taken  as  to
          whether to prosecute under the PTA or enlist  the  person  as  an
          informant. It is said that the  authorities  will  "always"  take
          action against a returnee that has either "engaged or planned  to
          engage in  a  terrorist  operational  or  support  activity."  In
          Professor  Gunaratna's   view,   "terrorist   support   activity"
          included: disseminating propaganda;  lobbying;  participating  in
          demonstrations; displaying of  terrorist  paraphernalia;  raising
          funds; procuring supplies;  and  organising  similar  activities.
          Further, "leadership, membership  or  association  of  a  listed,
          delisted or unlisted terrorist organisation is taken seriously by
          the Sri Lankan authorities." Those who left Sri  Lanka  illegally
          are no longer produced before a magistrate.

     120. Whilst the LTTE is not currently a viable  force  in  Sri  Lanka,
          GoSL is aware of the potential for it to be revived. It  is  said
          that twelve LTTE plots have been dealt with  by  the  authorities
          since May 2009. These plots were directed from abroad.  In  light
          of this, GoSL has built a "powerful" intelligence  capability  to
          monitor threats. There is capability  to  monitor  a  variety  of
          forms of communication, both online and offline. It is said  that
          the technology includes facial recognition  capability.   Sources
          are recruited  through  overseas  missions  in  order  to  gather
          intelligence. Interviews of failed asylum-seekers  are  conducted
          at the  SLHC  prior  to  return.  The  intelligence  gathered  is
          "verified  and  validated  and  integrated  with  other   related
          information..." All details are then  sent  back  to  Sri  Lanka.
          Those who work against the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka are
          investigated and, "depending on their disposition" they would  be
          prosecuted  if  uncooperative,  or  recruited  as  informers   if
          cooperative.

     121. Professor Gunaratna notes that a number of  commemorative  events
          are celebrated in  the  diaspora,  including  Great  Heroes  Day,
          Mullivaikkal Day, and Black Tigers Day. These "apex  events"  and
          other events said to be on behalf of the LTTE  are  monitored  by
          the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  Whilst  such  "terrorist  support
          activities" are permitted in this country,  "they  would  not  be
          tolerated in Sri Lanka."

     122. With reference to the rehabilitation programme, those former LTTE
          cadres who have been  through  that  system  are  no  longer  the
          subject of continuing animosity.  The  "anger"  of  the  security
          forces is instead directed towards the  "LTTE  front,  cover  and
          sympathetic organisations operating from overseas masquerading as
          diaspora organisations and exploiting  the  liberal/human  rights
          systems in the Western countries."

     123. Professor Gunaratna refers to the establishment  of  a  political
          party in Sri Lanka, Crusaders for Democracy, and the  willingness
          of GoSL to permit this. The party was set up  by  ex-LTTE  cadres
          who, in the eyes of the authorities, no longer posed  any  threat
          to  the  territorial  integrity  of  the  country.  This,  states
          Professor Gunaratna, indicates that Tamils living in Sri Lanka do
          not support the revival of separatism, contrary to the "pressure"
          from "LTTE front, cover and sympathetic organisations overseas".







      Answers to supplementary questions

     124. Aside from the TGTE, the other three claimed factions of the LTTE
          are said to be the GTF, the LTTE group led  by  "Nediyavan",  and
          the LTTE group (also known as  the  Headquarters  Group)  led  by
          "Vinayagam". GoSL does not accept that the TGTE is non-violent in
          its aims. The justification for describing  the  TGTE  and  other
          organisations as "LTTE fronts" is that "any entity fronting for a
          terrorist  organisation   is   a   terrorist   front".    Further
          information is given about  the  effect  of  proscription,  going
          beyond simply the  freezing  of  assets.  It  is  said  to  be  a
          deterrent  to  individuals  to  have  any  association  with  the
          relevant organisations.

     125. A list of the twelve attempted LTTE plots is provided in an annex
          to the main report. Professor Gunaratna highlights an  additional
          attempt in July 2020, where the putative attacker was killed when
          the bomb exploded prematurely.

     126. Clarification is provided as  to  what  is  meant  by  the  terms
          "terrorist   operational   activity"   and   "terrorist   support
          activity". Whether those engaged in the latter would have  action
          taken against them would depend on the profile of the individual.
          There is a preference on the part of the authorities  to  recruit
          Tamils who have been engaged in activities at a  lower  level  as
          informants and community sources. The rationale for this is  that
          sympathisers would monitor supporters, supporters  would  monitor
          members, and members would monitor leaders. It is  not  the  case
          that only "prominent activists" would be monitored or prosecuted.
          Professor Gunaratna did not accept that only those with  a  known
          profile would be at risk.

     127. In Professor  Gunaratna's  view  taking  part  in  demonstrations
          organised by  a  proscribed  terrorist  organisation  amounts  to
          involvement with a terrorist organisation. TID has responsibility
          for handling counterterrorism matters, not the CID. The level  of
          interest from  GoSL  would  vary  according  to  an  individual's
          profile. When asked what level of  profile  would  be  necessary,
          Professor Gunaratna's view is that "anyone"  connected  with  the
          organisation would be arrested and  interviewed  "regardless"  of
          the level of their involvement.




      Oral evidence

     128. Professor Gunaratna revealed that he had asked a person described
          as a "colleague" in the  United  Kingdom  to  review  his  report
          before it was submitted. This  individual  turned  out  to  be  a
          member of the Bar known (and was known by Professor Gunaratna  at
          the time) to have acted  for  Tamil  asylum-seekers  in  numerous
          cases over the years. He stated that this individual had not made
          any significant comments on the draft report and that he had  not
          made any changes on account of anything that  the  barrister  had
          said or written.

     129. Professor Gunaratna disagreed with the  suggestion  that  he  had
          overplayed the threat of an LTTE revival. The attempts  to  mount
          attacks in Sri Lanka since 2009 were genuine, and the threat  was
          not a figment of GoSL's imagination. He was not aware of evidence
          that the TGTE had sought to direct any of the attempted  attacks,
          nor that they had provided funding for  these.  However,  in  his
          view, the TGTE would be treated in the same way as other factions
          of the LTTE. It is perceived as  radicalising  Tamil  people  and
          following the same narrative path  as  Prabhakaran.  He  accepted
          that  none  of  the  United  Kingdom-based  TGTE  MPs  had   been
          proscribed, but noted that the organisation's  listing  had  been
          maintained following the de-proscription of others in  2015.  The
          BTF was described as a "key organisation" until it was  wound  up
          in the United Kingdom. The TGTE was described  as  currently  the
          most active political separatist organisation on British soil. He
          described the BTF as continuing to advocate for a separate  Tamil
          state, and that they wanted to revive the LTTE.

     130. With reference to the risk on return, Professor Gunaratna  stated
          that there were two lists: the first was  described  as  the  "UN
          Resolution list" and was publicly available (we took that to mean
          the list of proscribed organisations and individuals); the second
          was  held  by  the  intelligence  services  and  was   based   on
          information gathered from  various  sources.  This  list  is  not
          public. Both lists are used at the airport.  The  wider  database
          was described as "detailed and elaborate". Attendance at a single
          demonstration  could  place  an  individual  on  that   database.
          However, not all would be placed in the same category: there  was
          a difference in the "gradient of activities". Those suspected  of
          procuring weapons and suchlike would be treated more harshly than
          those engaged in the dissemination  of  propaganda.  Nonetheless,
          even those at  a  low  level  would  not  be  tolerated  and  the
          authorities would act against them. What this meant would depend.
          He went on to state that if a person was  on  the  database  they
          would "certainly" be detained and if they were a  member  of  the
          TGTE they would be arrested. The TGTE was described  as  a  "very
          high priority" in the eyes of GoSL.

     131. When asked about whether GoSL could access membership  lists  for
          relevant diaspora organisations, Professor Gunaratna referred  to
          the use of infiltrators and  suggested  that  "British  services"
          engaged in joint operations against such organisations.

     132. In respect of interviews at the SLHC, what was asked would depend
          on the individual interviewing officer. Questions could go beyond
          simply establishing nationality  and  identity.  An  officer  may
          obtain further information if the interviewee was content to give
          it.  People  would  be  asked  about  LTTE  links.   Whether   an
          interviewee was asked about political views  would  depend  on  a
          number of factors including whether GoSL deemed  there  to  be  a
          high threat period. Unless there was a specific instruction  from
          the SLHC to the contrary, anyone returning would be referred  for
          questioning at the airport.  A  person  returning  on  their  own
          passport would  not  be  scrutinised  unless  they  were  on  the
          database. Those known to be TGTE members would  be  arrested  and
          either recruited as an informant or prosecuted.

     133. Informants could be at a high-level or not. Information  on  such
          individuals would never be made public. Professor Gunaratna  gave
          an example of a senior LTTE member who had been recruited by  the
          authorities.

     134. Professor Gunaratna confirmed that he was unaware of any specific
          individuals connected to the TGTE who  had  been  ill-treated  or
          monitored on return to Sri Lanka. He stated that such information
          would be kept confidential by the relevant agencies.

     135. When asked what factors would be relevant when  deciding  whether
          an individual would be sent  for  rehabilitation  or  punishment,
          Professor Gunaratna said that the assessment would be  undertaken
          by the authorities based upon whether  the  individual  would  be
          likely to reoffend or constitute  a  threat  to  security.  There
          would be a detailed assessment and the police  would  check  with
          CID, TID, and the SIS. If an  individual  was  cooperative,  they
          might be sent for rehabilitation or no further action  taken.  If
          they were perceived to be a  risk  or  hiding  information,  they
          would be prosecuted.




      Mr Sockalingam Yogalingam

     136. Mr Yogalingam has been a Member of Parliament for the TGTE  since
          2011 and is a former Deputy Minister  for  Sports  and  Community
          Health. He is  also  the  Assistant  Director  of  Act  Now,  and
          Executive Committee Member  of  Nations  Without  States,  and  a
          National Councillor of the National  Liberal  Party  (the  United
          Kingdom-based political  party  promoting  self-determination  of
          ethnic minorities who have been forced from their homelands).




      Written evidence

     137. Mr Yogalingam had previously provided letters of support for both
          KK and RS, dated 16 May 2019 and 4 November  2019,  respectively.
          They provide a brief summary of the TGTE  and  confirm  that  the
          appellants  had  "joined"  the  organisation  as  volunteers  and
          subsequently been involved in "organising several  public  events
          in the UK." It states that the appellants had  attended  meetings
          and  events,  with  KK  having  also  taken  an  active  role  in
          organising  public  demonstrations.   Mr   Yogalingam   describes
          witnessing both appellants' "true commitment  and  dedication  to
          the Tamil Freedom Struggle", and that as a consequence  they  had
          been given "responsible  roles"  in  terms  of  organisation  and
          fundraising. A number of specific events in which it is said that
          each appellant played a "key role" are then set out.  In  respect
          of RS, it is said that "[h]er activities  goes  far  beyond  mere
          attendance  in  these  events.  She  continues  to  express   her
          political aspiration publicly." Both appellants are described  as
          "ardent" supporters of the TGTE mission  and  that  they  hold  a
          desire for an independent Tamil homeland.

     138. Mr Yogalingam provided a witness statement in these  proceedings.
          Having set out his own  background,  he  gives  details  of  each
          appellants' activities in the United Kingdom. KK is described  as
          having worked "closely"  with  a  former  TGTE  MP  and  with  Mr
          Yogalingam  himself  in  respect  of   campaigning,   leafleting,
          organising meetings, and fundraising. He is said  to  have  shown
          "sincere commitment" to the cause. In 2017 and 2018, he worked as
          a coordinator for security for the media team at the annual  TGTE
          National Sports meeting. He was an organiser of the demonstration
          during which Brigadier Fernando  made  the  well-documented  cut-
          throat gesture to protesters, and at subsequent  events.  KK  has
          been involved in organising commemorative  events  in  the  Tamil
          diaspora calendar since 2017.

     139. RS first made contact with the TGTE in 2014. She  and  ST  became
          increasingly active from 2017 and  they  have  both  subsequently
          shown their "commitment  and  dedication  to  the  Tamil  Freedom
          Struggle". Although RS is quieter than ST, her role as  a  female
          activist is said to be "particularly significant", as  there  are
          fewer women attending events and she can be seen as an example to
          others. RS is part of the TGTE WhatsApp group for women. A number
          of "responsible roles" undertaken by RS  are  listed,  including:
          membership of the sub- committee in her local area;  contributing
          to meetings and the organisation of events; informing  people  in
          the local area, inviting them to events, and selling tickets; and
          leafleting.

     140. Mr Yogalingam explains that the TGTE began issuing  "Tamil  Eelam
          National identity cards" in 2014 and although they stopped  being
          issued at the beginning of 2015, this restarted  at  the  end  of
          2017. These cards state that the bearer is a  "Citizen  of  Tamil
          Eelam". They are issued  to  anyone  who  applies  and  pays  the
          appropriate fee. One does not have to be a member of the TGTE  to
          be issued with a card, nor are all members  in  possession  of  a
          card. The TGTE is the only organisation that provides a  card  of
          this type. Mr Yogalingam goes on to state the following:

                 "27.  To my knowledge there have  not  be  [sic]  any  TGTE
                 members  or  supporters  returning  to  Sri  Lanka  without
                 problems.

                 28. I have heard of a small number of TGTE members of [sic]
                 supporters being forcibly removed from the UK who I did not
                 hear from since, they would not make contact anyway as that
                 would increase the risk to them."

     141. Mr Yogalingam avoids  trying  to  speak  to  TGTE  members  about
          matters such as relatives being at risk in Sri Lanka. People  are
          afraid of imparting information in case GoSL finds out. He  gives
          an example of a TGTE activist whose brother was arrested and ill-
          treated on return to Sri Lanka. Whilst  the  authorities  claimed
          that he was an LTTE member, the TGTE activist believed  that  his
          detention was down to her activities in the United Kingdom as her
          brother was not linked to the LTTE.




      Oral evidence

     142. Mr Yogalingam provided further details about  the  TGTE  National
          Sports  meeting,  stating  that  in  addition  to  the   sporting
          activities, political  activities  were  also  undertaken.  Tamil
          Eelam flags and a large statue of the territory were displayed at
          the event.

     143. It was accepted that not all Tamils supported the TGTE.  However,
          Mr Yogalingam believed  that  all  Tamils  did  want  a  separate
          homeland,  but  that  some   would   not   openly   state   this.
          Approximately 63,000 members of the diaspora had voted  for  this
          in a referendum held in 2010. When  asked  to  clarify  what  was
          meant by being a "member" of the TGTE,  it  was  said  that  this
          related to MPs: a normal member of the public would  be  regarded
          as a supporter.  There  is  no  formal  application  process  for
          membership of the organisation,  although  volunteers  needed  to
          complete a form  at  the  office.  Mr  Yogalingam  accepted  that
          neither he nor any of the other United Kingdom-based TGTE MPs had
          been proscribed. An individual has to pay  15  for  an  identity
          card.

     144. Mr Yogalingam disagreed that his letters of support for KK and RS
          were identical and were based on similar templates.  He  asserted
          that the appellants had been treated separately. He could not say
          why KK had not been named in a 2019 brochure for the TGTE  Sports
          Day meeting. KK has been involved in selling raffle  tickets  and
          tickets for a fundraising dinner. He  could  not  recall  whether
          KK's name and mobile number had ever been on TGTE literature. The
          details of "main" coordinators are normally stated. Mr Yogalingam
          initially stated that KK had  been  a  member  of  a  local  sub-
          committee, but when asked to clarify this  in  re-examination  he
          confirmed that this was not the case and that it was RS  who  was
          involved. In respect of RS, Mr Yogalingam was sure that  she  had
          attended the Sports Day meeting. RS was described as  "quiet  and
          very disturbed". Her role on the sub-committee was not an elected
          one. Mr Yogalingam could not recall if her  name  had  ever  been
          included on brochures. She had been involved  in  selling  raffle
          tickets and other fundraising.

     145. Mr Yogalingam stated that returnees would not want to contact him
          because they feared that the telephones  would  be  tapped.  When
          asked if an individual could use another telephone or purchase  a
          separate SIM card, Mr Yogalingam stated that someone known to him
          (who was not involved with the TGTE) had had his number  "tagged"
          at the airport when he went back to Sri Lanka.

     146. Mr Yogalingam confirmed that the TGTE does not hold  any  records
          of returnees who are associated with the organisation. There  was
          no mechanism to collect such  information.  The  explanation  for
          this was that people's lives  should  not  be  put  at  risk.  Mr
          Yogalingam could not provide any information as to the numbers of
          TGTE supporters who had returned (involuntarily  or  voluntarily)
          to Sri Lanka. When asked why his organisation would not have been
          told  by  individuals  about  their  imminent  removal/return  in
          advance, he stated that perhaps they would not be  able  to  make
          contact at that time. Mr Yogalingam had not thought it  necessary
          to include examples of returnees connected to  the  TGTE  in  his
          witness statement. He did refer to the single example set out  in
          his  statement of the brother of a TGTE  activist  who  had  been
          detained when he went back to Sri Lanka.




      Mr T Uthayasenan

     147. Mr Uthayasenan  is  the  International  Coordinator  for  TS,  an
          organisation established (originally  under  the  name  Stop  the
          Slaughter of Tamils) shortly before the end of the civil  war  in
          May 2009.




      Written evidence

     148. Mr Uthayasenan explains the aims of TS: to bring to the attention
          of a wider audience the past alleged wrongdoings of GoSL and  the
          authoritarian nature of the regime; and to  achieve  freedom  for
          the Tamil people "through a separate state of Tamil  Eelam".  The
          organisation is committed  to  encouraging  activism  within  the
          movement. To date, no TS  activists  have  been  removed  to  Sri
          Lanka.

     149. Mr Uthayasenan provides details  of  threats  and  actions  taken
          against  TS  in  Sri  Lanka.  Whilst  he  is  unable   to   state
          categorically that these emanated from GoSL, his belief  is  that
          this is the case. Such incidents  include:  their  website  being
          taken down; threats being made to individuals and their  families
          in Sri Lanka; and an aborted attempt to set up an office  in  the
          north of Sri Lanka which failed due to threats from the  CID.  Mr
          Uthayasenan himself was arrested at BIA airport in 2015,  despite
          the fact that he is a British citizen. With the help of  contacts
          he was eventually allowed into the country but was monitored  and
          "intimidated" throughout. An  attempt  to  visit  Sri  Lanka  the
          following year was initially met with refusal by the authorities.
          Again, following interventions, the visit was permitted,  but  Mr
          Uthayasenan was kept under surveillance. He states that he  would
          not go to Sri Lanka under the current regime.

     150. Mr Uthayasenan confirms that RS and ST  have  been  attending  TS
          events since 2019  and  that  they  have  attended  most  of  the
          protests held during the last  year.  Whilst  not  yet  a  formal
          member of  the  organisation,  RS  is  described  as  a  "regular
          supporter and  activist"  and  that  the  membership  process  is
          underway.




      Oral evidence

     151. In oral evidence, Mr Uthayasenan confirmed that  he  was  on  TS'
          National Coordinating Committee. The  names  and  photographs  of
          certain individuals referred to in his witness statement had been
          published on the organisation's website, but these do not include
          RS or ST. He confirmed that the membership  process  for  TS  was
          lengthy,  involving  discussions  with  the  candidate   and   an
          assessment of  their  knowledge  and  understanding  of  relevant
          issues. A final decision on  full  membership  is  taken  by  the
          National Committee. Currently,  there  are  approximately  80-100
          members and "a few hundred" volunteers/supporters.

     152. TS have not been proscribed by GoSL.  Mr  Uthayasenan  speculated
          that it might be because the organisation's initial  profile  was
          relatively low. He is aware  that  the  government  is  currently
          reviewing the proscribed list. Mr Uthayasenan is  not  himself  a
          proscribed person.

     153. Mr Uthayasenan confirmed that TS sometimes  organised  events  in
          conjunction  with  the  TGTE,  although  they   mostly   operated
          independently. The organisation did not collect  figures  on  the
          return of individuals connected to TS either as full  members  or
          supporters. To the best of his knowledge, there have been no such
          returns.




      The TGTE evidence

     154. The TGTE provided a letter from its current  Prime  Minister,  Mr
          Visvanathan Rudrakumaran, dated 27 July 2020.

     155. Mr Rudrakumaran confirms that he is  currently  serving  a  third
          term as Prime Minister following his re-election in May 2019.  He
          and the TGTE, are based in New York.  During  the  civil  war  he
          acted as Coordinator of the Constitution Affairs Committee of the
          LTTE and was a legal advisor for  that  organisation  during  the
          peace process in the early 2000s.

     156. The TGTE was formed on 17 May 2010 in response  to  the  "act  of
          genocide" perpetrated against the Tamil population. There  was  a
          need to articulate the political aspirations  of  Tamils  and  to
          "realise their right to self-determination". The  TGTE  currently
          has 132 MPs based in a number of countries. 20 MPs are  based  in
          the United Kingdom. The total Tamil diaspora consists of  over  1
          million people, with 300,000 of  them  living  in  this  country.
          Members  of  this  community  provide  "substantial  support"  to
          achieve the aim of freedom for Tamil people in Sri Lanka.

     157. The aims and objectives of the TGTE are stated to be:

                      i) "... to realise the political aspirations of Tamils
                         through peaceful, democratic, and diplomatic means,
                         and  its  Constitution  mandates  that  it   should
                         realise  its  political  objectives  only   through
                         peaceful means;

                     ii)  that  the  international   community   holds   the
                         perpetrators  of   war   crimes,   crimes   against
                         humanity, and genocide against the Tamil people  to
                         account;

                    iii) that a referendum be held to decide  the  political
                         future for Tamils;

                     iv) that the State of Sri  Lanka  is  referred  to  the
                         International Court of Justice under the Convention
                         Against Genocide."

     158. Details are provided about the overall  structure  of  the  TGTE,
          both internationally and in the United Kingdom.  Mr  Rudrakumaran
          explains that "supporters can join in projects, teams or tasks if
          they accept the aims and objectives of the TGTE."  There  are  no
          membership  fees,  although  members  and  supporters  can   make
          voluntary donations. As regards participation in TGTE activities,
          it is said that any member or supporter can be involved.  As  the
          TGTE is not proscribed outside of Sri Lanka, there  is  no  legal
          obstacle in the way of participation  in  activities  within  the
          diaspora. In response to a request for his view of how  the  TGTE
          is  perceived  by  GoSL,  Mr  Rudrakumaran  refers   to   several
          historical events relating to human  rights  abuses  by  the  Sri
          Lankan government against the Tamil population.  He  goes  on  to
          state  that  Sri  Lanka  "is  not  a  democratic  state  but   an
          ethnocratic state", and that it is a "cultural  vessel  of  rigid
          and entrenched Sinhala Buddhist hegemony."




      Mr Martin Stares

     159. Mr Stares is  currently  the  Head  of  the  Country  Policy  and
          Information Team at the Home Office and has  held  this  position
          since March 2014 when the team  was  formed.  Prior  to  this  he
          worked for the Home  Office  in  the  field  of  immigration  and
          asylum.

     160. Mr Stares provided written and oral evidence in these proceedings
          in response to  detailed  criticisms  of  the  FFM  made  by  the
          appellants in their skeleton argument.




      Written evidence

     161.  Mr  Stares  confirmed  that  a  standardised  approach  to   the
          undertaking  of  fact-finding  mission  had   been   adopted   in
          conjunction with a number of other European  countries,  and  set
          out in  Common  Guidelines  on  (Joint)  Fact  Finding  Missions,
          published in November 2010 under the  auspices  of  the  European
          Country of Origin Sponsorship programme. The Home Office internal
          guidance  ("Guidance:   conducting   fact-finding   missions   in
          countries of origin, version 0.1, published internally  in  March
          2018) is predicated upon the Guidelines. Both the  Guidelines and
          the internal guidance are referred to in the FFM. It is said that
          the approach undertaken does not  seek  to  provide  analysis  or
          interpretation of the source material, but is rather a summary of
          the information, grouped together thematically.

     162. The team that visited Sri Lanka did not include Mr Stares, but he
          was involved in reviewing and editing the final  version  of  the
          FFM.

     163. Mr Stares deals with each of the criticisms levelled against  the
          FFM by the appellants. As to the timing  of  the  mission  (which
          took place just before the  presidential  elections  in  November
          2019), it would have been difficult to judge the  length  of  any
          delay.  Mr  Stares  acknowledged  that  the  "main"  drivers  for
          undertaking the mission were a sudden and "seemingly inexplicable
          rise" in asylum applicants relying on TGTE activities as a  basis
          for their protection claims, together with  an  increase  in  the
          number of appeals being allowed in which the judge had apparently
          departed from the country guidance set out in GJ.

     164. The executive summary in the FFM was simply to  assist  decision-
          makers in assessing whether the  document  was  relevant  to  the
          claim that they were considering. There was still  a  requirement
          to consider the contents in full. In terms of  the  selection  of
          sources  to  be  interviewed,  the  internal  guidance  had  been
          followed. It was not possible to set up a mission that considered
          every angle, such as age, gender, religion, or ethnicity. It  was
          the  individuals'/organisations'  expertise  that  was  of   most
          importance, along with practical issues such as availability. The
          aim  was  to  include  sources  from  each  of  five  categories:
          government  sources,  local,  national  and  international   non-
          governmental organisations, media, diplomatic  and  international
          sources, and others such as lawyers or academics.

     165. Sources were asked as to how they wished to be referenced in  the
          report.  There  is  a  "loose  hierarchy"  of  how  sources   are
          referenced, ranging from full name,  role,  and  organisation  to
          simply "a source". Advice is taken from the  FCO  as  to  whether
          they thought it would be in the  interviewees'  interests  to  be
          anonymised. In addition, placing  an  individual  at  risk  might
          jeopardise the United Kingdom government's reputation.

     166. In response to the  assertion  that  a  number  of  sources  were
          "tainted", Mr Stares stated that they are generally understood to
          be giving the views  of  their  organisations,  unless  specified
          otherwise. It is accepted that a third of the  interviewees  were
          connected to the Sri Lankan government in one form or another. Mr
          Stares was confident that every source was able to  speak  freely
          when interviewed.

     167. As regards the specific questions put to sources,  a  number  are
          standard, with the scope to follow-up. On the particular issue of
          the TGTE, the decision as to who to ask about  this  organisation
          had been a matter for the fact-finding team itself. There was  no
          consideration given in advance as to whether a particular  source
          did have knowledge of it. The TGTE  had  been  a  focus  for  the
          mission, but not its sole purpose.

     168. As a matter of practice, interviewees were invited to review  and
          approve the notes of interviews made by members of  the  team.  A
          non-response to this request was interpreted as  an  approval  of
          accuracy.  Eleven  of  the  sources  interviewed  had   expressly
          approved the notes.




      Oral evidence

     169. The decision on the timing of the fact-finding mission  had  been
          justified. When asked about the lack  of  interviewees  of  Tamil
          ethnicity, Mr Stares stated that the primary focus was expertise.
          None of the interviewees had been asked about their ethnicity. He
          agreed that about a third of  the  interviewees  were  associated
          with the Sri Lankan state and that the figure might be  around  a
          half  given  that  some  of  the  interviews  included   multiple
          individuals. There  was  no  suggestion  that  interviewees  felt
          unable to speak freely about the TGTE.

     170. As regards the gathering of information on the  TGTE,  Mr  Stares
          said that it appeared as though  few  people  are  aware  of  the
          organisation and this was itself a useful indication. Whilst  one
          journalist believed that torture in detention did not occur, this
          did not indicate a general lack of knowledge. Certain aspects  of
          the information provided by the IOM relating to the  position  of
          returnees was "possibly" surprising and seemed "a little  stark".
          However, he did not believe that this organisation  was  partial.
          When asked why the IOM had been considered a useful source on sur
          place activities, Mr Stares believed that it  tried  to  interact
          with people and help them to reintegrate  back  into  Sri  Lankan
          society. UNHCR had been selected as a source  after  consultation
          with the FCO. Mr Stares confirmed that the FCO had been aware  of
          the "main drivers" for the fact-finding mission at the time  that
          potential sources were being discussed.

     171. Mr Stares was unaware if the TID had been approached  to  provide
          information. With hindsight, it was accepted that the  TID  might
          have been a useful source. He agreed with the view  of  Professor
          Gunaratna that the authorities would not disclose who they  would
          be interested in in the context  of  what  would  be  a  publicly
          available document (i.e. the FFM). He also  agreed  that  it  was
          possible for fact-finding teams to ask for an  ad  hoc  interview
          whilst in the country.

     172. The basis for concluding that there had been  a  sudden  rise  in
          protection claims here relying on the TGTE was  queries  made  by
          caseworkers and decisions made by Tribunals. No  statistics  were
          kept on the nature of sur place claims, their success  rates  or,
          to the best of Mr Stares' knowledge,  on  returns  to  Sri  Lanka
          where sur place claims had failed. Those subject  to  involuntary
          returns were not monitored by the United Kingdom government. This
          was due to capacity and a responsibility  to  avoid  raising  the
          profile of an individual after return. Mr Stares accepted that no
          questions had been asked of the sources in relation to the agenda
          of separatist groups, although a representative of  the  northern
          community had been asked about diaspora groups. It  was  accepted
          that the team had not interviewed any lawyers or  academics,  and
          that only a single human rights activist had been met.  This  was
          likely down to availability.  On  the  question  of  balance,  Mr
          Stares believed that the ratio of  government  to  non-government
          sources was  appropriate.  Any  source  could  provide  one-sided
          information and caution must be exercised.

     173. Mr Stares did not know why some  of  the  sources  had  requested
          anonymity. In respect of certain police and  government  sources,
          the names and specific roles had been taken out of the report  on
          the basis of FCO advice, but he was unable to say why this advice
          had been given. It was accepted that the policy  section  of  the
          CPIN involves filtering, whilst the FFM contains raw information.

     174. In terms of interview notes being  approved  by  sources,  it  is
          assumed that the record is accurate unless  an  interviewee  says
          otherwise. Mr Stares was not aware of any source  having  refused
          an invitation to be interviewed.

     175. The information gathered indicated that the TGTE  does  not  have
          much of a profile in Sri Lanka. Even though it does  not  operate
          within the country, in Mr Stares' view, some level  of  awareness
          there would have been expected.




      FFM

     176. Certain aspects of the FFM have  already  been  set  out  in  the
          summary of Mr Stares' evidence. Following  sections  setting  out
          the background  to  the  visit  and  its  purpose,  the  report's
          methodology is explained. This was addressed  by  Mr  Stares.  An
          executive  summary  is  provided,  followed  by   nine   thematic
          sections:

                    i. General situation;

                   ii. Treatment of Tamils;

                  iii. Tamil groups;

                   iv. Treatment of returnees in general;

                    v. Diaspora and sur place activities;

                   vi. Reports of torture and abductions;

                  vii. Arrests and police procedures;

                 viii. Airport procedures; and

                   ix. Medical facilities.

     177. There then follow four annexes. Annex B lists the sixteen sources
          which provided evidence, together with visits made by the team to
          BIA and the National Mental Health Institute of Sri Lanka.  Annex
          D includes the notes  of  the  meetings  held  with  the  various
          sources. It is this annex which represents  the  actual  evidence
          upon which the respondent in particular  relies  in  the  appeals
          before us and which has been the subject of much criticism by the
          appellants.

     178. Speaking at a time prior to the election of President Gotabaya, a
          number of sources  stated  that  the  overall  situation  in  the
          country  has  improved,  although  the  security  situation   has
          worsened since the Easter bombings in April  2019.  There  was  a
          sense of apprehension in respect of the forthcoming  presidential
          elections  in  November  2019.  Certain  Tamils,  including  some
          returning from  abroad,  may  be  monitored  depending  on  their
          overall profile. There continued  to  be  discrimination  against
          Tamils and continuing "Buddhist colonisation" of Tamil areas. The
          majority of sources were aware of the TGTE, but thought  that  it
          had little support within Sri  Lanka  itself.  It  received  very
          little, if any, coverage in the Sri Lankan media. Most Tamils  in
          Sri Lanka were more concerned with their economic well-being. One
          source regarded the TGTE as being associated with the  LTTE.  The
          CID stated that if one was active in a proscribed group or funded
          them, action may be taken, although not  if  the  individual  was
          "just a member".

     179. Certain ex-LTTE members may still be subject to monitoring in the
          country. Many thousands had  been  through  the  "rehabilitation"
          programme and one source stated that it has now finished.

     180. Several sources believed  that  returning  failed  asylum-seekers
          would be questioned at BIA. Some might  be  checked.  Details  of
          those being returned on a TTD would be  provided  to  Immigration
          Officers in advance. Other sources stated that they were  unaware
          of "ordinary Tamils" being targeted  on  return.  Returnees  with
          links to the LTTE would be likely to  face  further  questioning,
          although it would depend on the facts of the case. UNHCR  believe
          that only those with a "high profile" link to the LTTE  would  be
          questioned.

     181. There were mixed views as to whether those with TGTE links  would
          have problems on return. Some sources  thought  that  only  "high
          profile" members of that organisation would be questioned  and/or
          detained, others were of  the  view  that  "genuine  members  and
          supporters" might face difficulties on the basis that the TGTE is
          proscribed.

     182. In terms of the Sri Lankan  authorities'  attitudes  towards  the
          diaspora, the general activists were  probably  monitored  abroad
          and on return. One source  stated  that  the  main  influence  of
          diaspora groups within Sri Lanka related  to  remittances  rather
          than any political aspect.

     183. A number of sources stated that instances of torture in detention
          was less common.

     184. In respect of procedures at BIA, those returning on  an  enforced
          removal are  referred  to  a  Chief  Immigration  Officer  to  be
          interviewed. Those appearing on a  relevant  list  (described  by
          various sources as a "stop list" and/or a "watch list")  will  be
          identified at this stage.




      DFAT

     185. The report provides what is described as the  Department's  "best
          judgment  and  assessment"  of  the  country  situation  for  the
          purposes of protection status determination only. It purports  to
          give a general country  overview  and  does  not  contain  policy
          guidance for decision-makers. The information stated is  informed
          by the Department's "on-the-ground knowledge and discussions with
          a range of sources in Sri Lanka."

     186.  The  report  highlights  the  large  amount  of  money  sent  as
          remittances from working abroad. There  are  continuing  economic
          challenges faced by those living in the north  and  east  of  the
          country and  this  has  acted  as  a  push  factor  for  external
          migration. Limited improvements in  the  country's  human  rights
          records under  the  regime  of  former  President  Sirisena  were
          thought to be at risk if Gotabaya Rajapaksa or a close  associate
          gained power in the upcoming election (the report  was  published
          only a short period of time  before  this  event  took  place  in
          November 2019). The military maintains a significant presence  in
          the north of the country and there have been reports  of  ongoing
          military occupation of land. DFAT is of the view that there is  a
          degree of Tamil-based political activity  within  Sri  Lanka  and
          several political parties operate, mainly under the  umbrella  of
          the TNA. The Tamil community reports monitoring and  surveillance
          by the authorities in the north and east and informants are  used
          to obtain information. DFAT does not believe that a repeal of the
          PTA is likely in the near future.

     187. It is  said  that  the  authorities  "remain  sensitive"  to  the
          potential re-emergence of the LTTE. What  are  described  as  the
          "stop" and "watch" electronic databases continue to be  used  and
          that those on the latter are likely to be monitored.  There  have
          been reports  that  some  Tamils  with  imputed  LTTE  links  are
          monitored and harassed in order to guard against  a  re-emergence
          of the LTTE, although this took  a  more  subtle  form  than  had
          previously been the case. The report suggests that  "high-profile
          leaders of pro-LTTE diaspora groups, particularly diaspora groups
          banned under Sri Lankan law" may attract  the  attention  of  the
          authorities due to their  participation  in  demonstrations.  The
          government believes that elements of the diaspora  are  committed
          to a separate Tamil state. Sri Lankans living  abroad  have  been
          encouraged to return to the country or  invest  in  its  economy.
          Returnees may be monitored, "depending on  their  risk  profile."
          Such persons likely to be of "particular interest" include  those
          holding leadership positions in diaspora groups; those  who  were
          formerly part of the LTTE; and those who "actively  advocate  for
          Tamil statehood." There is a suggestion that  family  members  of
          former LTTE operatives may face discrimination on a societal  and
          official level.




      Other relevant country information

     188. We have been presented with a very substantial amount of  country
          information on Sri Lanka. It would be  both  near-impossible  and
          undesirable for us to attempt  to  summarise  all,  or  even  the
          majority, of this evidence. What follows is a very brief  summary
          of the reports most commonly referred to by the parties in  their
          respective submissions.

     189. The United States State Department Human  Rights  report  on  Sri
          Lanka for 2019 describes torture as being  "endemic".  The  Tamil
          population reported that security forces regularly monitored  and
          harassed activists, journalists, and former or  suspected  former
          LTTE members.

     190. The Report  of  the  Special  Rapporteur  on  the  promotion  and
          protection of human rights while countering terrorism,  dated  14
          December 2018, confirms the presence of torture in Sri  Lanka  as
          "endemic  and  systematic"  and  that  impunity  for  abuses   in
          detention persists.

     191. A 2019  report  from  the  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High
          Commissioner for  Human  Rights  concludes  that,  amongst  other
          problems, an unwillingness to pursue the perpetrators  of  abuses
          existed, as did the surveillance and intimidation of human rights
          activists and victims.

     192. A number of reports from  the  International  Truth  and  Justice
          Project, Human Rights Watch, and the International  Crisis  Group
          have been relied on by two  of  the  experts,  in  particular  Dr
          Nadarajah. In essence, these  materials  consider  the  issue  of
          returnees said to have faced problems, in some cases as a  result
          of alleged diaspora  activities.  Some  of  the  examples  stated
          appear to relate to individuals who had previous links  with  the
          LTTE.




      CPIN

     193. The CPIN draws heavily on the FFM, DFAT, and a variety  of  other
          country information. Given our summaries of these sources, above,
          it serves no useful purpose to re-state the general points raised
          in the evidence as it pertains to the issues before us.




      The evidence of KK

     194. In light of the undisputed medical evidence relating to  KK,  the
          parties were agreed that he should be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
          witness within the meaning of  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
          Note No.2 of 2010.




      Written evidence

     195. KK's most recent statement  sets  out  a  brief  summary  of  the
          struggle of the Tamil people in Sri Lanka  and  KK's  own  family
          background, including his parents' support for the LTTE  and  the
          death of three cousins in the conflict. His past  experiences  in
          Sri Lanka are said to  have  informed  his  desire  to  undertake
          political activities in the  United  Kingdom,  in  particular  in
          relation to the aims of the TGTE.  Prior  to  the  start  of  his
          involvement with this organisation in September  2014,  he  began
          attending political events soon after his arrival in  the  United
          Kingdom in 2009. KK describes his initial contact with  the  TGTE
          and his understanding of their  objectives,  namely  the  aim  of
          achieving a separate state for  Tamils  "carved  out  within  Sri
          Lanka within the parameters of the International Law and  getting
          justice for the genocide  committed  against  Tamils  through  an
          internationalised mechanism."

     196. He has committed himself to working with  the  TGTE  towards  its
          objectives, having worked "closely" with  a particular  TGTE  MP,
          Nimalan Seevaratnam, between 2014 and the middle  of  2017.  This
          included attending  political  meetings,  distributing  leaflets,
          meeting  people  to  inform  them  of   the   TGTE's   aims   and
          participation in the campaign for the Sri Lankan government to be
          referred to the International Criminal Court.

     197. Since 2017 he has been involved in organising events for the TGTE
          by,  for  example,  distributing  leaflets;  fundraising;  making
          placards; promoting events; and communicating with people with  a
          view to encouraging their attendance. He goes on to say  that  he
          got to know Mr  Yogalingam  over  the  course  of  time  and  has
          assisted him. Mr Yogalingam assigned him  to  organisational  and
          fundraising responsibilities within the TGTE.

     198.  Between  2014  and  2020  KK  has  been  involved  in   numerous
          activities: attending demonstrations  and  commemorative  events;
          the distribution of TGTE literature; involvement  in  the  annual
          Sports Day meeting; and campaigning during the TGTE Parliamentary
          elections in 2019. Reference is made to photographs and Internet-
          based images provided to support the claimed activities.

     199. KK asserts that the Sri Lankan authorities have been looking  for
          him ever since he left the country in 2009. A number of relatives
          have been questioned about him. In February 2020, his brother was
          arrested by the police and questioned about his (KK's) activities
          in the United Kingdom. The brother was shown  photographs  of  KK
          attending TGTE events in this country. The police  demanded  that
          KK ceased his activities and surrender himself. The  brother  was
          released with reporting conditions following the intervention  of
          the Mayor of Jaffna.




      Oral evidence

     200. KK gave his  oral  evidence  remotely.  Whilst  there  were  some
          technical difficulties at the outset, these were resolved and  we
          were satisfied that, having regard to the  method  by  which  his
          evidence was given and his vulnerability, KK  had  been  able  to
          present his evidence to us without any material restrictions.

     201. He agreed that he had not previously mentioned that  his  parents
          had supported the LTTE and that he had not  previously  mentioned
          that three of his cousins had died fighting in the civil war.  He
          asserted that these claims were  true.  He  stated  that  he  had
          supported and helped the LTTE himself.

     202. KK accepted that he had no photographs of events attended between
          2014 and mid-2016. There was some confusion as to the meaning  of
          the term "role" when questions were put as to the nature  of  his
          involvement, but it was accepted that he had not been an  officer
          or committee member of the TGTE.

     203. KK accepted that his brother's letter of  October  2016  did  not
          specifically  state  that  the  CID  were  aware  of  his  (KK's)
          political activities in the United Kingdom. The brother had  told
          him that the family were aware that this had not been included in
          the letter. He accepted that his name or  telephone  number  were
          not included in TGTE literature. He accepted that those  involved
          in TGTE  security  would  normally  be  listed  in  the  relevant
          brochure for the Sports Day meeting, but that his  name  was  not
          included in respect of the 2017 and 2018 events. He accepted that
          he had not been a "main coordinator"  when  helping  to  organise
          TGTE events.

     204. KK confirmed that he wanted to fight for a separate  Tamil  Eelam
          and would "do something" in Sri Lanka if  returned.  He  did  not
          agree that he could undertake political activities on  behalf  of
          the TNA. His aim was to fight for Tamil Eelam.  He  regarded  the
          TNA as a "Sinhala-supporting" party. He regards  Tamil  Eelam  as
          his "only option".




      The evidence of RS and ST

     205. In light of the uncontentious medical evidence  relating  to  her
          mental health, RS was not called to give oral  evidence.  We  did
          hear from RS' long-term partner, ST. Although he describes RS  as
          his "wife", they have  not  entered  into  a  legally  recognised
          marriage.




      RS's written evidence

     206. RS's statement details her poor mental health and the impact this
          has had on her ability to recall relevant  events.  She  confirms
          that she attempted suicide in 2016 and was then  sectioned  under
          the Mental Health Act 1983 from July to  October  of  that  year.
          She has been admitted to hospital on two further occasions.

     207. A relatively detailed account is given of the various  activities
          in which she has engaged whilst in the United  Kingdom  over  the
          course of time, including her involvement  with  the  TGTE  since
          2014,  her  attendance  at  commemorative  events  and   protests
          organised  by  that  group,  and  other   activities.   She   has
          distributed leaflets, been involved with her local sub-committee,
          and undertaken ad hoc organisational duties. RS goes on to  state
          that she has been involved with TS, BTF, and, to a  more  limited
          extent, TFL. She asserts that she had provided a statement to the
          ICPPG in 2014, which was to be passed to UN OISL.

     208. RS states that her support for the establishment of  Tamil  Eelam
          is genuine and that she would wish to express her political views
          if returned to Sri Lanka. However, she believes  that  to  do  so
          would place her and her family in danger.

     209. Contact with her mother is said to be very  limited  due  to  the
          fear that the Sri Lankan authorities will listen in. It  is  said
          that the mother changes her place  of  residence  regularly,  and
          that the CID had specifically asked about RS'  whereabouts  twice
          in the last year.




      ST's written evidence

     210. ST stated his commitment to  what  he  described  as  the  "Tamil
          separatist campaign" in the United Kingdom. He explained that RS'
          involvement in protests could alleviate her health  difficulties.
          She had experienced atrocities committed by the Sri  Lankan  army
          as a child  when  living  in  the  eastern  province.  He  always
          accompanies her. He states  that  he  also  suffers  from  mental
          health problems, although  these  are  not  as  severe  as  those
          afflicting RS.

     211. ST and RS first attended the TGTE offices in 2014, but  were  not
          "really active" until 2017. This was because of their poor mental
          health, ST's immigration detention, and the fact that RS had been
          moved around the United Kingdom and at one stage was sectioned in
          hospital. He believes that they have attended approximately fifty
          protests. He has protested  holding  posters,  banners,  a  Tamil
          Eelam flag, and wearing clothing showing the Tamil Eelam  symbol.
          He led the chanting at two protests, using a loudspeaker. RS  led
          the chanting for a brief period on one occasion. He  states  that
          he and RS are "members" of the local TGTE sub-committee.

     212. ST joined the BTF in 2014 and attended a single meeting.  He  and
          RS  ceased  their  involvement   because   they   regarded   this
          organisation as being "too close to the Sri  Lankan  regime."  ST
          states that they have volunteered for TFL and, since  2019,  have
          become involved with TS, attending a number of protests organised
          by that group.  In  2014  they  attended  the  TGTE  offices  and
          provided a statement to the ICPPG.

     213. In approximately April 2020, the CID approached  ST's  family  in
          Sri Lanka asking about him. He claims  that  his  relatives  were
          shown photographs of him at a protest outside the SLHC. According
          to his mother, the authorities have enquired after him on two  or
          three occasions.




      ST's oral evidence

     214. ST could not precisely remember the date on which he had provided
          the statement to the ICPPG.  He  accepted  that  a  copy  of  the
          statement had not been produced in evidence and that had not been
          asked to give any  oral  evidence  to  the  UN  Investigator.  He
          accepted that he had not  been  active  on  behalf  of  the  TGTE
          between 2014 and the end of 2017.

     215. Whilst there may be between fifteen  and  twenty  people  on  the
          local TGTE  sub-committee,  ST  stated  that  only  five  or  six
          normally attended. He accepted that anybody could join  the  sub-
          committee as a volunteer. He acknowledged that he was not a  full
          member of TS, but  was  simply  a  volunteer.  When  asked  about
          whether he and RS had been named in any  online  articles  and/or
          Facebook, ST stated that photographs and names appeared in all of
          the articles and photographs appeared everywhere.

     216. He confirmed that he maintains contact with  his  mother  in  Sri
          Lanka notwithstanding the CID visits. He stated that  his  mother
          is unaware of his political activities in the United Kingdom.  He
          did not accept the suggestion that if returned RS would not  need
          to undertake political activities in order to  find  support.  In
          his view, RS would commit suicide if she  had  to  return  alone.
          When asked  whether  he  would  get  involved  with  the  TNA  if
          returned, ST stated that that group could not provide "success".

     217. Following the completion of ST's evidence, an issue arose  as  to
          the status of his Facebook account. In oral evidence he confirmed
          that specific posts could be read by anyone because they were  on
          a public setting. Members of the respondent's legal team  brought
          up the Facebook page but were unable to  see  the  specific  post
          referred to, or indeed a number of others. In witness  statements
          provided by the two solicitors concerned, they explained that the
          only publicly viewable posts on the account were before September
          2019 and then from June  2020  onwards.  The  witness  statements
          asserted that when the Facebook account  was  viewed  later  that
          same evening, it appeared as though ST had changed  his  settings
          so that posts between September  2019  and  June  2020  were  now
          publicly viewable: the implication  being  that  ST  changed  his
          settings from private to public during the course of the hearing,
          and that this was an indication of  bad  faith  on  his  part.  A
          witness statement from RS' solicitor in  response  asserted  that
          she had seen all of the relevant posts on ST's  Facebook  account
          because they were publicly accessible (there appears to have been
          a misapprehension on her part as regards a number  of  the  posts
          appearing in the main bundle which in fact post-date the time  at
          which she states that she viewed them on ST's Facebook  account).
          In saying this, we are not suggesting that the solicitor  has  in
          anyway sought to mislead the Tribunal.




      G: THE PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS


     218. Both parties provided detailed skeleton arguments,  covering  all
          aspects of the  wider  country  guidance  issues,  together  with
          specific matters relating to each of the appellants. As a  result
          of the amount of evidence presented  at  the  hearing,  the  oral
          submissions too were detailed. We have summarised the submissions
          here, but confirm that we have taken them all fully into account.




      The appellants' written submissions

     219.  The  appellants  submitted  that  there  was  no  basis  for   a
          significant change in the country guidance set out in GJ. At  the
          same time, they contended that decision-makers would benefit from
          "greater clarity" as to who was and was not reasonably likely  to
          be at risk  on  return  by  virtue  of  diaspora  activities.  In
          particular, it was said that the term "significant role" used  in
          paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ should be understood to encompass  "any
          actual or perceived involvement in or linked to diaspora activism
          of which the authorities are aware" and  that  "known  membership
          of, affiliation to or involvement with any diaspora organisation"
          would lead to risk (we note that this is later qualified  in  the
          skeleton argument by the insertion of "separatist" between  "any"
          and "diaspora"). The term was not limited  to  activists  with  a
          "high profile", those regarded as "prominent", or  those  with  a
          "leading role" in diaspora activities. It  is  accepted  that  an
          extremely low level of involvement in  activities,  described  as
          "the most trivial  level"  (defined  as,  for  example,  a  brief
          attendance at a single demonstration or making a token  financial
          donation), would not place an individual at risk.

     220. The evidence of the three experts was commended to the  Tribunal,
          it being said that their respective reports  should  be  afforded
          significant weight.

     221. The body of reliable evidence  goes  to  show  that  GoSL  is  an
          "authoritarian, chauvinist Sinhalese/Buddhist entity in which the
          military plays a significant role." It has held, and continues to
          hold,  a  fundamental  opposition  to  the   concept   of   Tamil
          separatism, regards such an aim as terrorism, and  is  determined
          to quash any possibility of it gaining traction within Sri Lanka.
          In this regard there is a view that Tamil diaspora  organisations
          operate as "fronts" for  the  LTTE  and  are  working  towards  a
          resurgence of  violent  separatism.  It  is  submitted  that  the
          presidential election in  November  2019  and  the  parliamentary
          elections in August 2020 indicate a hardening of these views.

     222. The rhetoric from political and military leaders over the  course
          of time was not empty, but reflective of the  profound  hostility
          felt by  the  authorities  towards  the  Tamil  diaspora  and  in
          particular those individuals and/or organisations perceived to be
          criticising  the  government  and  working   to   undermine   the
          territorial integrity of Sri Lanka. There  is  evidence  to  show
          that a number of potential attacks by the LTTE within  Sri  Lanka
          since GJ  was  decided  have  been  thwarted,  including  one  as
          recently as July 2020 in  which  the  attacker's  bomb  detonated
          prematurely.  In  this  sense,  it  was  said,  the  Sri   Lankan
          authorities' concerns are not baseless.

     223. A number of named diaspora organisations were referred to by  the
          appellants including TGTE; TS; BTF; GTF;  the  ICPPG;  the  Tamil
          Coordinating Committee; and the World Tamils Historical  Society.
          The TGTE is said to  be  of  particular  significance  given  its
          proscription in 2014 under the UN Regulations and the Sri  Lankan
          authorities' perception that it is one of the "four  factions  of
          the LTTE" (it is to be noted that BTF and GTF were  re-proscribed
          by GoSL on 25 February 2021).

     224.  The  appellants  submitted  that  the  authorities  continue  to
          infiltrate diaspora  organisations  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
          conduct  surveillance  by  way  of  photographing  and   videoing
          protesters and monitoring the  Internet  and  social  media.  All
          relevant information is passed by the SLHC back to Colombo  where
          it is stored on an electronic database. It  was  the  appellants'
          case that individuals will be interviewed at the  SLHC  prior  to
          removal and at BIA at the point of return.  At  that  stage,  the
          authorities will know all they need to about the returnee.  Based
          upon the information obtained, "any actual or perceived  link  to
          diaspora activities of which the authorities are  aware  of  give
          rise to a real risk of persecution". Whilst it is  accepted  that
          "attending a single event  or  very  infrequent  events  may  not
          necessarily attract  attention  unless  the  individual  plays  a
          particular role or is featured in the media or online",  anything
          above  and  beyond  that  will,  it  is  submitted,  attract  the
          authorities' attention.

     225. As regards the relevance of a person's motivation to the risk  on
          return, there is said to be no basis to suggest  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities would be able or  willing  to  establish  whether  an
          activist was genuine or not.

     226. The written submissions include a detailed critique of  the  FFM,
          the CPIN, and the DFAT. It is said that the FFM in particular  is
          flawed  in  several  respects,  including  its  reliance  on  the
          prevalence  of  interviews  with  government-related  sources;  a
          failure to speak to those who may have knowledge of, for example,
          the TGTE; and failure to identify  sources.  In  light  of  these
          alleged shortcomings, little weight should  be  accorded  to  the
          report unless the evidence contained therein is  corroborated  by
          other sources.

     227. Detailed written submissions have been  provided  in  respect  of
          KK's and RS' individual appeals.




      The appellants' oral submissions

     228. Mr Mackenzie began his submissions  by  re-iterating  the  issues
          upon which the parties were agreed. In particular, there  was  no
          dispute that GoSL monitored sur place activities  in  the  United
          Kingdom; that the authorities would come to know all they  needed
          to of any such activities prior to or at  the  point  of  return;
          that the authorities maintain a stop list and a watch  list;  and
          that an individual was at real risk of persecutory  treatment  if
          detained. It was confirmed that  the  appellants'  case  was  not
          concerned with the risk categories set out at paragraph 356(7)(b)-
          (d) of GJ, although (b) may potentially overlap with the category
          set out in (a). It may be that what was described as a "tweak" to
          that  first  category  could  involve  confirming  that  previous
          activities on behalf of the LTTE may be a relevant  risk  factor,
          although it would not of itself be sufficient for  an  individual
          to succeed.

     229. Mr Mackenzie acknowledged  the  absence  of  direct  evidence  in
          respect of certain issues with  which  we  are  concerned.  These
          included the particular type of questions put to interviewees  at
          the SLHC; the precise method and criteria employed by  GoSL  when
          creating a profile on the electronic database; and where the line
          is drawn between those  returnees  deemed  to  be  of  sufficient
          interest to warrant detention and those who should be subject  to
          monitoring.  In  this  regard,  Mr   Mackenzie   emphasised   the
          importance of  what  he  described  as  the  "positive  role  for
          uncertainty", by which reasonable inferences could be drawn  from
          what evidence there is.

     230. On the subject of individuals being interviewed at the SLHC prior
          to return, Mr Mackenzie submitted that the weight of the evidence
          indicated that this did occur and that relevant information about
          sur place activities would be sought at that stage. On any  view,
          it was reasonably likely that the authorities would have relevant
          information on an individual and that this would be  passed  back
          to Sri Lanka.

     231. Submissions were made on the storage of information  gathered  on
          individuals. It was reasonably likely that an electronic database
          existed in one form or another. Those placed upon the  stop  list
          or the watch list were drawn from  this  electronic  database.  A
          core  question  was  what  consequences  would  flow   from   the
          information held. Mr Mackenzie emphasised the importance  of  the
          GoSL's  perception  of  an  individual's  sur  place  activities.
          Paragraph 351 of GJ refers to an activist being "committed",  not
          necessarily  of  having   a   "high   profile".   Attendance   at
          demonstrations  is  relevant,  but   so   too   is   fundraising,
          recruitment,  organisational  roles,  and  the  distribution   of
          literature. It was acknowledged that "the most trivial level"  of
          activity (as defined in the written submissions) might  not  come
          to the authorities' attention at all.

     232. All three experts had given evidence in GJ and much, if not  all,
          of  the  criticism  put  forward  by  the  respondent   now   was
          unjustified. Seen collectively, their evidence was not  that  the
          entire Tamil diaspora was perceived as being actively engaged  in
          separatist activities. However, it was  submitted  that  GoSL  is
          committed to preventing any  resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  other
          separatist movements. The  rhetoric  of  political  and  military
          leaders and the view taken of individuals involved in  sur  place
          activities should be seen in this context. In addition,  evidence
          in relation to proceedings before POAC ("Proscribed Organisations
          Appeal Commission") in the United Kingdom indicated that the LTTE
          is seen as a continuing threat.

     233. The upshot of the expert evidence was that it would not take very
          much by way of activity on behalf of a group perceived by GoSL to
          be separatist in nature for a returnee to be at risk.  That  risk
          increased if the individual had a higher profile,  but  this  was
          not necessary in order to satisfy the  relatively  low  threshold
          applicable  in  protection  claims.  A  "precautionary  approach"
          should be applied, having regard to the known attitudes of GoSL.

     234. It was accepted  that  in  "most  cases"  the  monitoring  of  an
          individual   post-return   would   not   of   itself   constitute
          persecution. However, someone under such  surveillance  could  be
          detained and  that  would  be  enough  to  create  a  real  risk.
          Alternatively, an individual's particular  vulnerabilities,  such
          as poor mental health, could mean that monitoring, and  all  that
          went with it, constituted serious harm.

     235. The risk  of  being  recruited  as  an  informant  gave  rise  to
          additional risks. If a person refused to undertake such  a  role,
          they risked being detained. If they accepted in  order  to  avoid
          detention,  they  would  still  succeed   under   the   principle
          established by HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31; [2011]  1  AC  596,  and
          affirmed in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38; [2013] 1 AC 152, namely
          that a person who  conceals  or  modifies  the  expression  of  a
          fundamental right in order to avoid persecution  is  entitled  to
          protection under  the  Refugee  Convention  (hereafter,  "the  HJ
          (Iran)  principle").  That  principle  would   apply   where   an
          individual holding genuine political  beliefs  on  the  issue  of
          Tamil separatism would, on return to  Sri  Lanka,  be  forced  to
          conceal or modify the expression of those  beliefs  in  order  to
          avoid detention and thus persecution.

     236. Additional written notes were provided by  Mr  Mackenzie  on  the
          following three issues: the evidence of returnees to  Sri  Lanka;
          the FFM; and the use of informants by the Sri Lankan authorities.

     237. Specific submissions were made  in  relation  to  the  individual
          appeals  of KK and RS and set out below.




      The respondent's written submissions

     238. The respondent's primary position is that, save for  one  "slight
          departure", the country guidance in GJ  should  remain  in  place
          without any gloss or clarification. The  issues  in  dispute  are
          described as "relatively narrow", a position in  line  with  that
          taken by the appellants. The respondent was at pains to emphasise
          the importance of retaining  the  phrase  "significant  role"  in
          paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ so that decision-makers  could  conduct
          risk assessments on the particular factual matrixes before  them.
          The  appellants'  position  is  said   to   involve   either   an
          impermissible interpretation of  the  word  "significant"  or  an
          unwarranted material expansion of the existing country  guidance.
          In short, the appellants have overstated the position as  regards
          the approach of GoSL to the diaspora in  general,  to  particular
          organisations, and the class of persons at risk on return.

     239. The "slight departure" is that a returnee travelling on a TTD who
          is not on  the  stop  list  or  watch  list  will  no  longer  be
          questioned at BIA about connections or sympathies with  the  LTTE
          or any wider diaspora activities. Questioning relates  solely  to
          establishing their identity  to  see  if  there  are  outstanding
          criminal charges or warrants against them.

     240. GoSL does not view the entire Tamil diaspora as  hostile  to  the
          integrity  of  the  Sri  Lankan  state,  nor  are  all   diaspora
          organisations perceived as being separatist in nature.  Those  at
          risk on return are within a subset  of  the  diaspora  comprising
          those who are, or perceived to be, "actively involved in  seeking
          to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan  state".  The  respondent
          asserts that the rhetoric of Sri Lankan  political  and  military
          leaders must be treated with a degree  of  caution:  it  may  not
          reflect the reality  in  terms  of  who  will  be  of  sufficient
          interest to warrant detention on return. There should be  a  more
          nuanced approach. There is a "sliding scale" in respect of  Tamil
          nationalism/separatism, and not every Tamil who supports  a  form
          of self-determination is, or would be perceived as, a separatist.
          Not all diaspora organisations are regarded by GoSL  as  "fronts"
          for the LTTE. It is submitted that "extreme  caution"  should  be
          exercised before accepting any assertion that  the  situation  in
          Sri Lankan is materially worse now than it was at the time of GJ,
          when the end of the conflict represented far more recent history.



     241. Whilst acknowledging the joint instruction of the  three  experts
          and the acceptance of aspects of  evidence  previously  given  by
          them in GJ, Ms Patel submitted that there was  no  obligation  on
          the respondent's part to accept every aspect of  their  evidence.
          Shortcomings in their evidence were highlighted. What the  expert
          evidence did indicate is that whether an individual was  at  risk
          on return depended on their individual profile, and this favoured
          a re-affirmation of the category set out in  paragraph  356(7)(a)
          of GJ.

     242. The respondent accepts that the Sri Lankan authorities maintain a
          sophisticated network  of  intelligence  gathering  overseas,  as
          found in GJ, but these capabilities have not materially increased
          in the intervening years. In any  event,  it  is  said  that  the
          amount of information on sur place  activities  enables  GoSL  to
          filter out those of real interest from those who are  peripheral.
          Those who had attended only a few demonstrations simply would not
          come to the attention of the authorities. There is an  acceptance
          that failed asylum-applicants who require a  TTD  will  still  be
          interviewed by  the  SLHC  prior  to  return,  that  intelligence
          acquired will be stored on "an electronic database", and that the
          authorities  will  still  know  all  they  need   to   about   an
          individual's sur place activities in the United  Kingdom  by  the
          time of arrival at BIA.

     243. The continued existence of a  stop  list  and  a  watch  list  is
          accepted. The respondent maintains  that  the  monitoring  of  an
          individual who appears on the watch list  does  not,  of  itself,
          lead to persecutory treatment or serious  harm.  Whether  such  a
          person is subsequently detained will depend upon what they  might
          do  next,  in  light  of  what  was  already  known  about  their
          activities abroad.

     244. As regards post-return political activities within Sri Lanka, the
          HJ (Iran) principle must be applied to the  facts  of  any  given
          case. In this regard, it is essential that the individual holds a
          genuine belief in Tamil separatism: those who had engaged in  sur
          place activities  in  United  Kingdom  for  purely  opportunistic
          reasons would not hold a  genuine  desire  to  express  political
          opinions, nor would any avoidance of  such  expression  represent
          concealment of those opinions in order to  avoid  persecution  or
          serious harm.

     245. The respondent's skeleton  argument  contains  specific  sections
          relating to the cases of KK and RS.

     246.  Finally,  there  is  a  detailed  rebuttal  of  the  appellant's
          criticisms of the FFM, CPIN, and DFAT.

     247. In addition to the skeleton argument, Ms Patel provided  us  with
          two written notes on reports from a variety of NGOs.




      The respondent's oral submissions

     248. Ms Patel cast doubt on some aspects of  the  expert  evidence  as
          regards the ability of GoSL to detect those undertaking sur place
          activities, or at least the extent of  such  activities.  It  was
          unclear how the authorities could intercept communications in the
          United Kingdom, when encrypted platforms such as  WhatsApp  could
          not yet be hacked into,  and  whether  there  was  indeed  facial
          recognition technology in use at BIA. There was no clear evidence
          of social media mapping. There was a lack of clarity  as  to  the
          precise nature  of  the  database  operated  by  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities and in respect of who might be placed  on  the  watch
          list.

     249. As to those subject to monitoring after return, this was  not  of
          itself persecutory and detention would not necessarily follow, as
          was held in GJ. More would be required;  for  example,  signs  of
          movement towards extremism and support for LTTE  ideology.  Wider
          support for nationalism or separatism would not be enough.

     250. On the issue of recruitment as an informant, Ms  Patel  submitted
          that the expert evidence was insufficiently cogent to  show  that
          any low-level supporter of a diaspora organisation would be faced
          with the choice of either having to provide information  or  face
          prosecution under the  PTA.  Professor  Gunaratna  was  the  sole
          source for this assertion and his  evidence  on  this  particular
          point should not be accepted. Whilst Dr Smith  had  spoken  about
          the use of "catchers" by the authorities to  provide  information
          in local communities, Ms Patel submitted that it was  implausible
          that people refusing to undertake this  work  would  actually  be
          detained.

     251. The appellants were casting the net too widely as regards  GoSL's
          adverse  view  of   individuals   and   diaspora   organisations.
          Separatism should be  understood  in  a  relatively  narrow  way,
          namely the aim of creating an independent state on the island  of
          Sri Lanka. It did not encompass all those  seeking  to  criticise
          GoSL through human rights activism and/or campaigning  for  self-
          determination. The need to distinguish rhetoric from reality  was
          re-emphasised, with the suggestion that  political  leaders  were
          sometimes playing to the public and the risk of a  resurgence  of
          the LTTE had been  overplayed.  The  Tamil  diaspora  was  not  a
          cohesive entity and many groups were simply not of  any  material
          interest to GoSL. Whether an organisation was proscribed  or  not
          was a relevant consideration,  but  was  never  determinative  of
          risk. The POAC proceedings took the appellants' case no further.

     252. There was a lack of clarity as to what profile  would  render  an
          individual liable to detention.  The  expert  evidence  disclosed
          differences of views on specific points, but all  three  appeared
          to accept that risk would depend upon various factors.  This  ran
          contrary  to  the  appellants'  argument  which,  on  one   view,
          effectively left no room for a fact-specific assessment  of  risk
          profile.

     253.  Ms  Patel  was  critical  of  Mr  Yogalingam's   evidence.   His
          explanation  that  returnees   could   not   be   contacted   was
          unsatisfactory and it was "remarkable" that the TGTE did not have
          any records  of  returnees  who  had  been  associated  with  the
          organisation. A similar point was made in respect of  TS  and  Mr
          Uthayasenan's evidence.

     254. In respect of the confidential evidence, Ms  Patel  went  through
          the various case-studies set out in Dr Smith's unredacted report.
          These  contained  very  little  information  on  what  sur  place
          activities  had  been  undertaken,  most   of   the   individuals
          apparently had prior  LTTE  links,  and  that  "extreme  caution"
          should be taken before drawing any conclusions from this evidence
          as to risk on return.

     255. It was submitted that paragraphs 356(7)(b) and (c) of  GJ  should
          not  be  the  subject  of   specific   consideration   in   these
          proceedings.  The  country  information  did  not   support   the
          subsuming of journalists or relevant human rights activists  into
          the primary risk category of those seen as having a  "significant
          role" in the Tamil separatist movement. In terms of those who had
          given evidence to the LLRC, it was clear  that  UN  OISL  adopted
          measures to protect the identity of witnesses, and  it  was  only
          those known to the Sri Lankan authorities who would be at risk.

     256. The FFM, CPIN, and DFAT, were relied on in support of many of  Ms
          Patel's submissions. These sources  were  said  to  be  generally
          reliable.

     257. On the application of the HJ (Iran) principle, there was a degree
          of "political space" in Sri  Lanka  in  which  individuals  could
          express their opinions, albeit not in respect of  separatism,  as
          that term should be properly understood. What an  individual  had
          done in the United Kingdom would inform what they would  wish  to
          do on return. The question of whether  the  individual  genuinely
          held relevant political beliefs was crucial.

     258. Submissions were made on KK's and RS' individual cases and  these
          are set out in detail at the appropriate juncture  later  in  our
          decision.




      Post-hearing matters

     259. On 21 October 2020, POAC promulgated its  open  judgment  in  the
          proceedings referred to by the parties in argument and supporting
          evidence (Arumugam PC/04/2019). In addition, on 30 November 2020,
          the decision of the Upper Tribunal in PK and OS (basic  rules  of
          human conduct) Ukraine CG [2020]  UKUT  00314  (IAC)  ("PK")  was
          published.

     260. Both parties subsequently provided concise written submissions on
          these decisions. The appellants submitted that  the  respondent's
          argument to the effect that the LTTE was a spent force and GoSL's
          rhetoric should be treated with caution stood in tension with her
          position before POAC, where she had argued that the  organisation
          was concerned in terrorism. PK was relevant because  it  strongly
          supported the argument that having  to  become  an  informant  or
          refusing to cooperate would  entitle  an  individual  to  succeed
          under  the  Refugee  Convention.  Providing  information  to  the
          authorities may lead to the subject  of  that  information  being
          detained, which would in turn expose them to  the  risk  of  ill-
          treatment. Being an  informant  would,  it  is  said,  amount  to
          complicity in torture. Any punishment arising from a  refusal  to
          cooperate would be persecutory.

     261. In response, the respondent submitted that her  positions  before
          POAC and the Tribunal were consistent. It was accepted  that  the
          LTTE had elements  of  support  outside  of  Sri  Lanka  and  was
          concerned in  terrorism.  At  the  same  time,  the  organisation
          remained inactive in Sri Lanka and  GoSL's  rhetoric  had  to  be
          viewed in that context. The issue in PK did not  arise  in  these
          appeals because the evidence on the recruitment of  returnees  as
          informants was weak. If it did, a fact-specific exercise would be
          required and the appellants' approach was too simplistic.




      H: GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE EVIDENCE


      The expert evidence

     262. The duties of experts  when  providing  evidence  to  courts  and
          tribunals  have   been   the   subject   of   numerous   judicial
          pronouncements over time. Their role in country guidance cases is
          of obvious  significance.  We  reiterate  the  importance  to  be
          attached to the duties set out in  paragraph  10  of  the  Senior
          President of Tribunal's Practice Directions 2010, as amended, and
          as cited in MOJ and  Others  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
          [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), at paragraph 25 and AAW (expert evidence
          - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC), at paragraph 24:

                 "(i) to provide information and express opinions
                 independently, uninfluenced by the litigation;

                 (ii) to consider all material facts, including those which
                 might detract from the expert witness' opinion;

                 (iii) to be objective and unbiased;

                 (iv) to avoid trespass into the prohibited territory of
                 advocacy;

                 (v) to be fully informed;

                 (vi) to act within the confines of the witness's area of
                 expertise; and

                 (vii)  to   modify,   or   abandon    one's   view,   where
                 appropriate."

     263. In general terms, the weight to be attributed to expert  evidence
          will correlate to the experience, reputation and authority of the
          author;  the  methodology  employed  and   the   seriousness   of
          investigations undertaken; the use of  appropriate  sources;  the
          extent to which their conclusions are consistent, both internally
          and  as  regards  external  sources;  and  the  impartiality  and
          objectivity of the expert (see NA v United  Kingdom  [2011]  ECHR
          1272, at paragraph 120).

     264. Whilst we accept that an expert is not simply the purveyor of raw
          data, the appellants' assertion  that,  by  dint  of  appropriate
          experience, reputation, and authority, the expert may  themselves
          be the source of the opinion evidence provided, should be seen in
          the context of what was said in LP at paragraphs  37  and  38  in
          response to a similar submission made by Mr Mackenzie then:

                 "38. As Collins J said in  Slimani,  experts  can  vary  in
                 their independence and expertise to a  very  large  degree.
                 Some are well known as  reliable,  others  perhaps  equally
                 well known as unreliable. In the centre  ground  comes  the
                 majority. It is the task of the  Tribunal  to  decide  what
                 evidence they accept and what weight they can put upon  the
                 evidence they receive. We do not entirely agree  with  Miss
                 Richard's analysis of the difference between an  expert  in
                 this jurisdiction and an expert elsewhere. She argued  that
                 experts in this jurisdiction are the providers of raw  data
                 whereas  those  in  the  civil  courts  tend  to   be   the
                 interpreters of such data. In fact, in  this  jurisdiction,
                 experts are not merely the providers of raw data  but  they
                 can  be   the   interpreters   of   it   as   well.   Their
                 interpretation,   and   any   opinion   based    on    that
                 interpretation, can only be as good as the raw data itself.
                 By that we mean not only the quality of the data,  but  the
                 selection or filtering, of it.

                 39. We agree with the concept of the expert as a filter  of
                 evidence. A real problem arises in this  jurisdiction  from
                 the use of the word "expert". In this context  an  "expert"
                 is merely a witness giving  factual,  hearsay  and  opinion
                 evidence. No witness is prohibited  from  doing  that.  The
                 question is not therefore the admissibility of the evidence
                 (as it would be in the criminal and civil courts)  but  the
                 weight to be given to it. The task for us is  therefore  to
                 decide, simply, how  much  weight  is  to  be  put  on  the
                 conclusions and/or the filtered evidence that is put before
                 us. The fact that it is  demonstrably  wrong  may  help  to
                 assess it. However, the fact that it  is  not  demonstrably
                 wrong does not engender reliance upon it,  whether  or  not
                 the person giving the evidence  is,  or  claims  to  be  an
                 "expert". Additionally, in order to accept an expert  as  a
                 competent and reliable filter mechanism it is necessary  to
                 trust the expert and to have confidence that he or she  has
                 filtered the evidence objectively  and  independently,  not
                 partially.  The  extent  to  which  that   trust   can   be
                 established may depend on a number of factors including the
                 reputation of the expert, and any established track record.
                 It may also depend  on  the  quality  of  the  sources  and
                 whether there is a  variety  of  sources.  For  example,  a
                 report on Sri Lanka  that  relied  only  on  LTTE  sources,
                 without countervailing evidence from sources that  did  not
                 support the LTTE, would be likely to carry  little  weight.
                 The age of the source material and the number of sources is
                 also important. An expert may not  have  any  track  record
                 with the Tribunal, in which case particular care is  needed
                 in assessing the weight to be put on the evidence, and  any
                 opinion said to be derived from it."

     265. Thus, an expert's opinion is itself  a  form  of  evidence  going
          beyond simply the raw data. However, that data is nonetheless  of
          importance  when  it  comes  to  evaluating  the  weight  to   be
          attributed to the opinion upon which it has been based.

     266. In the somewhat unusual circumstances of these appeals,  we  have
          taken account of the  fact  that  all  three  experts  have  been
          jointly instructed. That does not  mean  that  the  parties  were
          bound to accept all of their evidence, nor that we are  bound  to
          do so.

     267. It is entirely possible  that  certain  aspects  of  an  expert's
          evidence  may  attract  little  weight,  or  indeed  be  rejected
          entirely, whilst others may be accorded  significant  importance:
          it will be relatively rare for such evidence to be considered  on
          an "all or nothing" basis. As will become  clear  as  the  reader
          progresses through our  decision,  we  have  concluded  that  the
          evidence presents a mixed bag, as it were. We have preferred some
          aspects of the expert evidence to others, whether in  respect  of
          the same individual or as between the three, and  we  have  found
          that  some  of  the  evidence  specifically  relied  on  by   the
          respondent suffers from shortcomings.

     268. What follows is only a very  brief  commentary  on  the  evidence
          provided by the three experts.  More  detailed  consideration  of
          particular  aspects  of  their  evidence  is  best  left  to  the
          appropriate point in our analysis and  conclusions,  as  set  out
          later in this decision.




      Dr Smith

     269.  We recognise and acknowledge Dr Smith's experience  and  overall
          expertise in respect of the political and security  situation  in
          Sri Lanka over the course of time. He provided evidence  in  each
          of the previous three country guidance cases on  Sri  Lanka,  GJ,
          TK, and LP. The respondent points out that certain aspects of his
          evidence in LP were deemed to be problematic (paragraphs  40-41),
          whilst in TK  the  Tribunal  did  not  agree  with  some  of  the
          inferences drawn  from  the  source  material  and  that  he  had
          provided virtually no evidence in support of his opinion  on  the
          significance of illegal departure from Sri Lanka. In  respect  of
          GJ, one  particular  aspect  of  his  evidence  was  regarded  as
          speculative and the Tribunal did  not  accept  all  of  the  risk
          categories that he had articulated.

     270. On the other side of the equation, the appellants are correct  to
          point out that Dr Smith's evidence in GJ was not the  subject  of
          any significant criticism, and that aspects of his  contributions
          have underpinned important elements of the country guidance  over
          time (for example the use of a stop list and a watch list: see LP
          at paragraphs 80 and 171, and GJ at paragraphs  122-133).  It  is
          also the case that Dr Smith has visited Sri Lanka as recently  as
          November 2019 for the purposes of carrying out  preparatory  work
          for what was anticipated to be the provision of expert  evidence.
          This  was  his  third  visit  to  that  country  since   GJ   was
          promulgated.

     271. For reasons given when setting out our analysis  and  conclusions
          on relevant matters in due course, our overall assessment  of  Dr
          Smith's evidence  is  that  whilst  much  of  it  is  in  general
          deserving of considerable weight, in particular in  relation  to,
          for example, GoSL's ability to gather information and the process
          by which this is analysed, there are certain aspects  in  respect
          of which we have reservations.




      Dr Nadarajah

     272. Like Dr Smith, Dr Nadarajah gave evidence in GJ and  he  was  not
          the subject of any material criticism by the Tribunal. In general
          terms his evidence is detailed and of assistance  in  respect  of
          many of the issues with which we are concerned in these  appeals.



     273. In particular, we have found much of his evidence relating to the
          substance of GoSL's attitudes  towards  separatist  ideology  and
          certain  diaspora  organisations  to  be,  subject  to  a   point
          discussed below, informative and reliable.  His  generally  well-
          sourced opinions on the determination of the regime to prevent  a
          resurgence of separatist activity within Sri Lanka  have  carried
          significant weight with us. We also deem his acknowledgment  that
          a risk profile will depend on an "indicator-based" approach to be
          both candid and an accurate reflection  of  the  reality  of  the
          current position.

     274. We do note certain points which may be said to lie on  the  other
          side of the balance sheet. Dr Nadarajah has not been in Sri Lanka
          since June 2017 and will not therefore have had the  more  up-to-
          date direct evidence of the country as Dr Smith. It is  right  to
          say, though,  that  the  absence  is  not  particularly  lengthy.
          Certain  aspects  of  his  evidence  relating  to   the   current
          technological capabilities of GoSL were in our judgment  somewhat
          speculative, but we acknowledge that he has not purported  to  be
          an information  technology  expert.  Indeed,  this  highlights  a
          general omission in the evidence before us as to what must now be
          an important aspect of  many  protection  claims  relating  to  a
          variety of countries around the world which operate a  relatively
          efficient security apparatus. We would take this  opportunity  to
          urge parties to country guidance  cases,  where  appropriate,  to
          consider  adducing   expert   evidence   on   the   technological
          capabilities of the regime in question.

     275. There is also an apparent tension between, on the  one  hand,  Dr
          Nadarajah's assertion at certain points in his evidence that GoSL
          regards the entirety of the Tamil diaspora  to  be  deserving  of
          unqualified hostility, and on the other his  repeated  acceptance
          that risk on return "depends"  on  the  overall  profile  of  the
          individual. However, when his evidence is read  holistically  and
          together with all other  relevant  materials,  the  analysis  and
          conclusions which we set  out  later  in  this  decision  do  not
          materially undermine Dr Nadarajah's opinions as a whole. This  is
          not of course to say that we have agreed with all aspects of  his
          evidence.

     276. As with the two other experts, Dr Nadarajah has  been  unable  to
          provide any, or any reliable, evidence as to the  experiences  of
          individuals who have actually been returned to Sri Lanka from the
          United Kingdom.




      Professor Gunaratna

     277. Professor Gunaratna has also been involved  in  previous  country
          guidance cases. In GJ,  he  was  described  as  an  "insider"  in
          relation to the Sri Lankan government of the time  and  that  his
          evidence reflected its "mindset" (para  273).  We  conclude  that
          aspects of the evidence he has provided to us come from a similar
          perspective. The  fact  that  there  have  been  two  changes  of
          government since GJ does not materially reduce the  relevance  of
          what he says about current attitudes  of  GoSL.  After  all,  the
          regime is of a similar make up to that in power in 2012/2013.

     278. Having said that, for reasons we set out in  detail  at  a  later
          stage of this decision, we conclude  that  Professor  Gunaratna's
          opinions have  at  times  overstated  the  risks  said  to  await
          returnees who have engaged in diaspora activities, although it is
          fair to note that he seemingly qualified  his  initial  extremely
          broad category by  accepting  that  risk  will  "depend"  on  the
          individual's overall profile.

     279. A specific issue arose during the course of Professor Gunaratna's
          oral evidence which gave  us  immediate  and  serious  cause  for
          concern. It transpired that he had provided a draft of his report
          to a member of the Bar in the United Kingdom whose practice  has,
          over the course of many years, involved representing Tamil asylum-
          applicants. The purpose of this, he informed us, was  to  see  if
          the individual concerned had any comments to make on it before it
          was provided to the parties. Professor  Gunaratna  seemingly  did
          not think it necessary to have notified the parties (by  whom  he
          had been jointly instructed)  prior  to  taking  this  course  of
          action. Counsel confirmed to us that the parties  had  been  made
          aware of what had transpired after the event.

     280. With respect to Professor Gunaratna, whilst his request  for  any
          comments on the draft report was no  doubt  well-intentioned,  it
          was also ill-advised. By the act itself, a risk was created  that
          his report's content would be seen  as  tainted  because  of  the
          input of another party with a  professional  connection  to  what
          might be described in general terms as one side of the  argument,
          namely Tamil asylum-applicants. Greater caution should have  been
          exercised before selecting the source of any review of the  draft
          report. It would have been helpful if  the  parties  had  brought
          this  matter  to  the  Tribunal's  attention  during   the   case
          management process.

     281. In the  event  we  have  concluded  that  this  matter  does  not
          represent  a  significant  tainting  of   Professor   Gunaratna's
          evidence. He and the parties confirmed that  no  changes  had  in
          fact been made to the report as result of  the  "review"  and  we
          accept that this was the case. In addition, neither Ms Patel  nor
          Mr Mackenzie sought to rely on the point  in  their  submissions.
          Our conclusion might well have been different if any changes  had
          been made to the report.




      The FFM and Mr Stares' evidence

     282. There are in our view a number of shortcomings in respect of  the
          FFM which, to an extent, undermine  its  purported  status  as  a
          "key" aspect of the evidential picture in these appeals.

     283. Before turning to these, we make it clear that we in no way  seek
          to impugn the good faith,  professionalism,  and  honesty  of  Mr
          Stares and the members of the team who conducted the mission.  We
          express our gratitude to Mr Stares for attending the  hearing  to
          give oral evidence at short notice.

     284. The first point we make relates to the  report's  structure.  The
          presence of an executive summary may be of some  utility  to  the
          respondent's caseworkers operating under pressure  of  time,  but
          the summary is of no evidential value to us. It is, in effect,  a
          summary of the summaries which follow. As Mr Stares  very  fairly
          points out in his witness statement,  decision-makers  are  still
          required to examine the interview notes themselves.  That  caveat
          applies all the more to impartial and independent tribunals  when
          making their own findings.

     285. There is less to be said against the thematic summaries than  the
          executive  summary  and  there  is  merit  in  the   respondent's
          submission that there appears to be little or no actual  analysis
          of the source material. The statements contained in each  summary
          are cross-referenced to the underlying source. Having said  that,
          there is no substitute for a proper consideration of  the  source
          material, namely the interview notes. Again, this applies to  the
          respondent's caseworkers and all the more so to tribunals. Whilst
          bearing in mind the fact that  the  Tribunal  was  considering  a
          different report, we note the observations  stated  in  paragraph
          111 of EM:

                 "Where Mr Henderson is on stronger ground, we find,  is  in
                 relation to the executive summary at the beginning  of  the
                 FFM report.  The existence  of  this  summary  is  hard  to
                 reconcile with the  claim  in  the  introduction  that  "No
                 attempt has been  made  to  provide  any  analysis  of  the
                 material". Mr Walker, in his evidence,  essentially  agreed
                 with Mr Henderson on this matter, informing us that he  had
                 argued against including an  executive  summary.   For  the
                 respondent, Ms Grey informed the Tribunal that no  reliance
                 was  placed  on  the  executive  summary  or,  indeed,  the
                 summaries of responses from the  interviewees  (other  than
                 the  returnees).   We  have  taken  no  account  of   those
                 summaries in reaching our findings.  Although it is  not  a
                 matter for us, it may be that  those  responsible  for  the
                 preparation of future FFM reports would in future  do  well
                 to eschew  such  summaries,  leaving  decision  makers  and
                 judicial fact-finders to draw their  own  conclusions  from
                 the full versions of  the  questions  and  answers  of  the
                 interviewees."

     286. Whilst appreciating that the structure of  the  FFM  may  provide
          practical assistance to caseworkers, it remains the fact that the
          report is also put before tribunals for consideration. It is  not
          clear to us why the suggestion made by the Tribunal in EM has not
          been taken up.

     287. Perhaps in anticipation of this first criticism, the respondent's
          skeleton argument expressly states that reliance  was  not  being
          placed on the summary sections. We confirm that we have not taken
          these into account.

     288. Mr Stares described one of the "main drivers" of the  mission  as
          the desire to obtain up-to-date  information  on,  amongst  other
          matters,  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  attitude  to   diaspora
          activities and the treatment of members of  groups  such  as  the
          TGTE, in the context of what is  said  to  be  the  "inexplicable
          rise" in individuals citing this organisation  as  the  basis  of
          their protection claims.

     289. With this stated objective in mind, there is  in  our  view  some
          force in the appellants' criticism that  the  report's  value  as
          regards the central issues in these appeals  is  limited.  Within
          the thematic summaries, that entitled  "Diaspora  and  sur  place
          activities " consists of only two short passages, with neither of
          the two sources seemingly well placed to provide  information  on
          this important matter. It is true that a number of  sources  were
          asked about the TGTE and that the  relatively  limited  responses
          indicate a low level of general awareness  of  that  organisation
          within Sri Lanka. However, on an overall analysis,  we  take  the
          view that this evidence is, by itself, of limited  value  in  our
          assessment of the core issues of the GoSL's attitude to  relevant
          diaspora organisations (which, by definition operate  outside  of
          Sri Lanka) and, in turn, the consequences of this to returnees.

     290. On our count, only seven of the sources identified in Annex D  to
          the FFM were specifically asked about the TGTE. Of these, the TNA
          and UNHCR  confirmed  that  they  had  no  knowledge  about  this
          organisation   whatsoever.   The   CID   provided   very   little
          information, confirming  that  they  were  not  experts  on  this
          organisation.  The  senior  member  of  the  Attorney   General's
          Department was not aware that the TGTE was proscribed; a  notable
          lack of knowledge that had to be corrected by a colleague.  Those
          sources which could say something about the  TGTE  provided  only
          brief responses relating to  the  possible  adverse  interest  in
          returnees associated with it,  or  that  its  existence  was  not
          widely known within Sri Lanka.

     291. We find it somewhat surprising that no lawyers  and/or  academics
          were interviewed. Although Mr Stares suggested that this was down
          to availability, we have not been provided with information as to
          whether any such sources were approached in the  first  place.  A
          similar point arises in respect of the selection of only a single
          human rights activist. Such sources may (we put it no higher than
          that) have been  able  to  provide  contextual  evidence  on  the
          attitudes of the government and/or security  forces  to  diaspora
          groups perceived as pursuing a separatist agenda.

     292. Whilst a source from the CID was interviewed, the  TID  does  not
          appear to  have  been  approached.  Given  that  the  latter  has
          specific oversight of terrorism-related matters in Sri Lanka  and
          the connections drawn by GoSL  between  separatism  and  national
          security, this omission is rather striking. It seems to  us  that
          the TID was a  relatively  obvious  choice  for  selection  as  a
          source. In fairness, Mr Stares candidly accepted  that  with  the
          benefit of hindsight, this agency  might  have  been  approached.
          This comment is certainly consistent with the  CID  interviewees'
          response that "they were not experts  on  the  TGTE,  it  was  an
          intelligence issue."

     293. On the question of sources more generally, it  is  right  to  say
          that approximately a third were members of, or closely associated
          with, the government. It is  appropriate to obtain the  views  of
          the state, although  obtaining  information  from  a  variety  of
          appropriate sources will  assist  in  providing  a  more  rounded
          evidential picture, which in turn may have implications  for  the
          weight likely to be attributed to it by  fact-finding  tribunals.
          In respect of the FFM, it may be  said  that  the  best  possible
          balance was not achieved. However, in our judgment this is not of
          particular significance. Of greater import, and for  the  reasons
          set out above, is the lack of relevant  evidence  provided  by  a
          number  of  the  selected  sources,  be  they  connected  to  the
          authorities or not.

     294. Still on the theme of a lack of knowledge  displayed  by  certain
          sources, it is in our view surprising, to say the least, that one
          of the two journalist sources  interviewed  appeared  to  believe
          that torture  did  not  occur  in  Sri  Lanka,  contrary  to  the
          overwhelming weight of expert evidence and  country  information.
          In respect of the IOM's view that allegations  of  discrimination
          against Tamils made by members of that community were  being  put
          forward to serve their "own ends",  Mr  Stares  frankly  accepted
          that this answer appeared to be "quite stark": we agree. It  does
          not, on its face, sit happily  with  that  organisation's  stated
          impartiality.

     295. Of lesser concern, but a concern nonetheless, is  the  fact  that
          only a single source of Tamil ethnicity was  interviewed.  Whilst
          ethnicity is clearly not a decisive factor  in  selection,  given
          that the focus of the mission was to obtain evidence relating  to
          the Tamil  diaspora  and  its  activities,  it  might  have  been
          advisable to ensure  a  greater  representation  from  the  Tamil
          community in Sri Lanka.

     296. In general terms the fact that a  number  of  sources  failed  to
          respond to the request for approval of the interview  notes  does
          not cause  us  any  particular  concern.  We  accept  Mr  Stares'
          evidence that, in line with the respondent's  internal  guidance,
          interviewees are informed  that  a  failure  to  respond  to  the
          request for approval of the interview notes will be deemed as  an
          approval. What does raise a question mark is the confirmation  in
          the FFM that one source did not want the interview  notes  to  be
          used at all. We have not been told as to which source this was.

     297. Noting what is said at paragraph 164 of AMM and others (conflict;
          humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT  445
          (IAC), the anonymity of the sources (to the extent that  personal
          names  are  not  used)  does  not,  in  all  the   circumstances,
          materially reduce the weight which might otherwise be  attributed
          to the evidence. We take into account the fact  that  aspects  of
          the expert evidence before us also rely on unnamed sources.

     298. There is no real issue in respect of the timing of  the  mission.
          It could be  said  that  waiting  until  after  the  presidential
          election on 16 November 2019 might have been appropriate, a point
          recognised by Mr Stares in his oral evidence. Yet it  would  have
          been very difficult, if not impossible, to predict what, if  any,
          material changes might have come about over the following  months
          as a result of President Gobabaya gaining power. The mission  had
          to take place at some point.

     299. Other than Dr Smith's evidence, the FFM is a product of the  most
          recent information-gathering visit to Sri Lanka. This  of  itself
          provides a degree of illumination as  to  current  knowledge  and
          perceptions held by a variety of actors on the ground.

     300. In summary, given that  a  central  purpose  for  conducting  the
          mission in the first  place  was  the  aim  of  obtaining  useful
          information   on   attitudes   towards   diaspora   organisations
          (including in particular the TGTE), and the treatment  on  return
          of members/supporters thereof, the utility of the FFM is  not  as
          apparent as it might otherwise have been. Nonetheless,  we  place
          weight on  this  evidence  commensurate  with  our  analysis  and
          conclusions, above, and in the context of the  core  issues  with
          which we are concerned  in  these  appeals.  As  with  all  other
          aspects of the evidence before us, we have placed the FFM in  the
          context of the whole.




      The CPIN

     301. We do not propose to go into any great detail in respect  of  the
          CPIN. In general terms, we regard  the  "Assessment"  section  as
          constituting a statement of  the  respondent's  guidance  to  her
          caseworkers on a number of thematically-arranged issues. The CPIN
          is simply evidence of the respondent's position as it was at  the
          date of its publication in May 2020. The guidance to  caseworkers
          may be relevant in any given case where the respondent  seeks  to
          put forward an argument that is inconsistent with it. As  regards
          the  "Country  information"  section,  we  evaluate  the   source
          materials set out therein on their own merits in the usual manner
          and as part of the overall evidence before us. Where the FFM  and
          the DFAT are relied on as sources (as they are  on  a  relatively
          frequent basis), we bear in mind what we have said  about  these,
          above and below. We have placed appropriate weight on the  source
          materials cited in the CPIN.




      DFAT

     302. In addition to taking account of open source  materials  such  as
          the US Department of State human rights reports, DFAT is based on
          "on-the-ground knowledge and discussions with a range of  sources
          in Sri Lanka." However, none of the sources are identified, there
          is no explanation as to how the information  from  these  sources
          was obtained, and there is  no  annex  containing,  for  example,
          records of any interviews (unlike the FFM). Indeed, it is unclear
          whether any formal interviews took place.  The  report  does  not
          provide direct quotes from any source. In light of these matters,
          it is difficult to gauge the reliability  of  the  sources  which
          have informed the "judgement and assessment" applied to  them  by
          the authors of the report. On a  broader  point,  the  report  is
          focused primarily on the situation within Sri Lanka and there  is
          little on the question of sur place activities and  the  attitude
          of the authorities to these.

     303. Notwithstanding these  matters,  the  report  does  provide  some
          useful  background  on  issues  such  as  monitoring  within  the
          country, the relevance of past LTTE links, and, to a more limited
          extent, the basis upon which the authorities may take an interest
          in particular returnees. We are also cognisant of the  fact  that
          two of the experts refer to the report in their own evidence  and
          that the DFAT relies on evidence provided by Dr Smith in GJ.

     304.  DFAT  was  published  on  4  November  2019,  just  before   the
          presidential elections. As with the FFM, the benefit of hindsight
          might suggest that the publication could have been  delayed,  but
          this point does not materially feature in our considerations.

     305. With the above observations in mind, we have  placed  appropriate
          weight on DFAT when  evaluating  the  country  information  as  a
          whole.




      Other country evidence

     306.  We  have  considered  the  large  array  of  additional  country
          information as part and parcel of the overall evidential picture.
          In so doing we have noted that certain materials have been relied
          on in their own right, whilst  others  have  been  cited  by  the
          experts in support of their opinions. We have  assessed  relevant
          reports in light of the written and oral submissions presented by
          the  parties  (including  the  written  notes  provided  by   the
          respondent at  the  hearing).  In  general  terms,  a  relatively
          significant amount of this evidence  relates  to  uncontroversial
          matters such as the prevalence of torture in  detention  and  the
          use of monitoring by the Sri Lankan authorities. Where  this  has
          not been  the  case,  we  have  attributed  the  weight  we  deem
          appropriate in all the circumstances.




      Mr Yogalingam

     307. In general terms Mr Yogalingam provided what we  consider  to  be
          candid evidence of fact both in respect of the  workings  of  the
          TGTE in the United Kingdom and his  knowledge  of  KK's  and  RS'
          participation with the organisation over the course of time. What
          he said about the  distinction  between  formal  members  of  the
          organisation  and  supporters  has  been  useful,  as   has   his
          confirmation that anybody can be issued with a TGTE identity card
          upon payment of the relevant fee. Thus, possession of such a card
          is of very little, if any,  probative value as to an individual's
          involvement with the TGTE. We find that the only  formal  members
          of the TGTE are the elected MPs.

     308. We accept his evidence  that  the  TGTE  does  not  maintain  any
          records of supporters who have been returned to  Sri  Lanka.  The
          organisation (at least in respect of its operations in the United
          Kingdom) simply does not know how many, if any,  supporters  have
          in fact been returned. Our initial reaction to this evidence  was
          one of surprise: collecting some form of information on the  fate
          of its supporters would seem to be  an  exercise  that  the  TGTE
          would wish to engage in. On reflection, our initial  response  is
          somewhat tempered by  Mr  Yogalingam's  explanation  that  people
          would be afraid of contacting his organisation  from  within  Sri
          Lanka, a consideration that found support from Dr Smith. Although
          individuals had contacted Dr Smith from Sri Lanka, he stands in a
          different position to that of a proscribed organisation. The same
          is true of Dr Nadarajah who has  confirmed  that  he  remains  in
          communication (using WhatsApp) with contacts in  the  country  in
          order to keep abreast of developments. Notwithstanding  this,  it
          is relevant that the TGTE has not even  sought  to  make  contact
          with returnees or their families (whether in  Sri  Lanka  or  the
          diaspora)  by  using,  for   example,   encrypted   communication
          platforms  such  as  WhatsApp  or  Signal  in  order  to   obtain
          information. In turn, the lack of anecdotal  evidence  undermines
          Mr Yogalingam's assertion that anyone attending TGTE  events  who
          is then returned to Sri Lanka will be at risk.

     309. As to Mr  Yogalingam's  evidence  on  the  particular  activities
          undertaken by KK and RS, we find that there  was  no  attempt  to
          exaggerate the involvement during the course of oral evidence. It
          was to his credit that he clearly stated his inability to  recall
          certain details and, viewed in  the  round,  there  was  a  broad
          consistency in his evidence as a whole.




      Mr Uthayasenan

     310. We were impressed by Mr Uthayasenan's evidence. Overall, we found
          it to be measured and reliable. The description of the methodical
          membership process, adopted in order to ensure that an individual
          was committed to the separatist and anti-GoSL agenda advanced  by
          TS, was plausible and consistent with the detailed description of
          the organisation's aims  set  out  in  Mr  Uthayasenan's  witness
          statement. In light of TS's approach to full  membership,  it  is
          likely that an individual  supporter  will  become  more  heavily
          involved in activities as they progress down that path.

     311. We find that TS has never been  a  proscribed  group  within  Sri
          Lanka. We accept Mr Uthayasenan's evidence that TS and  the  TGTE
          do on occasion cooperate with  the  organisation  of  events,  an
          example of this being a protest  held  in  February  2018  during
          which the then Sri Lankan Defence Attach Brigadier Fernando made
          a notorious throat-cutting gesture at the demonstrators.

     312. Mr Uthayasenan's inability to say whether any  TS  supporters  or
          members have been returned to Sri Lanka does not  assist  in  our
          analysis of who might be at risk.




      I: ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS


     313. Two interrelated preliminary observations can be made. First,  by
          their nature, the issues with which we  are  concerned  are  such
          that the Sri Lankan authorities will not wish 'outsiders' to have
          any insight into their security practices and  approaches.  In  a
          very real sense, we are being asked to peer  into  the  secretive
          corners of a foreign State's  national  security  priorities  and
          apparatus. It would be remarkable if we had been presented with a
          clear picture of GoSL's operational priorities and  the  criteria
          by which individuals in the diaspora are deemed to be a threat to
          the country's territorial integrity.

     314. The second, and interrelated, point takes up a theme found in  Mr
          Mackenzie's submissions, namely what  he  has  described  as  the
          "positive role for uncertainty". Whilst we appreciate  the  point
          being made, it is important to emphasise that the concept  is  in
          reality simply a facet of the lower standard of proof  applicable
          in protection claims.  It  does  not  modify  that  standard  and
          judicial fact-finders must guard against legitimate extrapolation
          and  reasonable  inferences  crossing  over  into   impermissible
          speculation.




      Detention and the risk of persecution and serious harm

     315. Amongst all the numerous issues arising  from  the  evidence  and
          submissions thereon, it is important not to  lose  sight  of  the
          overarching question in these  appeals:  is  there  a  reasonable
          likelihood that the individual concerned will  be  persecuted  on
          return to Sri Lanka for a reason falling within Article 1A(2)  of
          the Refugee Convention and/or be at real  risk  of  ill-treatment
          contrary to Article 3 ECHR?

     316. In the context of the scenario with which we are concerned, there
          is no doubt that any such risk of persecution would, if it exists
          at all, have a clear nexus with the Refugee Convention reason  of
          political opinion, actual or imputed. In the generality of cases,
          Article 3 ECHR adds little, if anything, to the equation.

     317. Thus, it is of  paramount  importance  to  establish  whether  an
          individual who is the subject of sufficient adverse  interest  to
          result in detention (authorised by law or otherwise) is  at  real
          risk of being exposed to treatment which constitutes persecution.



     318. Paragraph 356(4) of GJ states in the clearest of terms that:

                 "(4)  If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security
                 services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm
                 requiring international protection."

     319.  Consistently  with  her  position  in  GJ,  the  respondent  has
          expressly invited us to maintain this particular  aspect  of  the
          existing country guidance, although there is  a  suggestion  that
          the country evidence indicates some improvements in the treatment
          of detainees. Unsurprisingly, the appellants' stance is that  the
          risk of persecutory treatment in detention remains high.

     320. The expert evidence all points to the conclusion  that  detention
          will give rise to a real risk of ill-treatment. This is  in  line
          with numerous sources of country information,  including  Amnesty
          International, the DFAT, the 2019 United States State  Department
          report,  and  the  December  2016  report  of  the   UN   Special
          Rapporteur. The use of torture and excessive force  is  variously
          described as "endemic" and "common",  and  that  "a  "culture  of
          torture" persists" in the country. Descriptions of the  types  of
          treatment meted out to detainees are all-too familiar and  follow
          a similar pattern to that considered by Tribunals in previous Sri
          Lankan country guidance cases.

     321. In light of the  position  set  out  in  GJ,  together  with  the
          evidence before us, it  is  abundantly  clear  that  there  is  a
          reasonable likelihood that  those  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities will be subjected to persecution within  the  meaning
          of the Refugee Convention and ill-treatment contrary to Article 3
          ECHR.

     322. It is the prior question concerning the circumstances in which an
          individual is at real risk of being  taken  into  detention  that
          represents the core issue for us to address.

     323. In order to do so, it is necessary to undertake a contextual step-
          by-step approach to several matters, ranging from the general  to
          the specific. We begin with the former.




      The current political landscape in Sri Lanka

     324. On 17  November  2019  Gotabaya  Rajapaksa,  the  former  Defence
          Secretary at the end of the  civil  war  in  May  2009,  won  the
          presidential election with just over  52%  of  the  vote,  having
          campaigned on an openly Sinhalese nationalist  platform.  Shortly
          thereafter he appointed his brother Mahinda, the former president
          between 2005 and 2015, as Prime Minister.

     325. The new regime quickly took  steps  to  implement  its  political
          agenda. In February 2020 it withdrew Sri Lanka from UN Resolution
          30/1 which the previous government of President Sirisena had  co-
          sponsored in order to promote reconciliation, accountability, and
          human rights in the country. There was  an  entrenchment  of  the
          presence  of  military  personnel  in  the  power  structure   of
          government. The possible repeal  of  the  PTA  envisaged  by  the
          previous government was firmly discounted. There  is  also  ample
          evidence of journalists and others who have sought to investigate
          alleged wrongdoings  by  political  and  military  leaders  being
          targeted for harassment and intimidation.  There  is  nothing  to
          suggest that the phenomenon of what was described in  GJ  as  the
          "Sinhalisation" of Tamil areas has  been  reversed  and  the  FFM
          contains  evidence  that  there  continues  to  be  a  degree  of
          "colonisation" by Buddhists. The  evidence  as  a  whole  clearly
          shows that there is a very large military presence in  the  north
          and that the army still occupies a good deal of  land  previously
          owned by the Tamil population before the end of the civil war.

     326. Both parties have described GoSL as "authoritarian" in nature. In
          light of the evidence before  us,  that  is  a  fitting  epithet.
          Whilst the term may not  have  been  expressly  employed  by  the
          Tribunal in GJ, it  would  have  also  accurately  described  the
          government in power at that time.

     327.  The  parliamentary  elections  took  place  on  5  August  2020.
          President  Gotabaya's  Sri  Lanka   People's   Front   ("Podujana
          Peramuna") won a landslide  victory  and,  with  the  support  of
          smaller parties, may be in a position to change  the  Sri  Lankan
          Constitution. At this stage, it would in our view be premature to
          conclude that the overall human rights situation in  the  country
          will deteriorate to the extent that it should  materially  affect
          our findings. Having said that, the "direction of  travel"  quite
          clearly does not point towards any improvement in the foreseeable
          future.

     328. It follows from the above that any modest reconciliatory  efforts
          that  might  have  occurred  during  the  currency  of  President
          Siresena's time in office have, or are in the process  of  being,
          dissipated, and play no material part in our considerations.




      Separatism in the Sri Lankan context

     329. The often bloody history of separatism in the Sri Lankan  context
          is well-documented and does not require recitation. Article  157A
          of the Sri Lankan Constitution, as amended, serves as the bedrock
          for successive governments' policies  towards  the  notion  of  a
          separate Tamil homeland. Article 157A,  brought  in  by  the  6th
          Amendment to the Constitution on 8 August 1983, provides,  in  so
          far as is relevant:

                 "157A. (1) No person shall, directly or indirectly,  in  or
                 outside Sri  Lanka,  support,  espouse,  promote,  finance,
                 encourage or advocate the establishment of a separate State
                 within the territory of Sri Lanka.

                   (2)  No  political  party   or   other   association   or
                 organisation shall have as one of its  aims  or  objectives
                 the establishment of a separate State within the  territory
                 of Sri Lanka."

     330. The determination  of  the  then  government  to  doggedly  guard
          against the possibility of a renewed "threat" of separatism was a
          central plank of the Tribunal's conclusions in GJ.

     331. Neither party has suggested that  the  resolve  of  the  previous
          regime has in any way diminished over time. A question for us  is
          whether President Gotabaya's  government  views  the  concept  of
          separatism more widely, as advanced by the appellants,  or  in  a
          more circumspect way, in line with the respondent's case.

     332. It is clear from the evidence in GJ and before us (as  previously
          summarised) that Sri Lankan governments have, over the course  of
          time and through numerous public statements made through  various
          media and to a range of audiences, regarded Tamil  separatism  as
          what Dr Nadarajah has described as "an  ongoing  and  existential
          threat to the state and prevailing  Sinhala  majoritarian  social
          order". The unswerving desire to  ensure  the  existence  of  the
          unitary State of Sri Lanka and combat what has  been  called  the
          "separatist  ideology"  is  in  keeping  with  the  agenda  of  a
          nationalist authoritarian regime comprised of many  of  the  same
          protagonists who presided over the last stages of the civil  war.
          With this in mind, there is merit to the  appellants'  submission
          that GoSL has genuine ideological and political incentives  going
          beyond a simple populist desire to "talk up" the perceived threat
          of renewed separatist activity, in particular by the LTTE.

     333. The respondent posits the argument that a distinction  should  be
          drawn between the rhetoric employed by GoSL and  the  reality  of
          its actions (this argument has also been made in respect  of  its
          view of the Tamil diaspora; see below). In our view, there  is  a
          degree of force in this position too. Dr  Smith  acknowledged  in
          oral evidence that speeches made by senior politicians are  often
          for public consumption and involved "playing to the  crowd".  The
          expert  evidence  and  country  information  provides  consistent
          support for the conclusion that the LTTE remains  a  spent  force
          within Sri Lanka, as was the case at the time of GJ. In one sense
          then,  there  is  not  now  an  organised,  separatist   movement
          operating within the country which, in the eyes of GoSL, requires
          immediate and concerted action.

     334. It is also the case  that  there  is,  to  use  the  respondent's
          phrase, some limited "political space"  for  pro-Tamil  political
          discourse  within  Sri  Lanka.  The  TNA   took   part   in   the
          parliamentary elections in August  2020,  as  did  certain  other
          minor parties representing Tamil interests,  including  the  TNPF
          and the Tamil People's Council, both of which  are  described  as
          "nationalist" in nature. A  fourth,  newly  formed  Tamil  party,
          TMTK, gained a seat in the elections. We note that  on  4  August
          2017 the Sri Lanka  Supreme  Court  rejected  a  claim  that  the
          advocation by ITAK for a  federalist  system  was  tantamount  to
          separatism, contrary to Article 157A of the Constitution.  Whilst
          there is  scope  for  a  legitimate  argument  that  the  Court's
          judgment should be seen  as  distinct  from  the  views  of  GoSL
          itself, that case, together with the  other  evidence,  indicates
          that there is currently at least some room,  albeit  constrained,
          for the espousal of political views which do not tally with those
          of the regime.

     335. Evidence from the experts, the FFM and DFAT suggests that many in
          the Tamil community within Sri Lanka are now more  interested  in
          improving their economic  circumstances  and  would  not  want  a
          return to separatist violence. We have not  been  presented  with
          evidence of individuals residing  in  Sri  Lanka  being  detained
          purely on the basis of expressing separatist views, as opposed to
          suspected links with the LTTE or  any  other  group.  It  may  be
          inferred from this  that  there  is  no  current  groundswell  of
          separatist  views  manifesting  themselves  within  the   country
          itself.

     336. There are, however, contraindications  within  the  evidence.  Dr
          Smith,  Dr  Nadarajah,  and  Professor  Gunaratna  all   provided
          evidence to the effect that  GoSL  fears  a  resurgence  of  LTTE
          activity within Sri Lanka and  a  possible  return  to  conflict.
          There is a logic to Dr Nadarajah's view that GoSL gives  a  broad
          interpretation to the term "separatism", and the same is true  of
          Dr Smith's opinion that the regime  views  Tamil  separatism  and
          nationalism as "two sides of the  same  coin".  An  authoritarian
          government committed to suppressing  the  (actual  or  perceived)
          resurrection of separatism within its territory is, in our  view,
          more likely to cast the net widely to ensure appropriate coverage
          in furtherance of its objective.

     337. We note that of the three pro-Tamil political parties referred to
          above, the TNA has been criticised by some in the Tamil community
          for being too willing to compromise with GoSL, whilst at the same
          time having been heavily criticised by the Prime Minister in  the
          run-up to  the  recent  parliamentary  elections  for  advocating
          federalism, which he in effect described as separatism by another
          route. On the evidence before us, neither of the other  two  pro-
          Tamil parties has ever explicitly professed the desire for  Tamil
          Eelam. Furthermore, press articles in the period  leading  up  to
          the elections report, in  our  view  reliably,  intimidation  and
          harassment of the TNPF. Another party which appears to have  been
          recently established is the Crusaders for  Democracy,  instigated
          by ex-LTTE cadres. As we understand it, the individuals concerned
          had been through the "rehabilitation" process and  were  regarded
          by the Sri Lankan authorities as being "reformed"  and  thus  not
          posing  any  material  threat  as  regards  the  propagation   of
          separatist opinions.

     338. We turn to a source of evidence to which we  attach  considerable
          weight. In an article published in a 2014  edition  of  PRISM,  a
          journal of the  Center  for  Complex  Operations  (a  think  tank
          connected to the US Department of Defense),  President  Gotabaya,
          who was then the Defence Secretary, wrote that:

                 "... It must be further realised that there are groups even
                 within the democratic mainstream in Sri Lanka  that  obtain
                 funding from the LTTE's international network and  pro-LTTE
                 elements overseas, which more or  less  openly  talk  about
                 achieving the very  same  objectives  that  the  LTTE  had.
                 Though  they  appear  to  have  a  democratic  face,  their
                 extremist separatist  ideology  has  not  yet  disappeared.
                 Their ultimate objective is achieving the division  of  Sri
                 Lanka. As a result of their actions and statements,  it  is
                 very much a possibility that certain radical elements  will
                 feel empowered to once again attempt to take up arms in the
                 name of separation.  This  is  a  major  national  security
                 threat that needs to be taken with the utmost seriousness."

     339. This passage is significant for three reasons. First, it emanates
          from the horse's mouth, as it were: the author is now  of  course
          the President and there is  no  sound  reason  arising  from  the
          evidence to suggest that his views have materially changed  since
          2014 (the article in question was based  upon  a  speech  he  had
          given in 2012; thus indicating a consistency of position over the
          years). Second, we find that the article was  not  written  as  a
          piece of electioneering propaganda intended  for  consumption  by
          the generality of the Sri Lankan voting public. Third, it sets up
          a link  (actual  or  perceived)  between  ostensibly  non-violent
          democratic groups and the threat (again, actual or perceived)  of
          a revival of violent separatism; a threat that  is,  we  conclude
          taken seriously now, as it was then.

     340.  The  argument  that  much  of  the  governmental  and   military
          pronouncements are simply rhetorical and should  be  viewed  with
          real caution is further undermined, at least to an extent, by the
          fact, as we find it to be, of  a  number  of  unsuccessful  LTTE-
          inspired plots to carry out attacks within Sri Lanka since GJ was
          decided. Of the eleven "attempts" detailed by Professor Gunaratna
          in an appendix to his main report, nine post-date GJ and occurred
          between 2014 and March 2020.  He  was  able  to  provide  further
          evidence as  to  apparent  connections  between  the  individuals
          concerned and LTTE-linked groups outside of Sri Lanka in  respect
          of some of the incidents, whilst he  could  not  be  specific  in
          respect of others. Added to  this  list,  a  variety  of  sources
          address the failed attempt by an ex-LTTE operative to undertake a
          suicide bombing in July 2020. The plot  was  said  to  have  been
          instigated by an LTTE member residing in France.

     341. These incidents certainly cannot be said  to  equate  to  general
          operational capabilities of the LTTE within Sri  Lanka  or  to  a
          meaningful resurgence of that organisation. However, they do  add
          force to the appellants'  argument  that  the  rhetoric  and  the
          expression of determination to  prevent  any  form  of  resurgent
          separatism does in fact have a basis in reality. In our view, the
          reality in this equation must be seen in the  context  of  GoSL's
          authoritarian nature and Sri Lanka's  violent  history  over  the
          last four decades.

     342.  The  foregoing  is  also  in  keeping  with  what  the  previous
          government stated in November 2015  when  amending  the  list  of
          proscribed groups and individuals  deemed  to  be  involved  with
          terrorism (of which,  more  will  be  said,  below).  The  LTTE's
          current listing entry includes the following:

                 "Despite the military defeat of the LTTE in Sri  Lanka  its
                 front organisations  and  structures  continues  to  remain
                 active overseas promoting LTTE ideology of creating a  mono
                 ethnic separate state  of  Tamil  Eelam  through  terrorist
                 means. Three clear resurgence attempts within  the  country
                 with assistance from pro  LTTE  groups  operating  overseas
                 (Year 2012-2014)."

     343. The bombings that took place on Easter  Sunday  April  2019  were
          carried out by Islamic extremists,  not  Tamil  separatists,  but
          this terrorist attack was  seen  by  many  to  be  a  significant
          intelligence failure by the authorities. It is not  unreasonable,
          in  our  view,  to  infer  that  this  incident  will  have  only
          heightened the security-related sensitivities of the  authorities
          in a general sense, which in turn is  likely  to  feed  into  its
          standpoint on the threat  (actual  or  perceived)  of  separatist
          activity within the country.

     344. As for the POAC judgment in Arumugam  and  the  evidence  adduced
          before us pertaining thereto, we have taken the view that neither
          materially undermines the position adopted by the  respondent  in
          these appeals, nor materially advances the appellants' case.  The
          thrust of the respondent's submissions on "rhetoric and  reality"
          went to the uncontroversial fact that the LTTE are not an  active
          force within Sri Lanka and that GoSL's utterances should be  seen
          in that context. She has not suggested that the organisation  has
          ceased to exist in any form outside the  country.  We  also  take
          account of the relatively narrow basis on which POAC allowed  the
          appeal against the decision to maintain  proscription  under  the
          Terrorism Act 2000. In short, we see no real tension between  the
          respondent's  stance  before  us  and  as  adopted  in  the  POAC
          proceedings.

     345. On the other hand, the  POAC  case  does  not  detract  from  the
          appellants' argument that GoSL genuinely perceives  the  LTTE  to
          represent an ongoing threat to the unity of the Sri Lankan state.
          It is unlikely that GoSL's  view  of  the  LTTE  will  have  been
          altered by the   proceedings  in  POAC.  If  anything,  the  case
          (including the respondent's position adopted  therein)  may  have
          simply re-affirmed an existing belief that the LTTE (in  whatever
          form it takes) continues its efforts to instigate attacks in  Sri
          Lanka from abroad. In any event, the decision in Arumugam has not
          played a material part in our  overall  conclusion,  as  set  out
          below.

     346. Having regard to all relevant considerations,  we  conclude  that
          much, if not all, of the rhetoric emanating from  senior  members
          of the  political  and  military  establishment  since  2012  has
          represented an accurate reflection of GoSL's position and has not
          simply constituted hyperbolic or vacuous pronouncements.  We  are
          satisfied that there is deemed to be an imperative need to ensure
          that any nascent movement, organisational capabilities, political
          voice, and even sympathies, related to the "separatist  ideology"
          within Sri Lanka are firmly suppressed.

     347. The evidence does not, however, show  that  every  expression  of
          opinions which are pro-Tamil and/or anti-government will, on that
          basis alone, be deemed by GoSL to equate to the advocation  of  a
          "separatist ideology". Much will depend on the  context.  Certain
          political parties operating within Sri  Lanka  are  described  as
          "nationalist", but if any party or organisation sought  to  dress
          up a call for Tamil Eelam in the clothes of "nationalism", it  is
          highly likely that GoSL will regard this as separatism by another
          name and act accordingly. Also of relevance is the source of  the
          opinion  (i.e.  the  profile  of  the  particular  individual  or
          organisation expressing it) and what is actually being said.  For
          example,  it  may  be  unlikely   that   a   campaign   for   the
          accountability of political  leaders  for  alleged  human  rights
          abuses mounted by an organisation perceived to be  separatist  in
          nature will be seen by GoSL as being in any way distinct from the
          overall separatist agenda. Conversely, a  human  rights  activist
          with no separatist profile (actual or perceived) who investigates
          alleged corruption may well not be  categorised  as  pursuing  an
          agenda contrary to the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka.

     348. Indeed, journalists and human  rights  activists,  together  with
          those who have given evidence to the LLRC,  are  the  subject  of
          specific risk categories under GJ which neither party  has  asked
          us to re-evaluate. Thus, individuals falling within them will not
          necessarily be regarded as having engaged in separatist  activity
          (which is a separate risk category); although such a person could
          conceivably fall within more than one.

     349. Drawing all of the above together, we conclude  as  follows.  The
          core focus of GoSL is to prevent any potential  resurgence  of  a
          separatist movement within Sri Lanka which has  as  its  ultimate
          goal the establishment of Tamil Eelam.  GoSL  draws  no  material
          distinction between, on the one hand, the avowedly violent  means
          of the LTTE  in  furtherance  of  Tamil  Eelam,  and  non-violent
          political advocacy for that  result  on  the  other.  It  is  the
          underlying aim which is crucial to  GoSL's  perception.  To  this
          extent, GoSL's interpretation of separatism is not limited to the
          pursuance thereof by violent  means  alone;  it  encompasses  the
          political sphere as well. Whilst there is currently limited space
          for pro-Tamil  political  organisations  to  operate  within  Sri
          Lanka, there is no tolerance of the expression  of  any  avowedly
          separatist or perceived separatist beliefs.




      GoSL's attitude to the Tamil diaspora in general

     350. The next stage of our assessment relates to how  GoSL  views  the
          Tamil diaspora in general, and sub-sets within  that  cohort,  in
          light  of  what  we  have  said  about  its   attitudes   towards
          separatism.

     351. As with most other aspects  of  our  decision,  GJ  provides  the
          starting point. In paragraphs 303 and 335,  the  Tribunal  stated
          that there were approximately 1 million Tamils living outside  of
          Sri Lanka, with what were described  as  "diaspora  hotspots"  in
          London, Paris, Toronto, and Oslo (for the sake  of  completeness,
          we observe  that  the  United  Kingdom-based  contingent  of  the
          diaspora consists of approximately 300,000 people).

     352. As regards the regime's determination to prevent a resurgence  of
          violent separatist activity within Sri Lanka,  it  was  concluded
          that the focus  had  shifted  from  the  domestic  front  to  the
          external. This continues to be borne out by the  evidence  before
          us, although, given the attempted terrorist actions on home  soil
          we have referred to previously, that  focus  is  not  exclusively
          outward-looking. The non-emergence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  other
          separatist movement within Sri  Lanka  in  the  period  since  GJ
          reinforces the conclusions reached in 2013 and is consistent with
          the current evidence that GoSL has an interest in maintaining the
          narrative  of  a  risk  of  resurgence  as  justification  for  a
          continuation of  authoritarian  domestic  security  measures:  in
          other words, that the apparently  effective  suppression  of  the
          separatist threat is said to be only as a result of the necessary
          actions of the government.

     353. Does this mean that GoSL regards the entire Tamil diaspora  as  a
          separatist threat, or is the position more nuanced?

     354. GoSL's hostility to the separatist movement is  undoubtedly  real
          and we accept that the  activities  which  may  be  perceived  as
          separatist in nature will in most cases emanate from  within  the
          diaspora: it is, as described by Dr Nadarajah, the "locus" of the
          perceived threat. It follows as a matter of logic that GoSL views
          the "entire" overseas Tamil population with a  generally  adverse
          mindset.

     355. However, in our judgment  this  does  not  completely  cloud  its
          ability to differentiate between an entire class of  persons  and
          those within that class who are, to a greater or  lesser  degree,
          politically active in a  manner  known  or  perceived  to  be  in
          furtherance of a  separatist  agenda.  If  every  member  of  the
          diaspora was regarded with such enmity as to make them of adverse
          interest such as to warrant detention (and thereby exposing  them
          to a real risk of persecution), we would, aside  from  any  other
          considerations, have expected to see evidence that  all  returned
          failed  Tamil  asylum-applicants  faced  this  outcome.  No  such
          evidence is before us and the appellants have not argued that all
          returnees are at risk. In addition, the evidence  does  not  show
          that the Tamil diaspora forms a single cohesive body  as  regards
          political beliefs and, importantly, activism. Given  the  ability
          of the authorities to monitor diaspora activities, it must be the
          case that there continues to be a basic awareness of  this  fact,
          as previously acknowledged in GJ. Finally, we have already  found
          that a limited amount  of  political  freedom  to  express  Tamil
          nationalist ideas exists within  Sri  Lanka  itself.  This  is  a
          further indication that GoSL is unlikely to view  the  expression
          of similarly constrained political beliefs as tantamount  to  the
          pursuance of an active separatist agenda.

     356.  Further  and  in  any  event,  whilst  certain  aspects  of   Dr
          Nadarajah's evidence may be somewhat ambiguous, we agree with  Mr
          Mackenzie's submission that he was not in fact purporting to make
          the claim that all members of the diaspora are at  risk.  Reading
          his evidence holistically we  find  that  his  intention  was  to
          attribute GoSL's main focus  only  to  the  political  activities
          undertaken  by  certain  groups  and/or  individuals  within  the
          diaspora.  Our view is reinforced by the fact  that  he  has  not
          used the term "entire" in his evidence. Dr  Nadarajah's  evidence
          is also consistent with that of the other two  experts,  both  of
          whom have referred, albeit using differing  terminology,  to  the
          Sri  Lankan  authorities  having  expressed   hostility   towards
          politically active elements within the diaspora.

     357. Thus, whilst there will  logically  be  a  focus  on  the  entire
          diaspora, the operative concern is with a sub-set of  that  large
          group. In our judgment GoSL does not regard the entire cohort  as
          either holding separatist views or, even  if  it  did,  that  all
          members of this cohort would be perceived  as  being  politically
          active in any meaningful way.

     358. With the above parameter in mind and taking full account of  what
          we have said about GoSL's attitude towards separatism in general,
          we  turn  to  consider  its  perception  of  relevant   political
          activities conducted in the United Kingdom. As the great majority
          of such activities are likely  to  be  undertaken  on  behalf  of
          organisations rather than simply as individuals, we will need  to
          examine those which are the subject of evidence before us. Before
          doing so, we address the issue of the proscription of  particular
          groups under Sri Lankan domestic law which was not the subject of
          consideration in GJ.




      Proscription under the 2012 UN Regulations

     359. The 2012 UN Regulations constituted the Sri  Lankan  government's
          implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1373
          (2001),  setting  out  wide-ranging  strategies  with  which  the
          international community seeks to combat  terrorism,  particularly
          in relation to the financing thereof.

     360. Under Regulation 4, the relevant minister, on the  recommendation
          of a "Competent Authority" is mandated to proscribe :

                    i.  natural  persons,  legal  persons,  and  groups   or
                       entities, in respect of which  there  are  reasonable
                       grounds to believe that they, "...commit  or  attempt
                       to  commit,  participate   in   or   facilitate   the
                       commission of, terrorist acts..."

                   ii. legal persons, groups or entities which are owned  or
                       controlled directly or indirectly by such natural  or
                       legal persons, groups or entities

                  iii. natural and legal persons, groups or entities  acting
                       on behalf of, or on the direction of any such natural
                       or legal persons, groups, or entities.

     361. In the Gazette published  on  21  March  2014,  sixteen  diaspora
          organisations and  424  individuals  were  proscribed  under  the
          Regulations.  That  original   list   contained   the   following
          organisations (the countries in which they were based are,  where
          stated in the Gazette, provided in parenthesis):

                    i. LTTE;

                   ii. Tamil  Rehabilitation  Organisation  (Sri  Lanka  and
                       other countries);

                  iii. Tamil Coordinating Committee (France);

                   iv. BTF (United Kingdom);

                    v. World Tamil Movement (Canada);

                   vi. Canadian Tamil Congress (Canada);

                  vii. Australian Tamil Congress (Australia);

                 viii. GTF (United Kingdom);

                   ix. National Council of Canadian Tamils (Canada);

                    x. Tamil National Council (Norway);

                   xi.  Tamil   Youth   Organisation   (Australia,   Canada,
                       Switzerland, and France);

                  xii. World Tamil Coordinating Committee;

                 xiii. TGTE;

                  xiv. Tamil Eelam People's Assembly;

                   xv. World Tamil Relief Fund;

                  xvi. Headquarters Group.

     362. In a revised list of  proscribed  organisations  and  individuals
          published in the Gazette on 20 November 2015 and re-confirmed  on
          9 November 2016, the following organisations  were  removed  from
          the original 2014 list:

                    i. GTF;

                   ii. BTF;

                  iii. National Council of Canadian Tamils;

                   iv. Tamil Youth Organisation;

                    v. World Tamil Coordinating Committee;

                   vi. Canadian Tamil Congress;

                  vii. Australian Tamil Congress;

                 viii. Tamil National Council.

     363. The Gazette published on 25 February 2021 confirmed that  all  of
          the de-proscribed organisations listed above, save for the  Tamil
          National Council, were re-proscribed. Thus, the current  list  of
          organisations proscribed under the 2012 UN  Regulations  consists
          of:

                    i. LTTE;

                   ii. Tamil Rehabilitation Organisation;

                  iii. Tamil Coordinating Committee;

                   iv. BTF;

                    v. World Tamil Movement;

                   vi.  Canadian Tamil Congress;

                  vii. Australian Tamil Congress;

                 viii. GTF;

                   ix. National Council of Canadian Tamils;

                    x. Tamil Youth Organisation;

                   xi. World Tamil Coordinating Committee;

                  xii. TGTE;

                 xiii. Tamil Eelam People's Assembly;

                  xiv. World Tamil Relief Fund;

                   xv. Headquarters Group.

     364. The  specified  effect  of  proscription  is  that  funds,  other
          financial assets, and economic resources belonging to or owned or
          held by such natural or legal persons, groups, or entities  shall
          be frozen for so long as they remain proscribed. The  Regulations
          also prohibit any person from providing  any  form  of  financial
          assistance to proscribed persons, groups, or entities.

     365. It is apparent that the legal effect of proscription  relates  to
          financial prohibitions. However, it would in our view be nave to
          conclude  that  GoSL  and  its  predecessors  have  in   practice
          approached proscription on such a narrow basis. In light  of  the
          underlying premise of the Regulations and our conclusions on  the
          regime's attitude towards separatism, there is force in Professor
          Gunaratna's evidence that  the  act  of  proscription  warns  the
          public (in our view, this will include  the  domestic  population
          and the diaspora) not to have any involvement with listed persons
          and/or groups, and, in the words of Dr Smith, that  it  "draws  a
          line in the sand" as to an express recognition  by  GoSL  that  a
          proscribed group will be,  for  that  reason  alone,  of  adverse
          interest. This much has been acknowledged, at least to an extent,
          by  the  respondent;  she   describes   proscription   as   being
          "potentially significant" to, although not determinative of, risk
          on return. This position is consistent with the FFM,  upon  which
          the respondent places a good deal of reliance in  these  appeals.
          The report contains evidence from a human  rights  activist,  the
          CID, a journalist, and the IOM, suggesting that the fact  that  a
          group (specifically, the TGTE) is proscribed might  result  in  a
          "member" or activist being at risk.

     366. However, for reasons which we will come to in due course, it does
          not follow that any  individual  connected  in  any  way  with  a
          proscribed organisation will, without more, be at risk on return.



     367. The parties disagree  on  the  significance  of  an  organisation
          having been removed from the list or never having been on it. The
          appellants contend that membership of a  proscribed  organisation
          must be relevant to an adverse  profile.  The  respondent  argues
          that the converse must also be a material consideration: in other
          words, an organisation  that  has  been  de-proscribed  or  never
          proscribed at all is accordingly likely to be of less interest to
          GoSL. The appellants' response  to  this  is  that  there  is  no
          material   distinction   between   the   various   organisations;
          proscribed or not, they will all be of adverse interest to  GoSL.
          As with a number of issues with which we have had to grapple, the
          evidence upon which the parties' respective positions  are  based
          is not clear-cut. On our reading of their evidence, none  of  the
          three experts have either expressly stated or implicitly accepted
          the proposition that the de-proscribing of some organisations  in
          2015 or the absence of any proscription is indicative of  a  lack
          of  material  interest  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in   a
          particular organisation. We see no particular tension between, on
          the one hand, the assertion that proscribed groups are  regarded,
          to use the term of the source cited  by  Dr  Nadarajah,  as  more
          "hard line", whilst on the  other,  that  de-proscribed  or  non-
          proscribed groups perceived as less of a threat will  nonetheless
          attract attention on the basis that, as Dr Smith has put it:

                 "...no longer being considered a terrorist seems not to  be
                 the  same  as  no  longer   being   of   existing   adverse
                 interest...it seems very possible that those who belong  or
                 are  affiliated  to  diaspora   groups   that   have   been
                 deproscribed remain of existing adverse interest."".

     368. This standpoint is also reflected in the  evidence  of  Professor
          Gunaratna, who states that:

                 "While the effect of proscription is to forbid and make  it
                 an offence to have any contact or  links  with  members  of
                 those proscribed organisations, the Sri  Lankan  Government
                 does not limit its focus on those organisations proscribed.

                 ...

                 Those in opposition of the Sri Lankan State are not defined
                 by whether they are listed, delisted or  unlisted,  but  by
                 the activities the organisation is involved in."

     369. In our view, what emerges from the body of expert evidence  is  a
          collective opinion that proscription does not represent a  bright
          line between the existence of adverse interest and its absence.

     370. This is supported further by  the  following  considerations.  In
          reaction to the de-proscription of eight organisations  in  2015,
          the then opposition leader (now Prime Minister) Mahinda Rajapaksa
          described the move as, "a definite threat to  national  security"
          and  criticised  the  government  of  the  day  as  having  acted
          "irresponsibly".  The  re-proscription  of  seven  of  the  eight
          organisations in February 2021 is indicative of GoSL's intent  to
          follow  through  on  the  strident  criticisms  of  the  previous
          government's actions, as expressed by an individual  whose  views
          are  likely  to  reflect  the  current  thinking  of  this   more
          authoritarian regime towards the types  of  groups  deserving  of
          adverse attention.

     371. The attitude of GoSL as regards de-proscribed  or  non-proscribed
          groups must also be seen in the context of its hostility  towards
          those  who  criticise  it  in  general  and  those  who   espouse
          separatism in particular. Against this background,  it  would  be
          surprising if the authorities eschewed an adverse interest in  an
          organisation with a clear separatist agenda simply because it did
          not appear on the list complied under the 2012 UN Regulations.

     372. The respondent's contention that de-proscription would indicate a
          reduction in adverse interest by GoSL is undermined  by  the  re-
          proscription of a number of organisations in February 2021.

     373. A final point is the fact that the LTTE itself was not proscribed
          under Sri Lankan law for much of the duration of  the  civil  war
          (we have not been provided with the  relevant  legal  provisions,
          but it does not appear that this is in dispute). This is  another
          indication that the absence of proscription  is  not  necessarily
          reflective of an absence of material interest.

     374.  In  summary,  we  conclude  as  follows.  Proscription   of   an
          organisation  is  a  relatively   significant   factor   in   the
          assessment of the profile of an individual who is connected  with
          that organisation, but it  is  not  determinative  of  risk.  Its
          presence is reasonably  likely  to  entail  a  higher  degree  of
          adverse interest in a particular organisation and, by  extension,
          in individuals known or perceived to be associated  with  it.  In
          respect of those organisations which have been  de-proscribed  or
          never proscribed  (the  single  organisation  which  remains  de-
          proscribed, the Tamil National Council, is extremely unlikely  to
          play a part in protection claims in the United  Kingdom),  it  is
          reasonably likely that  there  will,  depending  on  whether  the
          organisation  in  question  has,  or  is  perceived  to  have,  a
          separatist agenda, be an adverse interest on the  part  of  GoSL,
          albeit not necessarily at  the  level  applicable  to  proscribed
          groups. To this  extent,  we  reject  the  unqualified  assertion
          contained in  a  letter  from  the  British  High  Commission  in
          Colombo, dated 18 May 2017,  that  "...  members  of  [the  eight
          groups de-proscribed in 2015] whether  active  or  lay,  have  no
          reason to fear persecution as a consequence of their  affiliation
          to them from the government of Sri Lanka.".




      The TGTE

     375.  GJ alluded to the existence  of  the  TGTE,  but  there  was  no
          detailed consideration of its activities and how it was viewed by
          the Sri Lankan authorities at the time.

     376. The TGTE describes itself as a government  in  exile  and  is  an
          avowedly separatist organisation, although it is committed to non-
          violent means to achieve its goal of establishing Tamil Eelam  on
          the island of Sri Lanka. Aside from its raison d'tre, it  is  an
          undisputed  fact  that  the  TGTE's  founder  and  current  Prime
          Minister Mr Visvanathan Rudrakumaran, was a senior member of  the
          LTTE and acted as its legal  adviser  during  the  peace  process
          between that organisation and the Sri Lankan  government  in  the
          early 2000s. In a real sense, the TGTE was born out of the LTTE.

     377. For obvious reasons the TGTE does not operate  within  Sri  Lanka
          itself and its Mission Statement confirms that  only  members  of
          the diaspora are entitled to run for elected office. In light  of
          this, we regard the evidence from certain sources in the  FFM  to
          the effect that the TGTE were not well-known within Sri Lanka  to
          be relatively unsurprising and of limited value to our assessment
          of the question of how GoSL perceives the  organisation  and  its
          activities.

     378. The TGTE remains a proscribed organisation. Its entry in the list
          published in the Gazette on 9 November 2016 states the  essential
          reason for the continuing status to be:

                 "Terrorism related activities and Financing Terrorism."

     379. Although it appears as though the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have
          never provided evidence of this assertion  for  public  scrutiny,
          the description is consistent (from the perspective of GoSL) with
          the TGTE's separatist agenda, its genesis from the LTTE, and  the
          belief that any resurgence by the  latter  will  be  assisted  by
          diaspora groups.

     380. Professor Gunaratna, whose  evidence  we  have  found  useful  in
          providing an insight into the mindset of GoSL,  is  in  no  doubt
          that the TGTE is viewed as a "front" for  the  LTTE:  indeed,  he
          describes it as a "faction" of the LTTE. Dr Nadarajah's  evidence
          is that the TGTE has been described in  "official  discourse  and
          media coverage as an integral part of the LTTE".  Dr  Smith  also
          uses the term "front", albeit when providing his opinion  of  how
          GoSL perceives not  only  the  TGTE,  but  the  other  proscribed
          organisations. Thus, the body of expert evidence  is  as  one  on
          this particular point.

     381. There are then the views of the  former  Defence  Secretary  (now
          President) Gotabaya, as expressed in the PRISM article from  2014
          to which we have made reference previously:

                 "[The TGTE] was  formed  with  assistance  of  an  advisory
                 committee   comprising   prominent   pro-LTTE    activists,
                 including foreigners who have been  helping  the  LTTE  for
                 many years."

          The article goes on to describe  groups  including  the  TGTE  as
          "LTTE-linked".

     382. Once again, we find these views instructive. The  fact  that  the
          term "front" is not contained with  any  official  categorisation
          criteria is of limited relevance.  The  important  point  is  the
          extent to which this term, or indeed any other,  illuminates  the
          reality of GoSL's perception of and attitude towards the TGTE and
          other organisations.

     383. We wish to make it clear that nothing in what we have said should
          be taken as an indication on our part that the TGTE does in  fact
          have any involvement in, or support for, terrorism. There  is  no
          evidence before us to that effect and in any event, it is  not  a
          matter with which we are concerned. It has never been  proscribed
          in the United Kingdom under the Terrorism Act 2000.

     384. On the evidence as a whole, we find that the TGTE is involved  in
          the following types of  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It
          engages in what Dr Nadarajah described  as  "highly  visible  and
          effective"  international  lobbying  and  advocacy  campaigns  in
          pursuit of its agenda. One such campaign seeks to have Sri  Lanka
          referred to the International  Criminal  Court  for  alleged  war
          crimes committed at the end of the civil war. An online  petition
          launched in 2015 in furtherance of  this  goal  gathered  over  a
          million signatures worldwide. In the United  Kingdom,  we  accept
          that the organisation undertakes political advocacy, fundraising,
          and community activities. We note that it was the TGTE which made
          an application to the Secretary of State to de-proscribe the LTTE
          in the United Kingdom (with reference  to  the  POAC  proceedings
          discussed earlier). The organisation maintains  an  Internet  and
          social media presence through its website, Twitter, and Facebook.
          The TGTE has organised many demonstrations against the Sri Lankan
          government, the common themes of which have  included  calls  for
          accountability for alleged war crimes resulting from the  end  of
          the civil  war;  protests  against  the  "disappeared";  and  the
          commemoration of "Black July" (referring  to  the  1983  communal
          riots in Sri Lanka). It organised a concerted  campaign  to  have
          Brigadier Fernando prosecuted  in  this  country  for  his  "cut-
          throat" gesture at a demonstration in 2018. It is plain from  the
          photographic evidence that the LTTE  emblem  has  been  displayed
          during these events alongside placards and flags showing the TGTE
          symbol of an outline of what is deemed to be Tamil Eelam. Many of
          these activities are publicised on social media platforms.

     385. We find that  the  more  community-based  activities  include  an
          annual Sports Day meeting, together with particular commemorative
          events  such  as  Maavirar  Naal  (Heroes  Day)  and  the  Pongal
          Festival. Again, these activities are publicised on social media.

     386. It is self-evidently the case that the TGTE's activities are: (a)
          supportive of a separatist agenda; (b) highly critical of the Sri
          Lankan authorities and (c) a public platform  for  the  professed
          support of the LTTE  through  the  display  of  its  insignia  at
          events.

     387. For the reasons set out above, we conclude that GoSL regards  the
          TGTE with a significant degree of  hostility.  It  is  reasonably
          likely that GoSL perceives that organisation as a "front" for the
          LTTE, although this categorisation is  in  our  judgement  simply
          reflective of  the  level  of  adverse  interest  rather  than  a
          criterion for the existence of such interest in the first place.




      Tamil Solidarity

     388. We have found that TS pursues aims which are both separatist  and
          highly critical of the  human  rights  record  of  GoSL  and  its
          predecessors. It is, like the TGTE, a non-violent organisation.

     389. On the evidence before us, TS does not appear to  have  the  same
          relatively high profile as the TGTE. Nonetheless,  we  have  been
          provided  with  credible  evidence  from   Mr   Uthayasenan   (as
          summarised previously) that its activities are known to  the  Sri
          Lankan authorities and  have  been  taken  seriously  enough  for
          consequences to flow, including harassment within  Sri  Lanka  in
          respect of attempted activities there.  By  way  of  example,  an
          attempt by TS to open an  office  in  Kilinochchi  was  met  with
          visits  by  the  CID  and  threats  of  detention  if  activities
          persisted.  This  led  to  an  abandonment  of  the  project.  Mr
          Uthayasenan's evidence also satisfies  us  that  TS  occasionally
          cooperates with the  TGTE  in  respect  of  the  organisation  of
          events. Photographs of a demonstration organised by TS  and  held
          in October 2019 clearly show attendees holding  LTTE  flags.  The
          same is true of another demonstration held a month later.

     390. It is inconceivable that GoSL will be unaware of the interaction,
          albeit on a limited basis, between TS and the TGTE and in respect
          of the display of the LTTE emblem at events organised by TS.

     391. TS is  not,  and  has  never  been,  a  proscribed  organisation.
          However, as discussed previously, this fact does not preclude the
          existence of an adverse interest on the part of GoSL. Unlike  the
          TGTE, we conclude that GoSL does not regard TS as a  "front"  for
          the LTTE, insofar as that term would  indicate  the  belief  that
          there was a direct link between the former and the latter.  Aside
          from the fact that it has  never  been  listed  as  a  proscribed
          group, it has no direct historical ties to the LTTE and does  not
          appear in any of  the  evidence  emanating  from  politicians  or
          military sources. Nonetheless, it is clear to us  that  there  is
          likely to be hostility towards TS in light  of  its  agenda,  its
          associations with the TGTE, and the display of LTTE paraphernalia
          by attendees (whether TS members and/or  supporters  or  not)  at
          public events it has organised.




      Other diaspora organisations

     392. We have no direct evidence from any other diaspora  organisations
          and are left with the opinions of the three experts together with
          the contents of their source materials. We  have  endeavoured  to
          reach conclusions in respect of a number of organisations,  being
          conscious of the limits of any inferences that can reasonably  be
          drawn from the indirect evidence before us.

     393. It is reasonably likely that GoSL will have a significant adverse
          interest in the remaining fourteen proscribed groups appearing on
          the current list maintained under the  2012  UN  Regulations.  As
          discussed previously, their inclusion  is  a  reflection  of  the
          authorities' view over the course of  time  that  the  groups  in
          question  are  involved  in  terrorist  activities   and/or   the
          financing thereof. As with the TGTE, a number of these proscribed
          groups were specifically mentioned by President Gotabaya  in  his
          capacity as the then Defence Secretary in the PRISM article  from
          2014,  including  the  Tamil  Coordinating  Committee   and   the
          Headquarters  Group.  The  latter,  based  in  France,  has  been
          described, along with the TGTE, as one of the "factions"  of  the
          LTTE, with perceived links to active participation in efforts  to
          reorganise the LTTE and carry out attacks within  Sri  Lanka.  It
          is, in our  view,  reasonably  likely  that  GoSL  regards  these
          particular named groups as being "fronts" for the LTTE,  although
          we re-emphasise that this categorisation  is  descriptive  rather
          than representative of a threshold criterion.

     394. We turn to two specific  United  Kingdom-based  organisations  to
          which reference has been made. The first of  these  is  the  GTF.
          Professor Gunaratna describes this group as one of the "factions"
          of the LTTE and that it is the "premier LTTE international  front
          with headquarters in the UK". Dr Nadarajah cites the 2012  speech
          made by now President Gotabaya, in which he regarded the  GTF  as
          being an "LTTE front". As matters now stand, the GTF has been re-
          proscribed. Thus, the  act  of  de-proscription  in  2015  as  an
          indicator of decreased adverse interest has been superseded.  The
          re-proscription would also appear to have signalled  a  cessation
          of whatever cooperation between the GTF and the authorities begun
          in 2015, as described by Professor Gunaratna.

     395. In light of the evidence as a whole, we see no sound  reason  for
          drawing a material distinction between  the  GTF  and  the  other
          proscribed organisations previously named by  President  Gotabaya
          as being "fronts" for the LTTE. It is reasonably likely that GoSL
          now regards the GTF with a significant degree of hostility.

     396. It is fair to say that the evidence on the BTF is mixed.  It  too
          is  an  organisation  that  was  de-proscribed  in  2015,  having
          previously been cited by political and military figures as  being
          linked to  the  LTTE.  Dr  Nadarajah's  view  was  that  the  BTF
          continues to be perceived as an LTTE "front". Yet it too was  re-
          proscribed in  February  2021.  In  oral  evidence  Dr  Nadarajah
          appeared to suggest that it did not pursue a  separatist  agenda,
          but instead seeks self-determination for Tamils in Sri Lanka; the
          implication being that there was little  difference  between  the
          two, at least in the minds of GoSL. Professor Gunaratna's written
          evidence was that the organisation is the "premier LTTE front  in
          the UK", although  in  oral  evidence  he  seemed  to  implicitly
          qualify the currency of this status by reference to the fact that
          the limited company was wound up in July 2020 as a  result  of  a
          petition under the Insolvency Act 1986. He told us that the group
          advocates for a separate  Tamil  state  and  that  it  wanted  to
          "revive the LTTE". Dr Smith's view was that the BTF supports self-
          determination with an implicit strategy of working with  the  Sri
          Lankan government to achieve this end. The evidential picture  is
          therefore somewhat contradictory. We have not  been  assisted  by
          the absence of any direct evidence from the BTF itself.

     397. We have considered the organisation's website  (accessed  through
          the link in paragraph 7.1.2 of the  CPIN).  In  the  "Vision  and
          Mission" section, the attainment of self-determination is stated,
          with the goal being "self-rule in their [the Tamil  population's]
          Homeland" on the island of Sri Lanka through  non-violent  means.
          Reference is made to the need to establish the truth for  victims
          of the civil war and the "Events" page  refers  to  commemorative
          occurrences such as Black  July  and  protests  against  what  is
          described as the "genocide" of Tamils.

     398. Ultimately, we  conclude  that  the  BTF  remains  a  functioning
          organisation which is critical of GoSL and its  predecessors  and
          advocates for self-determination for the Tamil community with its
          own "Homeland". Whilst there is no express statement  in  respect
          of  Tamil  Eelam,  the  reference  to  a  "Homeland"  is  apt  to
          antagonise the authorities and is reasonably likely to lead it to
          perceive the organisation as being  sympathetic to  a  separatist
          ideology. This is consistent with the act of re-proscription.  We
          do not, however, find that GoSL actually regards the  BTF  as  an
          LTTE "front", or an organisation attracting the very high  levels
          of hostility suggested by Professor Gunaratna. It  has  not,  for
          example, been specifically named in the rhetoric  emanating  from
          prominent political or military figures. It  is  nonetheless  one
          which is reasonably likely to now be viewed  with  a  significant
          degree of hostility.

     399. Under the umbrella of the BTF, three groups aligned to the  major
          political  parties  in  the  United  Kingdom  campaign  for   the
          interests of the Tamil community. The BTC, the TFL, and the  TFLD
          are said by Dr Nadarajah to be perceived by GoSL as  "key  actors
          in the LTTE's post-war agenda and strategy". We are bound to  say
          this overstates the reality.  Dr  Smith  and  Dr  Nadarajah  were
          themselves of the view that these organisations do not hold to  a
          separatist agenda and the BTC was specifically described  by  the
          former as "not considered threatening" and having taken no  stand
          on the question of Tamil Eelam. We have  been  provided  with  no
          evidence to suggest that these  three  groups  in  fact  advocate
          Tamil Eelam, or that they have instigated campaigns or  organised
          protests of the nature seen in respect of, for example, the  TGTE
          or TS. Given the  groups'  alignment  with  mainstream  political
          parties, this is perhaps unsurprising. Finally, we note  that  Dr
          Nadarajah's view as to the perception of GoSL is based on sources
          dating back to 2011, including a chart  from  a  military  report
          describing the BTC and TFL as "front organisations" for the LTTE.
          In addition to its age, there is no source  material  to  suggest
          that this very stark (and manifestly erroneous) perception on the
          part of GoSL pertains now. In all the circumstances, we  are  not
          prepared to draw the inference that it does.

     400. Whilst taking full account of GoSL's dislike of criticism of  any
          kind, we apply at least a degree of  rational  behaviour  to  the
          regime: it is simply not reasonably likely that  groups  such  as
          the BTC,TFL, and TFLD will be  placed  in  the  same  bracket  of
          resolute adverse interest as those avowedly seeking  Tamil  Eelam
          and engaging in public anti-government demonstrations.

     401. This is not to say that GoSL is  unaware  of  the  activities  of
          these organisations. They are likely to be  on  the  authorities'
          radar  and  monitoring  is  likely  to  occur.  As   with   other
          organisations discussed previously, there  are  degrees  of  such
          interest  and  ultimately  all  will  depend  upon   an   overall
          assessment of the facts of  any  given  case  in  so  far  as  an
          individual's protection claim  is  concerned.  In  general  terms
          though, links to the BTC, TFL, and TFLD will not attract the same
          significance as  those  with  organisations  towards  which  GoSL
          directs material hostility.

     402. In respect of the  ICPPG,  we  conclude  that  it  falls  into  a
          different category than the organisations discussed above. It  is
          a  non-governmental  entity  and  its  primary  objective  is  to
          "collect evidence  against  perpetrators  of  genocide  and  work
          towards justice, peace and  reconciliation.".  In  our  judgment,
          those who have worked for this organisation or those who have  in
          fact provided evidence to UN OISL may, depending on the facts  of
          the  case,  fall  within  one  or  other  of  the  existing  risk
          categories set out at paragraph 356(7)(b) and (c)  of  GJ.  Given
          that the validity of these two categories is not an issue, it  is
          unnecessary  for  us  to  say  anything  more  about  the  ICPPG,
          particularly as we have not been presented with detailed evidence
          or submissions on what might have potentially constituted  a  new
          risk category (see MP and NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829,  at  paragraphs
          36 and 37, and KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ  59,  at  paragraph
          41). We can, however,  state  the  following  conclusion.  If  an
          individual can show that they have provided a  statement  to  the
          ICPPG and that this organisation has submitted  it  to  UN  OISL,
          this will constitute a matter in respect of which GoSL is  likely
          to take an adverse view if known about. Whether  it  will  obtain
          such knowledge will depend on the facts of the case.




      Monitoring and information gathering in the United Kingdom

     403. The key findings in GJ on the issue of monitoring and information
          gathering by the Sri Lankan authorities in the United Kingdom are
          to be found in paragraphs 324 and 336:

                 "324. President Rajapaksa has stated, and the press reports
                 and experts confirm, that the government has  sophisticated
                 intelligence concerning who is contacting the  diaspora  or
                 seeking to revive the  quest  for  a  Tamil  homeland.  The
                 government's intelligence includes monitoring of activities
                 online, on mobile phones, and in the diaspora in  the  four
                 hotspots: London, Paris, Oslo and Toronto. It has informers
                 throughout the Northern and Eastern Provinces, and  in  the
                 diaspora.   It   intercepts   electronic   and    telephone
                 communications and closes down  websites.  Photographs  are
                 taken of demonstrations and  the  GOSL  sponsors  an  image
                 recognition project at Colombo University.

                 ...

                 336. The former Tamil areas and the  diaspora  are  heavily
                 penetrated by the security forces. Photographs are taken of
                 public demonstrations  and  the  GOSL  may  be  using  face
                 recognition technology: it is sponsoring a face recognition
                 technology project at the University of  Colombo.  However,
                 the question which concerns the GOSL is the  identification
                 of Tamil activists working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to
                 destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state.  We  do  not
                 consider that attendance at demonstrations in the  diaspora
                 alone is sufficient to create a real risk or  a  reasonable
                 degree of likelihood that a  person  will  attract  adverse
                 attention on return to Sri Lanka."

     404. The parties' agreed position is that  there  is  no  evidence  to
          indicate that  this  level  of  infiltration,  surveillance,  and
          monitoring has ceased.

     405. In our judgment, this position is justified.  All  three  experts
          have  stated  that  GoSL  continues  to  operate   an   extensive
          intelligence-gathering regime which attempts to cover "all  forms
          of communication" and utilises information acquired  through  the
          infiltration of diaspora  organisations,  the  photographing  and
          videoing of demonstrations, and the monitoring  of  the  Internet
          and unencrypted social media. We find that at the  initial  stage
          of monitoring and information gathering, it is reasonably  likely
          that the Sri Lankan authorities will wish to gather  more  rather
          than less information on  organisations  in  which  there  is  an
          adverse interest  and  individuals  connected  thereto.  That  is
          congruent with what we have said about  GoSL's  attitude  towards
          the diaspora in general and in particular the  sub-set  of  those
          organisations and/or individuals involved in perceived separatist
          activities. It is also supported by the evidence we have  on  the
          job description of the former Sri Lankan Defence Attach  in  the
          United Kingdom, Brigadier Fernando, from May 2017, in respect  of
          which there is no sound reason to believe that anything  material
          has changed. In summary, this role involved:

                    i. monitoring anti-government activities in  the  United
                       Kingdom and reporting back to relevant Ministries and
                       agencies in Sri Lanka;

                   ii. monitoring "any LTTE activities"  in  United  Kingdom
                       and putting in place plans to counter these;

                  iii.  notifying  the  High  Commissioner  of   any   anti-
                       government protests and  implementing  strategies  to
                       counter them.

     406.  We  accept  that  the  dissemination  of   information   through
          technological means has increased since  GJ,  a  fact  which  all
          three experts stated  has  been  met  with  increased  monitoring
          efforts by the authorities. In the context of the evidence  as  a
          whole, we also accept that there is greater capacity in place  so
          that relevant information gathering has, so far as possible, kept
          pace with developments in communication technology.

     407. The evidence before us is insufficient to  show  that  GoSL  will
          have access to any databases  held  by  organisations  comprising
          specific details of their  members  and/or  supporters.  However,
          given the variety of methods that are available, this will not of
          itself prevent the authorities from being able to obtain relevant
          information on individuals.

     408. We received evidence that the Sri Lankan authorities have  sought
          technological assistance from China in order to break the end-to-
          end encryption used by WhatsApp, but none to indicate  that  this
          capability has in fact been achieved. The  same  applies  to  the
          suggestion that an Italian-based company had been approached  for
          the purchase of "digital surveillance technologies". We  are  not
          prepared to accept that these capabilities currently exist.

     409. Dr Nadarajah has addressed new  technological  territory,  namely
          social network analysis (mapping) and its sub-set,  social  media
          analysis (mapping). As we understand it, information obtained  by
          the former process can be fed into the latter in order to  create
          a fuller picture  of  an  individual's  beliefs,  contacts,  and,
          importantly,   the   likelihood   of   future   conduct.   Whilst
          acknowledging that an information processing matrix such as  that
          described is likely to be automated (in the sense that algorithms
          are applied to the raw data obtained),  the  evidence  before  us
          does not show that this is yet in place and being used by GoSL on
          a systematic basis. The main source  material  relied  on  by  Dr
          Nadarajah is an academic article from  2010  and  we  would  have
          expected a firmer and more current evidential basis upon which to
          conclude that such comprehensive,  interlinked  surveillance  and
          analysis  was  now  an  established  aspect  of  GoSL's  security
          apparatus.

     410. Having said that, we do accept that  information  obtained  as  a
          result of monitoring  the  Internet  and  social  media  will  be
          relevant  to  the  authorities'  perception  of  an  individual's
          profile, including any links  established  with  other  known  or
          suspected activists within the diaspora.

     411. The final matter is that of interviews conducted by the  SLHC  in
          London with proposed returnees who require a TTD. Paragraphs 307,
          308, and 352 of GJ clearly set out the position at that time:

                 "307. Sri Lankans returning without a Sri  Lankan  passport
                 will require an Emergency Travel Document  for  which  they
                 need to apply at the SLHC in London. Full disclosure of all
                 relevant identity information is given in  the  process  of
                 obtaining  a  TTD.  An  applicant   completes   a   lengthy
                 disclosure form and is then interviewed at the  Sri  Lankan
                 High Commission in London; the information received is sent
                 to the Ministry of External Affairs and the  Department  of
                 Immigration and Emigration in Colombo.  Files  are  created
                 and records verified; if the authorities agree to  issue  a
                 TTD, the MEA in Colombo emails  the  document  to  the  Sri
                 Lankan High Commission in London where the TTD is  stamped,
                 a photograph added, and issued to the applicant.

                 ...

                 308.  During the re-documentation  process  in  the  United
                 Kingdom, or at the airport on return, a forced returnee can
                 expect to be asked about his  own  and  his  family's  LTTE
                 corrections and sympathies.

                 ...

                 352. The evidence before us indicates that  any  Tamil  who
                 seeks a travel document from the SLHC in London or  another
                 diaspora hotspot will have a file created  in  Colombo  and
                 will be interviewed in London before a decision is made  to
                 issue a TTD. By the time the DIE in Colombo emails a TTD to
                 London to be issued to such an individual, the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities will know all they  need  to  know  about  what
                 activities an individual has undertaken outside  Sri  Lanka
                 and, in particular, whether the returnee poses a real  risk
                 to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the GOSL on return."

     412. The parties are agreed that this process  continues  and  on  the
          evidence before us, we conclude  that  this  is  so.  As  to  the
          content of these interviews, Professor Gunaratna's oral  evidence
          gave rise to potential uncertainty when  he  suggested  that  the
          extent to  which  an  interviewee  might  be  asked  about  their
          political opinions and any sur place activities would  depend  on
          the particular interviewing officer. To a  limited  extent,  that
          might be the case, but to conclude that these interviews  do  not
          routinely cover such matters would be contrary to all we know  of
          GoSL, its predecessors, and  indeed  to  common  sense.  Like  Dr
          Smith, we would be very surprised if  questions  surrounding  sur
          place activities were not standard practice, and this is the case
          whether the  interviewing  officer  already  had  before  him/her
          evidence of such activities, or if  nothing  was  at  that  stage
          known. An interview is a prime opportunity to ask a member of the
          diaspora about their views and activities prior to  a  return  to
          Sri Lanka. It is unlikely in the  extreme  that  the  authorities
          would pass up this chance to ask  specific  questions.  The  only
          observation we  would  make  in  respect  of  what  was  said  at
          paragraph 308 of GJ is that questions may  be  primarily  focused
          not on the LTTE itself, but on diaspora  organisations  known  or
          perceived to expose a separatist agenda.

     413. In response to any  questions  put  in  interview,  there  is  no
          suggestion that the interviewee can be expected  to  do  anything
          other than tell the truth and we emphasise that this must be  the
          premise upon which fact-finding tribunals proceed.

     414. In summary, we conclude that prior to the return of an individual
          travelling on a TTD, GoSL is reasonably likely to  have  obtained
          information on the following matters:

                    i. whether the individual is associated in any way  with
                       a particular diaspora organisation;

                   ii.  whether   they   have   attended   meetings   and/or
                       demonstrations and if so, at least approximately  how
                       frequently this may have occurred;

                  iii. the nature of involvement in these events,  such  as,
                       for example, whether they played a prominent part  or
                       have been holding flags  or  banners  displaying  the
                       LTTE emblem;

                   iv. any organisational and/or promotional  roles  (formal
                       or otherwise) undertaken  on  behalf  of  a  diaspora
                       organisation;

                    v. attendance at commemorative  events  such  as  Heroes
                       Day;

                   vi. meaningful fundraising on behalf of or the  provision
                       of such funding to an organisation;

                  vii. authorship of, or appearance  in,  articles,  whether
                       published in print or online;

                 viii. any presence on social media;

                   ix. any political lobbying on behalf of an organisation;

                    x. the signing of petitions  perceived  as  being  anti-
                       government.

     415. In respect of those Sri Lankan nationals who have failed in their
          protection claims but possess a valid passport, the  position  is
          somewhat different. The interview process  at  the  SLHC  relates
          only to applications  for  a  TTD.  We  have  not  seen  evidence
          indicating that those who do not require a  TTD  are  nonetheless
          interviewed in the United Kingdom. We find that they are not. The
          effect of this is that a means  by  which  potentially  important
          information might be obtained from an  individual  is  precluded:
          there will be no opportunity to put direct questions on  a  range
          of matters.

     416. The absence of an interview at  SLHC does not, however,  discount
          the ability of GoSL to obtain information on the matters set  out
          in paragraph 414  in  respect  of  an  individual  with  a  valid
          passport  using  the  other  methods  employed  as  part  of  its
          intelligence-gathering regime, as described in paragraph 405.

     417. When considering the case of an individual  in  possession  of  a
          valid passport, a judge must assess the range of  matters  listed
          above and the extent of  the  authorities'  knowledge  reasonably
          likely to exist in the context of a more restricted  information-
          gathering apparatus. This may have a bearing on, for example, the
          question of whether it is reasonably likely  that  attendance  at
          one or two demonstrations or minimal fundraising activities  will
          have come to the attention of the authorities at all.

     418. Whichever form of documentation is in place, it will be  for  the
          judge  in  any  given  case  to  determine  what  activities  the
          individual has actually undertaken and  make  clear  findings  on
          what the authorities are reasonably likely to have  become  aware
          of prior to return.




      Information processing and storage

     419. What happens to the  information  obtained  through  the  methods
          described in the previous section?

     420. The starting point for the processing of information gathered  in
          the United Kingdom is, we conclude, the Defence  Attach  at  the
          SLHC, an aspect of whose job it is to monitor diaspora activities
          and report back to Colombo. We accept Dr  Smith's  evidence  that
          the Attach is not simply a "postbox" and that he applies a basic
          filtration to the information before its next  processing  stage.
          As with certain other aspects of the evidence before  us,  it  is
          unsurprising that we  have  not  been  provided  with  definitive
          criteria by which this filtration is undertaken. It is logical to
          infer that the factors relevant to GoSL's perception of what  sur
          place activities are deemed to be separatist in nature will be in
          play. We would, however, apply  a  degree  of  caution  here.  As
          discussed below, once passed back to Colombo, the information  is
          further considered by relevant agencies  who  will  then  address
          their collective mind to it. It is at this later stage, when  the
          assessment of the agencies has been  undertaken,  that  the  more
          rounded and, for our purposes, material picture of the individual
          will have been inserted into  what  Dr  Smith  describes  as  the
          "institutional memory" of the authorities. With this in mind,  it
          is reasonably likely that the Defence Attach's  filtration  will
          not be rigorous, the reason being that agencies in Sri Lanka  are
          likely to be better equipped to provide a more informed analysis.
          What this initial sift does in our  view  achieve  though  is  to
          place a proposed returnee in one of two categories which  may  be
          fairly  crudely  described  as  "something  relevant  known"   or
          "nothing relevant known". Those  in  the  second  category  might
          include an individual who, for example, has only attended one  or
          two  demonstrations  or  meetings,  without  more.  It  may   be,
          depending on specific findings of  fact,  that  these  activities
          have never become known to the authorities. Alternatively, it may
          be the case that, whilst known of, such activities are deemed  so
          minimal as to be unworthy of reporting back.

     421. Drawing together the different threads of evidence on this  issue
          (as summarised earlier in our decision), we  conclude  that  once
          collected, the information is passed by the  Defence  Attach  to
          the collective defence and security apparatus of the  Sri  Lankan
          state. Specific recipients will include the army,  the  SIS,  the
          TID, the CID, and the Ministries of Defence, Internal Affairs and
          External Affairs.  The  conduit  for  the  dissemination  of  the
          information to these various bodies would appear to be the office
          of the Chief of National Intelligence.

     422. Dr Smith's evidence is that a report is  then  presented  to  the
          President and the Minister of Defence. Whilst we accept that this
          is the case, it is highly unlikely that they would be made  aware
          of the entire body of  information  passed  on  from  the  United
          Kingdom. We draw the reasonable  inference  that  they  would  be
          provided  with  summaries  and  any  specific  security   matters
          requiring their personal involvement.

     423. The passing of information through  the  institutional  hands  of
          various agencies strongly suggests that further filtration  takes
          place. This is the effect of  Dr  Smith's  evidence,  wherein  he
          describes, in our view reliably, a two-stage process: first,  the
          recipients of the information make an assessment as to whether it
          warrants being recorded on the operative storage system;  second,
          a decision  is  made  as  to  whether,  if  the  first  stage  is
          satisfied, the individual concerned should be placed  on  a  stop
          list or a watch list. We infer  that  these  two  stages  do  not
          require a collective decision-making process, and that  a  single
          agency can make the necessary judgment.

     424. The upshot of  this  is  that  the  information  entered  on  the
          individual's record will be  based  in  part  on  purely  factual
          information relating to sur  place  activities  (i.e.  the  what,
          when, and on whose behalf) and in part on  GoSL's  perception  of
          what this amounts to in the context of its objectives.

     425. We turn to the method of storing information. GJ does not address
          in any detail the issue of databases held by the authorities: its
          focus was on the existence of specific stop lists and watch lists
          at BIA. In these appeals, both parties  agree  that  intelligence
          acquired on individuals in the  United  Kingdom  prior  to  their
          return to Sri Lanka is stored on  "an  electronic  database."  Dr
          Smith's view is that  there  is  a  single,  "generic"  database,
          whilst Dr Nadarajah and  Professor  Gunaratna  have  referred  to
          there being multiple-interlinked databases.  In  the  absence  of
          unanimity amongst the various evidential sources, we have stepped
          back and taken a holistic view of the position in light of all we
          know of the Sri Lankan  authorities,  including  its  history  of
          record-keeping; the desire  to  keep  a  very  careful  watch  on
          diaspora  activities;  the  use  of   sophisticated   information
          gathering methods; and modern technology capabilities.

     426. It is reasonably likely that  there  is  a  single  comprehensive
          electronic database on which is  stored  all  information  passed
          back  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  any   other   pre-existing
          information gathered within Sri Lanka relating to,  for  example,
          previous links (known or suspected)  to  the  LTTE  (personal  or
          familial) and detentions.  It  is  reasonably  likely  that  this
          database is accessible by any of the agencies referred to  above,
          and that such access is possible by officials at the  SLHC,  BIA,
          and anywhere else within Sri Lanka.

     427. It is possible that other more  narrowly  defined  databases  are
          held by particular authorities within Sri Lanka, but  these  need
          not concern us.

     428. In the absence of  any  evidence  as  to  the  cessation  of  the
          practice of maintaining stop lists and watch lists,  we  reaffirm
          their continued usage. Whilst we were initially inclined to  view
          these as  simply  shorthand  descriptions  for  "flags"  recorded
          against  the  names  of  individuals  contained  in  the  general
          electronic database, the concept  of  separate  electronic  lists
          derived from that database is plausible.

     429. In oral evidence, Dr Smith suggested that an individual may be on
          the stop list even if there was no  extant  arrest  warrant.  His
          response to the assertion that he had not said  this  in  GJ  was
          that he would have done so. Appendix J to the Tribunal's decision
          provided only a  summary  of  Dr  Smith's  evidence,  but  it  is
          relatively detailed. It is clearly stated that he associated  the
          stop list with those subject  to  an  arrest  warrant.  There  is
          nothing in the summary about any other categories of persons  who
          would appear on a  stop  list.  In  his  main  report  for  these
          proceedings Dr Smith confirmed the existence of the stop list and
          the  watch  list,  but  in  respect  of  the  former   does   not
          specifically state that it would only include those subject to an
          extant warrant or court order: the list operates to "ensure  that
          those in which the authorities have an existing adverse  interest
          are detained upon arrival." There is a lack of clarity as to  who
          will be included on the stop list. It is  unfortunate  that  this
          lack of clarity emanates from the expert  who  first  raised  the
          existence of the lists. None  of  the  other  experts  support  a
          contention that the  stop  list  contains  a  wider  category  of
          individuals. In respect of country information, the  DFAT  report
          indicates that the stop list relates only to those  against  whom
          there is an extant arrest  warrant,  court  order,  or  order  to
          impound their Sri Lankan passport.

     430. Despite Dr Smith's assertion to the contrary,  we  are  satisfied
          that there was no evidence to this effect before the Tribunal  in
          GJ and the preponderance of the evidence before us  leads  us  to
          conclude that the  stop  list  should  continue  to  be  narrowly
          defined: it consists of only  those  against  whom  there  is  an
          extant arrest warrant and/or a court order.

     431.  The watch list comprises the residual category  of  persons  who
          are not on the stop list, but who are nonetheless deemed to be of
          adverse interest, to a greater or lesser degree, as a  result  of
          information gathered on them and the filtration process  we  have
          described previously. It is therefore not  the  case  that  every
          individual who is placed on the wider  electronic  database  will
          also be included on the watch list.

     432. Finally, we address Dr Smith's contention that once  created,  an
          entry on the general database is  held  permanently  and  is  not
          subjected to weeding or editing. For  a  state  inclined  to  the
          gathering and  storage  of  information  on  a  category  of  its
          citizens, there is nothing implausible in  the  idea  of  keeping
          such data on a permanent basis. The technological capability  for
          doing so plainly exists. The long-term preservation of  data  is,
          we find,  highly  likely  to  be  perceived  as  useful.  Indeed,
          deleting entire records would,  simply  as  a  matter  of  common
          sense, be counter-productive. For example, an individual  may  be
          politically active at one point, then apparently do  nothing  for
          some time, only to restart their involvement at  a  later  stage.
          Deleting the original entry would deprive the  authorities  of  a
          potentially useful source of  information.  It  follows  that  an
          entry can be added to where appropriate.




      The assessment of an individual's profile

     433. We turn to what is perhaps the most important question before us,
          at least in respect of the scope of the country  guidance  to  be
          given: what is the threshold against  which  GoSL  is  reasonably
          likely to determine whether or not to detain a returnee by virtue
          of their actual or perceived sur place activities?

     434. Paragraph  356(7)(a)  of  GJ  describes  the  first  category  of
          returnees at risk of detention and persecution:

                 "(a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat
                 to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a  single  state  because
                 they are, or are perceived to have a  significant  role  in
                 relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                 diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."

     435. As far as we can discern, the phrase "significant role"  did  not
          emanate from a specific evidential source,  but  was  rather  the
          view arrived at following consideration of  the  body  of  expert
          opinion. In this regard we refer to  the  Tribunal's  conclusions
          set out prior to its use of that  phrase.  Paragraphs  268,  272,
          326, and 351 state, in so far as relevant:

                 "268. We consider that Dr Smith's factor (c) [attendance at
                 anti-government demonstrations in the United  Kingdom]  has
                 relevance, in circumstances where the GOSL  has  reason  to
                 consider that  a  person  has  significant  involvement  in
                 diaspora activities which may unsettle the situation in Sri
                 Lanka and lead either to the resurgence of the  LTTE  or  a
                 similar  militia,  or  to  the  revival  of  the   internal
                 conflict.

                 ...

                 272...We do not consider, therefore, that  this  risk  [the
                 lack of a national identity card] is distinct from the  new
                 risk of being perceived as a person seeking to  destabilise
                 the GOSL by actively working for resurgence  of  the  Tamil
                 conflict.

                 ...

                 326. Many of the witnesses  stated  that  despite  official
                 pronouncements  that  all  returning  asylum  seekers  were
                 traitors, the  GOSL  was  aware  that  many  of  them  were
                 economic migrants. Such returnees would be  interviewed  at
                 the airport and unless it was  established  that  they  had
                 significant diaspora activities, were likely to be  allowed
                 to continue to their home areas.

                 ...

                 336. ... However, the question which concerns the  GOSL  is
                 the identification of Tamil  activists  working  for  Tamil
                 separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state.
                 We do not consider that attendance at demonstrations in the
                 diaspora alone is sufficient to create a  real  risk  or  a
                 reasonable degree of likelihood that a person will  attract
                 adverse attention on return to Sri Lanka.

                 ...

                 351. Our overall conclusion regarding  diaspora  activities
                 is that the GOSL has sophisticated intelligence enabling it
                 to distinguish those who are actively involved  in  seeking
                 to revive and re-fund the separatist  movement  within  the
                 diaspora, with a view  to  destabilising  the  unitary  Sri
                 Lankan  state.  Attendance  at   one,   or   even   several
                 demonstrations in the diaspora is not  of  itself  evidence
                 that a person is a  committed  Tamil  activist  seeking  to
                 promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka. That will  be  a
                 question of fact in each case, dependent  on  any  diaspora
                 activities carried out by such an individual."

     436. Paragraph 356(3) of the country guidance itself concludes that it
          was the then government's objective "to identify Tamil  activists
          in the diaspora who are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to
          destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state..."

     437. The respondent urges us to re-affirm the utility of, but  not  to
          depart from, or apply any gloss to, the term "significant  role",
          contending that:

                 "[t]he key question is always whether the  activity  is  or
                 might be perceived as indicative of a significant  role  in
                 Tamil separatism.  Beyond that, there is little utility  in
                 the  [Upper  Tribunal]  seeking  to  enumerate   types   of
                 activities."

     438. The appellants have submitted  that  if  the  "significant  role"
          threshold is to be retained, it should be clarified or amended so
          as to include, in the perception of GoSL,  "anyone  participating
          in activities...at anything more than the most trivial level"  (a
          threshold  we  have  previously  noted   when   summarising   the
          submissions). It is said that the appropriate threshold  will  in
          practice be readily  met:  "any"  individual  involved  in  "any"
          diaspora activities of a more than a trivial nature on behalf  of
          "any" separatist diaspora organisations will be at risk.

     439. Having regard to what was said in GJ and the evidence before  us,
          we conclude that the question of whether an individual has, or is
          perceived to have,  undertaken  a  "significant  role"  in  Tamil
          separatism remains the appropriate touchstone for the  assessment
          of risk in cases concerning sur place activities. In our judgment
          it continues to accurately reflect, on the one hand, a degree  of
          discernment on the part of  GoSL  as  to  whom  it  perceives  as
          constituting a threat to the integrity of the Sri Lankan state by
          reason  of  their  committed  activism  in  furtherance  of   the
          establishment of Tamil Eelam, whilst on the  other  allowing  for
          fact-sensitive  assessments  in   order   to   ensure   effective
          protection under the Refugee Convention.

     440. In so concluding, we  reject  the  respondent's  contention  that
          nothing more need  be  said  about  the  content  of  the  phrase
          "significant role." To our mind,  acceding  to  the  respondent's
          request would create the danger of leaving begging  the  question
          likely to be in the  minds  of  decision-makers:  when  will  the
          activities being evaluated amount to  a  "significant  role"?  To
          answer this by  opining  that  the  activities  will  disclose  a
          "significant role" if they are considered  "significant"  creates
          an obvious circularity, runs the risk of failing to do justice to
          the  evidence  before  us,  and  avoids  the  responsibility   of
          providing practical guidance.

     441.  What  we  say  in  due  course  about  "significant   role"   is
          clarificatory in nature: we are not departing from  the  core  of
          the guidance provided by GJ, but instead simply illuminating  the
          phrase in the context of the current evidence on Sri Lanka.

     442. If, contrary to our primary view,  the  approach  amounts  to  an
          amendment to the existing guidance, it is nonetheless  justified,
          bearing in mind the  evidential  requirements  and  the  need  to
          exercise caution elucidated in EM.

     443. We take full account of the fact that, whilst a number  of  years
          have passed since GJ was promulgated, many of those in  positions
          of political significance then hold office now.  Furthermore,  GJ
          was decided less than four years after the end of the civil  war.
          These factors would tend to indicate that the  situation  now  is
          unlikely to be worse than in 2013.

     444. There are, however,  countervailing  factors,  derived  from  the
          evidence of the three experts and other sources post-dating GJ.

     445. First, we have found that there have been a number  of  plots  to
          carry out what have at least been perceived by the authorities to
          be LTTE-inspired attacks in Sri Lanka, all of which  have  either
          been thwarted by the security forces or failed for other reasons.
          The last of these was in July 2020. The bomb  attacks  on  Easter
          Sunday in 2019 were of course perpetrated by  Islamic  terrorists
          and had nothing to  do  with  Tamil  separatism.  However,  their
          occurrence and the apparent failures  of  intelligence  gathering
          have clearly fed into a narrative  of  national  concerns.  As  a
          whole, these matters are  indicative  of  a  current,  heightened
          state of security alertness.

     446. Second, the deep-rooted hostility towards  Tamil  separatism  and
          its perceived links to the LTTE and/or a resurgence  of  violence
          has been expressed on numerous occasions over  the  past  six  or
          seven years through pronouncements made  by  leading  politicians
          (including  the  current  President)  and  senior  military   and
          security services personnel. We have  found  that  this  has  not
          simply been a trail of empty rhetoric, but represents,  at  least
          to a material extent, a genuine  agenda  on  the  part  of  GoSL.
          Combined with the recent  consolidation  of  power  by  President
          Gotabaya,  the  criticism  of  the  previous  government's   more
          conciliatory approach and the disengagement in February 2020 from
          international scrutiny of issues connected (at least in the  eyes
          of GoSL) to the fight against an existential threat, this  agenda
          is, in our judgment, entrenched.

     447. Third, the advent of the 2012 UN Regulations and the proscription
          in 2014 of a number of organisations and the  re-proscription  in
          February 2021, has formalised  and  reinforced  the  authorities'
          adverse view of particular aspects of diaspora activities.

     448. Fourth, GJ did  not  provide  a  detailed  analysis  of  relevant
          organisations in the context of  proscription  because  none  had
          then been proscribed.  Our  assessment  of  this  issue  and  the
          accompanying evidence is a material addition to the risk analysis
          which must now be conducted.

     449. Fifth, whilst we may not ultimately agree  with  everything  they
          have said as to where the risk line should be drawn, none of  the
          experts have endorsed the "significant role"  criterion:  indeed,
          all three have  either  expressly  disagreed  with  or  at  least
          questioned the validity of the proposition that this threshold is
          applied by the Sri Lankan authorities, although the consensus  is
          that risk "depends" on a variety of factors.

     450. The countervailing considerations set out above show  that  there
          is a sufficiently well-established and durable  evidential  basis
          on which to look again at the phrase "significant role" and amend
          what is meant by it.

     451. We now proceed  with  our  analysis  of  the  "significant  role"
          threshold, whether that is by way of clarification  of  what  was
          said in GJ, or substantive amendment thereto.

     452.  The  English  Oxford  Dictionary  (3rd  Edition),  contains  the
          following two definitions for the word "significant":

                 "Sufficiently great or important to be worthy of attention;
                 noteworthy; consequential, influential.

                 In weakened sense: noticeable,  substantial,  considerable,
                 large."

     453. The entry for "role" provides the following:

                 "...status assigned to or assumed by a person."

     454. It is apparent from these definitions that the words are amenable
          to a range of interpretations. In  the  context  of  GJ  and  our
          deliberations, it is in effect used to describe the outcome of an
          evaluative assessment based on factual matters. This is very much
          within the province of the security apparatus of the  Sri  Lankan
          state  and,  as  has  been  discussed  previously,  it  is  near-
          impossible to shine a direct light on this critical stage of  the
          process. The only illumination will be by  way  of  extrapolative
          and inferential means, consistent  with  the  lower  standard  of
          proof.

     455. It is clear to us that "significant role"  should  not,  and  was
          never intended to, require an individual to demonstrate that they
          have held a formal role within an organisation.  By  "formal"  we
          mean a specified position or status held through an  election  or
          as    a    result    of     appointment     by     a     relevant
          committee/body/individual or any other applicable  mechanism.  No
          such criterion emerges from GJ itself, nor is  it  apparent  from
          any of the evidential sources before us. On the totality of  that
          evidence, it would be contrary both to what we know about  GoSL's
          approach to separatism within  the  diaspora  and  the  need  for
          effective protection under the Refugee Convention and  Article  3
          ECHR to apply what we consider to be an  insufficiently  relevant
          factor such as this. An organisation which pursues  a  separatist
          agenda may not have a structure which involves formal  roles.  In
          any event, it is highly unlikely that GoSL will view the  absence
          of such a role as being of any real significance if the substance
          of an  individual's  activities  otherwise  discloses  sufficient
          interest. Having said that, if a formal role has been held by  an
          individual, this will be a relevant factor in  respect  of  their
          overall profile.

     456. By the same token, the fact that individual may not be a "member"
          of a particular organisation does not preclude them from having a
          profile sufficient to disclose a real risk on return. As we  have
          seen from the examples of the TGTE and TS, certain  organisations
          with a separatist agenda  may  have  a  very  limited  membership
          structure. It cannot sensibly be said that anyone  involved  with
          such an  organisation,  however  active  they  may  be,  will  be
          filtered out from GoSL's analysis merely because they are classed
          as a supporter.

     457. Nor should the term "significant role" denote  the  need  for  an
          individual to show that their role (whether formal  or  not)  has
          been "high profile" or  "prominent"  to  the  extent  that  these
          descriptions might suggest  a  position  of  leadership  or,  for
          example,   particularly    substantial    media    exposure    or
          organisational duties. On our analysis of the issues thus far, to
          conclude otherwise would set the bar too high and be inconsistent
          with the application of the lower standard of proof in respect of
          the assessment of risk. We note that both  these  categorisations
          (as set out in the assessment section of the CPIN) are  based  on
          evidence contained within the FFM, a report in respect  of  which
          we have expressed  certain  reservations,  with  a  consequential
          impact on the attribution of weight. Even on the  basis  of  that
          evidence alone, the restrictive interpretation of what  might  be
          regarded as sufficiently "significant" is only said to  be  "more
          likely" to lead to a risk: that provides a weak evidential  basis
          on which to conclude that a profile below that of "prominent"  or
          "high" will not be reasonably likely to lead to risk.

     458. We agree with the appellants' observation that the level of  risk
          will generally increase with the level  of  actual  or  perceived
          activities, and that an individual with what  is  established  by
          the evidence to be a "high profile" or "prominent"  position  may
          well be exposed to a  level  of  risk  significantly  above  that
          required to be shown in order to succeed in a protection claim.

     459. What then of the appellants' case, relying as it does on  a  risk
          threshold sitting just above  what  is  described  as  "the  most
          trivial" level of diaspora activity?

     460. For the reasons set out below, we conclude that in so far as  the
          evidence upon which this  argument  is  predicated  asserts  that
          "anyone"  linked  in  "any"  way  to  "any"  separatist  diaspora
          organisation and who has  undertaken  "any"  diaspora  activities
          known  to  the  authorities  "regardless"  of  their   level   of
          involvement will be at risk, the appellants' position does indeed
          overstate the reality  as  regards  GoSL's  view  of  who  is  of
          sufficient adverse interest to warrant detention.

     461. That evidence largely emanates from Professor Gunaratna, although
          he appears to qualify the apparently catch-all  assertion  stated
          at  various  points.  For  example,  when   asked   whether   the
          authorities would always take action against a returnee that  had
          engaged in relevant activity at however low a level, his response
          was that it "depends" on the profile of  the  individual.  Whilst
          not necessarily inconsistent with the very wide scope of those at
          risk contended for, the caveat  does  indicate  a  somewhat  more
          nuanced approach on the part of GoSL to those they consider to be
          of sufficiently adverse interest.

     462. The qualificatory indication in Professor Gunaratna's evidence is
          more strongly represented in that of  Dr  Nadarajah.  In  several
          responses to written questions  and  in  his  oral  evidence,  he
          confirmed that whether an  individual  would  be  regarded  as  a
          "threat" to Sri Lanka's territorial integrity  would  "depend  on
          his or her own overall profile as perceived by  the  authorities,
          and based on what they know or suspect about  him/her."   On  the
          basis that a person regarded as a "threat" is a crucial (if not a
          decisive)  factor  in  assessing  risk,  it  is  implicit  in  Dr
          Nadarajah's evidence that the simple fact of a link of  any  kind
          to a relevant organisation  and/or  any  activity  whatsoever  in
          support thereof does not accurately reflect GoSL's  approach.  If
          it were  said  that  the  term  "depends"  relates  only  to  the
          assessment of threat, a subsequent response by  Dr  Nadarajah  is
          instructive: although involvement with  a  relevant  organisation
          would create an interest  in  an  individual,  consequent  action
          against them would "depend" upon the overall profile.  Thus,  the
          qualification is provided in the context of what  might  actually
          occur, rather than just in  respect  of  the  perception  of  the
          individual.

     463. This picture of a more nuanced reality to the assessment of  risk
          was articulated by Dr Nadarajah as an "indicator-based approach",
          a phrase that in our judgment is both accurate  and  helpful.  We
          shall return to its utility, below.

     464. The totality of Dr Smith's evidence  is  more  supportive  of  Dr
          Nadarajah's view than Professor Gunaratna's. We note his comments
          that an individual who is on the  authorities'  "radar"  will  be
          detained, as would "anybody whom the authorities believe might be
          returning to assist the revival of the LTTE...". However, on  our
          reading, these points do not go to the issue of  when  GoSL  will
          have already decided that an individual is of sufficient interest
          to warrant detention.

     465. Finally, we address the evidence relating to individuals actually
          returned to Sri Lanka. We are  grateful  to  the  respondent  for
          obtaining the statistics on returnees to  the  country  over  the
          course of six years and out of respect for her efforts we set out
          the figures here:



          |Year          |Total asylum   |Enforced       |Voluntary       |
|              |-related       |               |                |
|              |returns        |               |                |
|2013          |257            |115            |142             |
|2014          |274            |157            |117             |
|2015          |288            |131            |157             |
|2016          |170            |56             |114             |
|2017          |248            |69             |179             |
|2018          |151            |26             |125             |
|2019          |74             |18             |56              |


     466. It is immediately apparent that these  figures  are  not  of  any
          great probative value to our task for the principal  reason  that
          we cannot discern the nature of the individuals' claims  and  the
          reasons for their lack of success. Specifically, it is impossible
          to tell whether any of the  returnees  had  been  found  to  have
          engaged in sur place activities in United Kingdom.

     467. No evidentially material assistance has been provided  by  either
          the experts or witnesses of fact. The problems  with  Dr  Smith's
          collation of and reliance on the six  case-studies  contained  in
          his report emerged as a result of the respondent's research  into
          the background of a  number  of  the  individuals  concerned  and
          during the course of his oral evidence.  It  transpired  that  Dr
          Smith had been put in contact with the interviewees by  a  United
          Kingdom-based  solicitor  previously   known   to   him.   Rather
          unfortunately, Dr Smith did not apparently ask for, and  was  not
          in any event provided with, any background documentation  on  any
          of  the  subjects.  As  a  consequence,  his  impression  of  the
          interviewees' profiles had not been formed  from  a  position  of
          full knowledge. Through questioning and an analysis of  decisions
          of the First-tier Tribunal in three of the cases, it became clear
          that these profiles included actual or  perceived  links  to  the
          LTTE and/or significant connections with the TGTE. In respect  of
          the latter,  one  individual  had  been  found  to  have  had  an
          important organising role and  a  substantial  media  and  online
          profile. Another had appeared on relevant television channels.  A
          third had assumed prominence through involvement at TGTE cultural
          events. All of this leads us to conclude that the evidence simply
          does not support the proposition put forward  by  Dr  Smith  that
          "any" form of association with the TGTE will result in a risk  on
          return. In short, the methodology adopted, whilst done so in good
          faith, rendered this particular aspect of his evidence less  than
          reliable.

     468. Dr Nadarajah's lack of information  on  what  may  have  in  fact
          happened to returnees was, he told us, based on  the  absence  of
          data. Professor Gunaratna accepted that he  was  unaware  of  any
          examples of returnees who might have been  linked  to  the  TGTE,
          which is consistent with the general absence of evidence on  this
          important issue.

     469. We have already expressed our views on the failure  of  the  TGTE
          and TS to hold, or even seek, evidence  on  returnees  associated
          with their respective organisations. This state  of  affairs  has
          not made our already difficult task any easier.

     470. There is a dearth of concrete examples of what  has  happened  to
          returnees. We do accept that in principle the absence of evidence
          does not necessarily indicate evidence of absence.  However,  its
          effect here is to highlight a lack of positive  support  for  the
          appellants' primary contention that those  who  have  engaged  in
          anything more than "the most trivial" level of activities are  at
          risk.

     471. Stepping back and taking account of the evidence as a whole,  and
          notwithstanding the finding that GoSL is an authoritarian  regime
          with a poor human rights record and a  hostile  attitude  towards
          Tamil separatism, it does not follow that it should  be  regarded
          as a government which exercises no, or no meaningful,  filter  in
          respect of who is regarded to be of sufficient  adverse  interest
          to justify detention. Clearly, this  was  not  the  view  of  the
          Tribunal in GJ and in our view the adoption of such  a  low  risk
          threshold  would  be  to  stretch  the  meaning  of  the   phrase
          "significant role" almost to breaking point.

     472. The position we have therefore arrived at is a rejection of  both
          the respondent's argument that we should simply say nothing  more
          about what constitutes a "significant role" and  the  appellants'
          assertion that anyone engaging in "more  than  the  most  trivial
          level" of diaspora activities will be at risk.

     473. Turning to the provision of practical  guidance  as  to  what  is
          reasonably  likely  to  form  the   substance   of   the   phrase
          "significant role", we see a consideration of overall context and
          examples of specific factors as representing the  best  means  of
          elucidating the "indicator-based approach" (or, as  described  in
          the CPIN, a "multi-factorial assessment").

     474. The relevant contextual factors are as follows:

                    i. the implacable hostility of GoSL to  the  concept  of
                       separatism in general;

                   ii. the post-GJ pronouncements by  leading  establishment
                       figures as to the view taken of the  section  of  the
                       Tamil diaspora with which we are concerned,  together
                       with our findings that these  have  not  simply  been
                       rhetorical in nature;

                  iii. our analysis of some of these diaspora  organisations
                       and the clear fact that the United  Kingdom  remains,
                       eleven years after  the  end  of  the  civil  war,  a
                       "hotspot"   for   separatist   and    anti-government
                       activities;

                   iv. the advent of proscription since GJ was decided;

                    v. the unsuccessful (perceived)  LTTE-inspired  attempts
                       at committing violent acts within Sri Lanka in recent
                       years, the last of these being in July 2020;

     475. With these matters in mind, and having regard to the totality  of
          our conclusions so far, we are satisfied that GoSL's objective is
          to identify those who are an actual or perceived  threat  to  the
          integrity of the Sri Lankan state by reason  of  their  committed
          activism in pursuit of the  establishment  of  a  separate  Tamil
          state on the island of Sri Lanka. That is  the  contextual  prism
          through which the term "significant role" should be  interpreted.
          This is consistent with what was said in GJ and accords with  the
          evidence before us.

     476. We turn to factorial matters. What follows is not  an  exhaustive
          list.  They  are  examples  of  elements  which  will  inform   a
          cumulative assessment, predicated in all cases on  careful  fact-
          finding.

     477. The first  relevant  factor  is  the  nature  of  any  particular
          organisation on behalf of which an individual  has  been  active.
          Reference should be had to our analysis and  conclusions  on  the
          named United Kingdom-based organisations. In respect of any other
          organisation which we have not specifically considered,  it  will
          be for the individual concerned to adduce evidence of its  agenda
          and activities. The assessment of how  GoSL  might  perceive  the
          organisation will be a matter for the judge to undertake in light
          of the relevant conclusions set out in our decision.

     478. That an organisation  has  been  proscribed  under  the  2012  UN
          Regulations will be relatively significant in terms of the  level
          of adverse interest reasonably likely  to  be  attributed  to  an
          individual associated with it, although it is  not  determinative
          of risk.

     479. The adjective "active" is  relevant  because  an  individual  who
          supports an organisation in a wholly passive manner is in general
          not reasonably likely to come to the attention of the authorities
          in the first place. If they did, it is difficult to conceive of a
          situation in which such support, without more, would give rise to
          a material risk profile. An example of passive support  might  be
          the individual who follows the activities of the TGTE through its
          online  and  social  media  presence,  but  without  contributing
          anything themselves by way of attendance  at  events,  meaningful
          fundraising, online posts, and suchlike.

     480. The holding of a particular role within an organisation may well,
          depending on all the circumstances, increase the  profile  of  an
          individual, although  its  absence  is  not  an  indicator  of  a
          decreased  risk.  By  "role"  we  include  any  formal  positions
          acquired by election or appointment;  ad  hoc  organisational  or
          promotional duties such as being named as a contact point  for  a
          specific event; or a more regular set of responsibilities, albeit
          outwith any formal organisational structure.

     481. In the normal run of cases, a protection claim based on  diaspora
          activities will feature a particular organisation. We do not rule
          out the possibility that an  individual  may,  albeit  unusually,
          have been active solely on their own  account.  Such  independent
          activity will still need to be properly assessed in light of  the
          remaining  factors  discussed  below,  together  with  any  other
          relevant circumstances.

     482. A second factor is  the  type  of  activities  undertaken  by  an
          individual. Whilst GJ made specific reference  to  attendance  at
          demonstrations only, we have been provided with reliable evidence
          in respect of a greater range of diaspora activities we regard as
          being relevant to an individual's overall  risk  profile  and  in
          respect of which we  have  already  found  that  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities  are  capable   of   obtaining   information.   These
          activities include, but are not limited to:

                    i.  attendance at public demonstrations;

                   ii. attendance at meetings held in venues that may or may
                       not be open to members of the public;

                  iii.  actual membership  of  or  particular  roles  within
                       relevant organisations;

                   iv. distribution of promotional literature;

                    v. meaningful fundraising on behalf of and/or  providing
                       meaningful funding to relevant organisations;

                   vi. attendance at commemorative  events  such  as  Heroes
                       Day;

                  vii. authorship of, or appearance  in,  articles,  whether
                       published in print or online;

                 viii. social media  activity,  whether  manifested  by  the
                       posting of original comments or promoting  the  views
                       of others;

                   ix. political lobbying on behalf of an organisation;

                    x. the signing of petitions perceived as being  critical
                       of the government.

     483.  In  respect  of  attendance  at  demonstrations,   we   see   no
          inconsistency between our view that  it  constitutes  a  relevant
          factor and the Tribunal's conclusion at paragraph 351 of GJ  that
          a presence at one or several was not "of itself"  evidence  of  a
          genuine commitment to Tamil  separatism.  The  point  being  made
          there was not about relevancy per se, but whether attendance  was
          sufficient to show a commitment to that ideology. All would then,
          and still does, depend on the facts of the case.

     484. With reference to fundraising and/or the provision of funding, we
          include the adjective "meaningful" because  certain  payments  to
          organisations are either not reasonably likely  to  come  to  the
          attention of the authorities in the first  place,   or,  if  they
          did, would not be reasonably likely to incite the interest of the
          Sri Lankan authorities. For example, we know that anyone can  pay
          the requisite fee to obtain an identity card from the TGTE:  this
          is not indicative of any level of activity as  such,  and  it  is
          highly likely that GoSL will be aware of this.

     485. In addition, we have purposely not included the provision  by  an
          individual of testimony to international investigations  such  as
          that carried on under the auspices of UN OISL. Such  actions  are
          covered by the risk categories set out in paragraph 356(7)(c)  of
          GJ, a category that we have not been  asked  to  re-evaluate  and
          which remains valid.

     486. The next factor is the extent of any activities.  The  appellants
          have realistically acknowledged that  a  brief  attendance  at  a
          single demonstration, even if known about, would not  be  capable
          of establishing a  profile  sufficient  to  disclose  a  risk  on
          return. In so far as it goes, that is clearly right. For  reasons
          set out previously, it does not  follow  that  even  if  this  de
          minimis threshold is crossed any further activity whatsoever will
          disclose a risk. By way of example, it might be open  to  serious
          question as  to  whether  GoSL  would  be  reasonably  likely  to
          perceive an individual  who  had  attended  two,  three  or  more
          demonstrations, standing passively at the back  of  a  crowd  and
          without having engaged in  any  other  diaspora  activity,  as  a
          threat to the integrity of the  state,  even  assuming  that  the
          attendance was known about in the first place.

     487. Having said that, there may be situations in  which  only  a  few
          attendances are capable of attracting  greater  significance.  We
          can contemplate cases where an individual has attended on  a  few
          occasions but  has  spoken  publicly  at  each  of  them  or  has
          otherwise taken on a prominent organisational role;  or  where  a
          recent  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  has   attended   every
          demonstration organised by a particular  organisation  since  and
          has, for example, held flags bearing the LTTE emblem, albeit that
          only a few such events have taken place.

     488. The number of  demonstrations  attended  can  bear  relevance  in
          another way. Whilst the overall  assessment  of  an  individual's
          profile is not simply  a  quantitative  exercise,  a  significant
          number of attendances may, depending on all the circumstances, go
          to inform  a  qualitative  evaluation.  It  is,  after  all,  the
          perception of GoSL which is important:  if  the  authorities  are
          aware  that  an   individual   has   taken   part   in   numerous
          demonstrations over the course of time, it may indicate a genuine
          commitment to the Tamil separatist cause. In our judgment, having
          regard to everything we know of relevant  developments  over  the
          last  six  years  or  so  and  GoSL's  attitude,  it   would   be
          inappropriate to  rule  out  the  potential  significance  of  an
          individual's attendance history.

     489. Our position on  the  question  of  an  individual's  history  of
          attendance at demonstrations leads us back to what  the  Tribunal
          said in GJ. What we have said in relation paragraph  351  of  GJ,
          above, holds good at this point too:  even  multiple  attendances
          will  not  "of  itself"  prove  a  genuine  commitment  to  Tamil
          separatism, although a track record  will  be  relevant  to  that
          issue.

     490. In respect of paragraph 336 of GJ, the Tribunal's conclusion that
          attendance at demonstrations in  the  diaspora  was  not  "alone"
          sufficient to create a reasonable likelihood of adverse attention
          on return to Sri Lanka remains sound, but only in so  far  as  it
          goes. It must be seen in light of what was not considered and our
          analysis of the evidence presented some seven  years  later.  The
          Tribunal did not, for example, specifically consider  what  role,
          if any, an individual might have  played  in  the  demonstrations
          attended. Nor did it address the question of the  nature  of  the
          organisations behind the demonstrations. We have already assessed
          the  significance  of  associations  with   avowedly   separatist
          organisations in the United Kingdom, two of which, the  TGTE  and
          the BTF, are proscribed. These two considerations themselves may,
          depending on the facts of  a  case,  significantly  increase  the
          importance of attendance at demonstrations and may,  again  on  a
          fact-specific basis, give rise to the perception by GoSL that  an
          individual constitutes a potential threat to the state.

     491. The foregoing does not materially depart from what is said in GJ.
          Further, it is of some note that the assessment  section  of  the
          CPIN itself recognises the multi-faceted relevance of  attendance
          at demonstrations to the overall evaluation of risk:

                 "2.4.33 Decision makers should consider a range of  factors
                 when  assessing  someone's  sur  place  activities,   these
                 include (but are not limited to);

                 . The diaspora groups they are involved with; whether  this
                 groups is on the  proscribed  list  of  organisations  (see
                 Proscribed/de-proscribed groups);

                 . the  nature  of  the  demonstrations  attended/nature  of
                 diaspora activities involved in;

                 .  a  person's  role  in  any  demonstration-  are  they  a
                 leader/organiser;

                 . how many demonstrations have they attended;

                 . have the demonstrations attracted media attention;

                 ..."

     492. Our consideration of  attendance  at  demonstrations  should  not
          deflect from the reality  that  many,  if  not  most,  protection
          claims based on  involvement  with  diaspora  organisations  will
          involve a variety of activities. This is illustrative of the need
          to undertake a holistic assessment of all  relevant  factors,  as
          they ultimately feed into the overall  profile  collated  by  the
          authorities.

     493. The duration of the activities undertaken by  the  individual  is
          relevant. Subject to what we have said above about the particular
          prominence of any specific activities  and  the  period  that  an
          individual has been  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  longer  that
          relevant  participation  has  been  pursued,  the   greater   the
          possibility that GoSL may consider the individual to be committed
          to Tamil separatism.

     494. In terms of the evaluative assessment of an individual's  profile
          as it is reasonably likely to be perceived by GoSL, we agree with
          the appellants' submission that motivation is not  relevant.  The
          reason for this lies within the previous sentence:  the  critical
          question is what the authorities will make of the  activities  in
          respect of which they have obtained information. They  will  have
          little or no inclination to enquire  into  an  individual's  good
          faith or lack thereof. We acknowledge that there must  exist  the
          possibility of opportunistic "hangers on" making out a claim  for
          international protection.  Unattractive  as  this  may  seem,  it
          cannot act as a valid basis for rejecting a risk.

     495.  The  genuineness  of  an  individual's  political  beliefs   and
          activities conducted as a consequence of these will  be  relevant
          to the application of  the  HJ  (Iran)  principle,  and  we  will
          address this in due course.

     496. The penultimate factor relates to matters not arising within  the
          United Kingdom, but instead to an  individual's  history  in  Sri
          Lanka.  In  GJ,  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Sri  Lankan
          government's concern was not with past membership of or  sympathy
          for the LTTE and that previous connections with that organisation
          were  not  perceived  by  the  authorities   as   indicating   an
          individual's threat to the state. Paragraph 356(8) confirmed that
          a history would be relevant "only to the extent that is perceived
          by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the
          Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government."

     497. As will be apparent from our  decision  thus  far,  the  evidence
          before us is replete with references to the LTTE and  the  belief
          on the part of GoSL (irrespective of whether this  perception  is
          accurate) that the organisation remains a source of danger to the
          Sri Lankan state. Sources in the FFM stated that past LTTE  links
          could result in  individual  being  monitored  or  questioned  on
          return. The DFAT refers  to  "low-profile"  former  LTTE  members
          being harassed and monitored. Also of note is the fact that  when
          Dr Smith's case-studies were interrogated, it transpired  that  a
          number of individuals had previous connections to  the  LTTE  and
          the appellants' ability to rely on these examples as evidence  of
          a risk to TGTE activists was  said  to  be  undermined  by  these
          histories; the implication being that, even in the post-civil war
          environment, actual or perceived links to the LTTE may  still  be
          deemed relevant. A final reason for the inclusion of this  factor
          in the non-exhaustive list is our finding that GoSL  regards  the
          TGTE as a "front"  for  the  LTTE:  as  a  matter  of  the  logic
          reasonably  likely  to  be  applied  by  the  regime,  actual  or
          perceived LTTE links in the past would not be left out of account
          when assessing an individual's overall profile.

     498. The cumulative effect of this drives us to the conclusion that  a
          history of links to the LTTE continues to  represent  a  relevant
          factor in the overall assessment of an individual's profile in so
          far as it is reasonably likely to inform the perception  of  GoSL
          as to the propensity of the individual  concerned  to  engage  in
          separatist activity with a view to threatening the  integrity  of
          the Sri Lankan state. The extent of its relevance will depend  on
          the particular facts of the case.  It  will  not,  save  in  very
          exceptional circumstances, be determinative.

     499. The final factor  in  our  non-exhaustive  list  is  that  of  an
          individual's familial connections. In light of what we have  said
          about the preceding factor and taking account of the evidence  in
          the FFM and DFAT suggesting that family members  of  former  LTTE
          operatives may be monitored within Sri Lanka,  it  would  in  our
          view  be  artificial  to  exclude  the  potential  relevance   of
          relatives' links  to  either  the  LTTE  or  separatist  diaspora
          organisations. Whilst this factor is in general likely  to  carry
          less weight than others,  its  assessment  remains  highly  fact-
          sensitive, with the degree of  relationship  and  nature  of  the
          links in question clearly being relevant to the enquiry.

     500. At this  point  it  is  appropriate  to  make  reference  to  the
          cautionary observation made by Underhill LJ at paragraph 50 of MP
          and NT, the relevant part of which reads as follows:

                 "...It is  also  clear  that  the  Tribunal  believed  that
                 "diaspora activism", actual or perceived, is the  principal
                 basis on which the Government of Sri  Lanka  is  likely  to
                 treat returning  Tamils  as  posing  a  current  or  future
                 threat; and I agree that that too was a conclusion which it
                 was entitled to reach.  But I do not read para. 356 (7) (a)
                 of its determination as prescribing that diaspora  activism
                 is the only basis on  which  a  returning  Tamil  might  be
                 regarded as posing such a threat and thus of being at  risk
                 on return. Even apart from cases falling under  heads  (b)-
                 (d) in para. 356 (7), there  may,  though  untypically,  be
                 other cases (of which NT  may  be  an  example)  where  the
                 evidence shows particular grounds for concluding  that  the
                 Government might regard the applicant as posing  a  current
                 threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even
                 in the absence of evidence that he or she has been involved
                 in diaspora activism."

     501. The guidance we have provided is just that: the assessment to  be
          undertaken in any given case is always  fact-specific  and  there
          may be exceptional  scenarios  which  fall  wholly  or  partially
          outside the parameters of our analysis.

     502. We have now arrived at the stage at which GoSL will have gathered
          any relevant information it can on an individual, sent it back to
          the security apparatus in Sri Lankan to be assessed, and  created
          or added to a profile on the general electronic database. What is
          contained on that database will determine the consequences for  a
          returnee on arrival at BIA or once they reach their home area  or
          another place of resettlement.




      The position of returnees at the airport

     503. Our analysis of diaspora activities, GoSL's information-gathering
          capabilities, its assessment and  recording  of  an  individual's
          profile on the electronic database, and the judgment  as  to  who
          would be perceived to  constitute  a  threat,  come  together  to
          produce four separate categories of returnees: (a) those of  whom
          nothing material is known at all and who therefore do not  appear
          on the general electronic database; (b) those who have  an  entry
          on that database, but do not appear on either the  stop  list  or
          the watch list; (c) those who appear on the stop  list;  and  (d)
          those who appear on the watch list.

     504. It remains clear that the Sri Lankan authorities  will  be  given
          advance notice of the arrival of individuals subject to return on
          a TTD. Although there is  a  degree  of  divergence  amongst  the
          various sources of evidence as to which agencies are  present  at
          BIA, we  are  satisfied  that  in  addition  to  the  immigration
          authorities, the TID and CID have either  a  permanent  or  near-
          permanent presence, and it is reasonably likely that the SIS will
          be  represented,  at  least  to  a  degree,  given  its  role  in
          populating the database and in  pursuing  the  national  security
          agenda. At the very least, relevant personnel will  be  available
          for the arrival of flights carrying  returnees  travelling  on  a
          TTD.

     505. It is plainly the case that  all  relevant  officials  will  have
          access to the general electronic database, together with the stop
          list and watch list. Any  other  conclusion  would  run  entirely
          contrary  to  the  whole  purpose  of  the  information   storage
          exercise. Adopting GJ as our starting point and in light  of  all
          we have said about the information gathering and processing  thus
          far, we are satisfied that the authorities will, in the words  of
          the Tribunal, "know everything  they  need  to  know  about  that
          individual."

     506. The issue of  facial  recognition  technology  at  BIA  has  been
          canvassed before us. Dr Nadarajah was of the  view  that  it  may
          well be in operation in Sri Lanka (we infer  that  this  included
          the airport). His opinion was based on the involvement of Chinese
          companies such as Huawei in Sri Lanka's technology infrastructure
          and a 2018 Freedom House report. This evidence does  not  in  our
          judgment show that facial recognition technology is in fact being
          used in the country, at least not at  any  meaningful  scale.  Dr
          Nadarajah  himself  acknowledged  that  cameras  have  not   been
          installed in BIA. This  is  consistent  with  Dr  Smith's  recent
          experience when he visited  the  country  in  November  2019.  In
          addition, the  2018  report  states  only  an  intention  by  the
          authorities to start using a facial recognition system. There  is
          no subsequent evidence to indicate that such a system has in fact
          been put in place. We do accept Dr Smith's evidence that there is
          a manual system at the airport whereby photographs can be matched
          to individuals. His view that there is a lack of  clarity  as  to
          the operation of this process is one with which we agree.

     507. It is uncontroversial that those being returned on a TTD will  be
          questioned on arrival at BIA. We find that that is the  case.  In
          respect of those who do not appear on either the stop list or the
          watch list, the respondent submits that any questioning on return
          will be limited to establishing identity and whether there are in
          fact any outstanding arrest warrants or criminal proceedings.  We
          agree. Additional questioning at the airport over and  above  the
          confirmation of identity is only reasonably likely to occur where
          the individual is already on either the stop list  or  the  watch
          list. This is because  all  relevant  information  on  sur  place
          activities and matters  arising  within  Sri  Lanka  itself  (for
          example, legal proceedings,  past  detentions,  or  other  issues
          passed on by the authorities in the home area) will have  already
          been entered onto the general electronic database and  will  have
          been assessed by relevant agencies in order to determine  whether
          the individual should be placed on either of the lists.  If  they
          are on neither, it  follows  that  they  are  not  of  sufficient
          interest  to  warrant  further  questioning  about  any  possible
          diaspora activities.

     508. The position of returnees in possession of a  valid  passport  is
          different, but only to a limited extent. The  evidence  indicates
          that such individuals will not be part of the readmission process
          and that  the  authorities  at  BIA  will  not  automatically  be
          provided with their names in advance of arrival, in  contrast  to
          those returning on a TTD. We conclude that  such  returnees  will
          not automatically be subject to questioning on arrival as regards
          the establishment of identity: their passport will confirm  this.
          However, it is the case that passports are swiped at  immigration
          control. It would be fanciful to suppose that the terminals  used
          for this are not linked to the general  electronic  database  and
          the stop list and watch list derived therefrom. If the individual
          appears on one or other of the two lists it is reasonably  likely
          that they will be questioned further.

     509. Our conclusion in respect of returnees in category (a) who do not
          appear on the general electronic database at all is that at  most
          they will be subjected to brief questioning in order  to  confirm
          their identity and will then be admitted to the  country  without
          any further intervention or ongoing monitoring. Our conclusion is
          the same in respect of returnees  falling  within  category  (b),
          namely who do appear on  the  general  electronic  database,  but
          whose entry is not flagged such  as  to  designate  inclusion  in
          either the stop list or the watch list.

     510. Those appearing on one  of  these  two  lists  face  a  different
          scenario. We reaffirm the conclusion at paragraph  356(6)  of  GJ
          that a returnee in category (c) who is included on the stop  list
          will be detained immediately and taken to  facilities  away  from
          the airport. It is at this stage that the risk of persecution and
          serious harm materialises.

     511. As to those returnees in category (d) who are named on the  watch
          list, we reaffirm what is said at paragraphs 356(6) and 356(9) of
          GJ, namely that they are not detained at the airport, but will be
          permitted to pass through and journey onward to their home  area.
          In our judgment, these returnees must then be  divided  into  two
          sub-categories: (i) those who, because of their existing profile,
          are deemed to be  of  sufficiently  strong  adverse  interest  to
          warrant detention; and (ii) those who are of interest, but not at
          a level sufficient to justify detention at that point in time.

     512. Although ostensibly only included on the watch  list,  those  who
          fall within the first sub-category, which  corresponds  with  the
          risk category under paragraph 356(7)(a) of  GJ,  are  not  simply
          being "watched" after arrival to determine what they may  or  may
          not do: they are at  risk  of  being  detained,  persecuted,  and
          subjected to serious harm. Our view is  reinforced  by  what  the
          Tribunal itself said at paragraph 310 of GJ:

                 "[I]f the  authorities  have  an  adverse  interest  in  an
                 individual, he will be  picked  up  at  home,  not  at  the
                 airport, unless there is a "stop"  notice  on  the  airport
                 computer system."

                                             (Emphasis added)

     513. On one view of the  respondent's  submissions,  she  appeared  to
          suggest that the risk of detention  for  individuals  within  the
          first sub-category would only  materialise  if  further  relevant
          activities were undertaken within Sri Lanka. If this  was  indeed
          her position, it cannot be correct. Such an  approach  would,  in
          effect, require a returnee to show a risk  of  persecution  twice
          over: first, in relation to their existing profile;  and  second,
          by  corroborating  that  profile  by  undertaking  the  same,  or
          similar,  activities  after  return.  It  cannot  have  been  the
          intention of the Tribunal to endorse such an approach.

     514. For the avoidance of any doubt, we add, that such  an  individual
          is reasonably likely to be monitored following departure from the
          airport and would be picked up wherever they may seek to go, even
          if this is a location other than their original home.

     515. In light of the above, inclusion in the risk category set out  in
          paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ is dispositive of a protection claim or
          an appeal against a refusal thereof, subject  to  any  issues  of
          exclusion (a topic which has not featured in these proceedings).




      Beyond the airport: monitoring, "rehabilitation", and  recruitment  as
      an informant

     516. For all others on the watch list (in other  words  those  in  the
          second sub-category of returnees  identified  in  paragraph  511,
          above), we conclude that in light of the evidence before us as  a
          whole, the guidance set out at paragraph  356(9)  of  GJ  remains
          valid and  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  they  will  be
          monitored by the authorities in their home area or wherever  else
          they may be able to resettle. There is, in general,  no  risk  of
          such individuals being detained, without more.

     517. We have received little evidence as to the precise nature of  any
          monitoring undertaken. We accept Dr  Smith's  evidence  that  the
          authorities  use  what   he   describes   as   local   "catchers"
          (informants) who are employed by the security  forces  (sometimes
          with  the  use  of  financial  incentives  and   quite   possibly
          accompanied by an implied threat of the consequences of  refusing
          to cooperate) to provide what has been described as  "real  time"
          information on the  activities  of  individuals;  primarily,  one
          assumes, their associations  or  activities.  DFAT  and  the  FFM
          corroborate  sources  cited  by  Dr  Nadarajah  indicating   that
          undercover members of the security forces carry out surveillance.
          We find that this is the case.  DFAT  describes  the  interaction
          between the authorities and the subjects of surveillance as  more
          "subtle" than in the past and  that  aside  from  being  watched,
          individuals may be visited at home or  receive  telephone  calls.
          Again, we accept this to be the case. A 2018 report  by  the  Sri
          Lanka Campaign for Peace and Justice speaks of there being  "very
          intense levels of contact" between the subjects  of  surveillance
          and the authorities, although no details of  what  the  "contact"
          entails are given and it adds nothing to  what  we  have  already
          found. The evidence does not show that an individual  subject  to
          monitoring  would  have  their  freedom  of   movement   formally
          restricted,  or  that  they  would  be  placed  under   reporting
          conditions.

     518. To the nature of surveillance reasonably likely to occur we would
          add  the  ability  of  the  authorities  to  monitor   electronic
          communications, the Internet and social media activity (in so far
          as it can view Facebook posts and other  unencrypted  platforms),
          as borne out by the expert evidence and the overall tenor of  the
          evidence  indicating  GoSL's   authoritarian   nature   and   its
          sensitivity to perceived separatist activity.

     519. It is common ground between the parties that monitoring will  not
          in general constitute persecutory treatment, a position which  is
          in line with what is said at paragraphs 317 to 319 and 431 of GJ.
          On  the  evidence  before  us,  we  agree,  but  would  add   two
          observations.

     520. First, we accept the appellant's argument  that  it  may,  in  an
          exceptional case, be possible for an individual to show  that  by
          virtue of, for example, very significant mental  health  problems
          (such as paranoid schizophrenia), the process of monitoring  will
          have such a detrimental impact as to permit them to succeed under
          the Refugee Convention (the monitoring will be  as  a  result  of
          actual  or  imputed  political  opinion  and  the  threshold  for
          persecution is to  be  assessed  in  light  of  the  individual's
          characteristics) and Article 3 ECHR.

     521. Second, in considering the question  of  post-return  monitoring,
          the Tribunal in GJ did not address the  implications  of  the  HJ
          (Iran) principle in terms not only of what an individual may  do,
          but what they may desist from doing due to  the  consequences  of
          undertaking certain activities. This important, and in some cases
          decisive, issue is dealt with in greater detail, below.

     522. We turn to the issue of the  "rehabilitation"  programme  in  Sri
          Lanka, which whilst not featuring significantly in  the  evidence
          or submissions before us, nonetheless requires consideration.  In
          GJ, the Tribunal dealt with the matter in paragraphs 316 to  319,
          with the relevant passages stating as follows:

                 "316. The "rehabilitation" programme was  designed  by  the
                 Sri Lankan government to re-educate former LTTE cadres, who
                 may never have known peace, and enable them  to  return  to
                 the community as ordinary citizens. The  best  evidence  on
                 this should have been  that  of  Professor  Gunaratna,  who
                 helped design the  programme,  but  in  fact,  very  little
                 information was provided by him or anyone  else  about  the
                 operation of the programme."

                 317. Those who have been rehabilitated  are  monitored  and
                 are required to report regularly and  live  in  their  home
                 areas; the GOSL has confidence that  those  who  have  been
                 through rehabilitation are unlikely to return to combat but
                 monitors them closely.

                 318. Professor Gunaratna's opinion,  which  we  accept,  is
                 that there has been a qualitative change in the purpose  of
                 the rehabilitation programme  between  2009  and  now.  The
                 government's concern  now  relates  to  those  who  may  be
                 associated with attempts to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
                 Lanka  by  reviving  the  LTTE  within  the  diaspora.  His
                 evidence explained how the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
                 approach selection of individuals for  rehabilitation  now:
                 he told us that those within Sri Lanka who  undertake  high
                 profile separatist activity (such as  the  Jaffna  students
                 trying to celebrate Maaveerar Naal in November 2011) or who
                 are known or perceived (while still in  Sri  Lanka)  to  be
                 seeking contact  with  the  leaders  or  activists  of  the
                 resurgence  movement  in  the   diaspora   hotspots,   risk
                 detention or "rehabilitation"."

     523. The evidence of "rehabilitation" before us emanates largely  from
          Professor Gunaratna. The relevant section of  his  report  refers
          solely to  LTTE  leaders,  members,  or  supporters  having  been
          "rehabilitated". His  evidence  also  links  rehabilitation  with
          prosecution; it being said that relevant  individuals  "will"  be
          taken to court and either placed into the programme for two years
          or  "punished".  Dr  Nadarajah's   view   was   that   a   single
          "rehabilitation" centre still  operated.  In  oral  evidence,  he
          stated that he did not think the programme had now been wound up.
          In contrast, Dr Smith has said that the programme  has  "run  its
          course". When this was put to Professor  Gunaratna,  he  told  us
          that a single "rehabilitation" centre existed, with ten occupants
          who had been connected with the LTTE.

     524. The evidence on this issue does not satisfy us that  there  is  a
          reasonable likelihood of a returnee appearing on the  watch  list
          and subject  to  monitoring  then  being  prosecuted  and  either
          sentenced to a period of custody or  sent  for  "rehabilitation".
          Nor does it  show  that  "rehabilitation"  will  be  used  as  an
          alternative to formal proceedings. Neither Professor  Gunaratna's
          evidence  nor  that  of  Dr  Nadarajah  relates  specifically  to
          diaspora activists as such (who may, or may well  not,  have  any
          previous links to the LTTE). It is also, to an extent, undermined
          by what Dr Smith says and there  is  no  empirical  or  anecdotal
          evidence of prosecutions,  an  omission  which  is  in  our  view
          significant given the formality of any such proceedings  and  the
          reasonable assumption that records would exist.

     525. As a result of this conclusion, the  question  of  whether  being
          subject to prosecution or "rehabilitation"  is  persecutory  does
          not arise.

     526. The final issue which falls  to  be  addressed  is  that  of  the
          recruitment of returnees as informants. This is a topic which was
          not canvassed in GJ and has not, as far as we are aware, been the
          subject of any judicial consideration.

     527. There are significant difficulties with this particular aspect of
          the appellants' case.

     528. The only evidence which purports  to  establish  a  link  between
          returnees subject to monitoring  and  recruitment  as  informants
          emanates from Professor Gunaratna. Even then,  there  is  only  a
          brief allusion  to  the  topic;  in  the  context  of  discussing
          intelligence gathering, it is  said  that,  "depending  on  their
          disposition, [the returnee] would be prosecuted if  uncooperative
          or recruited if cooperative." In responses to  further  questions
          put to him,  Professor  Gunaratna  spoke  of  a  "preference"  to
          recruit Tamils as  informants  and  community  sources  and  then
          stated that in cases known to him, TGTE members "were recruited".

     529. There  is  a  distinct  absence  of  source  materials  cited  by
          Professor Gunaratna for an opinion stated  in  relatively  robust
          terms. Further, he is unable to provide specific examples of  any
          TGTE "members" who have been  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  and  then
          recruited as informants. There is also no clear explanation as to
          what role any recruited returnee would be expected to  undertake.
          For example, it has not been said whether the  recruit  would  be
          expected to provide information on other individuals resident  in
          Sri Lanka, or maintain contact with previous  associates  in  the
          United Kingdom.

     530. It is clear from the evidence as a  whole  that  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities use informants both in the  diaspora  and  Sri  Lanka
          itself. However, the evidence relating to the former category  is
          not relevant to the issue with which we are currently  concerned.
          In respect of the latter, aside from Professor  Gunaratna,  other
          sources including Dr Smith and Dr Nadarajah, said  nothing  about
          the recruitment of returnees as informants, as opposed to members
          of the Tamil community already residing in Sri Lanka. In fact, Dr
          Smith's  evidence  was  that  recruits  consist  of  former  LTTE
          operatives, "low caste" Hindus, those disabled as result  of  the
          civil war, and those in need of financial resources due  to  very
          high levels of unemployment in the north. He makes no  connection
          between returnees and recruitment. In addition, even  in  respect
          of the case-studies set out in his report  which  have  been  the
          subject of criticism by us, there is no reference to any  of  the
          individuals concerned being confronted with recruitment.

     531. We acknowledge that a demand to become an informer was a relevant
          risk factor in LP (LTTE area - Tamils  -  Colombo  -  risk?)  Sri
          Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT 00076, but  this  was  a  country  guidance
          decision promulgated during the currency of the civil war and the
          risk factor applied to those who had been resident in Sri  Lanka,
          had been considered by the authorities as a potential  source  of
          information in respect of the  then  ongoing  operations  of  the
          LTTE, and had previously refused to cooperate before leaving  the
          country. It was not, and is not, relevant in  the  context  of  a
          returnee being the subject of recruitment for the first time.

     532. Our overall conclusion is that the evidence does  not  show  that
          there is in general a reasonable likelihood  of  a  returnee  who
          appears on the watch list and is then subject to monitoring being
          recruited as an informant or being prosecuted for  a  refusal  to
          undertake such a role.

     533. It follows from this that the issue addressed in PK and OS (basic
          rules of human conduct) Ukraine CG [2020] UKUT 00314  (IAC)  does
          not arise in these appeals.

     534.  For  the  sake  of  completeness,  we  reaffirm  the  undisputed
          conclusion reached in GJ that internal relocation is not a viable
          option for those individuals who are at risk in their  home  area
          or indeed any other place that they may be able  to  resettle  in
          immediately following return to the country.




      J: THE COUNTRY GUIDANCE


     535. The basic starting point for both parties  in  these  proceedings
          has been that the country guidance set out in GJ  remains  valid,
          subject to one or two suggested "tweaks" or  nuanced  amendments.
          Following our endeavours to undertake a comprehensive analysis of
          the arguments and the evidence upon which they  have  rested,  it
          will be apparent that we have arrived at something of a hybrid of
          conclusions. In fairly large measure,  we  agree  that  in  broad
          terms GJ still accurately reflects the situation facing returnees
          to Sri Lanka. However, in material respects, we have also  deemed
          it appropriate to clarify and supplement the  existing  guidance,
          with particular reference to sur place activities.

     536. Rather than requiring the reader to cross-reference GJ  with  our
          conclusions, it is best simply to restate the country guidance in
          its entirety as follows:

           1) GoSL is an  authoritarian  regime  whose  core  focus  is  to
              prevent any potential resurgence  of  a  separatist  movement
              within  Sri  Lanka  which  has  as  its  ultimate  goal   the
              establishment of Tamil Eelam.


           2) GoSL draws no material distinction between, on the one  hand,
              the avowedly violent means of  the  LTTE  in  furtherance  of
              Tamil Eelam, and  non-violent  political  advocacy  for  that
              result on the other.  It  is  the  underlying  aim  which  is
              crucial  to  GoSL's  perception.  To  this   extent,   GoSL's
              interpretation of separatism is not limited to the  pursuance
              thereof by violent means alone; it encompasses the  political
              sphere as well.


           3)  Whilst  there  is  limited  space  for  pro-Tamil  political
              organisations to  operate  within  Sri  Lanka,  there  is  no
              tolerance  of  the  expression  of  avowedly  separatist   or
              perceived separatist beliefs.


           4) GoSL views  the  Tamil  diaspora  with  a  generally  adverse
              mindset, but does not regard  the  entire  cohort  as  either
              holding separatist views or being politically active  in  any
              meaningful way.


           5) Sur place activities on behalf of an organisation  proscribed
              under the 2012 UN Regulations  is  a  relatively  significant
              risk factor in the assessment  of  an  individual's  profile,
              although its existence or absence  is  not  determinative  of
              risk. Proscription will entail a  higher  degree  of  adverse
              interest in an organisation and, by extension, in individuals
              known or perceived to be associated with it.  In  respect  of
              organisations  which  have  never  been  proscribed  and  the
              organisation that remains  de-proscribed,  it  is  reasonably
              likely that there will, depending on whether the organisation
              in question has,  or  is  perceived  to  have,  a  separatist
              agenda, be an adverse interest on the part  of  GoSL,  albeit
              not at the level applicable to proscribed groups.


           6)  TGTE  is  an  avowedly  separatist  organisation  which   is
              currently proscribed. It is viewed by GoSL with a significant
              degree of hostility and is perceived as  a  "front"  for  the
              LTTE. GTF and BTF are also currently  proscribed  and  whilst
              only the former is perceived as a "front" for the LTTE,  GoSL
              now views both with a significant degree of hostility.


           7) Other non-proscribed diaspora organisations  which  pursue  a
              separatist agenda, such as TS,  are  viewed  with  hostility,
              although they are not regarded as "fronts" for the LTTE.


           8) GoSL continues to operate an extensive intelligence-gathering
              regime in  the  United  Kingdom  which  utilises  information
              acquired through the infiltration of diaspora  organisations,
              the photographing and videoing  of  demonstrations,  and  the
              monitoring of the Internet and unencrypted social  media.  At
              the initial stage of monitoring and information gathering, it
              is reasonably likely that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  will
              wish  to  gather  more  rather  than  less   information   on
              organisations in which  there  is  an  adverse  interest  and
              individuals connected thereto. Information gathering has,  so
              far as possible, kept pace with developments in communication
              technology.


           9) Interviews at the SLHC  continue  to  take  place  for  those
              requiring a TTD.


          10) Prior to the return of an individual traveling on a TTD, GoSL
              is reasonably likely to  have  obtained  information  on  the
              following matters:


                      i. whether the individual is associated  in  any  way
                         with a particular diaspora organisation;


                     ii.  whether  they  have  attended   meetings   and/or
                         demonstrations and if so, at  least  approximately
                         how frequently this has occurred;


                    iii. the nature of involvement in  these  events,  such
                         as, for example, whether they played  a  prominent
                         part  or  have  been  holding  flags  or   banners
                         displaying the LTTE emblem;


                     iv.  any  organisational  and/or   promotional   roles
                         (formal or otherwise) undertaken on  behalf  of  a
                         diaspora organisation;


                      v. attendance at commemorative events such as  Heroes
                         Day;


                     vi.  meaningful  fundraising  on  behalf  of  or   the
                         provision of such funding to an organisation;


                    vii. authorship of, or appearance in, articles, whether
                         published in print or online;


                   viii. any presence on social media;


                     ix.  any  political   lobbying   on   behalf   of   an
                         organisation;


                      x. the signing of petitions perceived as being  anti-
                         government.

          11) Those in possession of a valid passport are  not  interviewed
              at the SLHC. The absence of an interview at  SLHC  does  not,
              however, discount the ability of GoSL to  obtain  information
              on the matters set out in  (10),  above,  in  respect  of  an
              individual with a valid passport using other methods employed
              as part of its intelligence-gathering regime, as described in
              (8). When considering the case of an individual in possession
              of a valid passport, a judge must assess the range of matters
              listed in (10), above, and the  extent  of  the  authorities'
              knowledge reasonably likely to exist in the context of a more
              restricted information-gathering apparatus. This may  have  a
              bearing on, for  example,  the  question  of  whether  it  is
              reasonably   likely   that   attendance   at   one   or   two
              demonstrations or minimal fundraising  activities  will  have
              come to the attention of the authorities at all.

          12) Whichever form of documentation is in place, it will  be  for
              the judge in any given case to determine what activities  the
              individual has actually undertaken and make clear findings on
              what the authorities are reasonably  likely  to  have  become
              aware of prior to return.

          13) GoSL operates a general electronic database which stores  all
              relevant information held on an individual, whether this  has
              been obtained from the United  Kingdom  or  from  within  Sri
              Lanka itself. This database is accessible at  the  SLHC,  BIA
              and anywhere else within Sri  Lanka.  Its  contents  will  in
              general determine the immediate  or  short-term  consequences
              for a returnee.

          14) A stop list and watch  list  are  still  in  use.  These  are
              derived from the general electronic database.

          15) Those being returned on a TTD will be questioned  on  arrival
              at  BIA.  Additional   questioning   over   and   above   the
              confirmation of identity is only reasonably likely  to  occur
              where the individual is already on either the  stop  list  or
              the watch list.

          16) Those  in  possession  of  a  valid  passport  will  only  be
              questioned on arrival if they appear on either the stop  list
              or the watch list.

          17) Returnees who have no entry on the general database, or whose
              entry is not such as to have placed them on either  the  stop
              list or the watch list, will  in  general  be  able  to  pass
              through the airport unhindered and return to  the  home  area
              without  being  subject  to  any  further   action   by   the
              authorities (subject to  an  application  of  the  HJ  (Iran)
              principle).

          18) Only those against whom there is  an  extant  arrest  warrant
              and/or a court order will appear on the stop list.  Returnees
              falling within this category will be detained at the airport.

          19) Returnees who appear on the watch list will fall into one  of
              two sub-categories: (i) those who, because of their  existing
              profile, are deemed to  be  of  sufficiently  strong  adverse
              interest  to  warrant  detention  once  the  individual   has
              travelled back to their home area  or  some  other  place  of
              resettlement; and (ii) those who are of interest,  not  at  a
              level sufficient to justify detention at that point in  time,
              but will be monitored by the authorities in their  home  area
              or wherever else they may be able to resettle.

          20) In respect of those  falling  within  sub-category  (i),  the
              question of whether an individual has,  or  is  perceived  to
              have, undertaken a "significant  role"  in  Tamil  separatism
              remains the appropriate touchstone. In making this evaluative
              judgment, GoSL will seek to identify those whom it  perceives
              as constituting a threat to the integrity of the  Sri  Lankan
              state by reason of their committed activism in furtherance of
              the establishment of Tamil Eelam.

          21) The term "significant role" does not require an individual to
              show  that  they  have  held  a   formal   position   in   an
              organisation, are a member of such, or that their  activities
              have been "high profile" or "prominent".  The  assessment  of
              their profile will  always  be  fact-specific,  but  will  be
              informed by an indicator-based approach, taking into  account
              the following non-exhaustive factors, none of which  will  in
              general be determinative:

                      i. the nature of any diaspora organisation on  behalf
                         of which an individual has been  active.  That  an
                         organisation has been proscribed under the 2012 UN
                         Regulations  will  be  relatively  significant  in
                         terms of the level of adverse interest  reasonably
                         likely  to  be   attributed   to   an   individual
                         associated with it;

                     ii. the type of activities undertaken;

                    iii. the extent of any activities;

                     iv. the duration of any activities;

                      v. any relevant history in Sri Lanka;

                     vi. any relevant familial connections.

          22) The monitoring undertaken by the authorities  in  respect  of
              returnees in sub-category (ii) in (19), above, will  not,  in
              general, amount to persecution or ill-treatment  contrary  to
              Article 3 ECHR.

          23) It is not  reasonably  likely  that  a  returnee  subject  to
              monitoring will be sent for "rehabilitation".

          24) In general, it is  not  reasonably  likely  that  a  returnee
              subject to monitoring will be recruited as  an  informant  or
              prosecuted for a refusal to undertake such a role.

          25) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human rights
              activists, who, in  either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri
              Lankan government, in particular its human rights record,  or
              are associated with publications critical of the  government,
              face a reasonable likelihood of being detained after  return,
              whether or not they continue with their activities.

          26) Individuals who have given evidence to the  LLRC  implicating
              the Sri Lankan security forces,  armed  forces,  or  the  Sri
              Lankan  authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes,  also  face  a
              reasonable likelihood of being detained after  their  return.
              It is for the individual concerned  to  establish  that  GoSL
              will be aware of the provision of such evidence.

          27) There is a reasonable likelihood that those detained  by  the
              Sri Lankan  authorities  will  be  subjected  to  persecutory
              treatment within the meaning of the  Refugee  Convention  and
              ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

          28) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for  a
              person at risk from the authorities.

          29) In appropriate cases, consideration must be given to  whether
              the  exclusion  clauses  under  Article  1F  of  the  Refugee
              Convention are applicable.





      K: THE HJ (IRAN) PRINCIPLE


     537. Beyond the application of the country guidance set out above,  it
          is of critical importance for tribunals to have regard  to  wider
          principles of refugee law. The ultimate decision in any case  is,
          after all, not whether an individual falls within the  parameters
          of the guidance, but whether they have  a  well-founded  fear  of
          persecution for a Convention reason.

     538. It is therefore essential, where  appropriate,  that  a  tribunal
          does not end  its  considerations  with  an  application  of  the
          country guidance to the facts, but proceeds to engage with the HJ
          (Iran) principle, albeit  that  such  an  analysis  will  involve
          interaction with that guidance.

     539. The HJ (Iran) principle establishes that it is  no  answer  to  a
          claim for asylum that an individual would  conceal  their  sexual
          identity in order to avoid persecution that would follow if  they
          did not do so. At paragraph 82 of HJ (Iran), Lord Roger, JSC, set
          out the correct approach to be adopted by decision-makers in  the
          context of an individual claiming to be at risk in their  country
          of origin by virtue of wishing to live openly as a gay man:

                 "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground  of
                 a well-founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the
                 tribunal must first ask itself whether it is  satisfied  on
                 the evidence that he is gay, or that he would be treated as
                 gay by potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

                 If so, the tribunal must then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
                 satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay  people  who
                 lived  openly  would  be  liable  to  persecution  in   the
                 applicant's country of nationality.

                 If so, the  tribunal  must  go  on  to  consider  what  the
                 individual applicant would do if he were returned  to  that
                 country.

                 If the applicant would in fact live openly and  thereby  be
                 exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he has a  well-
                 founded fear of persecution - even if he  could  avoid  the
                 risk by living "discreetly".

                 If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
                 applicant would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and  so  avoid
                 persecution, it must go on to ask itself why  he  would  do
                 so.

                 If the tribunal concludes that the applicant  would  choose
                 to live discreetly simply because that was how  he  himself
                 would wish to live, or because of social  pressures,  e  g,
                 not wanting  to  distress  his  parents  or  embarrass  his
                 friends, then his application should  be  rejected.  Social
                 pressures of that kind do not amount to persecution and the
                 Convention does not offer protection against them.  Such  a
                 person has no well-founded fear of persecution because, for
                 reasons  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  any   fear   of
                 persecution, he himself chooses to  adopt  a  way  of  life
                 which means that he is not in fact liable to be  persecuted
                 because he is gay.

                 If, on the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a
                 material reason for the applicant living discreetly on  his
                 return would be a  fear  of  the  persecution  which  would
                 follow if he were to live openly as a gay man, then,  other
                 things being equal, his  application  should  be  accepted.
                 Such a person has a well-founded fear  of  persecution.  To
                 reject his application on the ground that  he  could  avoid
                 the persecution by living discreetly would be to defeat the
                 very right which the Convention exists  to  protect  -  his
                 right to live freely and openly as a gay man  without  fear
                 of persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing him
                 to live freely and openly as a  gay  man  without  fear  of
                 persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that right
                 by affording the applicant a surrogate for  the  protection
                 from persecution which his country  of  nationality  should
                 have afforded him."

     540.  That  the  HJ  (Iran)  principle  applies  to  cases  concerning
          political  opinions  was  confirmed  by  Lord  Dyson,   JSC,   at
          paragraphs 26 and 27 of RT (Zimbabwe):

                 "26. The HJ (Iran) principle applies to any person who  has
                 political beliefs and is obliged to conceal them  in  order
                 to avoid the persecution that he would suffer if he were to
                 reveal them. Mr Swift accepted that  such  a  person  would
                 have a "strong" case  for  Convention  protection,  but  he
                 stopped short of an unqualified acceptance of the point. In
                 my view, there is no basis for such  reticence.  The  joint
                 judgment of Gummow and  Hayne  JJ  in  Appellant  S395/2002
                 contains a passage  under  the  heading  "'Discretion'  and
                 'being discreet'" which includes the following at para 80:

                       "If an applicant holds political or religious beliefs
                       that are not favoured in the country of  nationality,
                       the chance of  adverse  consequences  befalling  that
                       applicant on return to that country would  ordinarily
                       increase if, on return, the applicant  were  to  draw
                       attention to the holding of the relevant belief.  But
                       it is no answer  to  a  claim  for  protection  as  a
                       refugee to say to an  applicant  that  those  adverse
                       consequences could be avoided if the  applicant  were
                       to hide the fact that he or she holds the beliefs  in
                       question. And to say to an applicant that he  or  she
                       should be 'discreet' about such matters is simply  to
                       use gentler terms to convey  the  same  meaning.  The
                       question to be considered in  assessing  whether  the
                       applicant's fear of persecution is  well  founded  is
                       what may happen  if  the  applicant  returns  to  the
                       country  of  nationality;  it  is  not,   could   the
                       applicant live in  that  country  without  attracting
                       adverse consequences."

                 27. I made much the same point in HJ (Iran) at para 110:

                       "If the price that a person  must  pay  in  order  to
                       avoid persecution is that he must conceal  his  race,
                       religion, nationality, membership of a  social  group
                       or political opinion, then he is  being  required  to
                       surrender the very protection that the Convention  is
                       intended to secure for him. The Convention  would  be
                       failing in its purpose if it were to mean that a  gay
                       man does not have a well-founded fear of  persecution
                       because he would conceal the fact that he  is  a  gay
                       man in order to avoid persecution on  return  to  his
                       home country.""

     541. GJ did not address the HJ (Iran)  principle  in  the  context  of
          political opinions held, or perceived to be held, by returnees to
          Sri Lanka. The primary focus of the  Tribunal  was  the  risk  to
          returnees on the basis of what the authorities already knew about
          them. The HJ (Iran) principle is centred on what  the  individual
          would do, or at least  would  wish  to  do,  after  return.  This
          prospective assessment cannot, however, be entirely divorced from
          matters falling under the ambit of the country guidance.

     542. The genuineness of the belief in the establishment of Tamil Eelam
          is the very first question that must be  answered  when  applying
          the step-by step approach set out in paragraph 82 of  HJ  (Iran).
          It is essential that careful findings of fact  are  made  on  the
          evidence.

     543. In accepting that certain individuals may be refugees  under  the
          HJ (Iran) principle, the respondent suggests that  the  following
          criteria must be satisfied:

                 "They have a genuine belief in Tamil separatism  which  has
                 manifested in a significant role within Tamil separatism in
                 the diaspora."

     544. To the extent that  this  seeks  to  introduce  some  form  of  a
          qualitative threshold, the respondent's position cannot be right.
          The first question is simply whether the separatist  beliefs  are
          genuinely held. There is no need at this stage for those  beliefs
          to  have  been  manifested  in  any  particular  way  whilst  the
          individual was outside of Sri Lanka. The level of involvement  in
          diaspora  activities  may,  however,  be  relevant  to  questions
          arising further down the line of enquiry.

     545. We take account of Lord Rodger's reminder that an individual  may
          be perceived by a  potential  persecutor  to  be  something  that
          he/she is not (in that case, gay).  Whilst  that  is  undoubtedly
          true, it is difficult to envisage a situation  in  which  a  non-
          genuine  professor  of  separatist  beliefs  could  succeed  with
          reference to the Refugee Convention. It seems to us very unlikely
           that a tribunal would find that such an individual would wish to
          openly manifest beliefs on return that they did not in fact hold,
          particularly in light of the evidence on what is likely  to  flow
          from such actions. Even if this initial credibility barrier  were
          overcome,  it  would  inexorably  follow  that  the  individual's
          reluctance to openly express non-genuine separatist  views  would
          have no impact whatsoever on any protected right - in  this  case
          the right to hold and express political beliefs - because no such
          belief would exist.

     546. We emphasise that we are here concerned with those professing  to
          hold separatist beliefs,  as  that  concept  has  been  discussed
          earlier on in our decision. We cannot, and do not,  preclude  the
          possibility that other beliefs  held  in  respect  of  political,
          religious,  or  social  matters  might   be   relevant   to   the
          establishment of a  protection  claim  based  on  the  HJ  (Iran)
          principle.

     547. The next step of the enquiry involves the individual proving that
          the  open  expression  of  their  separatist  beliefs  would   be
          reasonably likely to result in  persecutory  treatment.  We  have
          previously concluded that there is only limited  political  space
          for the assertion of certain Tamil nationalist views  within  Sri
          Lanka. However, a tribunal considering the question of  how  GoSL
          will react to the expression of beliefs must do so on  a  correct
          premise: a genuine belief in varying degrees of autonomy for  the
          Tamil majority areas within Sri Lanka is self-evidently  distinct
          from a  commitment  to  the  establishment  of  Tamil  Eelam.  As
          discussed earlier, GoSL views separatism with real hostility. The
          view of a witness in GJ that any political  activity  within  Sri
          Lanka was at that time "incredibly dangerous" remains  valid  now
          in the context of a  "separatist  ideology"  and  the  expression
          thereof. Dr Nadarajah's evidence to  us,  upon  which  we  attach
          significant weight, is that individuals would be at risk if  they
          sought to undertake activities in Sri Lanka that they had pursued
          in the United Kingdom and that there was  "zero"  possibility  of
          any organisation with an avowedly separatist agenda being able to
          operate in that country.

     548. To these contextual factors must be added the uncontentious  fact
          that the authorities monitor the activities  of  those  returnees
          who appear on the watch list and the Tamil population in  a  more
          general sense, particularly in the north and east of the country.
          In our judgment, the authorities would be  reasonably  likely  to
          become aware of pro-separatist activities or the open  expression
          of such beliefs undertaken by a returnee, in whatever  form  they
          may be manifested.

     549. The respondent has asserted that in order to succeed under the HJ
          Iran principle, the returnee must show that:

                 "If returned, they would manifest  their  belief  similarly
                 [i.e. at a level disclosing a "significant role" within the
                 diaspora] and GoSL would be reasonably likely to detect  at
                 the same."

     550. As with the accompanying assertion discussed  in  paragraphs  545
          and 546, above,  this  position  is  misconceived.  There  is  no
          requirement for equivalence as between activities  undertaken  in
          the United Kingdom and those the individual may wish to pursue in
          Sri Lanka. We say this for three reasons. First, it is  a  simple
          fact that no  organisations  with  a  separatist  agenda  operate
          within the country. Thus, an individual  who  was,  for  example,
          highly active with the TGTE could not manifest his/her  genuinely
          held  beliefs  "similarly"  when  in  Sri   Lanka   because   the
          organisation does not operate there. That does not  prevent  them
          from acting on  an  individual  basis.  Second,  whilst  diaspora
          activities are clearly a source of hostility on the part of GoSL,
          the manifestation of separatist beliefs within Sri  Lanka  itself
          is highly likely to attract adverse attention and may,  depending
          on the facts of the case, require  less  from  an  individual  to
          prove that  they  would  be  detained.  Third,  the  respondent's
          position appears to require an individual who would already be at
          risk on return under paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ to then  undertake
          yet further activities so as to replicate that same risk.

     551. Continuing with the enquiry, facts must then be found as to  what
          the individual would wish to do on  return  in  relation  to  the
          expression of his/her genuinely held separatist beliefs. If it is
          accepted that they would intend to manifest these beliefs  in  an
          open fashion (whether by  physical  protest,  campaigning  and/or
          statements in the media and/or on social media), a finding  would
          have  to  be  made  as  to  whether  these  activities  would  be
          reasonably likely to be detected by the authorities,  bearing  in
          mind the climate of hostility towards Tamil separatism,  the  use
          of informants, and the ability to monitor individuals  and  most,
          if not all, forms of media.

     552. If the individual would engage in the  expression  of  separatist
          views and these were to become known,  it  is  reasonably  likely
          that they would be  detained,  with  the  consequential  risk  of
          persecution within the meaning of the Refugee Convention and ill-
          treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

     553. If it is found that the individual  would  not  seek  to  express
          their separatist beliefs on return, the next question is why that
          is  the  case.  If  a  material  reason  for  this   self-imposed
          censorship is to avoid the risk of persecution and serious  harm,
          they are entitled to international protection. It is  no  answer,
          as appeared to be the respondent's suggestion before us, that  an
          individual could pursue an alternative means of expressing  their
          political beliefs through support of a  nationalist  organisation
          such as the TNA. As highlighted  earlier,  there  is  a  material
          distinction between a nationalist agenda and one with  separatism
          at its core. In our judgment, it is wrong in principle to  expect
          an individual who holds a particular set of political beliefs  to
          "make do", as it were, with another, solely  in  order  to  avoid
          persecution or serious harm. This  would  amount  to  a  material
          modification of the protected right. To conclude otherwise  would
          run the risk of diluting the protection afforded by  the  Refugee
          Convention.

     554. In the first instance, there must be an engagement with the step-
          by-step approach in relation to a returnee who is  on  the  watch
          list, but not in the category of those who will  be  detained  in
          the home area by virtue of their pre-existing adverse profile. In
          undertaking this exercise, a tribunal will need to bear  in  mind
          the fact that the authorities will be monitoring  the  individual
          concerned, as the country guidance makes clear.

     555. However, even an individual who does not appear on the watch list
          or  indeed  on  the  general  electronic  database  at   all   is
          nonetheless entitled to have their protection claim  examined  in
          light of the HJ (Iran) principle if the findings of fact  support
          a conclusion that they would or  would  wish  to  openly  express
          genuinely held separatist beliefs on  return  but  would  conceal
          such beliefs  in  order  to  avoid  the  risk  of  detention  and
          persecutory treatment.




      L: THE TWO INDIVIDUAL APPEALS


     556. We now turn to consider the appellants' individual cases.  In  so
          doing we have  taken  all  the  evidence  adduced  into  account,
          whether or not specific  reference  is  made  to  any  particular
          aspect of it.




      KK's case in outline

     557. As originally put forward, KK's protection claim was based  on  a
          fear of the Sri Lankan authorities  due  to  detention  and  ill-
          treatment whilst in that country, together with the  consequences
          of sur place activities in the United Kingdom. It was  said  that
          the detention occurred because of suspected support for the  LTTE
          between 2006 and 2007. The sur place activities were on behalf of
          the TGTE and included  attendance  at  demonstrations  and  other
          community events.




      KK: the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     558. In dismissing KK's appeal, the First-tier Tribunal found that  he
          had not provided a truthful account  of  claimed  events  in  Sri
          Lanka.  In  addition  to  a  significant  delay  in  making   the
          protection claim in the United Kingdom, the judge found there  to
          be material inconsistencies in the evidence. The  judge  accepted
          that KK had undertaken some sur place activities,  but  concluded
          that he had never "played any significant role in the  TGTE"  and
          would not be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities on return.
          A claim based on the risk of  suicide  and  Article  3  ECHR  was
          rejected.




      KK: the error of law decision

     559. Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington  concluded  that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal had erred in  law  by  failing  to  adequately  consider
          whether KK's accepted sur place activities would be perceived  by
          the Sri Lankan authorities as sufficiently adverse to  place  him
          at risk on return. In setting  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
          decision, Judge Rimington expressly upheld the findings  of  fact
          on claimed events in Sri Lanka and the nature of  the  activities
          undertaken in the United Kingdom. The issue to be determined when
          re-making the decision was whether, in light  of  the  sur  place
          activities  to  date,  KK  would  attract  sufficiently   adverse
          interest to disclose a risk on return.




      KK: the parties' submissions

     560. The case-specific  skeleton  argument  provided  on  KK's  behalf
          emphasised the preserved findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
          respect  of  his  sur  place  activities  and  the   respondent's
          acceptance of the fact of additional activities undertaken  since
          August 2019.  KK's  involvement  with  all  activities  has  been
          sustained and committed. The range and nature of these activities
          are significant. The evidence of his brother  being  arrested  in
          Sri Lanka and questioned about  KK's  activities  in  the  United
          Kingdom should be  accepted.  Even  if  this  particular  factual
          element is rejected, KK's profile is such that  he  would  be  at
          risk on return. Alternatively,  KK's  genuinely  held  separatist
          beliefs and his desire to express them if returned to Sri  Lanka,
          but an unwillingness to do so because of the  risk  of  detention
          and persecution, permits him  to  succeed  under  the  HJ  (Iran)
          principle.

     561. The oral submissions built upon those set  out  in  writing.  The
          evidence from Mr Yogalingam added further support to the case. It
          was clear that GoSL will be aware  of  KK's  activities  in  this
          country prior to his return.

     562. The respondent's case-specific skeleton argument for  KK  accepts
          that there is "relatively little dispute between the  parties  as
          to the broad kinds of activity that KK has  engaged  in."  Whilst
          accepting that KK has been involved in a variety of activities on
          behalf of the TGTE, and that GoSL will be  aware  of  these,  the
          respondent asserts that there is no risk on  return,  whether  in
          respect of an  application  of  the  country  guidance,  or  with
          reference to the HJ (Iran) principle.

     563. Reliance is placed on the preserved  finding  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal that KK has never held a formal role  within  the  TGTE.
          Other preserved adverse findings are said to be "highly  relevant
          and material" to the assessment of KK's  overall  credibility  at
          this stage. Claimed activities for which there is  no  additional
          supporting evidence should not be accepted. Having accepted  that
          GoSL will be aware of  certain  activities,  KK's  profile  would
          still not show that the authorities would perceive him as  having
          played a "significant role" within the Tamil separatist movement.
          At most, he would be subject to monitoring, but  this  would  not
          lead to persecution or serious harm.

     564. The oral submissions focused primarily on the lack of what may be
          described as higher  profile  activities  by  KK  in  the  United
          Kingdom. His attendances at demonstrations involved nothing  more
          meaningful than that. He had never been named as a coordinator in
          any TGTE brochures. In respect of the claimed harassment of  KK's
          brother in Sri Lanka, it was noted that this had been rejected by
          the First-tier Tribunal and there was  an  absence  of   evidence
          from the brother himself.

     565. In respect of the HJ (Iran) principle, there were serious  doubts
          as to whether KK's  activities  had  been  undertaken  out  of  a
          genuine belief in separatism. The evidence as to  what  he  might
          wish to do on return to Sri Lanka was vague. This, in combination
          with his mental health problems, the absence of the TGTE in  that
          country, and the ability of his family and the Tamil community at
          large to provide support, went to show that KK would not in  fact
          wish  to  express  any  relevant  political  beliefs  on  return.
          Therefore, the HJ (Iran) principle did not apply.




      KK: findings of fact

     566. As with all the evidence  before  us,  we  have  considered  that
          relating specifically to KK  holistically  and  set  against  the
          lower   standard   of   proof.   Overall,   notwithstanding   his
          vulnerability, we are satisfied that he was able  to  participate
          in the hearing fully.

     567. We begin by reaffirming the preserved finding of fact relating to
          claimed past events: KK had never worked for the LTTE, nor had he
          been detained and ill-treated by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in
          2008. It follows that he was never  released  from  detention  on
          payment of  a  bribe,  nor  was  he  ever  subject  to  reporting
          conditions.

     568. In his latest witness statement, KK purports to rely on  previous
          statements and his  asylum  interview  record.  In  addition,  he
          asserts that after his arrival in  this  country,  he  wanted  to
          "vent my anger against the Sri Lankan government due to the  ill-
          treatment I suffered at the hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan  security
          forces...". Clearly, in light of the preserved finding of fact as
          to past events, KK's continued reliance on elements of his  claim
          that have been rejected does not assist his  overall  credibility
          at this stage.

     569. We have  borne  in  mind  the  preserved  adverse  findings  when
          assessing KK's evidence as a whole. On the one hand, having  told
          untruths in the past may act as an indicator as to  a  propensity
          to do so subsequently. On the other  hand,  we  remind  ourselves
          that a person can  be  untruthful  in  certain  respects,  whilst
          providing reliable evidence in relation to other matters.

     570. In oral evidence, KK accepted  that  he  had  not  mentioned  his
          parents' claimed support for the LTTE, or that three cousins  had
          died fighting on behalf of that organisation. This point was  not
          the subject of specific submissions, but we  address  it  in  any
          event. We are prepared to accept KK's  evidence.  Notwithstanding
          other untruthful elements of the claim, it is plausible that  his
          mother would have supported the LTTE as a  member  of  the  Tamil
          population living in Jaffna during  the  currency  of  the  long-
          running conflict. There is no suggestion that she was ever active
          and we find that to be the case. In respect of  the  cousins,  we
          accept that they existed and died in the manner  claimed.  Having
          reviewed the evidence, we note that KK had  not  previously  been
          asked about the involvement of any members of his extended family
          in the conflict. It is likely that he  did  not  regard  them  as
          having any bearing on his own claim. As discussed later, that  is
          our view as well.

     571. We now turn to KK's activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Again,
          aspects of the evidence relating to  these  are  the  subject  of
          preserved findings:

                    i. KK first became involved with the TGTE  in  September
                       2014 and had been issued with a Tamil Eelam  identity
                       card in May 2017;

                   ii. between 2014 and the hearing  before  the  First-tier
                       Tribunal in May 2019, KK had  been  involved  in  the
                       distribution  of  leaflets;  attending  meetings  and
                       demonstrations; and in a petition campaign;

                  iii. KK had not held a formal role within the TGTE;

                   iv. KK's brother and uncle had not been approached by the
                       authorities in Sri Lanka concerning his activities in
                       the United Kingdom.

     572. We confirm the status of those findings.

     573. Beyond the preserved  findings  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
          decision, the respondent has also accepted, to  the  extent  that
          his own evidence is supported by other sources, that KK continues
          to be involved with the TGTE and that he has undertaken a variety
          of sur place activities, including  attendance  at  meetings  and
          public demonstrations; fundraising; the distribution of leaflets;
          and  involvement  in  the  "one  million   signatures"   petition
          campaign.

     574. In so far as the respondent's  position  on  the  additional  sur
          place activities is concerned, we conclude that she is  right  to
          have accepted the essential fact of much of what KK  has  claimed
          to have undertaken. In addition to what KK himself has set out in
          considerable detail in his latest witness statement, there  is  a
          good deal of corroborative evidence in the form of photographs of
          his  attendance  at  demonstrations  and  other  events.  We  are
          satisfied that the images in fact show KK at the  various  events
          listed in the index to the main bundle and  covering  the  period
          beyond the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. We  also  find
          that a number of the relevant events have  been  the  subject  of
          Internet-based media coverage, as evidenced in the sources listed
          in the index.

     575.  In  respect  of  other  activities  which  KK  claims  to   have
          undertaken,  but  which  are  not  specifically  corroborated  by
          photographs, social media posts, or other literature, we find  it
          to be reasonably likely that he did in fact  participate  because
          the uncontentious activities form the  large  majority  of  those
          claimed. The additional events are consistent with  KK's  pattern
          of involvement.

     576. KK can also derive material  support  from  the  evidence  of  Mr
          Yogalingam. We have previously stated our overall view  that  his
          evidence has  been  candid  and  without  exaggeration,  both  in
          respect of wider issues relating to the TGTE and his knowledge of
          the activities undertaken by KK and  RS.  Specific  examples  are
          provided in Mr Yogalingam's witness statement on events in  which
          it is said that KK participated. We find that  this  evidence  is
          essentially reliable as regards those events which are within  Mr
          Yogalingam's own knowledge and  those  in  respect  of  which  he
          contacted his TGTE colleague, Mr Seevaratnam, in order to confirm
          KK's involvement.

     577. Although KK has alluded to  some  participation  with  TS,  Tamil
          Coordinating Committee, and the World Tamil  Historical  Society,
          there has been  no  detail  or  corroborative  evidence  provided
          whatsoever. Any activities of this nature  which  may  have  been
          undertaken are not of any material relevance in this case.

     578. The nature of KK's involvement in activities  on  behalf  of  the
          TGTE (as opposed to the  simple  fact  of  participation)  is  in
          dispute. From what we now know about the TGTE's structure, it  is
          clear that KK is not a "member" as he is not one of  the  elected
          MPs. It has not been suggested that he holds any permanent and/or
          formal role within that organisation. KK's case is  that  he  has
          undertaken what might be described as ad hoc  organisational  and
          promotional duties over the course of time.

     579. The evidence on this important  issue  presents  something  of  a
          mixed picture. The preserved adverse findings count against  what
          KK has to say about the nature of his involvement with the  TGTE,
          at least to an extent. There is also an absence of much  evidence
          documenting  any  claimed   organisational   and/or   promotional
          activities.  In  particular,  there  are  very   few,   if   any,
          photographs of KK in what might be described as an organisational
          role in demonstrations or other events (for example, acting as  a
          steward or addressing protesters with a  loudspeaker).  His  oral
          evidence highlighted these shortcomings. He was bound  to  accept
          that his name had not appeared  on  brochures  or  posters  as  a
          coordinator or member of any security detail for particular  TGTE
          events.

     580. However, KK can look once again to Mr Yogalingam  for  evidential
          support. The letter of 16 May 2019 is fairly  sparse  as  regards
          the particulars of KK's involvement. It  does  however  state  in
          terms that  he  has  been  given  "responsible  roles"  including
          assisting with the organisation of events. Examples  provided  in
          the letter include the TGTE National Sports  meets  in  2017  and
          2018; the Black July protest; the TGTE election campaign; and the
          protest against Brigadier  Fernando  in  February  2018.  Without
          more, we might regard  the  contents  of  this  letter  as  being
          insufficiently detailed in  order  to  overcome  the  credibility
          concerns pertaining to KK's own evidence. The letter must be read
          in conjunction with Mr Yogalingam's witness statement. In this he
          provides a good deal  more  information,  not  simply  about  the
          number and range of activities undertaken, but,  importantly,  on
          the nature of KK's involvement in some  of  these.  Examples  are
          given of specific events in which it  is  said  that  KK  had  an
          organisational role, a number of which are also contained in  the
          2019  letter,  but  also  include  additional  community  events,
          protests, and a hunger strike. All-told, ten named events are set
          out within the period 2017 to 2020. Mr Yogalingam places these in
          the context of KK having worked with him "closely".

     581. Taking a holistic view  of  the  evidence,  there  are  no  sound
          reasons for rejecting the truthfulness or reliability of what  Mr
          Yogalingam has to say about the nature of KK's  involvement  with
          the TGTE. We find that his evidence, viewed in the round and when
          combined with that of KK (in respect of  which  we  have  applied
          appropriate scepticism), shows that  the  latter  has  undertaken
          organisational and promotional  responsibilities  in  respect  of
          TGTE  events  since  2017.  Prior  to  that  we  find  that   his
          involvement did not include such responsibilities.

     582.  As  implicitly  acknowledged  by  the  respondent,  the  medical
          evidence from Professor Katona is effectively of neutral value on
          this issue: it does not suggest that KK would be more  likely  to
          undertake such responsibilities; nor does it indicate  that  such
          activities are inconsistent with his mental health condition.

     583. We reject KK's evidence that his brother has been harassed by the
          Sri Lankan authorities over the course of many years and to date.
          The claim that this same brother had been confronted by  the  Sri
          Lankan authorities in November 2017 because  of  KK's  sur  place
          activities was specifically rejected by the First-tier  Tribunal.
          We note that the brother's latest witness statement  purports  to
          rely on previous statements which  had  been  considered  by  the
          First-tier Tribunal and found wanting. This aspect of  KK's  case
          is, in our judgment, an embellishment. Whilst  taking  this  into
          account when assessing KK's overall credibility, it does not,  on
          the lower standard, drive us to the conclusion  that  other  core
          aspects relating to his activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
          rendered unreliable.

     584. The fact of KK's activities for the TGTE, both in terms of  their
          nature and extent, is conceptually distinct from the question  of
          whether they have been motivated by a  genuine  belief  in  Tamil
          separatism. We cannot of course peer into an  individual's  mind.
          The best we can do is to examine what KK  himself  has  said  and
          done, together with the surrounding evidence.

     585. The assertion  in  KK's  witness  statement  that  his  political
          beliefs are underpinned by his own experiences at  the  hands  of
          the Sri Lankan authorities  does  not  bear  scrutiny  given  the
          preserved adverse findings. Nor does it automatically follow that
          being of Tamil ethnicity denotes  support  for  separatism.  KK's
          willingness to provide an  untrue  account  in  the  past  counts
          against the general credibility of the claimed genuineness of his
          activities in United Kingdom: it could be  said  that  he  has  a
          vested interest in creating a profile for himself simply to avoid
          removal from this country.

     586. Competing against these concerns are the  following  matters.  We
          are prepared to accept that KK attended  some  demonstrations  in
          2009, soon after his arrival in the United Kingdom. However,  his
          sur place activities only commenced in any meaningful way when he
          became involved with the TGTE in September  2014,  some  eighteen
          months after he  made  his  asylum  claim.  Whilst  he  has  been
          criticised for the delay in claiming asylum, the  period  of  his
          prior involvement in sur place  activities  cannot  in  our  view
          simply  be  dismissed  as  opportunism  in  order  to  bolster  a
          protection claim. We have found that he has engaged in a  variety
          of activities on behalf of the TGTE over the course of  time  and
          has taken on additional responsibilities since at least 2017. The
          duration and nature of these activities points towards a  genuine
          commitment to the belief  in  Tamil  Eelam.  There  is  also  the
          evidence of Mr Yogalingam, who  has  attested  not  only  to  the
          variety and nature of KK's contribution, but  also  what  he  has
          described as KK's "sincere commitment" to the TGTE's  objectives.
          We place weight on this assessment by the witness of fact who has
          represented the organisation's position in these appeals.

     587. Overall, and not by a particularly wide margin, we find  that  KK
          does hold a genuine belief in and commitment to the establishment
          of Tamil Eelam. His rejection of the suggestion that he might  be
          able to find a political home, as it were, with the  TNA  is,  we
          find, plausible and in keeping  with  his  political  standpoint,
          being one which does not match that of  any  political  party  or
          organisation operating within Sri Lanka.

     588. We find  that  KK  would  wish  to  express  his  genuinely  held
          separatist views on return to Sri Lanka. His  oral  evidence  was
          that, "if I  go  [to  Sri  Lanka]  I  will  do  something."  That
          statement of intent is consistent with what he has done whilst in
          the United Kingdom over the course of several years. On our  view
          of the evidence as a whole, KK has  not  merely  been  a  passive
          activist; he has a  track  record  of  expressing  his  views  on
          separatism  publicly  and  of  participating  in   events   which
          themselves manifest the ideology of a separate Tamil state.

     589. When it was put to KK that  he  would  not  participate  in  TGTE
          events in Sri Lanka  (leaving  aside  the  somewhat  misconceived
          nature of the question, given that  that  organisation  does  not
          operate within the country), KK replied that there would  be  "no
          protection for me". We infer  from  that  answer  that  he  would
          desist from undertaking any activities in Sri Lanka  which  would
          involve the expression  of  his  separatist  beliefs  because  he
          believes he would thereby expose himself to a risk of harm.

     590. It is accepted that KK does not have a valid Sri Lankan passport.
          We find that his return could only  be  facilitated  through  the
          issuance of a TTD.

     591. KK's  mental  health  does  not  play  a  material  role  in  our
          assessment of risk on return. However, it is right that we  state
          our findings as to his current circumstances,  in  light  of  the
          unchallenged medical  report  from  Professor  Katona.  We  place
          significant weight on this evidence and find that KK is currently
          suffering from Complex PTSD and a Major Depressive Episode. There
          is no evidence before us to indicate that KK has yet accessed any
          specialist treatment for either condition, although it appears as
          though he continues to take prescribed antidepressant medication.




      KK: conclusions

     592. We now apply our findings of fact to the assessment  of  risk  on
          return. This  exercise  has  been  undertaken  in  light  of  our
          analysis of the country situation, as crystallised in the country
          guidance, together with the HJ (Iran) principle.

     593. The factual profile pertaining to KK is as follows:

                   i. he has no previous history of  involvement  with  the
                      LTTE itself;

                   ii.  there  is  no  material  familial  history  of  LTTE
                       involvement;

                  iii. he has been actively involved with the TGTE  for  six
                       years;

                   iv.  his   involvement   has   included   attendance   at
                       demonstrations,  meetings,  and   community   events,
                       together with fundraising  and  the  distribution  of
                       literature;

                    v. A number of his attendances at events have been shown
                       in online media reports;

                   vi.  the  nature  of  his  involvement  in  the  relevant
                       activities   has    included    organisational    and
                       promotional roles;

                  vii.  he  has  worked  "closely"  with  an  TGTE  MP,   Mr
                       Yogalingam;

                 viii. his belief in Tamil separatism and his activities  on
                       behalf  of  the  TGTE  are  motivated  by  a  genuine
                       conviction.

     594. It is reasonably likely that GoSL will already be aware  of  this
          factual profile, or will come to know of it prior to KK's  return
          to Sri  Lanka.  This  is  the  case  by  virtue  of  the  various
          information-gathering techniques used by the authorities in  this
          country, as we have assessed them to be, together with the  near-
          certainty that KK will be interviewed at the SLHC as part of  the
          TTD process. At any such interview KK will be  expected  to  tell
          the truth and this is reasonably likely to reveal any  additional
          relevant information on his activities which would not already be
          known through other sources.

     595. It is plainly the case that  the  information  relating  to  KK's
          activities in this country will be  passed  back  to  Sri  Lanka,
          whereupon  it  will  be  entered  into  the  general   electronic
          database.

     596. There is no question of a court order or  extant  arrest  warrant
          having been issued against KK. Therefore, he will not  appear  on
          the stop list.

     597.  What  then  will  the  authorities  make  of   KK's   particular
          circumstances, as we have found them to be? He is  an  individual
          who has been actively involved  with  a  proscribed  organisation
          perceived as a "front" for the LTTE.  The  activities  undertaken
          have covered a relatively wide range. His  involvement  with  the
          TGTE has been protracted and not limited to the lowest level.

     598. We conclude it to be reasonably likely that GoSL will identify KK
          as an individual who poses a perceived threat to the integrity of
          the Sri Lankan state by  virtue  of  his  committed  activism  in
          pursuit of Tamil Eelam. He will, in the eyes of the  authorities,
          be seen to have played a significant role in the Tamil separatist
          movement. This analysis will place KK on the watch list.

     599. The authorities will be aware of KK's return to Sri  Lanka  on  a
          TTD. As they will already know all  they  need  to,  KK  will  be
          permitted to exit BIA, but will be placed under  surveillance  in
          order to ensure that his arrival in  his  home  area  (or  indeed
          anywhere else) is known. In  light  of  our  conclusions  on  the
          assessment of risk, there is a real risk that KK will be detained
          on the basis of his existing profile.

     600. The risk of persecution and serious  harm  materialises  at  this
          juncture. It follows that KK is a  refugee  and  a  person  whose
          removal would expose him to ill- treatment under Article 3  ECHR.
          He succeeds in his appeal.

     601. If it were necessary to decide KK's appeal on the application  of
          the HJ (Iran) principle, we conclude as follows. His  belief  in,
          and activities in pursuance of, Tamil separatism are genuine.  We
          have found that he would, if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  wish  to
          express his separatist beliefs openly. It is clear to us that  if
          he were to do so, he  would  expose  himself  to  the  very  real
          possibility of being detained by the authorities  and,  in  turn,
          the risk of persecution and serious harm. KK's accepted  evidence
          is that he would conceal his beliefs and exercise self-censorship
          in order to avoid that risk. We have previously concluded that it
          is no answer to his protection claim to require  KK  to  make  do
          with professing support for a different political creed  (whether
          through the TNA  or  any  other  pro-Tamil  organisation  in  Sri
          Lanka): that would constitute  a  material  modification  of  his
          beliefs and the expression thereof.

     602. On this alternative basis, KK is a refugee.




      RS' case in outline

     603. The original asylum claim put forward in 2007 was  predicated  on
          the claimed fear of the Sri Lankan authorities as a result of  RS
          having been detained and ill-treated due to  perceived  links  to
          the LTTE. This history was rejected by the First-tier Tribunal in
          2008, which concluded that she was not a credible  witness.  That
          core finding has never been disturbed.

     604. Following that unsuccessful appeal, RS made a series  of  further
          submissions to the respondent in 2011, 2014, and 2018. The  focus
          of these was the claimed political activities undertaken  in  the
          United Kingdom, latterly on behalf of the TGTE. It was said  that
          these activities were being conducted together with ST.  Further,
          RS relied on her poor  mental  health.  Although  the  respondent
          rejected her further submissions, they were treated  as  a  fresh
          claim enabling RS to appeal  the  respondent's  decision  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal.




      RS: the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     605. Having considered the evidence before her in the context  of  the
          well-known principles set out in D (a Tamil) *[2002] UKIAT 00702,
          the judge reached the following material conclusions:

                    i. the adverse credibility findings made by  the  First-
                       tier Tribunal in 2008 were re-affirmed;

                   ii. RS had not been suffering from mental health problems
                       at the time of her 2007 asylum  interview,  the  2008
                       First-tier Tribunal hearing,  and  for  a  number  of
                       years thereafter;

                  iii. RS' current  mental  health  problems  were  not  the
                       result   of   ill-treatment   by   the   Sri   Lankan
                       authorities;

                   iv. any sur place activities undertaken by  RS  were  not
                       significant and did not place her at risk on return;

                    v. neither the medical claim based on Article 3 ECHR nor
                       the Article 8 ECHR claim based upon the  relationship
                       with ST could succeed.

     606. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.




      RS: error of law decision

     607. In  setting  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  Upper
          Tribunal Judge Rimington expressed the basis of her  decision  in
          clear  terms:  the  error  related  solely  to  the  failure   to
          adequately assess whether RS' involvement  with  the  TGTE  would
          have placed her at risk  on  return.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
          confirmation of  the  adverse  findings  made  in  2008  and  the
          circumstances  surrounding  RS'  mental  health   problems   were
          preserved.




      RS: the parties' submissions

     608. RS's case-specific skeleton argument  emphasised  her  very  poor
          mental  health  and  the  respondent's  acceptance   of   certain
          activities undertaken in the United Kingdom on behalf of the TGTE
          and TS. The evidence as a whole shows RS  to  be  a  genuine  and
          committed activist who supports the creation of Tamil Eelam.  Her
          numerous  activities  are  supported  by  the  two  organisations
          together with  photographic  and  other  materials  covering  the
          period from 2014 to 2020. In addition to her own  activities,  it
          is submitted that those of her partner, ST, have  been  prolonged
          and significant: these include speaking at protests; appearing on
          a TGTE brochure; and a material social media  presence.  As  with
          KK, it is submitted that RS' profile,  alone  or  in  combination
          with that of ST, is sufficient to place her at  risk  on  return,
          whether in respect of the original guidance  set  out  in  GJ  or
          under a clarified and/or  amended  version  thereof.  Again,  the
          alternative argument based on the HJ (Iran) principle  is  relied
          on as a route to success.

     609. The oral submissions made reference to  the  number  of  relevant
          activities undertaken by RS and ST, together  with  corroborative
          evidence, all of which went to show a risk on return.  There  was
          no real issue as  to  ST's  Facebook  settings:  these  could  be
          changed from public to private and back again at different times.
          Mr Mackenzie noted that there was a familial connection with  the
          LTTE (in respect of RS' father) and that this was  an  additional
          risk factor. Finally, it was submitted that her mental health was
          sufficiently poor so as to give rise to a real  risk  of  serious
          harm if she were placed under surveillance on return to Sri Lanka
          Being forced to engage in contact with the authorities could,  it
          was said, trigger a mental health crisis.

     610.  The  respondent's  skeleton  argument  emphasised  the   adverse
          findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in 2008  and  2019.  RS'
          willingness to tell untruths in  the  past  was  relevant  to  an
          assessment of her credibility now. As with  KK,  it  is  accepted
          that RS has participated in diaspora  activities  in  respect  of
          which there is corroborating photographic  or  other  documentary
          evidence. However, and notwithstanding her status as a vulnerable
          individual, numerous  aspects  of  her  evidence  now  should  be
          rejected, specifically in relation to the nature  and  extent  of
          her sur place activities, whether she holds a genuine  belief  in
          Tamil separatism, and whether any members of her  family  in  Sri
          Lanka  have  been  approached  by  the  authorities.   The   same
          credibility concerns should apply to ST's evidence.

     611. Even if RS' sur place activities are known to GoSL,  her  profile
          would not be such  as  to  give  rise  to  risk  on  return.  Her
          activities only occurred relatively recently and have all been of
          a low level. The respondent accepts that there might be a risk of
          RS being subjected to monitoring after her return, but it is said
          that this would not constitute persecution  or  lead  to  serious
          harm. In respect of the HJ (Iran) principle, there  are  question
          marks surrounding the genuineness of the  motivation  behind  her
          activities.

     612. The oral submissions emphasised the lack of any detailed evidence
          on claimed activities prior to 2017. It was not accepted that  RS
          had ever provided a statement to the ICPPG. Whilst attendance  at
          some demonstrations  was  accepted,  it  was  not  at  the  level
          suggested by RS and ST in their evidence.  The  photographic  and
          other documentary evidence did not  indicate  that  RS  had  ever
          played a prominent role in any activities on behalf of the  TGTE.
          Indeed, her poor mental health was  consistent  with  not  having
          done so. It was submitted that Mr Yogalingam had put a "gloss" on
          RS' low level activities. At its  highest,  her  involvement  had
          clearly   not   amounted   to   a   leadership   or   significant
          organisational role. It was not accepted that her mother had been
          visited by the authorities. It was of  note  that  there  was  no
          evidence from the mother.

     613. We were asked to find that ST had sought to change  his  Facebook
          page from private view only to open  during  the  course  of  the
          hearing. This reflected poorly on his credibility.

     614. On the HJ (Iran) principle, the respondent  maintained  her  view
          that RS did not hold a genuine belief in separatism.  There  were
          serious question marks as to whether RS would  wish  to  advocate
          for separatism in Sri Lanka at all. Even if she wanted to express
          some form of political beliefs, other non-separatist views  might
          be appropriate. It was not accepted that RS would be required  to
          become an informant for the authorities, particularly in light of
          her low-profile and mental health conditions.




      RS: findings of fact

     615. As with KK, RS arrives at this stage of the appellate proceedings
          already burdened by preserved adverse findings. Nothing  we  have
          seen or heard discloses a good reason to disturb  those  findings
          and we confirm that they stand.  Thus,  RS  has  previously  been
          found to have provided an untruthful account as to  claimed  past
          experiences in Sri Lanka. She was not detained and ill-treated by
          the authorities on suspicion of involvement with the LTTE, or for
          any other reason.

     616. It has never been in dispute that RS was born and brought  up  in
          Batticaloa in the Eastern Province of Sri Lanka, a  region  which
          was the setting for fierce conflict during the  currency  of  the
          civil war. The witness  statement  provided  for  the  First-tier
          Tribunal in 2019 refers to her experiences  growing  up  in  that
          area, including witnessing the consequences of the  war  for  the
          civilian population. A similar account was provided to  Dr  Brady
          in her  2020  report.  Notwithstanding  her  adverse  credibility
          profile, we find it to be reasonably likely that she was  exposed
          to distressing experiences, as  indeed  were  many  thousands  of
          civilians caught up in the conflict.

     617. The 2008 First-tier Tribunal accepted that  RS'  younger  brother
          had been taken by the LTTE in line with their  one  member  of  a
          household  "policy".  It  also  accepted  that  her  sister   had
          committed suicide (albeit not whilst in the custody  of  the  Sri
          Lankan army). These findings were not the subject of any  comment
          by the First-tier Tribunal in its 2019 decision,  nor  were  they
          specifically preserved in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  error  of  law
          decision. In all the circumstances, we find both of these  events
          to be true. The evidence in respect of each was considered in the
          2008 appeal and there is nothing by way  of  subsequent  judicial
          assessment or evidence which undermines the original findings.

     618. Nothing in the evidence relating to ST indicates that he has  any
          material LTTE history and we find that there is none.

     619. We turn to RS' activities in the United Kingdom. As is  the  case
          with KK, the respondent accepts that RS  has  participated  in  a
          number  of   activities   including   attendance   at   protests,
          commemorative events, meetings,  together  with  some  assistance
          with the promotion of  such.  It  is  also  accepted  that  these
          activities have in the main been on behalf of the TGTE and TS.

     620. Before addressing the evidence on the nature and  extent  of  RS'
          activities, it  is  important  to  establish  her  mental  health
          circumstances. There is no dispute as  to  the  medical  evidence
          provided by, in particular, Dr Brady. In light of this, we accept
          her diagnoses and find that RS is currently  suffering  from  the
          following conditions:

                    i. severe PTSD;

                   ii. severe depression;

                  iii.  schizoaffective  disorder,  currently   in   partial
                       remission.

     621. There is also no dispute as  to  her  significant  mental  health
          history, at least from 2016 onwards. Given the  medical  evidence
          as a whole, we find that RS has been detained  under  the  Mental
          Health Act 1983 on three separate occasions:  August  to  October
          2016; June 2017; and January 2019.  We  find  that  in  2017  she
          attempted suicide. She had been deemed  to  be  highly  dependent
          upon ST for her care needs  and  overall  emotional  support.  Dr
          Brady was of the view that she presented a "low to moderate" risk
          of suicide, with that risk being largely mitigated by the support
          of ST. We accept this evidence. We also accept that  her  removal
          from the United Kingdom would be reasonably  likely  to  increase
          the risk of a deterioration in her overall  mental  health,  with
          the consequent risk of psychotic symptoms and a higher chance  of
          suicide or self-harm.

     622.  It  is  clear  to  us  that  there  is  a  particularly   strong
          relationship of dependency between RS and ST.

     623. We have taken RS' mental health into account when evaluating  her
          evidence.

     624. With the above in mind, we find it credible that RS has only been
          able to participate in activities when accompanied by ST.  It  is
          also the  case  that  RS'  mental  health  conditions  will  have
          effectively precluded her from taking on what may be described as
          higher-level organisational roles on behalf of  the  TGTE  and/or
          TS.

     625. We find that RS has been regularly active on behalf of  the  TGTE
          since 2017. Her own evidence on this point is supported  by  that
          of Mr Yogalingam, whom we have found to be a  generally  reliable
          witness.

     626. Having interrogated the helpful table of activities  set  out  in
          RS' case-specific skeleton argument, we are  satisfied  that  she
          and ST have attended at least seventeen public  protests  in  the
          period early 2019 to February 2020. We find that they  have  also
          attended commemorative events between  2014  and  2019  and  were
          active in the TGTE election campaign in April 2019.  It  is  also
          the case that they have attended various TGTE  Sports  Day  event
          meetings.

     627. We do not accept ST's evidence that he and RS  have  attended  at
          least fifty demonstrations in this country. That  figure  is  not
          supported by any documentary evidence or indeed  by  any  details
          provided by ST himself. We regard his assertion that RS may  have
          forgotten about a number of demonstrations  attended  because  of
          her ill-health as less than credible, particularly as RS has  not
          provided a similar explanation.

     628. The photographic evidence to which we have been referred  clearly
          shows that the LTTE flag has  been  prominently  displayed  at  a
          number of the protests attended by  RS  and  ST.  There  is  also
          reliable evidence to show  that  RS's  attendance  at  least  one
          protest was included in footage broadcast on TGTE TV. It is clear
          that other events  she  and  ST  attended  were  the  subject  of
          publicity whether in print or online.

     629. With the corroborative support of Mr  Yogalingam's  evidence,  we
          accept that RS has been a regular attendee at  the  sub-committee
          of the TGTE in her local  area.  Whilst  this  is  not  a  formal
          membership role (bearing in mind the very limited scope  of  that
          term in the context of the TGTE),  we  do  accept  that  she  has
          worked as a volunteer in  order  to  assist,  to  the  relatively
          limited extent that  she  is  able,  with  the  organisation  and
          promotion of events. It  is  of  some  note  that  Mr  Yogalingam
          regards her involvement as being important for the  organisation,
          given what he has described as the low levels of participation by
          women in general.

     630. We find that RS and ST have been issued with TGTE cards. However,
          for the reasons set out earlier in  our  decision,  this  has  no
          material bearing on their overall profile.

     631. Turning to activities conducted on behalf of TS, we find that  RS
          and ST have been involved with this organisation since  2019  and
          have attended protests and other events.  There  is  photographic
          evidence appearing on the TS Facebook page of their attendance at
          a demonstration in 2019. We have previously stated our favourable
          impression of Mr Uthayasenan's evidence and we regard what he has
          to say about RS and ST as providing good support for this  aspect
          of RS's case. In particular, his confirmation  that  RS  is  well
          known to a number of TS coordinators is indicative of a level  of
          committed involvement. Overall, we find that the  description  of
          RS as a "regular supporter and activist" is an accurate one,  and
          we place weight on Mr Uthayasenan's belief that she and  ST  will
          become full members of TS in due course.

     632. For the reasons set out previously and  relating  to  RS'  mental
          health, her activities are largely reflective of those undertaken
          by ST. There are certain aspects of his activities which  require
          additional consideration. Photographic evidence confirms that  he
          has, on at  least  one  occasion,  attended  a  protest  and  led
          proceedings  with  a   loudspeaker.   The   relevant   photograph
          accompanies an online article providing  details  of  the  event.
          ST's full name also appears on the brochure for a TGTE  event  in
          2019. In respect of TS, the photographic  evidence  shows  ST  in
          attendance at events organised  by  this  organisation  and  that
          which the LTTE flag is on prominent  display.  He  is  also  seen
          pictured with Mr Yogalingam at several  demonstrations.  Overall,
          we find that the evidence proves ST to have, on  occasion,  taken
          on a role more specific than simple attendance at events.

     633. RS and ST have asserted that in 2014 they provided statements  to
          the ICPPG who in turn submitted these to UN OISL. This aspect  of
          the case caused us some concerns. The alleged statements have not
          been provided to us and  it  is  right  to  say  that  ST's  oral
          evidence on this issue was vague. These difficulties must be  set
          against the documentary evidence. There are  photographs  showing
          RS and ST at a location said to be the offices of  the  ICPPG.  A
          banner situated behind the couple in one of the photographs  does
          indeed name that organisation and is to that extent supportive of
          the location. What is of more evidential significance are the two
          letters from the organisation. The first,  dated  November  2014,
          confirms that RS had provided "written evidence" which was "to be
          submitted" to UN OISL. This would only take RS' assertion so  far
          as it does not confirm the actual submission of any statement  to
          that body. The second of the two letters, dated July 2020, states
          that due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the ICPPG offices were  closed
          and the statements of RS and ST could not be obtained. The letter
          goes on to confirm, however, that the statements had in fact been
          submitted to UN OISL. Although the picture  is  not  particularly
          satisfactory, we are not inclined to treat the letter's  contents
          as simply unreliable and we find that a  statement  was  in  fact
          provided by RS  in 2014.  Having said that, there is  nothing  to
          indicate that her name, or any other personal  information  which
          would lead to her identification, will have been disclosed either
          by the ICPPG or UN OISL.

     634. In respect of the issue surrounding the settings on ST's Facebook
          account, we are presented with an evidential scenario  for  which
          there is no clear answer. We find that ST did change his Facebook
          setting from private to public after completing his oral evidence
          and that posts covering the period September 2019  to  June  2020
          were made viewable by the public. We are unclear as to  why  this
          was done, but it would appear to have been opportunistic and thus
          adverse to his credibility. However, when seen in context of  the
          evidence as a whole, this specific  matter  does  not  materially
          affect our overall findings as  to  ST's  political  beliefs  and
          activities. We also find that he has in any event posted publicly-
          accessible anti-government content  both  before  and  after  the
          period in question.

     635.  It is apparent from our findings thus  far  that  the  level  of
          activity undertaken by RS and ST increased  significantly  during
          2019. It is  of  course  possible  that  this  was  in  some  way
          engineered in order solely to bolster the prospects of her appeal
          to the First-tier Tribunal and then  in  this  Tribunal.  On  the
          lower standard of proof and not without a degree  of  hesitation,
          we are prepared to accept that they both have in fact  acted  out
          of a commitment to a genuinely held belief in  the  establishment
          of Tamil Eelam through non-violent means. There are  difficulties
          with certain aspects of their evidence and we are fully cognisant
          of the fact that RS has previously been found to have  fabricated
          aspects of her protection  claim.  The  following  matters,  when
          combined, go to outweigh these not insignificant concerns.

     636. First, the couple have been involved in diaspora  activities  for
          some time now, at least in respect of the TGTE. They have engaged
          in a variety of activities.

     637. Second, the nature and commitment of their involvement  has  been
          supported by the TGTE and TS.

     638. Third, the aspects of RS' background in Sri Lanka which  we  have
          accepted lend some  weight  to  a  subsequent  development  of  a
          genuine belief in the need for a Tamil homeland. We  do  not  see
          the fact of her brother's "recruitment" by the LTTE as  something
          which would make the holding of such  a  belief  materially  less
          likely. After all, the violent methods of that organisation  have
          never represented the sole  basis  upon  which  any  support  for
          separatism is based.

     639. Based on the unchallenged letter from  BTF  we  are  prepared  to
          accept that RS became a paid member of that organisation in 2014.
          However, we find that the membership lapsed in October  2015  and
          that neither RS nor ST have had any involvement since.

     640. Both RS and ST have claimed that their respective families in Sri
          Lanka have been approached by the authorities on the  basis  that
          the sur place activities are known  about.  Whilst  acknowledging
          that the harassment or relatives by the  authorities  is  not  in
          general terms implausible, we  find  that  these  assertions  are
          embellishments. RS' evidence  on  this  issue  is  brief  in  the
          extreme; all that is said in her witness statement  is  that  her
          mother informed her at some unknown point in time that  "the  CID
          had asked about me twice last year." There is  no  evidence  from
          her mother. ST has stated that his family has been visited by the
          CID on two or three occasions, the last  being  in  approximately
          April 2020 and that they had been shown photographs of him  at  a
          demonstration in London. When asked in cross-examination  why  he
          maintained regular contact with his mother  despite  the  alleged
          adverse interest by the authorities, his apparent explanation was
          that she was unaware of what he had  been  doing  in  the  United
          Kingdom and that she had difficulties with her hearing. We do not
          find that to be a credible response.

     641. The final factual matter to be addressed is what, if anything, RS
          would wish to do if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  in  terms  of  the
          expression of any genuinely held political  beliefs.  As  matters
          stand, we cannot say whether she would be returned together  with
          ST: the prospect of  a  separation  would  seem  to  be  somewhat
          unlikely, but he is not an appellant in these proceedings.

     642. We find that, whether or not she was returned with ST,  RS  would
          hold a desire to express her separatist  views  in  one  form  or
          another. We have little hesitation in finding that she would  not
          in fact do so. If she were in Sri Lanka without ST a  reason  for
          concealing her beliefs would be the absence of his support,  upon
          which she greatly depends. However, we find that that  would  not
          constitute the sole basis for  her  self-censorship.  A  material
          reason would also be the risk, of  which  she  is  quite  clearly
          aware, of being detained by the authorities. Indeed, in light  of
          her very  poor  mental  health,  the  very  prospect  of  adverse
          attention would be likely to cause her further problems  on  that
          front. If she were  in  Sri  Lanka  with  ST,  the  fear  of  the
          consequences of expressing her beliefs would constitute the  only
          reason for remaining silent.




      RS: conclusions

     643. The factual matrix is now to be applied to our conclusions on the
          country guidance issue and the HJ (Iran) principle.

     644. The relevant factual profile pertaining to RS is as follows:

                    i. her brother was taken by the LTTE to fight during the
                       civil war;

                   ii.  she   was   never   herself   involved   with   that
                       organisation;

                  iii. she has never been detained or ill-treated by the Sri
                       Lankan authorities;

                   iv. since 2017 she  has  been  involved  with  the  TGTE,
                       engaging in a variety of activities extending  beyond
                       attendance at demonstrations;

                    v. more recently she has actively supported TS, with the
                       prospect  of  becoming  a   full   member   of   that
                       organisation;

                   vi. she has submitted a statement to the ICPPG, which has
                       in turn been submitted to UN OISL. Her identity  will
                       not have been disclosed by either organisation;

                  vii. her sur place activities have been undertaken out  of
                       a genuine commitment to Tamil separatism;

                 viii. she is the long-term partner of an individual who  is
                       also actively involved with both the TGTE and TS. His
                       activities have also been  undertaken  on  a  genuine
                       basis and have, to an extent, been at a higher  level
                       of prominence than her own;

                   ix. the Sri Lankan authorities have not as yet approached
                       family members within  that  country  on  account  of
                       activities undertaken by RS in the United Kingdom;

                    x. RS suffers from significant mental health problems;

                   xi.  she  would  wish  to  express  her  genuinely   held
                       political beliefs on return to Sri Lanka,  but  would
                       not do  so  in  part  because  of  the  fear  of  the
                       consequences.

     645. In light of its intelligence-gathering capabilities  as  we  have
          assessed them to be, it is clear enough that GoSL will  be  aware
          of RS' activities in the United Kingdom on behalf of the TGTE and
          TS, whether or not this knowledge  encompasses  the  entirety  of
          what she has done. RS will be  subject  to  the  TTD  application
          process and will be interviewed at the SLHC. At this point she is
          likely to be asked additional questions about her  activities  in
          this  country,  to  which  she  must  respond  truthfully.  Quite
          clearly, we cannot say for sure precisely what questions will  be
          posed; but we cannot exclude the reasonable likelihood  that  she
          would be asked about any connection  with  the  ICPPG  and/or  UN
          OISL, given GoSL's  heightened  sensitivity  to  this  particular
          issue.

     646. It is then reasonably likely that material  information  will  be
          passed back to Sri Lanka and entered onto the general  electronic
          database.

     647. Following further analysis from within the country,  it  will  be
          apparent that RS has no extant arrest warrants  or  court  orders
          against her name. It follows that she will not appear on the stop
          list and will not therefore be detained at the airport.

     648. Her assessed profile will, we conclude, place her in the category
          of persons included in the  watch  list  who  are  of  sufficient
          adverse interest to warrant attention on their arrival  in  their
          home area or another place of resettlement.  This  conclusion  is
          based on the  following  analysis,  which  of  course  is  itself
          predicated on the perception of GoSL.

     649. It will be seen that RS has a familial link to the  LTTE  in  the
          past,  albeit  not  one  that  is  reasonably  likely  to  arouse
          significant hostility. She has  a  track  record  in  the  United
          Kingdom of active involvement with a proscribed group - the TGTE-
          regarded as a "front" for  the  LTTE  and  TS,  another  avowedly
          separatist organisation. It will be noted that RS  has  not  only
          attended a fairly significant number of demonstrations, but  that
          several of these have received  publicity,  either  in  print  or
          online. Her other activities, including involvement with a  local
          sub-committee of the TGTE, is reasonably likely to be regarded as
          indicating a genuine commitment  to  that  organisation  and  the
          separatist ideology in general. The adverse interest in her  will
          be exacerbated by the knowledge that she has provided evidence to
          UN OISL.

     650. RS' own circumstances will be seen by GoSL in the context of  her
          relationship with ST,  whom,  we  conclude,  is  also  reasonably
          likely to be viewed with significant hostility by virtue  of  his
          activities in this country. We are not basing this on the premise
          that ST will necessarily be the subject of  any  TTD  application
          process at the same time as RS. Rather, we  are  concluding  that
          information on him will either already be known  when  RS  begins
          that process, or that she will be obliged to truthfully  disclose
          it  during  an  interview  at  the  SLHC.  The  effect   of   her
          relationship is, in our judgment, likely to increase the level of
          animosity towards RS herself. Put  shortly,  GoSL  is  reasonably
          likely to see RS as one part of a committed separatist couple.

     651.  We  do  not  regard  RS'  sex  or  mental  health  problems   as
          representing any sound  basis  on  which  to  conclude  that  her
          profile would be  reduced.  Nothing  in  the  expert  or  country
          evidence before us indicates that women are deemed to be less  of
          a threat than men, whether in respect of violent  or  non-violent
          separatist activism. As to the  mental  health  conditions,  GoSL
          will see RS' record for what it is: as a matter of fact  she  has
          participated in numerous  activities  over  a  not  insignificant
          period of time, notwithstanding her difficulties. To  regard  her
          ill-health as a significant "mitigating" factor in  the  eyes  of
          GoSL would, quite frankly, run contrary to all that we know about
          the regime's authoritarian nature and poor human rights record.

     652. In summary, we conclude that it is reasonably likely that RS will
          be perceived by GoSL as a committed activist who has, in all  the
          circumstances, been playing  a  significant  role  in  the  Tamil
          separatist movement and as such will be regarded as a  threat  to
          the integrity of the Sri Lankan state.

     653. It follows from this that RS is reasonably likely to be  detained
          and exposed to the risk of persecution within the meaning of  the
          Refugee Convention and ill-treatment contrary to Article 3  ECHR.
          She therefore succeeds in her appeal.

     654. As with KK, we go on to consider the alternative scenario; namely
          that RS would appear on the watch list, but would not be at  risk
          of being detained without more. In such circumstances, she  would
          be subject to monitoring.

     655. We have found as  a  fact  that  RS  genuinely  holds  separatist
          beliefs and that she would wish to express these on return to Sri
          Lanka. If she in fact did so, even to a lesser  extent  than  she
          has been able to do thus far whilst in the United Kingdom, it  is
          reasonably likely that any such activities would be detected  and
          that she would consequently be detained  and  persecuted.  RS  is
          aware of this risk and we have found that  at  least  a  material
          reason for her concealing her  separatist  beliefs  would  be  to
          avoid being ill-treated.

     656. Expecting her to modify her beliefs by seeking to profess support
          for a party such as the TNA is no answer to her case. Nor is  the
          availability of familial support on  return.  Whilst  this  would
          clearly be of assistance  to  RS,  given  her  very  poor  mental
          health, emotional and practical support  from  others  is  not  a
          substitute for genuinely held political  beliefs  on  a  specific
          issue and the desire to manifest these beliefs.

     657. Thus, on this alternative scenario RS is a refugee.




      Notice of Decision


     658. The making of the decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
          appeals of KK and RS involved the making of errors on  points  of
          law.

     659. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal have been set aside.

     660. The decision in the appeal of KK is re-made and  that  appeal  is
          allowed.

      The decision in the appeal  of  RS  is  re-made  and  that  appeal  is
      allowed.










      Signed: H Norton-Taylor      Date:  26 May 2021


      Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







      TO THE RESPONDENT

      FEE AWARD


      No fees have been paid in these  appeals  and  there  can  be  no  fee
      awards.




      Signed: H Norton-Taylor      Date:  26 May 2021


      Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





                                 APPENDICES


Appendix A: the country information

          OBJECTIVE DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

|Item |Document                                            |Date             |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Prevention of Terrorism      |24 July 1979     |
|     |(Temporary Provisions) Act                          |                 |
|     |UNSC Resolution 1373 (2001) S/RES/1373              |28 September 2001|
|     |Human Rights Watch: Funding the "Final War" - LTTE  |14 March 2006    |
|     |Intimidation and Extortion in the Tamil Diaspora    |                 |
|     |The Independent, 'Tamil Tigers: defeated at home,   |23 May 2009      |
|     |defiant abroad'                                     |                 |
|     |Report of Home Office Information Gathering Visit to|August 2009      |
|     |Colombo Sri Lanka, 23 - 29 August 2009              |                 |
|     |Roger Mac Ginty, 'Social network analysis and       |2010             |
|     |counterinsurgency: a counterproductive strategy?' , |                 |
|     |Critical Studies on Terrorism 3(2) pp.209-226       |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: The Sri Lankan Tamil    |23 February 2010 |
|     |Diaspora after the LTTE                             |                 |
|     |Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE): The |15 March 2010    |
|     |Advisory Committee, 'Formation of a Provisional     |                 |
|     |Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam: Final      |                 |
|     |report based on the study by the Advisory Committee'|                 |
|     |TamilNet, 'Cancellation tactics make potential      |11 May 2010      |
|     |candidates withdraw from TGTE elections'            |                 |
|     |Letter from the British High Commission (as quoted  |5 January 2012   |
|     |in UKBA 2012 Country of Information Report)         |                 |
|     |Ministry of Foreign Relations Website, 'Sri Lanka is|12 January 2012  |
|     |still under threat - warns Secretary Defence'       |                 |
|     |(contains text of "Future Challenges of National    |                 |
|     |Security in Sri Lanka)                              |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: 'Locked Away: Sri Lanka's    |March 2012       |
|     |security detainees'                                 |                 |
|     |Sunday Observer, 'LTTE front funds Amnesty          |4 March 2012     |
|     |International'                                      |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Gazette, United Nations      |15 May 2012      |
|     |Regulation No.1 of 2012                             |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Gazette, United Nations      |31 May 2012      |
|     |Regulations No.2 of 2012                            |                 |
|     |UN: UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the  |21 December 2012 |
|     |International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers    |                 |
|     |from Sri Lanka                                      |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka's Assault on       |2013             |
|     |Dissent                                             |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: We Will Teach You a Lesson -    |26 February 2013 |
|     |Sexual Violence against Tamils by Sri Lanka Security|                 |
|     |Forces                                              |                 |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Written evidence to the House |21 June 2013     |
|     |of Commons Select Committee on Foreign Affairs      |                 |
|     |Gotabaya Rajapaksa, 'Sri Lanka's National Security',|2014             |
|     |Prism (vol 4, 2014)                                 |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP): A   |March 2014       |
|     |Still Unfinished War                                |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: 'Sri Lanka: Free        |17 March 2014    |
|     |Prominent Rights Defenders'                         |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Gazette, Government          |21 March 2014    |
|     |Notification                                        |                 |
|     |The Economist, 'Never a Good Time: Sri Lanka and    |21 March 2014    |
|     |Human Rights'                                       |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Diaspora organisations             |1 April 2014     |
|     |proscriptions should not be used to stifle free     |                 |
|     |speech and legitimate criticism UK tells Sri Lanka' |                 |
|     |The Hindu, 'Sri Lanka bans 15 Tamil diaspora        |2 April 2014     |
|     |organisations'                                      |                 |
|     |BBC, 'Suspected Tamil rebels shot dead in Sri Lanka'|11 April 2014    |
|     |New.LK, 'Terrorist-Political-Human Rights Nexus in  |16 April 2014    |
|     |Canada'                                             |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Third abortive Diaspora-backed       |25 April 2014    |
|     |attempt to revive the LTTE'                         |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Sri Lanka's diaspora ban has 'no   |29 April 2014    |
|     |legal effect in Canada' says Foreign Affairs        |                 |
|     |Minister'                                           |                 |
|     |The Sunday Leader, 'TGTE Losing Lustre Among Tamils'|11 May 2014      |
|     |The Sunday Leader, 'The LTTE revives its US network'|13 July 2014     |
|     |The Sunday Leader, 'LTTE reaches out to Scottish    |27 July 2014     |
|     |separatists'                                        |                 |
|     |Home Office Country Information and Guidance Note,  |28 August 2014   |
|     |'Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism'                       |                 |
|     |UN: Oral update of the High Commissioner for Human  |22 September 2014|
|     |Rights on promoting reconciliation, accountability  |                 |
|     |and human rights in Sri Lanka                       |                 |
|     |Huffington Post, 'Why Sri Lanka's Detention of Mrs  |1 October 2014   |
|     |Balenderan Jayakumari Is so Sinister'               |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Gazette, Amendments to the   |11 December 2014 |
|     |United Nations Regulations                          |                 |
|     |Stanford University Centre for International        |2015             |
|     |Security and Cooperation, 'Liberation Tigers of     |                 |
|     |Tamil Eelam'                                        |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Office of the United Nations High |16 February 2015 |
|     |Commissioner for Human Rights on Promoting          |                 |
|     |Reconciliation, Accountability and Human Rights in  |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka (OISL)                                    |                 |
|     |Al Jazeera, 'Spy cables reveal Sri Lanka hyped up   |4 March 2015     |
|     |Tiger postwar threat'                               |                 |
|     |GroundViews, 'PTA detainees - Ignored under         |9 May 2015       |
|     |"Yahapalanaya"?'                                    |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: The Constitution of the      |15 May 2015      |
|     |Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (revised |                 |
|     |- as amended up to 15 May 2015)                     |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP): A   |1 July 2015      |
|     |Still Unfinished War (with annexes)                 |                 |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Tainted peace                 |August 2015      |
|     |International Crisis Group: 'Sri Lanka between      |12 August 2015   |
|     |elections'                                          |                 |
|     |Sunday Times (Sri Lanka), 'TNA hits out at LTTE,    |20 September 2015|
|     |calls on Govt. to accept OISL report'               |                 |
|     |UN: Comprehensive report of the Office of the UN    |28 September 2015|
|     |High Commissioner for Human Rights on Sri Lanka     |                 |
|     |UN Resolution 30/1                                  |1 October 2015   |
|     |Human Rights Watch: We Live in Constant Fear - Lack |23 October 2015  |
|     |of Accountability for Police Abuse in Sri Lanka     |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: The Gazette of the Democratic|20 November 2015 |
|     |Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka                     |                 |
|     |Daily FT, 'Sri Lanka slashes list of 'terrorists' in|23 November 2015 |
|     |reconciliation bid'                                 |                 |
|     |Jeevanthie Senanayake, 'Understanding Separatist    |2016             |
|     |Networking in Sri Lanka: Ideology as a concept in   |                 |
|     |network analysis.' Defence & Security Journal 1:    |                 |
|     |15-29. (Journal of the Defence Services Command and |                 |
|     |Staff College, Sri Lanka.)                          |                 |
|     |Vajira Senadheera, 'Back to Civilian Life: Dynamics |2016             |
|     |of Economic Reintegration Process of Ex- LTTE       |                 |
|     |Combatants in Post-War Sri Lanka', Defence and      |                 |
|     |Security Journal, Volume 1, Issue 1, 2016 pp 60-74. |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |January 2016     |
|     |Silenced: Survivors of Torture and Sexual Violence  |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: Sri Lanka: Events of 2015       |27 January 2016  |
|     |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, 'Sri Lanka:|15 March 2016    |
|     |Activity of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam    |                 |
|     |(LTTE) in Sri Lanka, including arrests, whether LTTE|                 |
|     |members have been responsible for extortion,        |                 |
|     |disappearances or bombings since the government     |                 |
|     |defeated the LTTE, and whether the LTTE has the     |                 |
|     |capacity to regroup within Sri Lanka (2010-Feb.     |                 |
|     |2016)'                                              |                 |
|     |Benar News, 'Sri Lanka Faces Twin Threat Commentary'|4 April 2016     |
|     |International Crisis Group: Sri Lanka: Jumpstarting |18 May 2016      |
|     |the Reform Process                                  |                 |
|     |Perera, 'The influence of Tamil diaspora on         |June 2016        |
|     |stability in Sri Lanka'                             |                 |
|     |The Guardian, 'Briton 'tortured' in Sri Lanka       |11 June 2016     |
|     |returns to UK'                                      |                 |
|     |The Independent, 'British groom detained in Sri     |11 June 2016     |
|     |Lanka has been arrested and tortured says family'   |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Campaign: Torture is still happening in   |16 June 2016     |
|     |Sri Lanka                                           |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Working Group on Enforced or      |8 July 2016      |
|     |Involuntary Disappearances on its mission to Sri    |                 |
|     |Lanka                                               |                 |
|     |PTI, 'Sri Lanka police cracks down on violent gang  |31 October 2016  |
|     |with 'LTTE link''                                   |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Gazette, Government          |9 November 2016  |
|     |Notification                                        |                 |
|     |Adalayaam: Situation Brief No. 1: Student Killings, |18 November 2016 |
|     |Aava Gang and the Securitisation of Jaffna          |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and |22 December 2016 |
|     |other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or      |                 |
|     |punishment on his mission to Sri Lanka              |                 |
|     |John A. Gentry. 'The intelligence of fear.'         |2017             |
|     |Intelligence and National Security 32(1): 9-25      |                 |
|     |Niels Terpstra and Georg Frerks, 'Rebel governance  |2017             |
|     |and legitimacy: understanding the impact of rebel   |                 |
|     |legitimation on civilian compliance with the LTTE   |                 |
|     |rule.' Civil Wars 19(3): 279-307                    |                 |
|     |UN: Concluding observations on the fifth periodic   |27 January 2017  |
|     |report of Sri Lanka , adopted on 30 November 2016   |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Special Rapporteur on minority    |31 January 2017  |
|     |issues on her mission to Sri Lanka                  |                 |
|     |Alpes Blonder Preiss and Monras, 'Post-deportation  |February 2017    |
|     |risks for failed asylum seekers', Forced Migration  |                 |
|     |Review                                              |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Campaign for Peace & Justice: 'Broken     |February 2017    |
|     |Promise'                                            |                 |
|     |Sunday Times, 'Police Counter Terrorism Unit warns  |12 February 2017 |
|     |of LTTE resurgency'                                 |                 |
|     |Pearl: Impunity Reigns in Sri Lanka                 |March 2017       |
|     |Adalayaam: Joint Civil Society Submission to the UN |30 March 2017    |
|     |Periodic Review of Sri Lanka (28th Session)         |                 |
|     |UN: Concluding observations on the eighth periodic  |9 March 2017     |
|     |report of Sri Lanka                                 |                 |
|     |CPIN Annex A - British High Commission Letter       |18 March 2017    |
|     |Inform: Submission to the UN                        |30 March 2017    |
|     |Submission by the Human Rights Commission of Sri    |May 2017         |
|     |Lanka: Review of Fifth Periodic Report of Sri Lanka |                 |
|     |under the   International Covenant on Economic,     |                 |
|     |Social and Cultural Rights to the UN Economic,      |                 |
|     |Social and Cultural Rights Committee                |                 |
|     |Noria Research: 'From Arms to Politics: The New     |May 2017         |
|     |Struggle of the Tamil Diaspora'                     |                 |
|     |Brigadier Priyanka Fernando Job Description         |11 May 2017      |
|     |Foundation for Human Rights: The Policy and Legal   |13 June 2017     |
|     |Framework Relating to the Proposed Counter-Terrorism|                 |
|     |Act of Sri Lanka: A Review of Compliance with       |                 |
|     |international human rights norms                    |                 |
|     |US Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism|July 2017        |
|     |2016 [excerpt]                                      |                 |
|     |UN: Preliminary findings of Special Rapporteur on   |14 July 2017     |
|     |the promotion and protection of human rights and    |                 |
|     |fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism     |                 |
|     |concludes visit to Sri Lanka                        |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |14 July 2017     |
|     |Unstopped: 2016/17 Torture in Sri Lanka             |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Federalism is not Separatism Rules   |19 August 2017   |
|     |Supreme Court'                                      |                 |
|     |Adalayaam: Normalising the Abnormal - The           |September 2017   |
|     |Militarisation of Mullaitivu                        |                 |
|     |Adalayaam: Civil Security Department - The Deep     |September 2017   |
|     |Militarisation of the Vanni                         |                 |
|     |Associated Press, 'Dozens of men say Sri Lankan     |8 November 2017  |
|     |forces raped and tortured them'                     |                 |
|     |UN Depository Notification, Optional Protocol to the|5 December 2017  |
|     |Convention against Torture, Sri Lanka: Accession    |                 |
|     |UN: Preliminary findings following visit to Sri     |15 December 2017 |
|     |Lanka                                               |                 |
|     |Suthan Nadarajah, 'The Tamil Proscriptions:         |2018             |
|     |Identities, Legitimacies, and Situated Practices',  |                 |
|     |Terrorism and Political Violence (2018 Vol 2)       |                 |
|     |South Asian Terrorism Portal (SATP): Sri Lanka      |2018             |
|     |Assessment 2018                                     |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, ' TGTE member refused entry into Sri|15 January 2018  |
|     |Lanka'                                              |                 |
|     |UN: OHCHR Report, Promoting reconciliation,         |25 January 2018  |
|     |accountability and human rights in Sri Lanka        |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: Locked Up Without Evidence -    |29 January 2018  |
|     |Abuses under Sri Lanka's Prevention of Terrorism Act|                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Report 2017/18               |February 2018    |
|     |Sri Lanka Campaign: I live in fear and go to work:  |February 2018    |
|     |Ongoing Surveillance, Harassment and Intimidation in|                 |
|     |Sri Lanka's North                                   |                 |
|     |Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka: Brigadier   |5 February 2018  |
|     |Priyanka Fernando Defence Attache in London         |                 |
|     |Tamil Solidarity Website, 'Tamil Solidarity Facebook|14 February 2018 |
|     |Page BLOCKED'                                       |                 |
|     |UN: OHCHR Letter to Sri Lankan Government           |13 April 2018    |
|     |Pearl: Sri Lanka's Failing Transitional Justice     |May 2018         |
|     |Process                                             |                 |
|     |The Straits Times, 'Sri Lanka warns of Tamil        |20 May 2018      |
|     |separatist resurgence'                              |                 |
|     |Hindustan Times, 'Tamil separatists are regrouping  |21 May 2018      |
|     |abroad, says Sri Lanka president'                   |                 |
|     |The Catamaran, 'Ithayalal: We have to solve the     |7 June 2018      |
|     |problems of Tamils within our country'              |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the         |23 July 2018     |
|     |promotion and protection of human rights and        |                 |
|     |fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism     |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary        |23 July 2018     |
|     |Detention on its visit to Sri Lanka                 |                 |
|     |UN: Conclusions and Recommendations of Special      |24 July 2018     |
|     |Rapporteur (reported in Sri Lanka brief)            |                 |
|     |Daily News, 'Army vigilant over Social Media Colombo|8 August 2018    |
|     |Defence Seminar 2018'                               |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Ava group a social phenomenon in     |24 August 2018   |
|     |Jaffna'                                             |                 |
|     |Adalayaam: Surveillance, Harassment and Intimidation|30 August 2018   |
|     |of Disappearances' Activists in the North-East      |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Army Directorate of Training, 'Colombo    |31 August 2018   |
|     |Defence Seminar 2018 - Group A Diaspora Communities |                 |
|     |amidst Peace and Conflict'                          |                 |
|     |URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hwS4i60zJYY    |                 |
|     |Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka: Inconvenient|September 2018   |
|     |truths, the newspapers they didn't read             |                 |
|     |Sunday Morning, 'Sword gangs pose a threat to       |14 October 2018  |
|     |Jaffna'                                             |                 |
|     |UK Tamil News, 'British Police release TGTE members |14 October 2018  |
|     |arrested during protest against SL PM's visit'      |                 |
|     |Adayaalam Centre for Policy Research: 'Student      |18 November 2018 |
|     |Killings, Aava Gang and the Securitisation of       |                 |
|     |Jaffna'                                             |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the         |14 December 2018 |
|     |promotion and protection of human rights and        |                 |
|     |fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism     |                 |
|     |Squadron Leader Chamara Wanigasinghe, 'Open source  |2019             |
|     |intelligence model for enhancing the national       |                 |
|     |intelligence capability of Sri Lanka.' Defence &    |                 |
|     |Security Journal 4: 88-102. (Journal of the Defence |                 |
|     |Services Command and Staff College, Sri Lanka.)     |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'UK court issues arrest warrant for |21 January 2019  |
|     |Sri Lankan Brigadier'                               |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: The Year in Rights|21 January 2019  |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Too little change             |February 2019    |
|     |UN: OHCHR Report - Promoting reconciliation,        |8 February 2019  |
|     |accountability and human rights in Sri Lanka        |                 |
|     |Society for Threatened Peoples: Sri Lanka - Civil   |19 February 2019 |
|     |Land under Military Occupation (Submission to the   |                 |
|     |OHCHR)                                              |                 |
|     |FORUM - ASIA: Instruments of Repression: A Regional |20 February 2019 |
|     |Report on the Status of Freedoms of Expression,     |                 |
|     |Peaceful Assembly, and Association in Asia          |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Judge says Brigadier death threats |1 March 2019     |
|     |not covered by diplomatic immunity'                 |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Over 100 Tamil diaspora orgs call  |2 March 2019     |
|     |for Sri Lanka to be referred to ICC'                |                 |
|     |DailyFT, 'TGTE calls on UN High Commissioner of     |2 March 2019     |
|     |Human Rights to 'halt' Sri Lanka's UNHRC "charade"  |                 |
|     |Thinakkural, 'Stop the irresponsible course of the  |3 March 2019     |
|     |Sri Lankan government: Rudrakumaran demands'        |                 |
|     |(translation)                                       |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, '2 Tamil activists arrested by      |5 March 2019     |
|     |counterterrorism police at Heathrow'                |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Oral Statement during the    |20 March 2019    |
|     |interactive dialogue on the report of the High      |                 |
|     |Commissioner for Human Rights on Sri Lanka at HRC 40|                 |
|     |Inform: Repression of Dissent in Sri Lanka 1 January|31 March 2019    |
|     |- 31 March 2019                                     |                 |
|     |The Independent, 'Sri Lanka, the top holiday        |19 April 2019    |
|     |destination for 2019, is polluted by torture and    |                 |
|     |lies'                                               |                 |
|     |CBC, 'Sri Lanka's counter-terrorism strategy a      |22 April 2019    |
|     |recipe for disaster: Former UN investigator'        |                 |
|     |Sunday Times, 'Hi-tech facial recognition system at |28 April 2019    |
|     |BIA'                                                |                 |
|     |Daily FT, 'India to provide counter-terrorism,      |13 May 2019      |
|     |warfare assistance, says Sri Lankan Army Chief'     |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: Impunity fuels    |18 May 2019      |
|     |recurrence of violence                              |                 |
|     |The Island, 'LTTE ban to be challenged in secretive |21 May 2019      |
|     |British court'                                      |                 |
|     |Business Standard, 'LTTE ban faces legal challenge  |22 May 2019      |
|     |in UK'                                              |                 |
|     |Sunday Observer, 'China to share social media       |26 May 2019      |
|     |surveillance technology with Sri Lanka'             |                 |
|     |International Service for Human Rights: Fighting To |June 2019        |
|     |Exist: Legislative Protection For Human Rights      |                 |
|     |Defenders In Asia [excerpt]                         |                 |
|     |UN: Concluding observations on the sixth periodic   |7 June 2019      |
|     |report of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and   |                 |
|     |Northern Ireland                                    |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Grave Fears for Prisoners on |25 June 2019     |
|     |Death Row                                           |                 |
|     |Inform: Repression of Dissent in Sri Lanka: 1st     |30 June 2019     |
|     |April - 30th June 2019                              |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: 'Sri Lanka: Muslims Face        |3 July 2019      |
|     |Threats, Attacks'                                   |                 |
|     |CIVICUS: Misuse of ICCPR Act and judicial system to |5 July 2019      |
|     |stifle freedom of expression in Sri Lanka           |                 |
|     |The Jamestown Foundation: Ethnic Conflict in Sri    |26 July 2019     |
|     |Lanka: The Easter Bombings and Beyond               |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Former Tamil political activist    |30 July 2019     |
|     |denied entry to Sri Lanka'                          |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |September 2019   |
|     |Terrorism Investigation Division: Sri Lankan Police |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: After Sri Lanka's Easter|27 September 2019|
|     |Bombings: Reducing Risks of Future Violence         |                 |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Where does torture happen     |8 October 2019   |
|     |around the world                                    |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Displaying LTTE flags in UK: SL wants|22 October 2019  |
|     |stern action'                                       |                 |
|     |Report of the Select Committee of Parliament to look|23 October 2019  |
|     |into and report to Parliament on the Terrorist      |                 |
|     |Attacks that took place indifferent places in Sri   |                 |
|     |Lanka on 21st April 2019 (extracts, with            |                 |
|     |translations)                                       |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |24 October 2019  |
|     |Press Release: Sri Lankan security agencies         |                 |
|     |assaulting families of asylum seekers in UK         |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Campaign: A Decade of Impunity            |November 2019    |
|     |Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, |4 November 2019  |
|     |Country Information Report Sri Lanka                |                 |
|     |Freedom House: Freedom on the Net 2019 - Sri Lanka  |5 November 2019  |
|     |International Crisis Group: Sri Lanka's Presidential|18 November 2019 |
|     |Election Brings Back a Polarising Wartime Figure    |                 |
|     |New York Times, 'Sri Lankan Critics Fear Crackdown  |27 November 2019 |
|     |is Underway, and Some Flee'                         |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Thousands of British Tamils mark   |28 November 2019 |
|     |Maaveerar Naal across the UK'                       |                 |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Everything you need to know   |29 November 2019 |
|     |about Gotabaya Rajapaksa, Sri Lanka's new President |                 |
|     |Uthayan, 'Regarding the struggle for a referendum - |2 November 2019  |
|     |Villanover'(translation)                            |                 |
|     |Colombo Telegraph, 'Defence Attache Brigadier       |6 December 2019  |
|     |Priyanka Fernando Convicted- Full text of the       |                 |
|     |judgment'                                           |                 |
|     |The Guardian, 'Sri Lankan official fined over       |6 December 2019  |
|     |throatslitting gestures in London'                  |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Tamil Diaspora behind Swiss        |9 December 2019  |
|     |incident and British court ruling, claims Sri       |                 |
|     |Lanka's defence secretary'                          |                 |
|     |Inform: Repression of Dissent in Sri Lanka before   |31 December 2019 |
|     |and after the Presidential Election: 1st July - 31st|                 |
|     |December 2019                                       |                 |
|     |South Asian Terrorism Portal (SATP): Sri Lanka      |2020             |
|     |Assessment 2020                                     |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Government withdraws Counter         |3 January 2020   |
|     |Terrorism Bill'                                     |                 |
|     |Ministry of Defence Website, 'National Security was |13 January 2020  |
|     |neglected due to negligence and ignorance- Defence  |                 |
|     |Secretary                                           |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: World Report 2020               |13 January 2020  |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP): Sri |13 January 2020  |
|     |Lanka: And the crackdown begins                     |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: Sri Lanka: Human Rights Gains in|14 January 2020  |
|     |Grave Peril New Administration Poses Threat to      |                 |
|     |Activists, Media, Victims Seeking Justice           |                 |
|     |Ministry of Defence Website, 'Proper plans afoot to |16 January 2020  |
|     |deradicalize misguided youth - Secretary Defence'   |                 |
|     |Report of a Home Office fact-finding mission to Sri |20 January 2020  |
|     |Lanka conducted between 28 September and 5 October  |                 |
|     |2019 and annexes                                    |                 |
|     |Amicus Brief in Support of Respondent (Department of|22 January 2020  |
|     |Homeland Security v Vijayakumar Thuraissigiam)      |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: Watch List 2020: A      |29 January 2020  |
|     |Dangerous Sea Change in Sri Lanka                   |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: 2019 in review - Sri Lanka:  |30 January 2020  |
|     |Security fears trump freedoms                       |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Campaign: Abandoned Promises? Preserving  |February 2020    |
|     |Human Rights and Pursuing Accountability            |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Army Website, 'Sri Lankan Military       |25 February 2020 |
|     |Defeated LTTE Terrorism 10 years ago but few Tamil  |                 |
|     |politicians still propagate its ideology'           |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: Joint Letter to   |25 February 2020 |
|     |President Rajapaksa on the harassment and           |                 |
|     |intimidation of journalists                         |                 |
|     |UN: OHCHR Report - Promoting reconciliation,        |26 February 2020 |
|     |accountability and human rights in Sri Lanka        |                 |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Sri Lanka's withdrawal from UN|26 February 2020 |
|     |Human Rights Council resolution: what it means for  |                 |
|     |survivors                                           |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Government: Statement by Hon. Dinesh     |26 February 2020 |
|     |Gunawardena, Minister of Foreign Relations of Sri   |                 |
|     |Lanka, at the 43rd Session of the Human Rights      |                 |
|     |Council - High Level Segment                        |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'With introduction of three           |27 February 2020 |
|     |surveillance units Immigration beefs up security at |                 |
|     |BIA'                                                |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: Concerns Mount for|27 February 2020 |
|     |Detained Lawyer: Hejaaz Hizbullah                   |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: Withdrawal from UN|27 February 2020 |
|     |commitments requires robust response by Human Rights|                 |
|     |Council                                             |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'With introduction of three           |27 February 2020 |
|     |surveillance units Immigration beefs up security at |                 |
|     |BIA'                                                |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: Joint Oral        |28 February 2020 |
|     |Statement at the HRC 43                             |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Security in North-East tightened     |7 March 2020     |
|     |after unearthing assassination plot'                |                 |
|     |US Department of State, Sri Lanka 2019 Human Rights |11 March 2020    |
|     |Report                                              |                 |
|     |Thinakkural, 'Sumanthiran's attempt to rewrite      |17 March 2020    |
|     |history is dangerous: Rudrakumaran' (translation)   |                 |
|     |UN: Press briefing note on Sri Lanka                |27 March 2020    |
|     |WSWS, 'Sri Lankan president grants clemency to war  |30 March 2020    |
|     |criminal'                                           |                 |
|     |World Socialist Web Site, 'Sri Lanka government     |9 April 2020     |
|     |intensifies crackdown on social media'              |                 |
|     |Adalayaam: COVID-19: Sri Lanka's militarised        |30 April 2020    |
|     |response poses grave threats to human rights        |                 |
|     |CPIN, 'Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism' Version 6.0 and |May 2020         |
|     |annexes                                             |                 |
|     |International Policy Digest, 'Sri Lanka's Expansion |1 May 2020       |
|     |into Despotism Goes Unchallenged by Western         |                 |
|     |Democracies'                                        |                 |
|     |UN: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights  |5 May 2020       |
|     |to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, |                 |
|     |Visit to Sri Lanka                                  |                 |
|     |The Economist, 'Sri Lanka's new president is putting|14 May 2020      |
|     |soldiers in charge of everything'                   |                 |
|     |Colombo Gazette, 'Former East Timor President to    |15 May 2020      |
|     |appear at pro-LTTE event'                           |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'TNPF organisers arrested as        |18 May 2020      |
|     |genocide commemorations underway'                   |                 |
|     |Thinakkural, 'Colombo must question itself on the   |22 May 2020      |
|     |issue of Tamils: Former President of East Timor'    |                 |
|     |(translation)                                       |                 |
|     |ReadMe, 'eNIC in Sri Lanka: Evolution, Revolution   |23 May 2020      |
|     |and a looming breach?'                              |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Surveillance and intimidation of   |23 May 2020      |
|     |TNPF members ramps up'                              |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |26 May 2020      |
|     |Press Release: Alleged Torturer heads Sri Lankan    |                 |
|     |CID.                                                |                 |
|     |Lankaweb, 'Vision & Mission of Misrepresented and   |30 May 2020      |
|     |Hoodwinked Tamil Diaspora orgs'                     |                 |
|     |Inform: Repression of Dissent in Sri Lanka          |31 May 2020      |
|     |Centre for Policy Alternatives: Article on release  |June 2020        |
|     |of 'The Appointment of Two Presidential Task Forces'|                 |
|     |Centre for Policy Alternatives: The Appointment of  |June 2020        |
|     |the Two Presidential Task Forces                    |                 |
|     |Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka: Sri Lanka:  |1 June 2020      |
|     |Female human rights lawyer facing continuous death  |                 |
|     |threats                                             |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project, 'Sri Lanka |1 June 2020      |
|     |- Yet More Problematic Military Promotions: ITJP'   |                 |
|     |Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka: "My son was |2 June 2020      |
|     |beaten to death," in Sri Lanka's high-security      |                 |
|     |prison                                              |                 |
|     |The Times, 'Sri Lankan leader's 'discipline' threat |8 June 2020      |
|     |raises fear of new death squads'                    |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Campaign: Sri Lanka's slide into          |10 June 2020     |
|     |authoritarianism                                    |                 |
|     |Sunday Times, 'State of the Police and a Police     |14 June 2020     |
|     |State'                                              |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |15 June 2020     |
|     |Letter to IAGCI and SSHD re CPIN                    |                 |
|     |Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka: Sri Lankan  |18 June 2020     |
|     |Torture Sites                                       |                 |
|     |Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka: First ever  |19 June 2020     |
|     |torture map of Sri Lanka identifies over 200 torture|                 |
|     |sites                                               |                 |
|     |Inform: Repression of Dissent in Sri Lanka          |30 June 2020     |
|     |CPIN, 'Sri Lanka medical treatment and healthcare'  |July 2020        |
|     |Version 1.0 and annexes                             |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Brief: Sri Lanka: Militarisation,         |July 2020        |
|     |Sinhala-Buddhist Supremacy and Absence of Rule of   |                 |
|     |Law - A Deadly Combination                          |                 |
|     |Freedom from Torture: Response to Country Police and|July 2020        |
|     |Information Note Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism        |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Former NPC member MK Shivajilingam |5 July 2020      |
|     |arrested at his home'                               |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'TNPF leader threatened with arrest |5 July 2020      |
|     |over Black Tigers Day commemoration'                |                 |
|     |The Island, 'Police: Bomb was to be exploded to mark|6 July 2020      |
|     |Black Tiger day'                                    |                 |
|     |Asylum Research Consultancy: Sri Lanka Country      |7 July 2020      |
|     |Report                                              |                 |
|     |Ministry of Defence Website, 'How LTTE supporters   |9 July 2020      |
|     |overseas enjoying plush lives are exploiting        |                 |
|     |innocent Tamil villages: Bombshell revelation of    |                 |
|     |distant terrorist'                                  |                 |
|     |UN: Statement of the Special Rapporteur on the      |9 July 2020      |
|     |rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and          |                 |
|     |association                                         |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Former parliamentarian rebukes     |10 July 2020     |
|     |increased military checkpoints causing 'fear and    |                 |
|     |hardships' in the North'                            |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Concern, concern, concern - UN     |10 July 2020     |
|     |Special Rapporteur says Sri Lanka has 'rapidly      |                 |
|     |changed'                                            |                 |
|     |News in Asia, 'Sri Lanka likely to ban some foreign |10 July 2020     |
|     |organizations and individuals for LTTE links'       |                 |
|     |Sunday Observer, 'Sri Lanka likely to ban some      |12 July 2020     |
|     |foreign organisations and those with LTTE links'    |                 |
|     |Daily Mirror, 'Explosion in Iyakachchi and aborted  |14 July 2020     |
|     |Black Tiger day plot'                               |                 |
|     |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Human Rights and   |16 July 2020     |
|     |Democracy: the 2019 Foreign and Commonwealth Office |                 |
|     |report [excerpt]                                    |                 |
|     |Thinakkural, 'A memorial should be erected to       |24 July 2020     |
|     |commemorate Black July: Rudrakumaran' (translation) |                 |
|     |Transnational  Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE):    |27 July 2020     |
|     |Letter from TGTE (with letter of instruction and    |                 |
|     |enclosures)                                         |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: Sri Lanka: Human Rights Under|29 July 2020     |
|     |Attack - Lawyers, Human Rights Defenders and        |                 |
|     |Journalists Arrested, Threatened, Intimidated       |                 |
|     |Colombo Gazette, 'Concerns raised in House of Lords |30 July 2020     |
|     |on TGTE Adele Balasingham'                          |                 |
|     |PTI, 'TNA won't be allowed to achieve through vote  |30 July 2020     |
|     |what LTTE failed to do with gun: Mahinda Rajapaksa' |                 |
|     |Asylum Research Consultancy: Sri Lanka: Observations|31 July 2020     |
|     |on UK Home Office Fact-Finding Mission              |                 |
|     |Asylum Research Consultancy: Sri Lanka: Commentary  |31 July 2020     |
|     |on the Australian DFAT                              |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Candidates on the verge of         |31 July 2020     |
|     |withdrawing due to ferocious threats'               |                 |
|     |International Policy Digest, 'Sri Lanka's southern  |3 August 2020    |
|     |political parties need the LTTE at election time'   |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Editorial: Majority Rule - Sri     |5 August 2020    |
|     |Lanka goes to the polls'                            |                 |
|     |New York Times, 'Sri Lanka Elections Hands Rajapaksa|6 August 2020    |
|     |Family a Bigger Slice of Control'                   |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'Rajapaksas dominates South with    |6 August 2020    |
|     |landslide victory in Sri Lankan elections'          |                 |
|     |BBC News, 'Sri Lanka election: Rajapaksa brothers   |7 August 2020    |
|     |win 'super-majority'                                |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian, 'TNA suffers losses in North-East as|7 August 2020    |
|     |Tamils frustration mounts'                          |                 |
|     |The Wire, 'Sri Lanka Elections: The SLPP's          |10 August 2020   |
|     |Formidable Majority Doesn't Bode Well for Pluralism'|                 |
|     |Foreign and Commonwealth Office travel advice - Sri |11 August 2020   |
|     |Lanka                                               |                 |
|     |International Truth and Justice Project (ITJP):     |30 August 2020   |
|     |'Press Release: Raped and Tortured for Collecting   |                 |
|     |the Names of the Disappeared'                       |                 |
|     |Tamilthaii, 'The Demonstration of the Relatives of  |30 August 2020   |
|     |the Enforced Disappeared took place Emotionally in  |                 |
|     |Britain', and translation                           |                 |
|     |Vivasaayi, 'Tamils Gather in Britain Seeking Justice|31 August 2020   |
|     |for their Disappeared Relatives' (with translation) |                 |
|     |The Gazette of the Democratic Socialist Republic of |25 February 2021 |
|     |Sri Lanka                                           |                 |
|     |Columbo Gazette online article 'Sri Lanka bans Tamil|29 March 2021    |
|     |diaspora groups and several individuals'            |                 |
|     |Tamil Guardian article, 'Sri Lanka prescribes       |29 March 2021    |
|     |hundreds alongside Tamil diaspora organisations'    |                 |
|     |Sri Lankan Army Website, 'Banned! No fronting for   |undated          |
|     |LTTE'                                               |                 |
|     |Sri Lanka Podujan Peramuna (SLPP) Manifesto,        |undated          |
|     |'Gotabaya presents to you a reconstructed country   |                 |
|     |with a future - Vistas of prosperity and splendor'  |                 |
|     |UN: Terms of Reference, OHCHR Investigation on Sri  |undated          |
|     |Lanka                                               |                 |
|     |Profile of 'J.S.' Tissainayagam                     |undated          |
|     |South Asian Terrorism Portal (SATP): Liberation     |undated          |
|     |Tigers of Tamil Eelam                               |                 |
|     |Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE): TGTE|undated          |
|     |US Website, 'Mission Statement'                     |                 |
|     |Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE):     |undated          |
|     |'TGTE UK' Facebook Page                             |                 |
|     |Url: https://www.facebook.com/tgte.uk/              |                 |
|     |Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE):     |undated          |
|     |'TGTE Official' Facebook page                       |                 |
|     |https://www.facebook.com/tgteofficial/              |                 |
|     |Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE):     |undated          |
|     |Wikipedia page for 'Transnational Government of     |                 |
|     |Tamil Eelam'                                        |                 |
|     |TamilNet, Sri Lanka High Commission engaging in     |undated          |
|     |video photography of the demonstrators              |                 |
|     |Senjeewa, 'Re-emergence of Tamil Tiger cells in Sri |undated          |
|     |Lanka: A comparative analysis to terrorism          |                 |
|     |perspective', General Sir John Kotelawala Defence   |                 |
|     |University                                          |                 |
|     |Tamil diaspora declaration of solidarity            |undated          |
|     |Evolution of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam       |undated          |
|     |Evidence disclosed by Respondent in Kanthappu &     |undated          |
|     |others v Secretary of State for the Home Department |                 |
|     |Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium,         |undated          |
|     |'Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam'           |                 |





Appendix B: error of law decision in KK


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09978/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th December 2019                |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mr K K
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Benfield, instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cary promulgated on 12th August 2019.

 2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity born on  15th
    October 1984 and he arrived in the UK in January  2009  with  leave  to
    enter as a student valid  until  30th November  2010.   He  had  leave
    extended as a Post-Study Work Migrant until 11th January 2013 and then
    made an application for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled
    Entrepreneur which was refused on 17th May 2013.   His  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on 11th December 2013 and he became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 16th April 2014.

 3. He made two further unsuccessful applications,  under  Tier  1  and  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds and claimed asylum again on 5th March 2016.  The
    appellant appealed the refusal decision and the  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski who dismissed the appeal but  that
    decision was set aside and the matter was remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cary.

 4. During his asylum interview on September 1st 2016 the appellant claimed
    he had collected money for the LTTE in Colombo in Sri Lanka from  about
    February 2006  until  November  2007.   He  said  he  was  subsequently
    arrested on 8th October 2008 for helping the LTTE by  collecting  money
    for them and was taken to an army camp and detained  for  fifteen  days
    and tortured.  He was eventually released on reporting conditions after
    signing a document stating he was an LTTE member.  He decided to  leave
    Sri Lanka with the assistance of an agent.

 5. The appellant also claimed to have been involved with the  Transitional
    Government  of  Tamil  Eelam,  TGTE  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  the
    respondent did not consider his involvement was such that it would  put
    him at risk on return as  there  was  no  evidence  that  he  played  a
    significant role in Tamil diaspora activities in the UK.

 6. The grounds of appeal against the determination of Judge Cary  were  as
    follows

      a. a failure to exercise anxious scrutiny and take account of relevant
         factors when assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim



          i.  the  judge  purported  to  direct  himself   to   the   joint
             presidential guidance but the determination disclosed that the
             judge made adverse  credibility  findings  divorced  from  any
             consideration of the medical report.  Dr Dhumad's first report
             of October 2016 diagnosed  the  appellant  as  suffering  with
             severe depression and PTSD.   There  was  a  failure  to  give
             adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the  reports  as  clinically
             supportive  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  as   independent
             evidence of torture, failing to engage with the  report.   The
             first report of Dr Dhumad included opinions which  cited  that
             the psychological symptoms were consistent with  the  response
             to  traumatic  experience  such  as  torture  (12.2),  (18.1),
             (18.4).  The judge did not engage with the clinical assessment
             of Dr Dhumad and placed little or no  weight  on  the  medical
             reports and the reasons for placing no weight on  the  medical
             reports appeared to be based on the fact that Dr  Dhumad  made
             no reference to having  read  GJ.   Dr  Dhumad  is  a  country
             expert.   The  references   to   the   appellant's   condition
             deteriorating owing to fears of deportation could not properly
             draw away from the detailed conclusion Dr Dhumad  came  as  to
             the consistency of the appellant's account with  trauma.   The
             judge failed to consider the medical evidence with due care in
             line with SS Sri Lanka and the Secretary of State for the Home
             Department [2012] EWCA Civ 155;

         ii. there was a failure to  take  account  of  relevant  evidence;



        iii. the judge expressed doubt about  the  appellant's  credibility
             owing to concerns how he left Sri Lanka given  what  was  said
             about those being on a stopwatch being at risk  and  that  the
             appellant had not claimed to be on a stop list.  There  is  no
             evidence that those on a watch list would be  stopped  at  the
             airport.  There is no evidence in GJ and  others  (post  civil
             war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  that
             persons on a watch list would  be  stopped  and  GJ  expressly
             addressed that agents were able to assist persons from leaving
             the country;

         iv. the judge expressed as significant that the appellant had  not
             explained why the Authorities were able to find out about  his
             activities which had stopped a year earlier  but  it  was  not
             rational for the appellant to give a definitive response;

          v. the appellant had not produced written evidence to support his
             claim to have been released on reporting conditions, but  this
             was not a matter that the judge could hold against  A.   There
             was no reference in the country guidance to the requirement of
             reporting conditions to be in writing given the  extrajudicial
             nature of detention in Sri Lanka;

         vi. the judge placed  lesser  weight  on  the  brother's  evidence
             merely by stating "in his letter of October 16th 2016 S  makes
             no mention of being threatened when  the  CID  came  to  their
             house on February 2nd 2019";

        vii. at 63 the judge stated that he

                  "Did not understand why the Authorities would continue  to
                  visit the appellant's home relatively frequently for  such
                  a prolonged period  after  the  cessation  of  hostilities
                  particularly as they had been told about  the  appellant's
                  departure for the United Kingdom in 2009".

             But country information had supported that repeated visits  to
             family members do occur in Sri Lanka even  when  a  person  is
             known to be out of the country;

       viii. finally when assessing credibility the judge  failed  to  give
             reasoned findings  on  the  evidence  of  the  witness  Mr  Ka
             recorded at 29 to 32  did  not  carry  weight.   That  witness
             reported he had been questioned about the  appellant  and  had
             been told that  the  appellant  was  working  with  the  TGTE;



      b. there was a failure  to  take  account  of  relevant  factors  when
         assessing the appellant's sur place claim

          i. the judge fell into error by considering the appellant had not
             told Dr Dhumad about his activities with the TGTE but that was
             incorrect and amounted to a failure to consider  the  evidence
             with anxious scrutiny and was material to the totality of  the
             assessment of the sur place claim.  It was accepted  that  the
             first report of October 2016 did not  address  his  activities
             but in his third report the point is directly addressed at 5.4
             where the doctor refers  to  the  appellant  "attending  Tamil
             events";

         ii. failure to consider the evidence with anxious  scrutiny.   The
             judge addressed the evidence in support of the  activities  of
             the TGTE at 74 to 75 but the judge only gave  superficial  and
             cursory consideration to what was a much more  extensive  body
             of evidence  such  as  the  TGTE  card  issued  in  May  2017,
             photographs, articles on  which  the  appellant  is  named  or
             photographed 2019, articles in which the appellant is named or
             photographed 2017 to 2018, photographs of the appellant  at  a
             demonstration and meetings, letters from the TGTE, photographs
             of the appellant's involvement in TGTE activities.

             The judge failed to  take  account  of  the  totality  of  the
             evidence and erred in  considering  that  the  "bulk"  of  the
             photographic evidence was from  2016.   The  judge  failed  to
             consider this evidence with anxious scrutiny and this affected
             the assessment of the determination such that the judge  ruled
             out as not reasonably likely the appellant's brother and Mr Ka
             were questioned about his activities in 2017.   There  was  an
             absence of consideration of the evidence from 2016 and for the
             judge to consider that the appellant's  involvement  with  the
             TGTE was not significant could not stand  in  the  absence  of
             detailed consideration;

        iii. there was a failure to properly apply the country guidance and
             relevant country information.  The judge failed to provide any
             clear reasons why it was considered the appellant's activities
             with the TGTE would not be considered to be significant in the
             eyes of  the  Sri  Lankan  Authority  and  gave  a  simplistic
             analysis at 76 which did not extend beyond an  acknowledgement
             the TGTE was a proscribed organisation.

         iv. The grounds added that the determination failed to engage with
             the public statement about the  extensive  monitoring  of  the
             Tamil  diaspora  and  the  appellant  having  been  repeatedly
             pictured in the public domain associated with  TGTE  activity.



          v. The country guidance in GJ states the primary objective was to
             identify those who were active in the Tamil diaspora  and  set
             out  detailed  findings  about  the  nature  and   extent   of
             monitoring in  the  UK.   The  Tribunal  in  GJ  accepted  the
             Government  were  seeking  to  identify  individuals  who  are
             seeking  to  destabilise  the  unitary  state  by  using  face
             recognition technology, photographs taken  at  demonstrations,
             filming  and   sophisticated   extensive   intelligence,   see
             paragraph 336 and 354 and 324.

         vi. The Home Office Country Information  and  Guidance  Sri  Lanka
             Tamil  Separatism  Version  1  valid  from  28th  August  2014
             expressly   addressed    the    proscription    of    diaspora
             organisations, see Section 2.3.6.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission to appeal finding it  was
    arguable the judge's credibility  findings were not open to him to make
    and he conflated the evidence  of  the  stop/watch  list  held  by  the
    intelligence services and the judge expected the appellant  to  provide
    answers to questions he could not  reasonably  have  been  expected  to
    know.

The Rule 24 Notice

 8. The Rule 24 notice submitted that the decision was a comprehensive that
    considered all of the evidence both medical, witness evidence,  serious
    delay and objective evidence, country guidance.  It was  submitted  the
    judge had given comprehensive reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim to be at risk on return and it was not  for  a  judge  to  assess
    every  piece  or  making  findings  on  every  piece  of  evidence  but
    sufficient that the reader knows why the appeal  had  been  allowed  or
    dismissed.  The Tribunal directed itself appropriately.

 9. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Haywood took  the  Tribunal
    through the evidence, particularly that in relation to the  appellant's
    claimed membership and activities with the TGTE.  There were three main
    areas of challenge to the determination, (albeit only  two  grounds  in
    the challenge) the treatment of the evidence given by  Dr  Dhumad,  the
    credibility  assessment  and  the  third  in  relation  to   the   TGTE
    involvement with which Mr Haywood started and clearly thought  was  the
    most important of the grounds.

10. In particular he submitted that the evidence showed that the  appellant
    had been involved with the TGTE since  2014  and  there  were  numerous
    photographs of him at  demonstrations  and  an  article  on  electronic
    media.  When considering paragraph 336 of GJ and Others post-civil  war
    returnees Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  which  stated  "we  do  not
    consider that attendance at demonstrations in  the  diaspora  alone  is
    sufficient to create a real risk or  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
    that a person will attract adverse attention on return  to  Sri  Lanka"
    but here the evidence went much further.  The  appellant  had  produced
    cogent evidence of his involvement with TGTE.

11. There was evidence from S his brother that he had paid an agent to make
    arrangements at the airport.

12. There were various letters to show that the appellant had  been  active
    in the TGTE, not least there was an  official  stating  at  D1  in  the
    bundle that the appellant was known in the TGTE,  his  membership  card
    and a range of photographs of  the  appellant  shown  close  to  public
    placards and articles posted on the world wide web,  such  as  a  media
    article at page 48 of the bundle.  The  judge  had  not  addressed  the
    membership of the TGTE fully  in  paragraph  74  onwards  and  the  key
    passages at 75 to 78 did not address all of the  evidence.   The  judge
    noted that the individuals who are perceived to be a threat may  be  at
    risk and that the TGTE was proscribed but he did not make any clear  or
    detailed  findings  on  the  appellant's  level  of  involvement   when
    considering this appellant's level  of  involvement  was  a  matter  of
    public record.  The salient passage at 78 that the appellant was not an
    officer did not reflect that he was not required  to  show  he  was  an
    officer of the TGTE.  He was not expected to lie on return to Sri Lanka
    and the fact was he was a member of the TGTE as evidenced by his  card.



13. Overall all of the evidence should have  been  analysed  more  closely.



14. In relation to  the  findings  on  credibility  both  of  the  brothers
    referred to paying a bribe and paying an agent to secure the removal of
    the appellant from Sri Lanka.  The question of the watch list  did  not
    take matters further because not  only  were  a  stop  and  watch  list
    different concepts but GJ talked in terms of return, not  of  departure
    and further the appellant did give information about going through  the
    airport.  There were findings made on information  that  the  appellant
    could only have speculated on and it was not proper to take  the  point
    against him, factual confusion at paragraph 63 and a need  for  clarity
    about the findings in relation to the individual witnesses.

15. In relation to the evidence of Dr Dhumad his evidence was relevant  and
    the structure of the  determination  was  such  that  it  divorced  the
    treatment of credibility from the  medical  evidence.   Dr  Dhumad  had
    applied the methodology of the Istanbul  Protocol  but  the  judge  had
    compartmentalised his evidence in the decision.

16. Mr Melvin responded that looking at  the  evidence  in  the  round  the
    appellant had  no  significant  role  and  a  full  analysis  regarding
    involvement in the TGTE was made from paragraph 74 to  78.   The  judge
    had looked at the evidence holistically.  There was no need to  make  a
    finding on every document and given his mental health it was surprising
    if he played a significant role in the organisation and the judge noted
    that.  The  appellant  was  not  a  speaker  and  has  not  made  a  TV
    documentary or radio appearance mocking the Government but  had  merely
    attended several demonstrations.  There was no  indication  as  to  the
    circulation of the Tamil website.  This was a last  ditch  attempt  for
    the appellant to claim asylum in the UK.  The appellant  had  left  Sri
    Lanka on a student visa and  had  the  ability  to  leave  on  his  own
    passport.  There were numerous credibility findings, no evidence of the
    mother or brother being threatened and a lack  of  consistency  in  the
    evidence.  The credibility findings were open to the  judge  and  there
    was an attempt to argue small parts of the evidence.  The judge gave  a
    careful assessment of the evidence in this  appeal  and  UT  Sri  Lanka
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 cautions against revisiting findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal merely because the Upper Tribunal does not agree with it.
     For example at paragraph 19 it holds

         "Although 'error of law' is widely defined, it is not the case that
         the UT is entitled to remake the decision of the FtT simply because
         it does not agree with it or because it thinks  it  can  produce  a
         better one".




    Analysis

17. UT Sri Lanka cited AH Sudan [2007]  UKHL  49  in  which  Baroness  Hale
    identified that the immigration Tribunal was a specialist Tribunal  and
    appeal courts should not rush to find misdirections merely  because  on
    the facts the decision might have been decided differently.

18. It is clear that the judge did direct himself to the joint presidential
    guidance on vulnerable witnesses at  paragraph  47  and  at  66  to  68
    recognised the need to consider the medical  evidence  as  an  integral
    part of the assessment of credibility.  At paragraph 10 the judge noted
    that the appellant would not be giving evidence because of  his  mental
    health issues as identified in the various reports of Dr Saleh  Dhumad.
    The determination shows the judge was fully  conscious  of  the  mental
    health of  the  appellant.  The  absence  of  the  appellant  from  the
    proceedings could not have gone unnoticed by the judge.  Indeed,  again
    at paragraph 36 the judge recorded that the appellant was  said  to  be
    suffering from PTSD and at paragraph 44 specifically stated

         "I have specifically considered what is said about the  appellant's
         mental  health  to  assess  the  likely  impact  of  that  on   his
         credibility'

19. The judge proceeded to note that Dr Dhumad in his first  report  stated
    that the appellant's

         'presentation  ...  is  consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of   severe
         depressive episode without psychotic symptoms'  and  also  that  he
         suffered from 'post-traumatic stress disorder'".

20. The judge gave further detail of the subsequent reports of  Dr  Dhumad,
    including that of 28th May 2019 noting that the appellant was unfit  to
    attend court.  It  was  thereafter  at  paragraph  46  that  the  judge
    proceeded to give  his  findings  in  relation  to  credibility  having
    already identified key elements of the  reports.   As  set  out  in  HH
    (medical evidence; effect  of  Mibanga)  Ethiopia  [2005]  UKAIT  00164
    medical evidence, a Tribunal  considers  that  there  is  a  danger  of
    Mibanga being misunderstood.  The judgment is  not  intended  to  place
    judicial fact-finders in a form of "forensic straightjacket".  There is
    no order  as  to  which  judicial  fact-finders  are  to  approach  the
    evidential materials before them and  "one  has  to  start  somewhere".
    There is nothing illogical in this approach.  It was open to the  judge
    to criticise the appellant's failure to claim international  protection
    until March 2016 where he appeared to have exhausted all other  avenues
    for remaining in the UK. His observations therein  are  pertinent.  The
    judge at paragraph 55 stated

         "There appears to  be  no  mental  health  reasons  justifying  the
         appellant's tardiness in seeking international protection.  He  was
         presumably well enough to make a series of  applications  no  doubt
         with the benefit of legal assistance up to and  including  February
         2016 and in those circumstances it makes no sense for the appellant
         to delay asking the Authorities in this country for protection".

    As the judge cited when the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  he
    looked well and was alright prior to 2016 and that was confirmed by  Dr
    Dhumad.

21. It should be noted that the appellant did not give  oral  evidence  and
    the criticism of the  judge's  application  of  the  "consideration  of
    vulnerability" at paragraph 58 were such that the appellant  had  given
    "very little detail as to exactly what happened at the airport and  how
    the agent was able to  secure  his  safe  passage"  citing  the  asylum
    interview.  Indeed to a range of questions in the asylum interview when
    asked the appellant merely stated "I don't  know".   That  was  limited
    information and it was  this  which  undermined  the  appellant's  case
    regarding departure. That interview was undertaken  in  2016  when  the
    appellant was supposed to be well enough to have made applications  and
    had legal assistance.

22. Although there was criticism of the judge's approach at paragraph 61 in
    relation to the appellant not being able to explain how the Authorities
    were able to find him a year earlier, the main thrust of  paragraph  61
    is that although the appellant claimed he was beaten with plastic pipes
    and had backpain there was no assessment by a medical professional  and
    no medical evidence to support the appellant's claim to have been  ill-
    treated  either  in  Sri  Lanka  or  the  United  Kingdom.  Again  that
    observation was open to the judge.

23. The consideration of the  medical  evidence  is  woven  throughout  the
    determination.  As the judge states it was his responsibility to assess
    the appellant's credibility in  the  light  of  all  of  the  evidence,
    including the medical report, HH Ethiopia and the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 306.  As the  judge  identified
    "there could be  other  obvious  potential  causes  for  the  signs  of
    anxiety, stress and depression" and that these included the  fact  that
    an applicant may be facing return to the country  which  he  has  left.
    The judge noted that there were  a  family  history  of  mental  health
    issues and specifically the judge noted that Dr Dhumad  concluded  "the
    appellant's condition had deteriorated due to a fear  of  deportation".



24. Mr Haywood criticised the judge's observation that the more a diagnosis
    was dependent on assuming that the account given by the  appellant  was
    to be believed the less likely it is that significant weight should  be
    attached to it.  The judge did however consider  the  evidence  in  the
    round.  At paragraph 70 the judge considered that it was not just  that
    the appellant's evidence was vague but the  witness  evidence  did  not
    assist, for example because Mr K had never fully explained why he would
    be involved in collecting money in Colombo and in  particular  why  the
    appellant was  his  only  operative.   There  is  no  traction  to  the
    assertion that the judge failed to engage with the clinical  assessment
    of Dr Dhumad albeit that the doctor may have complied with the Istanbul
    Protocol.  As the judge states the question of credibility falls to the
    judge.

25. Turning  to  the  second  ground  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of
    credibility and particularly how the appellant left Sri Lanka, I  refer
    to the findings  in  relation  to  departure  above.   It  was  further
    asserted that the appellant had not claimed that he had been on a  stop
    list in 2008 and there was no evidence in GJ that a person on  a  watch
    list would be stopped at the airport.  From paragraph  56  onwards  the
    judge carefully assessed the  appellant's  departure  from  Sri  Lanka,
    taking into account the evidence of S his brother who made  no  mention
    of organising the appellant's departure from Sri Lanka in either of his
    letters (at 56).  The judge notes that he refers to paying a  bribe  to
    secure the appellant's release from detention but he makes  no  mention
    of any involvement in helping the appellant leave Sri Lanka.  The judge
    also noted at paragraph 56

         "In his asylum interview the appellant claimed that his brother had
         organised and printed his application for a visa and  that  he  had
         applied for a student visa  with  the  help  of  his  brother.   He
         specifically said that when he was applying for his visa he did not
         need the agent's help".

    Further

         "according to the respondent the appellant  did  not  apply  for  a
         student visa until  January  13th  2009  several  weeks  after  his
         claimed release from detention.  He has not given  any  reason  for
         the delay".

26. The evidence given in GJ was that "there are  two  main  lists  at  the
    airport to alert the Authorities of someone of  adverse  interest;  the
    watch list and the stop list".  Those on the watch list will likely  be
    placed under surveillance especially on return  to  their  homes.   The
    fact is that the appellant claimed to have left Sri Lanka after  having
    obtained a visa,  for which he did not need the agent's  help  and  the
    judge found that even if he was using an agent, the appellant had given
    very little detail as to exactly what happened at the airport  and  how
    he was able to secure his safe passage.  The  judge  also  went  on  to
    state that S had arranged everything, ASQ 92 but that he had  paid  the
    agent the bribe and had given him the money to do  so,  ASQ  98.   This
    contradicted the evidence of one of the  other  witnesses  Mr  [K}  who
    simply said it was S who had paid the bribe.   Thus  the  evidence  was
    inconsistent.

27. Crucially the judge also stated that

         "At 59 Mr [K] also told me his brother was definitely proposing  to
         return to Sri  Lanka  when  he  initially  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  That makes no sense if the appellant  had  been  arrested
         and tortured as claimed and subsequently failed to  report  to  the
         Authorities in accordance with his release conditions".

28. Against that background even if the judge had confused a watch and stop
    list it  was  not  material  bearing  in  mind  the  remainder  of  the
    fundamental findings which undermined the appellant's credibility as to
    his experience  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  applied  GJ  and  in  the
    circumstances of this particular case, and the critical lacuna  in  the
    appellants' evidence, the country background evidence would not  assist
    further.

29. I find that much of the criticism for example at paragraph  51  of  the
    judge's  expectation  of  the  appellant  being  able  to  explain  the
    Authorities' ability to locate him was in fact comment and not material
    to the main critical findings on a credibility.

30. At paragraph 62 the judge  is  merely  describing  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had not produced written evidence in support of his claim  to
    have been released on reporting conditions albeit he said that  he  had
    reported six times and that he had  not  explained  why  he  went  into
    hiding and further the appellant made no mention of the payment of  any
    bribe for release during his asylum interview.

31. In relation to the witnesses, the appellant's own evidence and that  of
    S contradicted each other as set out at paragraph 63

         "however in his letter of October 16th 2016 S makes no  mention  of
         being threatened when the CID came to their house in  February  2nd
         2019.  He simply refers to threats made against their mother".

32. The judge merely made the passing comment at paragraph 63 that  he  did
    not understand  why  the  Authorities  would  continue  to  visit  that
    appellant's home relatively frequently  for  such  a  prolonged  period
    after the cessation of the hostilities.  It was the frequency  and  the
    length of period which the  judge  commented  on  albeit  that  it  was
    accepted in GJ that Authorities do continue to hassle  family  members.



33. Further the judge stated

         "There is no evidence  that  an  arrest  warrant  has  been  issued
         against the appellant.  Although Mr K told that  he  had  seen  the
         newspaper articles confirming that his brother was still wanted  by
         the CID my attention was not drawn to those articles (assuming they
         exist) at the hearing".

34. Overall the judge made a series of valid findings in  relation  to  the
    appellant's credibility, not least the contradiction  between  Mr  Ka's
    oral evidence and his statement as to his discovery of what happened to
    the appellant through the LTTE Intelligence Department.  In evidence he
    did not know what happened to the appellant after he found out  he  had
    been arrested but in his letter he claimed that the Authorities had all
    the information, paragraph 64.  Mere disagreement about the  weight  to
    be accorded to the evidence, which is a matter for  the  judge,  should
    not be characterised as an error of law, Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    412.  Overall the credibility findings were detailed  and  sufficiently
    adequately reasoned in relation to the experience in Sri Lanka, bearing
    in mind GJ and the country background material, and those findings will
    stand.

35. In relation to the TGTE activities I note that UB Sri Lanka [2017] EWCA
    Civ 85 was within the papers submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    paragraphs 12 and 13 of UB Sri Lanka held as follows:

         "12.     Annexed to the guidance is the text of  two  letters  from
             the British High Commission in Sri  Lanka.  This  material  is
             authoritative  and  clearly  intended  to  be  read  with  the
             guidance. The first letter is dated 16 April 2014:

             "Proscribed Terrorist Groups

             On 1 April 2014, the government of  Sri  Lanka  announced  the
             designation  of  16  Tamil  Diaspora  organisations  and   424
             individuals under the UN Security Council resolution  1373  on
             counter-terrorism. The order was issued by  the  Secretary  of
             Defence. The government asserts  that  this  action  has  been
             taken to stop attempts to  revive  the  LTTE.  The  BHC  [i.e.
             British High Commission] has asked the government of Sri Lanka
             to provide evidence to support this decision.

             Among  the  organisations  proscribed  are  the  Transnational
             Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) and the UK-based Global Tamil
             Forum (GTF) and British Tamil Forum  (BTF).  When  making  the
             announcement on 1 April, Brigadier  Ruwan  Wanigasooriya  said
             that individuals belonging to these organisations  would  face
             arrest under anti-terrorism laws ...  [T]o  date,  there  have
             been no known arrests based on membership of one of the  newly
             proscribed groups."

         13.      The later letter is dated 25 July 2014  and  the  relevant
             text reads:

             "The spokesperson from the DIE stated that  returnees  may  be
             questioned on arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and  TID.  They
             may be questioned about what they have been doing  whilst  out
             of Sri Lanka, including whether they have been  involved  with
             one of the Tamil Diaspora groups. He said that it  was  normal
             practice for returnees to be asked about their  activities  in
             the country they were returning from.

             The  spokesperson  from  the  SIS  said  that   people   being
             "deported" will always  be  questioned  about  their  overseas
             activities, including whether they have been involved with one
             of the proscribed organisations. He said that members  of  the
             organisations are not banned from returning to Sri Lanka, they
             are allowed to return, but will be questioned on  arrival  and
             may be detained.".

    UB (Sri Lanka) proceeded at paragraph 24

         "24.     In truth, consideration of the risk to the Appellant turns
             not merely on him showing that he was actually a member of the
             TGTE, but relies on his membership being detected  on  arrival
             in Sri Lanka. There is no suggestion that this Appellant is on
             any list of individuals of interest to the authorities in  Sri
             Lanka. The objective findings by the FTT are  clear  that  any
             activity by the Appellant in this country, even if observed or
             recorded, was low level and not likely to  carry  risks.  That
             activity itself would not demonstrate membership of the  TGTE.
             In addition, I bear in mind the very clear findings  that  the
             Appellant lied and exaggerated in alleging mistreatment during
             his last visit to Sri Lanka, and thus his credibility is low".

36. In this instance albeit the credibility in relation to  his  activities
    in Sri Lanka was disbelieved the judge nevertheless accepted  the  TGTE
    membership card was genuine.

37. The judge rejected the activities of the appellant in relation  to  the
    TGTE noting the letter from Mr Si on TGTE notepaper at 74 but  observed
    that it was a remarkably brief letter and described the appellant as  a
    "activist involved in promoting" the TGTE's projects  "on  genocide  of
    Tamils".  No details were given.  The judge  struggled  "to  understand
    how the appellant is able to play such a seemingly significant role  in
    the TGTE in view  of  his  psychiatric  problems  as  described  by  Dr
    Dhumad".

38. At paragraph 75 the judge states this

         "75.      Although  I  have  some  photographs  of  the   Appellant
             attending what appeared to be various demonstrations the  bulk
             of those photographs are from 2019.  I was  told  that  he  is
             referred to by name in two articles.  The first dated April  5
             2019 simply names "K...".  The second dated May 11 2019 refers
             to  "Ko...  Ka..."  amongst   others   as   a   "Tamil   Eelam
             sentimentalist" involved in  attending  an  event  in  Downing
             Street".

    And at 77 and 78 the judge stated the following

         "77.     In reaching my assessment I have taken into  account  what
             is said by the witnesses about the  enquiries/threats  alleged
             to have been made by the authorities in Sri Lanka in  relation
             to the Appellant's alleged TGTE activities.  Mr Ka claims that
             Su and himself were approached in November  2017  by  Military
             Intelligence  who  claimed  that  they  were  aware  that  the
             appellant was acting "in concert" with the TGTE in the UK.  In
             view of the evidence of the Appellant's involvement  with  the
             TGTE I do not consider it reasonably  likely  that  this  ever
             happened despite what is said by Su in his letters of March  7
             and December 2 2017, In the  first  letter  Su  refers  to  an
             earlier visit in February 2017 and  claims  that  he  referred
             what occurred to  a  Mr  Arnold  of  the  Northern  Provincial
             Council. Although I have a letter from him dated March 14 2017
             he does not mention any ongoing interest  by  the  authorities
             due to the Appellants alleged association with the TGTE.   His
             earlier letter  of  October  12  2016  simply  refers  to  the
             Appellants earlier arrest "for supporting  the  LTTE"  without
             specifying exactly what the Appellant did in support.

         78.      The Respondent does not accept that the Appellant has  had
             a  significant  role  in  relation  to   post-conflict   Tamil
             separatism  within  the  Diaspora  and/or   the   renewal   of
             hostilities within Sri Lanka.  I agree with that assessment. I
             do not consider it reasonably likely that  the  Appellant  has
             ever played any significant role in the TGTE sufficient to  be
             of any conceivable interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  He
             has never been an officer or committee member. Although he may
             have turned up at a few demonstrations that does not mean that
             he  will  perceived  to  have  a  "significant  role"  in  the
             organisation. Indeed it is difficult to see how  he  could  in
             the light  of  his  claimed  health  issues.     It  therefore
             follows that the Appellant can have no claim to  international
             protection either on asylum grounds or under Articles 2 and  3
             of the European Convention as he does not fall within  any  of
             the risk categories identified in  GJ.  He  has  no  claim  to
             humanitarian protection.  I  reject  the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant and his witnesses (at least some of whom are  family
             members) for the reasons given".

39. The judge appears to accept that the appellant has a role in  the  TGTE
    but does not accept that he has a significant role and  indeed  it  was
    difficult to see how he could do so in the light of the claimed  health
    issues.

40. I am not persuaded the judge failed to take account of the totality  of
    the  evidence  but  the  key  question  is  whether   the   appellant's
    activities, as accepted,  would be considered to be significant in  the
    eyes of the Sri Lankan Authorities, particularly as pointed out in  the
    grounds, that if the appellant was questioned about his  activities  in
    the UK and disclosed his involvement with the TGTE  over  a  five  year
    period he would likely be detained.  The real question  is  whether  on
    the findings of the judge whether the  perception  of  the  appellant's
    role would be significant in the eyes of the Sri Lankan Government.

41. I do not set aside the judge's actual factual findings in  relation  to
    his TGTE activities but his conclusion as to risk from TGTE  activities
    is set  aside.   This  is  because  from  paragraph  [74]  onwards  the
    assessment omitted reference to all relevant information  such  as  the
    media articles and  at  [78]  there  was  required,  an  assessment  in
    relation to the need to play a 'significant' role in  order  to  be  at
    risk on return.        On this ground alone, that is in relation to his
    TGTE activities, I consider there to be an error of law.  I  set  aside
    paragraph [78] and  thus  the  conclusion  in  relation  to  protection
    grounds. The matter shall be resumed before me in the Upper Tribunal on
    the issue of the TGTE activities of the appellant in the United Kingdom
    and its implications.
42. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision  at  paragraph  [78]  and  only  specifically  paragraph  [78]
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    findings to be made the matter should be retained in the Upper Tribunal
    and will be relisted before me.

Direction:

    Any further evidence is to be  filed  and  served  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 15(2)A of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
    at least 14 days prior to the resumed hearing.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 23rd December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Appendix C: error of law decision in RS


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13288/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd January 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   ms r s
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel, J W I Joint Council for
                    the Welfare of Immigrants
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O'Garro  promulgated  on  18th  September  2019  which  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 14th May 1977
    and she appealed against the refusal decision of the  respondent  dated
    7th November 2018.  As the judge recorded, the appellant had a previous
    claim for asylum which was refused on 25th January 2008 and her  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed  on  27th  May  2008.   She  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 25th June 2008.

 2. In this challenge there were four grounds of  appeal.    Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton Taylor on all grounds

 3. Ground (i); failure to apply the  vulnerable  witness  guidelines.  The
    judge described the appellant by reference to the medical  evidence  as
    "psychotic, depressed, hopeless and very anxious, her concentration  is
    poor ... she would not be able to follow the proceedings  meaningfully"
    [12].  The evidence stated she was "suffering from  PTSD"  although  in
    the light of her psychotic symptoms no clear diagnosis could  be  made.
    It was recorded, in the evidence that she had been  detained  on  three
    occasions under the Mental Health Act.  However, the judge  stated  she
    had borne in mind the vulnerability guidance at [13] but  she  did  not
    apply it.

 4. Mr Bandegani did not rely on the  grounds  of  appeal  whereby  it  was
    asserted that the judge did not  say  whether  she  had  concluded  the
    appellant was indeed a vulnerable witness.  That was abandoned  at  the
    hearing before me but he submitted that the judge did not determine the
    effect of vulnerability on the quality of the evidence and  the  weight
    to be placed on such vulnerability  in  assessing  the  evidence.   The
    judge did not address whether she considered the appellant's disability
    caused or resulted in impaired memory or whether "the order and  manner
    in which evidence was given was affected by  mental,  psychological  or
    emotional trauma or disability or whether the appellant's comprehension
    of questioning may  have  been  impaired".   That  her  previous  legal
    representatives in her previous asylum claim failed to secure  evidence
    as to her capacity to instruct or give evidence at any time  could  not
    make a hold against the appellant in principle.

 5. Ground (ii); failure to adequately deal with the TGTE issue.  There was
    the failure to take into account  all  the  photographic  evidence  and
    content in relation to the activities that the appellant had undertaken
    on behalf of the  TGTE.   The  appellant  was  clearly  marked  in  the
    photographs and she had attended public pro-Tamil demonstrations flying
    a large flag with the Tamil Tiger emblem at the centre.  She  was  also
    standing in the group of men next to men wearing vests  with  the  TGTE
    logo on it and was standing next to a minister of the TGTE in London.

 6. In concluding that there was no written confirmation of the appellant's
    or her partner's membership directly from the TGTE at paragraph 40  the
    judge failed to take into  account  that  the  TGTE  rarely,  if  ever,
    provided such letters.  She did not need to hold senior office or  have
    a high profile to be of interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  on
    return.  The judge failed to consider that the TGTE  was  a  proscribed
    organisation in Sri Lanka and the ban made it a  criminal  offence  for
    Sri Lankans to maintain contact with such organisations or its members.
     This was acknowledged in the Country Information  Guidance  Sri  Lanka
    Tamil separatism.  The  judge  failed  to  consider  that  the  country
    guidance of GJ did not assess or consider the  risks  facing  a  person
    associated with TGTE, a terrorist organisation.

 7.  Ground  (iii):  erroneously  took  into  account  personal   knowledge
    experience. At paragraph 32 the judge reached  the  surprising  finding
    that "in my experience a person who had been raped or  sexually  abused
    in conditions such as detention, will take a long  time  to  trust  and
    engage with someone of the opposite sex.  There was no indication  that
    the judge had experience in this regard and failed to  explain  why  on
    her experience and on what evidence, three years was not a  long  time.
    The judge's finding in this respect was unfair and irrational as it was
    based on no evidence.

 8. At ground (iv), the judge in approaching the medical evidence erred  by
    placing the cart  before  the  horse  and  determining  credibility  in
    advance in considering  the  content  of  the  expert  medical  report.
    Because the judge decided that the appellant  lacked  credibility,  the
    doctor's opinion in turn could not be given  much  weight.   The  judge
    also erred by concluding that the  doctor  only  reached  his  clinical
    assessment based on what he had been told by the appellant  whereas  it
    was  undertaken  by  applying  clinical  methodology,  his  experience,
    training and expertise.

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Bandegani pointed to the 2008 determination
    which did refer to the appellant's distress and referred to  her  claim
    that she had been mistreated.  It should have been  considered  whether
    there was a plausible or good reason, there being no reference  in  the
    medical reports to her vulnerability and it was  to  be  found  in  the
    report of Dr Dhumad  dated  3rd  August  2019  which  stated  that  the
    appellant could not talk about her previous sexual assault.   According
    to the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  on  credibility  Asylum  Policy
    Instruction  assessing  credibility  and  refugee  status   version   9
    publication date 6th January 2015 there was no dispute that a  decision
    maker must, when looking at a vulnerable witness, consider why  matters
    were not referred to before and at paragraph 7.8 acknowledge that there
    may be a delay in disclosure.  This applied equally to the Secretary of
    State and to the judge.

10. The appellant was diagnosed  with  PTSD  which  stemmed  from  a  life-
    threatening traumatic experience.  The judge at  paragraphs  21  to  27
    accepted she had a mental health condition and the judge took no  issue
    with the clinical opinion of Dr Dhumad.  The judge at 27 stated  "I  am
    also aware that facts personal to the appellant that were  not  brought
    to the attention of the first Immigration Judge, that were relevant  to
    the issues before me should be treated with a greater  circumspection".



11. The judge looked at the GP records and there was no  reference  to  her
    being  mentally  unwell  but  that  would  not  be  apparent  from  the
    information because the appellant had not previously disclosed and  the
    reason was explained in the medical  report.   Mr  Bandegani  submitted
    that had the judge properly  applied  the  vulnerability  guidance  the
    judge would have been aware that what she had to do  was  consider  the
    extent of the vulnerability and the impact of that  and  there  was  no
    application of that important  part  of  the  guidance.   The  ultimate
    conclusion of Dr Dhumad was to be found at 10.3. which stated "She  saw
    her GP in the UK but was not able to talk  about  the  torture  or  the
    sexual assault, she felt ashamed and could not talk about it."

12. In relation to Ground (iv),  Mr  Bandegani  submitted  that  the  judge
    placed the cart before the horse and this was accepted by the Secretary
    of State and put alongside the failure in Ground (i) the  judge  failed
    to look at the content of the report in the round.  It was an error  to
    reject the report merely because it was based on  the  appellant's  own
    account.  The judge failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that
    the trauma had nothing to do with her fear of returning to Sri Lanka.

13. In relation to Ground (ii) it was insufficient for the Tribunal to look
    at GJ which did not in turn consider the TGTE or links thereto.  It did
    not consider how, having links with  a  proscribed  organisation  would
    affect the risk on return.  There was a misapplication of GJ and Others
    particularly  in  relation  to  the  requirement  for  there  to  be  a
    significant role in that organisation.

14. In relation to Ground (iii), the judge had no rational basis  to  reach
    the conclusion about the way people behaved if they had  suffered  from
    sexual violence.  There was no indication that the judge had  expertise
    in this area of law or that it was made known to the parties.

15. Mr Clarke submitted that the challenge was misconceived.  The appellant
    had an appeal in 2008 and a central part of  that  determination  found
    the appellant not to be credible.  One of the things taken into account
    was the brevity of the witness statement, her numerous  inconsistencies
    and the vague evidence, but at paragraph 29 the judge had this to say:

         "29.     No evidence of the appellant's  mental  state  was  placed
             before the Judges  who  heard  her  appeal  but  there  is  no
             reliable evidence before this Tribunal that the appellant  was
             suffering from any mental health  issues  when  she  left  Sri
             Lankan or indeed for many years after she left Sri Lanka.  Her
             medical  records  which  is  before  this  Tribunal  makes  no
             reference to the appellant having any  mental  health  problem
             before 2016.  Prior  to  August  2016,  the  appellant's  main
             contact with her GP was to do with general matters."

16. Additionally, the report of Dr Dhumad made no  reference  to  the  2008
    determination.  The assertion was that she was  supressing  her  mental
    health and one would expect the expert to comment on the non-disclosure
    of mental health.  That was not done.  When the judge states there  was
    no reliable evidence to go behind the 2008 findings that  was  patently
    fair.  The judge approached the evidence correctly and  did  find  that
    she is a vulnerable witness but  there  was  nothing  to  unsettle  the
    determination of 2008.  The further medical evidence was dated 2019 and
    nothing in that evidence which suggests that the mental  health  issues
    undermined the evidence in relation to the determination in 2008.   The
    burden of proof was on the appellant.  That is why Mibanga [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367  was immaterial and what the judge said was  not  probative  of
    central issues because the medical report does not comment on the issue
    of 2008.  The same case was put forward in 2008.

17. In relation to Ground (iv) the expert report had no  Istanbul  Protocol
    findings.  KV made reference to sliding scale in regard to the Istanbul
    Protocol findings and how much the expert believed but at 14.2  of  the
    report it was impossible to discern  anything  regarding  the  Istanbul
    Protocol findings or in respect of causation.  Further the  doctor  did
    not consider the determination from 2008.

18. At Ground (ii) Mr Clarke accepted that at pages 34,  35  and  36  there
    were photographs of the appellant in relation to the TGTE but there was
    no evidence that the Sri Lankan  authorities  would  be  aware  of  the
    appellant's return or that the  low-level  association  with  the  TGTE
    would cause her to be arrested and detained.  There was no evidence  of
    her membership and there was no submission in  relation  to  her  being
    identified.

19. In relation to Ground (iii) there was a  charge  of  irrationality  but
    that was a very discrete challenge at paragraph 32 and  the  point  was
    immaterial and had no bearing on the point at 35.  At 32 the judge  was
    looking at inconsistencies in the medical and witness evidence.

20. Mr Bandegani responded that the judge was required to take note of  the
    medical evidence in  order  to  assess  the  inconsistencies  from  the
    evidence such as at paragraph 34.

21. Further, UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA 85 should be  read  logically  from
    paragraphs 23 to 25 and in order.  The appellant would not be  expected
    to lie on her return and she would be very  vulnerable  should  she  be
    questioned.  None of this was considered by the judge and there was  no
    authority in GJ or UB that anyone associated with TGTE is not  at  risk
    and the judge's failure must be material.

22. The fundamental point was that there was late disclosure in  this  case
    and secondly there was no way that the doctor in  2019  could  diagnose
    the person's mental health condition a decade before.   At  that  point
    she did not disclose the trauma.  It was necessary to look at the other
    evidence.  The judge stated at paragraph 38 that  no  issue  was  taken
    with the diagnosis but merely rejected that the trauma was suffered  in
    Sri Lanka.  The judge's reason for not following the expert opinion was
    that surrounding her  immigration  status  but  the  reasons  for  that
    conclusion were not well-founded against the  weight  of  the  evidence
    pointing to a different conclusion.

Analysis

23. The difficulty for the appellant's case is that it attempts to unsettle
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in 2008 on the basis  of  delay
    in disclosure.  As Mr Bandegani indicated. it was not  possible  for  a
    doctor in 2019 to diagnose a person's mental health condition a  decade
    before.  The essence of her claim in 2008 was  similar,  that  she  was
    questioned by the LTTE and detained  and  tortured.   Albeit  that  the
    judges in the First-tier Tribunal in 2008 identified that she was in  a
    state of distress at  the  hearing  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant at that date was suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder
    or that she was unrepresented or that she failed to give oral evidence.
     The Tribunal in 2008 made adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant not least because of her  inconsistent  answers,  bearing  in
    mind there was no indication of or confirmed mental  health  issues  at
    that  point,  and  because  her  evidence  was  inconsistent  with  the
    background country information.  The inconsistencies addressed  in  the
    respondent's refusal were not addressed.  Further at  paragraph  35  of
    that determination in 2008  it  was  evident  that  country  background
    material had been assessed and for example there was no explanation why
    the LTTE wished to take the appellant when they had a quota  policy  of
    person per family and her brother had already been taken. It  was  open
    to the judge to apply Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702 as s/he did.



24. The medical report produced by Dr Dhumad did not address the  issue  of
    the delay  in  disclosure  concentrating  as  it  did  on  her  current
    psychological state.  Nor did the report make reference to the previous
    determination of 2008.   There was no explanation in the report  as  to
    the delay of disclosure and merely a brief reference at 10.3. that "she
    saw her GP in the UK but was not able to talk about the torture or  the
    sexual assault, she felt ashamed and could not talk about it".  Nor was
    there any explanation about why she decided to disclose sexual  assault
    ten years later.  There was indication of a psychotic episode  in  2016
    and a  referral  to  hospital  for  psychotic  episode  where  she  was
    diagnosed with PTSD and paranoid schizophrenia, depression and  anxiety
    but there appeared to be no hospital report.  At 10.6. of  the  report,
    it was concluded that the appellant had a diagnosis of bipolar  illness
    and schizophrenia and was being treated with olanzapine.  As the doctor
    records at 10.6. she also has a  family  history  of  a  mental  health
    condition and that her sister committed suicide.

25. The doctor at 14 of his report set out the following:

         "14.1.   MRS [RS'] presentation, in my opinion, is consistent  with
                a diagnosis of severe  Depressive  Episode,  with  psychotic
                symptoms as defined in the international  classification  of
                disease 10th Edition, Mental and Behavioural Disorder, ICD10
                F 32.3. (Appendix II).

         14.2.    She also has Post Traumatic  Symptoms  but  her  psychotic
                symptoms are prominent at this stage and it is difficult  to
                assess her PTSD  symptoms.   In  my  opinion  her  traumatic
                experience, torture at the hands of the authorities  in  Sri
                Lanka is the primary cause of her mental health issues.

         14.3.    Her medical records noted that she was  admitted  3  times
                detained under the  provision  of  the  MHA.   Her  symptoms
                appears to be  a  mixture  of  schizophrenic  and  affective
                symptoms  (elated  and  depressed  mood),  therefore  in  my
                opinion  she  is  suffering  from  Schizoaffective  Disorder
                appendix (III), as stated  in  the  ICD10  'A  diagnosis  of
                schizoaffective disorder  should  be  made  only  when  both
                definite schizophrenic and definite affective  symptoms  are
                prominent simultaneously."

26. The report of the doctor is geared primarily to the assessment  of  her
    psychosis rather than her PTSD, which he stated was difficult to assess
    and which the judge recorded, and thus whether she was  fit  to  attend
    court and give oral evidence and whether she was fit to fly.  There was
    passing reference to her contact with the GP and that she was not  able
    to talk about the torture but nothing in relation to any assessment  of
    her symptoms in accordance with  the  Istanbul  Protocol,   despite  an
    affirmation that the principle set out in  the  Istanbul  Protocol  had
    been followed, and a mere reference that  she  had  not  mentioned  the
    sexual assault to the Home Office or to her GP.  There was no  analysis
    of the delay in disclosure or any explanation for it.

27.  In  the  absence  of  clear  and  specific  findings  by  the  medical
    professional, it was thus open to the judge to make the finding at [27]
    that facts personal to the appellant  that  were  not  brought  to  the
    attention of the first Immigration Judge,  and  were  relevant  to  the
    issues before him, should be treated  with  a  greater  circumspection.
    The appellant was under medical treatment and had legal  representation
    at the time and there was no evidence before the  Tribunal  to  suggest
    that she had mental  health  issues  in  2008.   The  judge  accurately
    records at paragraph 29 that her mental health problems were documented
    in 2016 some eight years later.  That was a finding open to the judge.

28. Nor am I  persuaded  that  without  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in
    relation to her mental state at that date in 2008, the judge  erred  in
    approach to the medical records.  The judge painstakingly analysed  the
    medical  evidence  from  the  GP  notes  which  are   the   independent
    documentary records and specifically noted at paragraph 34 that in 2015
    she stated that she had been married and trying to conceive  for  eight
    years which was contradictory to her recent statement that she did  not
    meet her present partner until July 2010.  The appellant did  not  give
    oral evidence but relied on a witness statement which was prepared with
    the assistance of her legal representatives but even  so  the  comments
    made by the judge relate to information and evidence given prior to the
    record of any onset of  significant  illness.   For  example,  in  2015
    (prior to firm medical evidence of any significant mental condition) it
    was recorded that she had 'married and  trying  to  conceive  ...For  8
    years'.

29. The comments at paragraph 32 in relation to  her  miscarriage  were  no
    doubt not within the expertise of the judge but  it  is  not  material,
    being effectively superfluous, when considering  the  judge  contrasted
    the statement in  her  witness  statement  at  paragraph  31  with  her
    evidence  as  recorded  in  her  GP  records  at  paragraph  34.    The
    credibility findings at 34 and 35 were open to  the  judge,  not  least
    there was no  firm evidence  that  there  was  any  significant  mental
    health problem prior to 2016 and this was compared with  the  no  doubt
    carefully drafted statement by the representative for the court hearing
    in 2019.

30. It was open to the judge to give less weight  to  the  report  from  Dr
    Dhumad for the reasons I have given and further because it was  largely
    based on the appellant's own account. It is now said she is  psychotic.
    JL (medical  reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  00145  in  fact
    confirms that the more the doctor has relied  on  the  appellant's  own
    account the less weight the judge is entitled to accord to that report.
     There was no indication that the medical  professional  had  read  the
    previous decision. In terms of  documentation  he  merely  referred  to
    'letters of instruction', Home Office bundle and  Medical  records  and
    prescription from The  Medical  View  Surgery'.    However,  the  judge
    placed little weight on the report rather than no  weight  and  finally
    comes to the conclusion at 39  that  the  appellant's  medical  records
    contradicted what she  stated  in  her  statement  and  undermined  her
    credibility.

31. Further as Mr Clarke pointed out, the 2019 report did not undermine  or
    unseat the adverse credibility findings made in the first determination
    and the report in  the  form  that  it  was  presented  only  cursorily
    referred to failure to disclose and made no attempt at explaining  that
    failure to disclose until 2019.   In  the  circumstances  the  "Mibanga
    point" taken by the appellant has no force.  The  report  contained  no
    Istanbul Protocol findings and KV (Sri Lanka) v the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] UKSC 10  specifically  refers  to  those
    Istanbul Protocol relevant findings when considering how much an expert
    is to be relied  upon.    There  was  no  indication  that  the  report
    contained an opinion about the consistency of  the  findings  with  the
    asylum seeker's account of the circumstances in which  the  injury  was
    said to be sustained.  This was not a scarring case but if  an  analogy
    is drawn one of the functions of a medical report is to offer  a  clear
    statement in relation to their consistency  of  presentation  with  the
    history given.  As the Supreme Court stated at [20] of KV

         'decision-makers  can  legitimately   receive   assistance,   often
         valuable,  from  medical  experts  who  feel  able,  within   their
         expertise, to offer an  opinion  about  the  consistency  of  their
         findings with the asylum-seeker's account of the  circumstances  in
         which the scarring was sustained, not limited to the  mechanism  by
         which it was sustained'.

    And at [22] and [23]

         '... In RT (medical reports -  causation  of  scarring)  Sri  Lanka
         [2008] UKAIT 00009 the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in  para  37
         described the SA (Somalia) case as  a  landmark  authority  in  the
         identification of the purpose of a medical report  in  relation  to
         alleged  torture  and  in   the   indorsement   of   the   Istanbul
         Protocol'[22].

         '... [T]he function of  the  report  as  being  to  provide  expert
         opinion on the degree of correlation  between  the  asylum-seeker's
         presentation  and  his  allegations  of  torture.  And  indeed,  no
         surprise that, in para  3.3  of  his  instruction  to  case-workers
         entitled Medico-Legal Reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation  and
         the Medical Foundation Medico-Legal Report Service dated July 2015,
         the  Home  Secretary  should  have  required  them  to   give   due
         consideration  to  medical  opinions  given  on  behalf  of   those
         organisations upon the degree of consistency between  the  clinical
         findings and the account of torture[23]'.

32. There was no such clear statement of consistency with presentation  and
    in line with the Istanbul Protocol.  Contrary to the Istanbul  Protocol
    the doctor did not consider the  alternative  causes  for  her  medical
    state, SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.

33. Finally, the Supreme Court confirmed  that  the  ultimate  decision  on
    credibility rests with the judge by noting at [25]

         'The conclusion about credibility always rests with  the  decision-
         maker following a critical survey of all the  evidence,  even  when
         the expert has placed his conclusion within category  (a)  or  (e).
         Indeed, in an asylum case in which the  question  is  only  whether
         there is a real possibility that the account  given  is  true,  not
         even the decision-maker is required to arrive at an overall  belief
         in its truth; the inquiry is into credibility  only  of  a  partial
         character'.

34. Overall I find thus that the judge's approach to the  evidence  in  the
    light of the appellant 's vulnerabilities of  which  s/he  was  clearly
    aware was not a material error of law.

35. In this case the judge was also charged with falling  foul  of  Mibanga
    and I note Mr Clarke's acceptance of that albeit it was  not  material.
    I agree for the reasons given above even if it were 'compartmentalised'
    it was not material, but looking at the decision as a whole it is clear
    that the judge in the course of setting out the  evidence  specifically
    cited the psychiatric report of Dr Saleh Dhumad at paragraph 12, at the
    outset of the findings,  and recorded that the appellant was  suffering
    from post-traumatic stress disorder.  The judge also confirmed that  he
    had made careful note of the submissions in the Record of  Proceedings.
    Bearing in mind the problems with the report, as expressed above, I  do
    not consider that the approach by the judge was flawed  and  undermines
    the assessment of the judge in his decision.

36. HH (medical evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia  [2005]  UKAIT  00164
    confirms that a judge has to start somewhere and the references to  the
    medical evidence at the start and  throughout  the  decision  indicate,
    contrary to the grounds that the judge did factor in the medical report
    from the onset and did weigh in that assessment  when  considering  the
    evidence. As HH explains a judge has to start somewhere. 'As the  judge
    reasoned at [29]

         'there is no  reliable  evidence  before  this  Tribunal  that  the
         appellant was suffering from any mental health issues when she left
         Sri Lankan (sic) or indeed for many years after she left Sri Lanka.
          Her medical  records  which  is  before  this  Tribunal  makes  no
         reference to the appellant having any mental health problem  before
         2016.  Prior to August 2016,  the  appellant's  main  contact  with
         their GP was to do with general medical matters'.

37. Finally, the judge at paragraph  39  did  state  "I  find  the  medical
    evidence carries little probative weight.  In respect  of  her  written
    evidence, I find that the appellant's medical records  contradict  what
    she stated in her statement and further undermine her credibility."

38. I do however, turning to Ground (ii), consider that the judge  has  not
    considered all of the evidence and Mr Walker conceded that at pages  34
    to 36 had not been addressed by the judge.   As  Mr  Bandegani  pointed
    out, the appellant would not be expected to lie and GJ and others (post
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  does  not
    address issues in relation to the TGTE.   It  would  appear  the  judge
    failed to consider that the TGTE is a proscribed  organisation  in  Sri
    Lanka specifically dedicated to the promotion of a Tamil state and  the
    ban is a criminal offence for Sri  Lankans  to  maintain  contact  with
    organisations or  its  members  and  the  relevance  of  this  risk  is
    acknowledged  in  the  respondent's   own   policy   guidance   country
    information than Sri Lanka Tamil separatism dated 28th August 2014.

39. The judge stated at paragraph [41] "In any event, even if the appellant
    did attend a demonstration or is a member  of  the  TGTE  there  is  no
    evidence before me that either the appellant  or  her  partner  have  a
    significant role in the TGTE or her role at the demonstration".

40. That does not grapple with the question of whether a  significant  role
    is required or how the appellant would be seen on  return  particularly
    bearing in mind her mental condition and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.

41. It  is  the  perception  of  the  authorities  as  to  the  appellant's
    activities in the UK which is key and as Mr Bandegani  pointed  out  GJ
    acknowledges  the  reliance  by   the   Sri   Lankan   authorities   on
    sophisticated intelligence for the purposes of identification.

42. I thus find there is an error of law in the approach by  the  judge  to
    the TGTE aspect of this claim and I  direct  that  there  should  be  a
    resumption before me in the Upper Tribunal on this point alone.

43. The Judge erred in law for the reasons identified,  and,  in  a  manner
    which could have a material effect on the outcome.  Pursuant to Section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007), I
    set aside the decision in relation to the findings  on  the  TGTE  only
    specifically paragraphs [40] to [47].


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 17th January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

