
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of B) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
(recording of leave - date stamps) IJR [2016] UKUT 00135 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London

                                                            19 February 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)

                                      B
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                      (Hearing date: 10 December 2015)

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr B. Ali, instructed by Aman Solicitors Advocates, appeared on behalf of
the applicant.

Ms S. Reeves, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared on
behalf of the respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

(1) The judgments of the Court of Appeal in R v Secretary of State  for  the
Home Department ex parte Bagga  [1991]  1  QB  485  are  authority  for  the
proposition that, if there is no practice on the part of  the  Secretary  of
State of using a  date  stamp  to  record  the  grant  of  leave  under  the
Immigration Act 1971, even  a  'blameless'  individual  will  be  unable  to
derive any material benefit from that stamp.

(2) The corollary, however,  is  not  that  a  blameworthy  individual  must
automatically be able to benefit  from  such  a  stamp,  which  is  used  in
practice to record the grant of leave. Someone  who,  by  misrepresentation,
induces an immigration officer  to  proceed  on  a  mistaken  basis  is  not
automatically entitled to succeed, merely because a  mistaken  decision  has
been formally recorded.

(3)  In such a scenario, consideration must be given to:

(a) the person's actions and understanding; and

(b) what the immigration officer thought he or she  was  doing  by  affixing
the stamp.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE PETER LANE:


Harwich: New Year's Eve 2013


1.     On New Year's Eve  2013,  around  8pm,  a  car  and  passenger  ferry
    arrived at Harwich from The Hook of Holland.  Ms Tracy  Rogers  was  an
    immigration officer on duty that night at the car control PCP  (primary
    line), dealing with vehicles disembarking  from  the  ferry.   A  white
    Nissan Qashqai vehicle approached Ms Rogers'  booth.   In  the  vehicle
    were the applicant and its driver, Mr Abdesslam.  There is some dispute
    as to what conversation passed between Ms Rogers and the  occupants  of
    the car.  What is, however, undisputed is that  Ms  Rogers  "asked  for
    passports" and was given Mr Abdesslam's British  passport  and  a  Home
    Office travel document (HOTD) bearing the name  of  the  applicant,  in
    which there was a stamp dated 28  January  2004,  issued  by  the  Home
    Office Immigration and Nationality Department, stating  "THIS  DOCUMENT
    IS VALID FOR TRAVEL  TO  ALL  COUNTRIES  EXCEPT:  LIBYA.   HOME  OFFICE
    REFERENCE NUMBER ... THERE IS AT PRESENT NO TIME LIMIT ON THE  HOLDER'S
    STAY IN THE UNITED KINGDOM".  Ms Rogers stamped "an open date stamp" in
    the applicant's HOTD.


2.   The vehicle then made its way to the Car Hall  Examination  Area,  some
    40 metres  from  Ms  Rogers'  booth.   Here,  it  was  examined  by  Mr
    Christopher Glen-Barber, also an immigration officer, for  what  appear
    to have been (at least in part) customs-related reasons.  Mr  Abdesslam
    told Mr Glen-Barber he had been to visit relatives  for  a  wedding  in
    Amsterdam.  He had contacted his friend, the applicant, to offer him "a
    lift home as he knew he was returning in the New Year".


3.   The applicant's Libyan passport, issued on 13  March  2009,  was  found
    under the driver's seat of  the  vehicle.   Mr  Glen-Barber's  notebook
    records that this passport "belongs to [the applicant], who presented a
    UK 1951 Convention document at controls".  The applicant told Mr  Glen-
    Barber that due to changes in circumstances in Libya, it was "now  safe
    for him to return to" that country.  The last exit stamp out  of  Libya
    was noted as being 27 December 2013.  According to  an  HMRC  printout,
    apparently made contemporaneously, checks "came back satisfactory along
    with further checks by border force in relation to our databases".  The
    printout states that the applicant "had hidden  Libyan  passport  under
    driver's seat". The applicant disputes this.  At all  events,  the  car
    and its occupants were  allowed  to  leave  the  examination  area  and
    proceed on their way.





The applicant


4.   The applicant was born in Libya in  1975.   In  1997,  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  In 2001, the respondent  recognised
    the applicant as a refugee.  On 8 June 2002, the applicant was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  On 28  January  2004,  the  applicant  was
    issued with a further HOTD, with a date of expiry of 28  January  2014.
    This was the document that Ms Rogers saw.  The HOTD was issued  with  a
    "Notice  to  Holders  of  Home  Office  Travel  Documents",  which  the
    applicant accepts he received. This said:


        "Before you use your document you should read  the  notes  in  your
        travel document."


          Note 4 in the HOTD said:


         "4.  If the holder obtains  a  national  passport  from  their  own
             Government, this travel document will no longer be  valid  and
             should  be   returned   to   the   Travel   Document   Section
             immediately."


5.   In October 2003, the applicant married.  He  and  his  wife  had  three
    children born in this country in, respectively, 2004,  2005  and  2007.
    The applicant says he divorced his wife in October 2010.


6.   On 13 March 2009, the applicant obtained a  Libyan  national  passport.
    The respondent contends that the effect of this was to  invalidate  the
    HOTD, which was  not  returned  to  the  Travel  Document  Section,  as
    required.


7.   Thereafter, the applicant appears  at  some  point  to  have  left  the
    United Kingdom, because on 9 June 2009 he  presented  his  HOTD  to  an
    Immigration Officer in Manchester, in order to gain entry to the United
    Kingdom.  In the same month, the applicant  entered  Libya,  using  his
    Libyan passport.  The applicant was absent from the United Kingdom  for
    approximately four and a half years, until his return  on  31  December
    2013.  It seems the applicant lived in Libya during that  time,  except
    for a visit to Greece to receive medical treatment  in  respect  of  an
    injury, said to have been received in the Libyan civil war in 2011.


8.   In June 2013, the applicant says he got married in  Libya.   He  agreed
    with his wife that he would be returning to the United Kingdom at  some
    point after their marriage and that she would join  him  when  she  had
    learnt English.





The judicial review


9.   After passing through Harwich, the applicant  made  his  way  to  North
    West England and on 9 February 2014, he applied to  the  respondent  to
    transfer the "no  time  limit"  stamp  in  the  HOTD  into  his  Libyan
    passport.  The respondent refused the application, which  led  to  this
    judicial review application.  The applicant's amended grounds, on which
    he was in August 2015  granted  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
    proceedings, contend (as ground 1)  that  the  respondent,  through  Ms
    Rogers, granted the applicant leave to enter the United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 19 of the immigration rules, without limitation on the length
    of time he could stay in the United Kingdom.  Ms  Rogers  was  said  to
    have chosen "not to ask the [applicant] any questions when she  stamped
    his passport with an ILR stamp".   Alternatively,  Ms  Rogers  "made  a
    mistake and the [applicant] is entitled to take  the  benefit  of  that
    mistake". A declaration is sought that  the  applicant  has  indefinite
    leave to remain.


10.  Ground 2 submits that the respondent's decision not  to  place  an  NTL
    stamp in the applicant's Libyan passport "is  unlawful  and  completely
    unreasonable" on the basis that he "has had and does have ILR".


11.  Ground 3 "challenges the allegation made against him  that  he  entered
    illegally or is an illegal entrant"; whilst the fourth  ground  submits
    that, in the alternative, the respondent's agents "were  aware  of  the
    full facts of the case during and arising from the questioning and  the
    search of the vehicle the [applicant] was travelling  in".   Thus,  the
    respondent allowed the applicant "to leave Harwich with his ILR intact.
     This was a continuing exercise of discretion".





Legislation


12.  So far as relevant, sections 3  and  4  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    provide as follows:


         "3.- General provisions for regulation and control.


                (1)    Except as otherwise provided by or  under  this  Act,
                    where a person is not a British citizen


                    (a)    he shall not  enter  the  United  Kingdom  unless
                        given  leave  to  do  so  in  accordance  with  the
                        provisions of, or made under, this Act;


                    (b)    he may be given leave to enter the United Kingdom
                        (or, when already there, leave  to  remain  in  the
                        United Kingdom) either for  a  limited  or  for  an
                        indefinite period;


                    c) if he is given limited leave to enter  or  remain  in
                        the United Kingdom, it may be given subject to  all
                        or any of the following conditions, namely-


                    ...


                  (2)  The Secretary of State shall from time to  time  (and
                      as soon as may be) lay before  Parliament  statements
                      of the rules, or of any changes in  the  rules,  laid
                      down by him as to the practice to be followed in  the
                      administration of this Act for regulating  the  entry
                      into and  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  persons
                      required  by  this  Act  to  have  leave  to   enter,
                      including any rules as to the period for which  leave
                      is to be given and the conditions to be  attached  in
                      different circumstances;


                      ...


                  4)   A person's leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
                      Kingdom shall lapse on his  going  to  a  country  or
                      territory outside the common travel area (whether  or
                      not he lands there), unless  within  the  period  for
                      which he had leave he returns to the  United  Kingdom
                      in circumstances in  which  he  is  not  required  to
                      obtain leave to enter; but, if he does so return, his
                      previous  leave  (and  any  limitation   on   it   or
                      conditions attached to it) shall continue to apply.


        4(1) The power under this Act to give or refuse leave to enter  the
             United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration  officers  ...
             and, unless otherwise allowed  by  or  under  this  Act,  those
             powers shall be exercised by notice in  writing  given  to  the
             person affected ..."


13.  Section 33(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 defines  an  illegal  entrant
    as follows:


         "Illegal entrant" means a person -


         (a)  unlawfully entering  or  seeking  to  enter  in  breach  of  a
             deportation order or of the immigration laws, or


         (b)  entering or seeking to enter by means which include  deception
             by another person,


         and includes  also  a  person  who  has  entered  as  mentioned  in
         paragraph (a) or (b) above."


14.  So far as relevant, the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order
    2000 provides:


             "7.- (1) An Immigration Officer, whether or not in the  United
                      Kingdom, may give or refuse a person leave  to  enter
                      the United Kingdom at any time before  his  departure
                      for, or in the course of his journey to,  the  United
                      Kingdom.


                  (2)  In order to determine whether or not to give leave to
                      enter under this article (and, if so, for what period
                      and  subject  to  what  conditions),  an  immigration
                      officer may seek such information, and the production
                      of  such  documents  or   copy   documents,   as   an
                      immigration officer would be entitled to obtain in an
                      examination under paragraph 2 or 2A of Schedule 2  to
                      the [Immigration Act 1971].


             13.- (1) In this article and article 13A 'leave' means -






                      (a)  leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  (including
                           leave to enter conferred by  means  of  an  entry
                           clearance under article 2); and


                      (b)  leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


                  (2)  Subject to paragraph (3), where a  person  has  leave
                      which is in force and which was:


                      (a)  conferred by means of an entry clearance  (other
                           than a visit visa) under article 2; or


                      (b)  given by an immigration officer or the Secretary
                           of State for a period exceeding six months,


                      such leave shall not lapse on his going to a  country
                      or territory outside the common travel area."


                  ...


                  (4)  Leave which does not lapse under paragraph (2)  shall
                      remain  in  force  either  indefinitely  (if  it   is
                      unlimited) or  until  the  date  on  which  it  would
                      otherwise have expired (if limited), but -


                      (a)  where the holder has stayed outside  the  United
                           Kingdom for a continuous period of more than  two
                           years, the leave (where the leave  is  unlimited)
                           or any leave then remaining (where the  leave  is
                           limited) shall thereupon lapse; and ..."






Immigration rules


15.  As in force at  the  relevant  time,  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules
    provided as follows:


             "18. A person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a
                  returning resident may be admitted for settlement provided
                  the Immigration  Officer  is  satisfied  that  the  person
                  concerned:


                  (i)  had indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
                        Kingdom when he last left; and


                  (ii) has not been away from the United  Kingdom  for  more
                        than 2 years; and


                  (iii)    did not  receive  assistance  from  public  funds
                        towards the cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and


                  (iv)      now  seeks  admission   for   the   purpose   of
                        settlement.


             19.   A  person  who  does  not  benefit  from  the  preceding
                  paragraph by reason only of  having  been  away  from  the
                  United Kingdom too long may nevertheless be admitted as  a
                  returning resident if, for example, he has lived here  for
                  most of his life.


             ...


             20.  The leave of a person whose stay in the United Kingdom is
                  subject to a time limit lapses on his going to  a  country
                  or territory outside the common travel area if  the  leave
                  was given for a period of six months or less or  conferred
                  by a visit visa.  In other  cases,  leave  lapses  on  the
                  holder  remaining  outside  the  United  Kingdom   for   a
                  continuous period of more than two years.  A person  whose
                  leave has lapsed and who returns after a temporary absence
                  abroad within the period of  this  earlier  leave  has  no
                  claim  to  admission  as  a   returning   resident.    His
                  application to  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom  should  be
                  considered in the light of all the relevant circumstances.
                   The same time limit  and  any  conditions  attached  will
                  normally be reimposed if  he  meets  the  requirements  of
                  these Rules, unless he is seeking admission in a different
                  capacity from the one in which he was last given leave  to
                  enter or remain."






Case law


16.  Counsel referred me to a number of cases.  Mr Ali relied first  upon  R
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Badaike, Queen's
    Bench Divisional Court, Times, 3 May  1977.   In  this  case  a  former
    member of the  Nigerian  Air  force  obtained  an  order  quashing  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport him as an  illegal  entrant  to
    the United Kingdom.  The applicant had first come to the United Kingdom
    when exempt from the operation of the 1971 Act  by  reason  of  section
    8(4)(b).  An entry certificate had been stamped in his passport,  dated
    21 September 1973 and valid for six months.  When he later returned  to
    the United Kingdom, he was no longer exempt.  He presented his passport
    to the Immigration Officer. The Court said:


         "it was common ground, throughout that the applicant did not put  a
         foot wrong.  He did not produce any other documents,  nor  did  the
         immigration officer ask for any others.  The  applicant  said  that
         the Immigration Officer  did  not  ask  any  questions  but  simply
         stamped the passport 'Immigration Officer Gatwick'  and  the  date"
         (Peter Pain J)."


17.  The Divisional Court rejected the Secretary of State's contention  that
    the immigration officer who stamped the applicant's passport  had  done
    so by reason of a mistake, of such  a  character  as  to  invalidate  a
    "notice in writing" conferring leave for the purpose of  section  4  of
    the 1971 Act.  "There being no provisions for what  form  a  notice  in
    writing had to take, the stamp was a sufficient notice  in  writing  to
    satisfy section 4".


18.  In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex  parte  Choudhary
    [1978] 3 All ER 790 the applicant, who in fact had  no  entitlement  to
    enter the United Kingdom, received a stamp  in  his  Pakistan  passport
    marked "indefinite leave to enter".  He  was  subsequently  taken  into
    custody as an illegal entrant.  The Court of Appeal held that,  in  the
    circumstances of the case, the immigration officer had not  had  lawful
    authority to grant indefinite leave to enter to the applicant, who  was
    not "settled" for the purposes of the 1971 Act.


19.  In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Ram  [1979]
    1 WLR 148, the Divisional Court considered the position of an applicant
    who, upon return to the United  Kingdom  in  November  1974,  told  the
    Immigration Officer he had come  to  attend  a  wedding.   He  made  no
    misrepresentation to the officer but  his  passport  was  stamped  with
    leave to enter the United Kingdom  and  to  remain  for  an  indefinite
    period.  Using that leave to return to the United Kingdom on  a  number
    of subsequent occasions, the applicant  in  February  1977  was,  again
    without making any representation, given leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom for an indefinite period.  Considering himself lawfully in  the
    country, he set up business.


20.  The Divisional Court held that since the immigration  officer  had  not
    been misled by the applicant into stamping the passport with  leave  to
    enter indefinitely, the burden was on the Secretary of  State  to  show
    that  the  applicant  was  an  illegal  entrant.   The  fact  that  the
    immigration officer had mistakenly stamped the passport did not vitiate
    the officer's authority under section 4(1) of the  1971  Act  to  grant
    leave to enter the United Kingdom, with the result that  the  applicant
    was lawfully in this country.


21.   The  Divisional  Court  was  referred  to  Choudhary.   Although   not
    dissenting, Lord Widgery CJ  noted  that  Choudhary  and  another  case
    (Nasir Ali):


         "clearly contemplate the  possibility  that  there  is  a  new  and
         further principle here, namely that if the immigration officer  had
         no authority to grant the particular permission which  was  granted
         that vitiates the permission and renders the leave void."


    Lord Widgery CJ said that he "would like to wait  for  another  day  to
    consider in greater detail how that doctrine should be included in this
    fast developing branch of the law."


22.  In R v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  ex  parte  Bagga
    [1991] 1 QB 485, the Court of Appeal  was  faced  with  applicants  who
    either had been employed as members of diplomatic missions or were  the
    family members of such persons.  Mr Bagga subsequently ceased to  be  a
    member of a diplomatic mission but, on his return to the United Kingdom
    from India, his passport was date-stamped and endorsed "visa exempt" by
    an immigration officer, in the mistaken belief  that  he  was  still  a
    member of a mission.


23.   Parker LJ held:-


         "It is common ground that on 13 April 1986 the immigration  officer
         who date-stamped [Mr Bagga's]  passport  did  so  in  the  mistaken
         belief that he was exempt from control.


         The first remaining issue is therefore:


         What is the effect of a date stamp placed on  a  passport  in  such
         mistaken belief?


         Section 4(1) of the Act provides that the power to give leave  must
         be exercised by notice in writing.  ...


         On the face of it a mere date stamp does nothing more  than  record
         date of entry, and it is accepted that, in the case of someone  who
         is exempt from control or who requires no leave under  the  Act  or
         rules,  that  is  all  it  does.   It  is  therefore  difficult  to
         understand how it  can  possibly  amount  to  a  written  grant  of
         indefinite leave, at least when it is placed on a passport  in  the
         belief, albeit mistaken, that the holder is  exempt  from  control.
         The stamp itself does not purport to grant leave and as a matter of
         construction, unaided or influenced by any  factual  matrix,  could
         not in my view be regarded as doing so.  If one  goes  outside  the
         document itself to the factual matrix and finds  that  the  officer
         who placed the stamp in fact believed the  passport  holder  to  be
         exempt, it cannot in my view possibly lead to the result  that  the
         date stamp is to be construed as  a  written  grant  of  indefinite
         leave.


         It is however possible that the factual matrix might be  such  that
         the date stamp would amount to a written grant of indefinite leave;
         if, for example, the date stamp  was,  as  a  matter  of  practice,
         always used to indicate the grant of indefinite leave.  But this is
         not the case.  [500]


         ...


         The court [in Ex parte Badaike - see  above]  clearly  treated  the
         date stamp as being a notice in writing giving indefinite leave  to
         enter, but it appears also to have taken the view that if the stamp
         had been impressed by mistake, or indeed if the immigration officer
         asserted that he had been misled,  the  position  would  have  been
         different.  The court also  clearly  held  that  the  section  4(1)
         requirement for notice in writing was merely directory.  As I  read
         the report, it proceeded on the basis that as a fact the  applicant
         had been given leave to enter and that it did not matter  that  the
         notice had not been given in writing.


         I respectfully disagree with the  view  that  the  requirement  for
         notice in writing is merely directory.  The words of  section  4(1)
         are, in my view, clearly mandatory.  The use of  the  word  'shall'
         coupled with the preceding words 'unless otherwise allowed by  this
         Act,' in my view admit of no other conclusion.  For the  rest,  the
         report in The Times newspaper is of assistance only in so far as it
         shows that the  court  recognised  that  mistake  would  have  been
         sufficient to prevent the  date  stamp  operating  as  a  grant  of
         indefinite leave.  In so far as it does so I agree with it.   Even,
         therefore, if a date stamp can be regarded as a notice  in  writing
         that the holder of the passport has been granted  indefinite  leave
         to enter the United Kingdom in some circumstances, it cannot in  my
         judgment be so regarded in the present case."  [502]


24. In Glidewell LJ's judgment, we find the following:


         "Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides, so  far  as  is
         material:


             'The power under this Act to give or refuse leave to enter the
             United Kingdom shall be exercised by Immigration Officers  ...
             and ... those powers shall be exercised by notice  in  writing
             given to the person affected ...'


         It is clear that such a notice  must  inform  the  person  affected
         whether he has been given or refused leave to enter, and if he  has
         been given leave, whether it is leave for an indefinite  period  or
         for a limited period, which must then be specified.  An  open  date
         stamp gives the person affected none of this  information.   It  is
         simply a record that the person concerned has been  interviewed  by
         an Immigration Officer, and passed through immigration control,  on
         the stated date.  It follows, therefore, that an open date stamp is
         not a notice that indefinite leave  to  enter  has  been  granted."
         [506]






The competing arguments


25.  Mr Ali said that  Ms  Rogers'  evidence  was  deeply  flawed.   It  was
    difficult to accept that, some six months after  the  incident  on  New
    Year's Eve, she could recall (as asserted in her witness statement) the
    registration number of the Qashqai vehicle.  Her assertion that she had
    asked questions of the applicant was denied by him and the driver.


26.  Although Mr Ali accepted that the applicant's absence from  the  United
    Kingdom meant that his indefinite leave to remain had lapsed,  pursuant
    to the 2000 Order, and  that,  in  consequence,  paragraph  18  of  the
    immigration rules could not apply, the action of Ms Rogers in putting a
    date stamp in the HOTD  meant  that  the  applicant  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to enter pursuant to paragraph 19 of those Rules.   Ms
    Rogers had exercised a discretion under paragraph 19  and  had  granted
    the applicant indefinite leave to enter.


27.  If that was not the position, Mr Ali submitted that account  needed  to
    be taken of what happened in the Car Hall Examination  Area.   By  that
    point, the applicant's Libyan passport had been discovered and  he  had
    been asked, and answered, questions about his  return  to  Libya.   The
    fact that the applicant had been permitted by the respondent  to  leave
    the ferry port meant that, considering as a whole the  actions  of  the
    respondent's officers, the applicant had been granted indefinite  leave
    to remain.


28.  Although Mr Ali accepted that it was more  likely  than  not  that  the
    applicant had seen the Notes accompanying the HOTD,  Mr  Ali  submitted
    that that document was still valid.  The applicant still had the status
    of a refugee.  The respondent needed to invoke the relevant legislative
    process, if she wished to deprive the applicant of that status.


29.  The applicant was not an "illegal entrant" within the  meaning  of  the
    1971 Act.  He had not employed deception.  He had not  been  asked  any
    questions by Ms Rogers and, when his passport was discovered in the Car
    Hall Examination Area, he had answered truthfully.


30.  Mr Ali made reference to paragraph 3.84 of Macdonald's Immigration  Law
    & Practice (Ninth Edition).  This states that:


         "A duty is cast on all persons  who  are  examined  by  immigration
         officers (either on arrival or departure) to answer  any  questions
         put to them, say what documents they may be carrying and to produce
         their passport or other identity document ...  There is no duty  to
         volunteer unsolicited information, and a  person  will  not  be  an
         illegal entrant if  they  accidentally  and  without  intention  to
         mislead offer incorrect information,  and  silence  accompanied  by
         conduct can in some circumstances amount to a false  representation
         ...  See Khawaja v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [1984] 1 AC 74 ..."


31.  Mr Ali's position on the case law was essentially  as  follows.   Since
    the present applicant had done nothing wrong in any interaction with Ms
    Rogers, his position was analogous to those of the  applicants  in  Ram
    and Badaike.  Choudhary could be distinguished on the  basis  that,  in
    the  present  case,  Ms  Rogers  did  have  authority  to  "stamp"  the
    applicant's HOTD with a stamp indicating  indefinite  leave  to  enter.
    Her authority derived from  paragraph  19  of  the  immigration  rules.
    Bagga also fell to be distinguished.  Mr Ali submitted that there was a
    practice of using open date stamps to indicate the grant of  indefinite
    leave.


32.   Ms  Reeves'  submissions  were  essentially  as  follows.   When   the
    applicant arrived at Harwich, he had no indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  His HOTD was no  longer  valid.   The  applicant's
    refugee status had come to an end, by reason of Article 1C of the  1951
    Refugee Convention: the applicant had voluntarily re-availed himself of
    the protection of Libya, having subsequently obtained a Libyan passport
    and  returned  to  live  there.   The  applicant,  being   subject   to
    immigration control, required leave to enter.  In order to  seek  entry
    as a returning resident, pursuant to paragraph 19  of  the  immigration
    rules, the applicant needed to make a paid-for  application,  supported
    by evidence.


33.  Ms Rogers had mistakenly assumed that she was admitting  the  applicant
    as a returning resident, pursuant to paragraph 18  of  the  rules.   Ms
    Rogers' mistake arose because the applicant failed to disclose  to  her
    that he had remained outside the United Kingdom for a continuous period
    of more than two years.   Since  no  application  under  paragraphs  19
    and/or 20  of  the  immigration  rules  was  made,  Ms  Rogers  wrongly
    concluded that the applicant still had ILR.  By using the  HOTD,  which
    he must have known was no longer valid, and by failing to present to Ms
    Rogers his Libyan passport, the "irresistible inference" was  that  the
    applicant was deliberately trying to  conceal  the  fact  that  he  had
    remained away from the United Kingdom for a period of some four  and  a
    half years; and that he had returned in that time to Libya.  Ms  Rogers
    was, accordingly, deliberately misled.


34.  So far as the case law was concerned, Ms Reeves  submitted  that  Bagga
    was binding on the Tribunal on the relevant issue; namely that an  open
    date stamp, of the kind affixed by Ms Rogers to the  applicant's  HOTD,
    cannot have the effect of granting leave under the 1971 Act.  Ms Reeves
    relied particularly upon the passage from the judgment of Glidewell LJ,
    set out above.


35.  According to Ms Reeves, in order for  the  applicant's  lapsed  ILR  to
    have been re-activated or for ILE granted by mistake,  Ms  Rogers  must
    actually have considered herself to have done one or the  other.   But,
    as Ms Rogers' evidence in her witness statement explains:-


         "Based on the document [HOTD] and the  information  provided,  that
         [the applicant] had  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom when he last left, and that he had not been away  from  the
         United Kingdom for more than two years, I admitted [the  applicant]
         into the United Kingdom under rule 18 of the Immigration  Rules  on
         31st December 2013."


36.  This statement made it plain that Ms Rogers did not consider  that  she
    was re-activating lapsed ILR or granting ILE.  The applicant could  not
    properly "gainsay her state of mind in this regard".


37.  Ms Reeves submitted, finally, that Mr Ali had not adduced any  evidence
    to show that there was a practice on the  part  of  the  respondent  of
    granting ILR or ILE pursuant to paragraphs 18 or 19 of the  immigration
    rules, by using merely an open date stamp as  the  notice  required  by
    section 4 of the 1971 Act.





Discussion


(a)  The applicant's indefinite leave to remain


38.  It is common ground that,  long  before  he  arrived  in  Harwich,  the
    applicant's indefinite leave to remain had lapsed.  Article 13(4)(a) of
    the 2000 Order is plain.  The applicant's ILR lapsed at the point  when
    he had been absent from the United Kingdom for more than two years.





(b)  Home Office Travel Document


39.  The Notes to the HOTD state that "the holder is  authorised  to  return
    to the United Kingdom without  a  visa  within  the  validity  of  this
    document" (my emphasis).  As already stated, Note  No.  4  provides  in
    terms that if the holder of the HOTD "obtains a national passport  from
    their own Government, this travel document will no longer be valid  and
    should be returned to the Travel Document Section immediately".   As  a
    matter of law, the applicant,  therefore,  proffered  to  Ms  Rogers  a
    travel document which was invalid and which, it  is  plain,  Ms  Rogers
    would have realised was invalid, if the applicant had not withheld from
    her his Libyan passport.  The applicant has not begun  to  put  forward
    any credible evidence to the effect that he thought the HOTD  might  be
    valid.





(c)  Refugee status


40.  I do not consider that the question whether the applicant  was  or  was
    not a recognised refugee within the meaning of the 1951  Convention  as
    at New Year's Eve 2013 has any material bearing on his case.   Refugees
    are not, as such, exempt  from  immigration  control:  ST  (Eritrea)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  643.
    Indeed, Mr Ali rightly did not  submit  that  the  applicant's  refugee
    status had any bearing on the operation of article 13(4)(a) of the 2000
    Order.  So far as the applicant's attitude is concerned, I  cannot  see
    that it has been anywhere contended he had no inkling that, having been
    granted refugee status as a result of his asserted well-founded fear of
    persecution in Libya,  his  subsequent  decision  to  obtain  a  Libyan
    passport and go to live in that country might be capable of having some
    bearing on his entitlement to return to the  United  Kingdom.   It  has
    also not been any part of the applicant's case that, unless and until a
    person's refugee status has been formally revoked, the  respondent  has
    no power to terminate the validity of the HOTD,  in  the  circumstances
    described in Note 4.





(d)  Did the applicant mislead Tracy Rogers?


41.  On any rational view, the answer to this must be,  yes.   Even  if  one
    accepts the evidence of Mr Abdesslam, the position is plain:-


         "The way the booth is set up she [Tracy Rogers] was closest to  me,
         as the driver of the car, and spoke to me.  She asked for passports
         and I gave her my British passport and [applicant] gave me  his  UN
         Refugee Travel Document to pass on to her; which I did."


42.  So, asked to provide his passport, the applicant chose  to  leave  that
    passport lying under the driver's seat of  the  car,  and  instead  put
    forward the HOTD, which was  invalid  and  which  he  either  knew  was
    invalid or about which, at the very least, he must  have  had  profound
    concerns, given his history over the previous four and a half years. By
    proffering the HOTD, the applicant represented that he did not  have  a
    relevant passport in his possession.


43.  I accept Ms Reeves' submission that, whatever  other  reservations  one
    might have about details given by Ms Rogers - such as the  registration
    number of the Qashqai  vehicle - Ms Rogers' state of mind, as described
    in her statement, cannot  be  impugned.   On  the  basis  of  what  the
    applicant chose to show her, Ms Rogers thought she was dealing  with  a
    returning resident under paragraph 18 of the  immigration  rules.   Her
    actions cannot be explained on any other basis.


44.  I reject the applicant's attempt to pray in aid what  happened  at  the
    Car Hall Examination Area, after the applicant  and  Mr  Abdesslam  had
    been allowed by Ms Rogers to continue.  The evidence shows clearly that
    Ms  Rogers  was  carrying  out  the  respondent's  immigration  control
    functions by reference to Part 1 of the 1971 Act.  By contrast, Mr Glen-
    Barber and his colleagues were examining vehicles and  their  contents.
    Notwithstanding what is recorded in Mr Glen-Barber's notes and  in  the
    HM Revenue & Customs printout, the applicant has not persuaded me  that
    the discoveries  made  about  him  at  the  examination  area  had  any
    retrospective effect on  Ms Rogers' state of mind when she put the date
    stamp in the applicant's HOTD; or that  the  events  in  the  Car  Hall
    Examination Area in some other  way  enabled  the  applicant  to  leave
    Harwich in possession of valid indefinite leave to remain or indefinite
    leave to enter the United Kingdom.








(e)  Paragraph 19 of the immigration rules


45.  In my view, the artificiality of the applicant's  claim  to  have  been
    admitted under paragraph 19 of the immigration rules is quite manifest.
     Any notional observer, sitting in Ms Rogers' booth  and  possessing  a
    reasonable working knowledge of the respondent's system of  immigration
    controls (including her rules), could not possibly  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that what Ms  Rogers  had  done  was  to  have  granted  the
    applicant leave to enter pursuant to paragraph 19 on  the  basis  that,
    even though the applicant had been away "from the  United  Kingdom  too
    long", Ms Rogers had  nevertheless  exercised  her  discretion  in  his
    favour.  It is, I consider, immaterial whether Ms Reeves  is  right  or
    wrong about whether an application under paragraph 19 can only be  made
    in writing or on-line, with payment of a fee.  The fact of  the  matter
    is that Ms Rogers, and any other immigration officer, would have  acted
    entirely differently, had the applicant  indicated  that  his  position
    might be such as (expressly or impliedly) to fall within the ambits  of
    paragraph 19.


46.  By the same token there is no scintilla of evidence  concerning  events
    in the Car Hall Examination Area to the effect that Mr Glen-Barber  (or
    anyone else) appreciated that he was  being  called  upon  to  exercise
    discretion under that paragraph.





(f)  Relevance of the case law


47.  Choudhary and Bagga are  judgments  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  whilst
    Badaike and Ram are judgments of the Divisional  Court.   There  is  no
    question, therefore, but that I am bound to follow the judgments of the
    Court of Appeal (in particular, Bagga), if and insofar as there is  any
    material conflict in ratio decidendi.


48.   Ms  Reeves  submitted  that  Bagga  was  binding  authority  for   the
    proposition that a date stamp does not constitute written notice  of  a
    grant of leave, as required by section 4(1) of the 1971 Act. I  am  not
    persuaded that is correct.  I accept that the passage relied on  by  Ms
    Reeves from the judgment of Glidewell LJ can be  read  as  having  that
    effect.  The judgment of Parker LJ, however, appears to proceed on  the
    basis that there might be  circumstances  where  "the  factual  matrix"
    would be such as to enable a date stamp to amount to a written grant of
    indefinite leave.  Parker LJ gave as an example where "as a  matter  of
    practice" a date stamp is so used.


49.  The third member of the panel, Leggatt LJ, was able to reach  the  same
    result as his  colleagues,  without  having  to  address  directly  the
    significance of the date stamp. He considered he  was  able  to  "agree
    with Parker LJ and Glidewell LJ about  the  effect  of  a  date  stamp"
    [510]. But those Lords Justice did not, in fact, agree on the issue.


50.  Accordingly, I do not consider that this  Tribunal  is  bound  to  find
    that a date stamp cannot, in law, operate as a  formal  record  of  the
    grant of leave.  I do, however, agree with  Ms  Reeves  to  the  extent
    that, if there is no practice of using a date stamp to record the grant
    of leave, then, despite what the Divisional Court said in  Badaike  and
    Ram, the case of Bagga is authority for the  proposition  that  even  a
    "blameless" individual will be unable to derive  any  material  benefit
    from that stamp.


51.    But  the  corollary  is  not  that  a  blameworthy  individual   must
    automatically be able to benefit from such a stamp.   Someone  who,  by
    misrepresentation, induces an  immigration  officer  to  proceed  on  a
    mistaken basis is not automatically entitled to succeed, merely because
    a mistaken decision has been formally recorded.  In  such  a  scenario,
    consideration must be given to:


        (a) the person's actions and understanding; and


        (b) what the immigration officer thought he or  she  was  doing  by
        affixing the stamp.


52.  Having reached these conclusions on the law, I must apply them  to  the
    facts of this case. The applicant has  not  put  forward  any  specific
    evidence to make good Mr Ali's contention that date stamps are used  to
    record the grant of leave in paragraph 18 or paragraph 19 cases. It has
    to be acknowledged, however, that what Ms Rogers did,  by  putting  the
    date stamp in the applicant's HOTD, is  indicative  of  a  practice  of
    using such a stamp to record the grant of "leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a returning resident" under paragraph 18 of the rules. That,
    after all, seems to have been what Ms Rogers thought she was doing; and
    it is difficult to see how else a person can  be  admitted  under  that
    paragraph.


53.   On the facts of this case, however, I  find  that  the  applicant  can
    derive no benefit from the date stamp that  Ms  Rogers  placed  in  his
    invalid HOTD.  Unlike the applicants in Badaike and  Ram,  the  present
    applicant cannot be said to have acted in a blameless manner.   On  the
    contrary, as I have found, the evidence he  has  himself  seen  fit  to
    adduce  reveals  him,   by   his   actions,   to   have   fundamentally
    misrepresented  his  immigration   position   to   Ms   Rogers.    That
    misrepresentation operated so as to cause her, mistakenly, to treat the
    applicant as a resident  returning  to  the  United  Kingdom,  who  was
    entitled to enter by virtue of paragraph 18 of the  immigration  rules.
    She did not consider she was doing anything else.   She  certainly  did
    not think she was exercising any discretion in the  applicant's  favour
    under paragraph 19, which is the proposition for  which  the  applicant
    contends.


54.    In conclusion, on the facts of this case the existence  of  the  date
    stamp in the HOTD  is  immaterial.  The  evidence  of  the  applicant's
    actions and understanding, and the evidence of what Ms  Rogers  thought
    she was doing, disclose  a  misrepresentation  by  the  applicant  that
    induced a fundamental mistake on the part of Ms Rogers. In  short,  the
    applicant can derive no benefit from what happened in  Harwich  on  New
    Year's Eve 2013.





Disposing of the grounds


55.  Accordingly, on ground 1, I find  that  the  applicant  does  not  have
    indefinite leave to remain or indefinite  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  I therefore decline to make the declaration sought.


56.  On ground 2, as a consequence of my  finding,  the  applicant  was  not
    entitled to have an NTL stamp placed in his Libyan passport.


57.  Ground 3 challenges what  is  said  to  be  an  "allegation"  that  the
    applicant is an illegal entrant.  Ms Reeves stated that the  respondent
    has not, in fact, made any specific decision to this effect.   On  that
    basis, Mr Ali indicated the applicant was content  not  to  proceed  on
    this ground.


58.  Ground 4 involves the contention that, whatever happened at Ms  Rogers'
    booth, by the time the applicant left Harwich, the  respondent  was  in
    full possession of the relevant  facts.   I  have  explained  above  my
    reasons for finding that what  was  said  and  done  at  the  Car  Hall
    Examination Area has no material bearing on the respondent's  decisions
    that are the subject of this judicial review.





Decision


59.  The application is dismissed.





~~~~0~~~~

