
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL | |
|  DM (Evidence not relied on before ECO) Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT    |
|00130                                                             |
|                                  |                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 6 September 2005                     |                         |
|                                        |14th September, 2005     |
|                                        |.........................|
|                                        |....................     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Senior Immigration Judge)                              |
|Mr T B Davey                                                      |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - HARARE                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr B Montilla, Home Office Presenting Officer

This case deals with  cases  where  evidence  emerges  after  the  decision
relating to matters which were not put to the Entry Clearance  Officer  and
also covers the need to focus on the intentions of  the  appellant  (rather
than the sponsor).

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent appealed the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  Grant
      D Birt) who allowed the appeal of  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe  from  the
      decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse his application  for
      a family visit visa.   By virtue of the  Transitional  Provisions  the
      grant of permission to appeal takes effect as an order to the Tribunal
      to reconsider the decision of the Adjudicator.

2.    The decision under appeal  was  taken  on  30  December  2003.     The
      appellant wished to visit his mother-in-law  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      The Entry Clearance Officer was satisfied that the appellant would  be
      adequately maintained and accommodated in the United Kingdom  by  her.
       In the refusal notice he stated that he recognised the importance  of
      maintaining family ties and furthermore he did not question  that  the
      appellant's sponsor might well be a credible witness whose credentials
      and bona fides are not in doubt.    The refusal notice continued  that
      there was no evidence to demonstrate that the appellant and his mother-
      in-law were related as claimed but this aspect of the refusal was  not
      maintained following receipt of  the  grounds  of  appeal.     It  was
      stated that there was no  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  either  the
      appellant's wife or his children would be accompanying  the  appellant
      and the Entry Clearance Officer did not "find it  credible  that  your
      mother-in-law would sponsor you and not her own daughter".

3.    The Entry Clearance Officer noted that the appellant was married  with
      four dependent children in Zimbabwe and was currently employed with  a
      modest income and with only a small amount of personal savings.    The
      appellant had not demonstrated, in the view  of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer, sufficiently  strong  family,  social  or  economic  ties  to
      satisfy the Entry Clearance Officer that  he  intended  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom on completion of his visit.

4.    In the notice of appeal the appellant said his  wife  was  staying  in
      Harare because the children were going back to school and she  had  to
      look after them.

5.    At the hearing before the Adjudicator the sponsor  gave  evidence  and
      gave the reason for her son-in-law's visit.   During the 1990s she had
      purchased a mini bus for the family and had  arranged  for  it  to  be
      shipped to Zimbabwe.    In April 2004 when she had visited her  family
      in Zimbabwe she had noted that the engine in the mini bus was worn out
      and a new one was required.  As she knew nothing about engines her son-
      in-law would assist her in purchasing an engine in the United Kingdom.
         This could be taken back by way of  cargo  to  Zimbabwe.    It  was
      accepted that the appellant had not mentioned any of this to the Entry
      Clearance Officer when he made his application.

6.    The Adjudicator found that the appellant had his wife and children  in
      Harare and had good employment.  It was natural that the sponsor would
      want guidance in relation to the type of engine to  be  purchased  for
      the mini bus and could  not  be  expected  to  do  it  herself.    The
      appellant had sufficient money to make the journey and his  mother-in-
      law would look after him and he would return  with  the  engine.   The
      Adjudicator was satisfied that the appellant was a genuine visitor and
      allowed the appeal.

7.    In the grounds of appeal the Entry Clearance Officer argued  that  the
      Adjudicator had erred in law by not properly assessing the appellant's
      intentions based on the evidence given by the appellant at the date of
      decision.   The Adjudicator could not properly assess the  appellant's
      intentions on the basis of a reason the appellant had not given to the
      Entry Clearance Officer.    Reliance was placed on ECO v Kumar  [1978]
      Imm AR 185.

8.    Mr Montilla relied on these grounds.   The Adjudicator  had  erred  in
      finding in the appellant's favour as to his intention  solely  on  the
      basis of  what  the  sponsor  had  told  him  at  the  hearing.    The
      Adjudicator had not referred  to  the  intentions  of  the  appellant.
      Reference was made to the letter of invitation from the sponsor  dated
      27 October 2003 inviting the appellant over for Christmas.

9.    Although the appellant himself  was  not  represented,  he  had  filed
      submissions which were received on 30 August 2005.   It was  submitted
      that the Adjudicator had not erred in admitting the evidence from  the
      sponsor.   The space provided for on the form of application  was  not
      enough to enable the appellant to specify and  particularise  all  the
      reasons for an intended visit.   The Adjudicator had  found  that  the
      appellant was a genuine visitor from the information supplied by  both
      the appellant and the sponsor.  It was proper  for  the  appellant  to
      take the evidence before him in  its  totality.     A  copy  of  these
      submissions was made available to Mr Montilla at the hearing.

10.   At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our determination.

11.   We note that this is not a case in which any record  of  interview  is
      supplied with the papers.   There are some  manuscript  notes  on  the
      back of the application form.  There is no record of any questions and
      answers between the Entry Clearance Officer and  the  appellant.    In
      the invitation letter dated 27 October 2003 the  sponsor  states  that
      she had not seen the appellant for a very long time and she would like
      him to come for the Christmas holidays.   She would send him the money
      for the ticket.   It is the sponsor's case that his last visit was  in
      1986  although his passport covering that period had been stolen.   As
      we have mentioned, the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  originally  had
      doubts about the relationship but  that  aspect  of  the  refusal  was
      withdrawn.  Indeed it  was  expressly  conceded  throughout  that  the
      credibility of the sponsor was not in issue.

12.   The question of the wife and children not accompanying  the  appellant
      was explained by the fact that the children needed to  attend  school.
      The objection taken by the Entry Clearance Officer to  the  fact  that
      neither the appellant's wife nor his children  would  be  accompanying
      him to the United Kingdom sits uneasily with the objection taken  that
      he had not sufficiently strong family ties to ensure his return.

13.   The Adjudicator was plainly impressed by the evidence of the  sponsor.
        Indeed, as we have said, her credibility and bona fides were not  in
      issue.  The sponsor had visited the family in Zimbabwe in  April  2004
      and had noted  that  the  mini  bus  engine  needed  replacing.    The
      appellant was to visit her over the Christmas holidays and return with
      the engine.    The objection in a nutshell is  that  the  business  of
      purchasing the engine was not mentioned at interview.   The  appellant
      was going to see his mother-in-law over the Christmas holidays.

14.   In ground 1 of the grounds of appeal  the  Adjudicator  is  criticised
      for not properly assessing the appellant's intentions  "based  on  the
      evidence given by the appellant at the date of decision".  As we  have
      pointed out, there is no record of any interview with  the  appellant.
      Certainly there is no suggestion that he lied at any  time.    It  was
      said that the Adjudicator could not properly  assess  the  appellant's
      intentions on the basis of a reason the appellant had not given to the
      Entry Clearance Officer and reliance is placed on the  case  of  Kumar
      which we have cited above.  In  that  case  a  distinction  was  drawn
      between an unreported case (Mangat Singh TH/7840/76  (941))  where  an
      Adjudicator had erred because he had focused on the  question  of  the
      sponsor's intentions.   The sponsor's intention  had  been  to  ensure
      that the appellant would leave and that the  appellant  would  comply.
      In the case of Abdul Sattar TH/9837/76 (1107), on the other hand,  the
      appeal had been properly allowed upon the evidence of  the  intentions
      of the appellant after weighing up relevant matters.   In the case  of
      Kumar the Adjudicator had found that the appellant's  intentions  gave
      rise to concern and he had resolved that concern  in  the  appellant's
      favour because he had accepted the undertakings given by the  sponsor.



15.   We find that this appeal is a different type of case from the case  of
      Kumar.    The Adjudicator clearly had in mind the  intentions  of  the
      appellant.  He noted that the appellant had his wife and  children  in
      Harare and was in good employment.   He took  into  account  the  fact
      that the sponsor would want guidance in relation to the type of engine
      to be purchased for the mini bus and could not be expected to do  this
      herself.  He added "the appellant has sufficient  money  to  make  the
      journey, his mother-in-law would look after him and  he  would  return
      with the engine". We do not read Kumar as supporting  the  proposition
      that an immigration judge cannot independently assess the question  of
      an appellant's intention on the basis of material furnished after  the
      decision where that material relates to the appellant's  intention  at
      the date of decision: see DR[2005] UKIAT 00038. Clearly where evidence
      emerges after the decision going to the appellant's  intentions  there
      may be credibility issues. The immigration judge will no doubt wish to
      investigate  why  the  matter  was  not  mentioned  before.  He  will,
      moreover, not have the advantage of an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  who
      will normally have interviewed the appellant and who will arguably  be
      better placed to take into account local circumstances.  However,  the
      bald proposition that it is not open to a judge to take  into  account
      such evidence is not made good on the arguments addressed to us.

16.   The Adjudicator gave sufficient reasons for  his  conclusion  that  he
      was satisfied that the appellant was a  genuine  visitor.  We  do  not
      consider that the Adjudicator fell into the trap of focusing solely on
      the question of the intentions of the sponsor.

17.   The Adjudicator felt that had the appellant been more  open  with  the
      respondent  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  would  have  allowed   the
      application himself.  We are  not  sure  that  any  criticism  can  be
      levelled at the appellant in this matter.    There is no  evidence  of
      any questions put to him at interview or his answers.   He  was  going
      to England to see his mother-in-law for Christmas and it would  hardly
      be surprising if he returned to Zimbabwe without  a  present  for  the
      family from his mother-in-law, generous, practical and unusual  though
      that present might be.   The appellant had nothing to conceal in  this
      case.   The purpose of the visit was clear and  transparent.   It  was
      perfectly open to the Adjudicator to find that  the  appellant  was  a
      genuine visitor who would return to Zimbabwe with the mini bus engine.

18.   The Adjudicator's determination contains no material error of law  and
      we order that the Adjudicator's determination shall stand.


                                                                      G Warr
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge
                    approved for electronic distribution

