
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Youssef (Refugee Convention - Article 1F(c)) [2016] UKUT 00137 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2015                          |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                hanY youssef
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr A O'Connor QC instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department

For a person to be excluded from refugee protection under Article  1F(c)  of
the Refugee  Convention  on  the  basis  that  they  knowingly  incited  and
encouraged acts contrary to  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
Nations it is not necessary to  show  that  such  acts  have  actually  been
committed or attempted.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is  a  national  of  Egypt.   We  note  that  an  earlier
    anonymity order was  rescinded  on  5  May  2015,  on  the  appellant's
    request.  In a decision dated 26 November 2012 the  respondent  decided
    that  he  should  be  excluded  from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention under Article 1F(c), and also from  humanitarian  protection
    in accordance with paragraphs 336 and 339D of  HC  395.   It  was  also
    decided that he would currently be at risk of  torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or  punishment  in  breach  of  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights if he were to be returned to  Egypt
    at the present time, and as a consequence he was granted limited  leave
    to remain.

2.   He appealed against that decision and that  appeal  was  allowed  by  a
    panel of the First-tier  Tribunal.   A  subsequent  challenge  to  that
    decision was successful before a panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which
    found an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  its
    application of the test required in respect of Article 1F(c).   A  copy
    of that decision is attached  to  this  judgment.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    directed that the appeal should remain in the Upper Tribunal and  hence
    the hearing before us today.  As a consequence of a direction  made  by
    the Upper Tribunal, the respondent clarified, on 10  August  2015,  the
    essence of her case,  which  is:   that  the  appellant  has  knowingly
    incited and encouraged acts of international terrorism contrary to  the
    purposes and principles of the United Nations and as a  consequence  he
    is excluded under Article 1F(c)  from  the  protection  the  Convention
    would otherwise afford him.

3.   The essence of the appellant's history is set out at paragraphs 3 to  5
    of Mr Mackenzie's skeleton argument.  The appellant claimed asylum on 6
    May 1994 on the basis that he had  been  a  defence  lawyer  in  Egypt,
    working on behalf of political prisoners,  and  had  been  a  political
    activist in his own  right.   He  was  detained  and  tortured  on  two
    occasions in 1981 and 1982.  In 1983 he was pressured by the  State  to
    speak out against his clients and when he refused to do so  his  office
    was destroyed and his files were stolen.  He has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 6 May  1994.   He  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.   On  13
    September 1998 he  was  detained  under  the  Prevention  of  Terrorism
    (Temporary  Provisions)  Act  1989,  released  four  days   later   but
    rearrested on release on  the  basis  that   his  detention  pending  a
    decision on his asylum claim was necessary in the interests of national
    security.  On 23 December  1998   his  claim  for  refugee  status  was
    rejected.  The respondent acknowledged that  his  case  was  one  which
    might ordinarily have led to a grant of asylum, but declined to  do  so
    on the basis  that  the  appellant  had  been   involved  in  terrorist
    activity. The UK Security Services  assessed  him  as  being  a  senior
    member of Egyptian Islamic Jihad. On 18 April  1999  it  was  announced
    that he had been sentenced  by  an  Egyptian  military  court  to  life
    imprisonment with hard labour, as one of the leaders of a revolutionary
    organisation.  He has always denied these charges.  His  contention  is
    that the conviction  was  tainted  by  the  probable  use  of  evidence
    obtained by torture.  The rest of his immigration history is set out in
    detail at paragraphs 17-20 of the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  at
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1082.  The essence of the  conduct  relied  on  by  the
    respondent to justify exclusion is that the appellant has  incited  and
    encouraged acts of terrorism, in particular, sermons and other material
    that has been published on the internet.

4.   In  essence  there  are  two  central  issues  before  us,  the  latter
    contingent on the former.  The first is a question of law.  Much of the
    law in relation to this case is common ground, and we will set out that
    law shortly.  The point of contention is, in essence the matter set out
    at paragraphs 29 to 33 of Mr Mackenzie's skeleton argument as amplified
    by him in oral submissions.  This is the argument that,  in  contending
    that the appellant "knowingly incited and encouraged" acts contrary  to
    the purposes and principles of the United Nations, it is  necessary  to
    show that such acts have actually  been  committed  or  attempted.   Mr
    O'Connor QC on behalf of the respondent disagrees  entirely  with  this
    submission.  If Mr Mackenzie is right, there  is  no  need  to  go  and
    consider the further issue, which we may for  convenience  describe  as
    the evidential issue, that is whether the evidence  relied  on  by  the
    respondent (it being accepted that  the  respondent  cannot  show  that
    relevant  acts  have  actually  been  committed  or  attempted   as   a
    consequence of what has been said by the appellant) amounts to  knowing
    incitement and encouragement to commit acts contrary to the purposes of
    the principles of the United Nations.

The Law

5.   Article 1F of the Refugee Convention provides as follows:

         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

          a) he has committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  or  a
             crime  against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the  international
             instruments drawn up to make  provision  in  respect  of  such
             crimes;

          b) he has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
             country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as  a
             refugee;

          c) he has been guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations."

6.    Article  12  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the   Qualification
    Directive")  reproduces  the  terms   of   Article   1F   with   slight
    modifications.  For our purposes  the  relevant  provision  is  Article
    12(2)(c) which states as follows

         "(c) he or she has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
                 principles of the United Nations as set out in the Preamble
                 and Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations.


         (3)  Paragraph 2 applies to  persons  who  instigate  or  otherwise
             participate in the commission of the crimes or acts  mentioned
             therein."

7.   The Qualification Directive was transposed into United Kingdom  Law  by
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (SI2006/2525).

8.   Also relevant to note is section 54  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act").  This provides as follows:

         "(1) In the construction and application of Article  1F(c)  of  the
             Refugee Convention the  reference  to  acts  contrary  to  the
             purposes and principles of the United Nations can be taken  as
             including, in particular -


             (a)  acts of committing, preparing  or  instigating  terrorism
                  (whether or not the acts amount to an actual  or  inchoate
                  offence), and

             (b)  acts of encouraging or inducing others to commit, prepare
                  or instigate terrorism (whether or not the acts amount  to
                  an actual or inchoate offence).

         (2)  In this section -

                  'the Refugee Convention' means the Convention relating  to
                  the status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951, and



                  'terrorism' has the meaning given  by  section  1  of  the
                  Terrorism Act 2000."

9.   In its  decision  in  Al-Sirri  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] UKSC 54, the Supreme Court provided helpful  guidance
    on the nature and ambit of Article 1F(c).  Having considered  a  number
    of authorities including Pushpanathan v Canada, Minister of Citizenship
    and Immigration (Canadian Council for Refugees  Intervening)  [1998]  I
    SCR 982 and Bundsrepublik Deutschland B and D (joined cases C-57/09 and
    C-109/09), [2011] Imm AR 190, the court set out some conclusions as  to
    the correct approach to Article 1F(c) as follows:

         "16. In our view, this is the correct approach.  The article should
             be interpreted restrictively and applied with caution.   There
             should be a high threshold 'defined in terms of the gravity of
             the act in question, the manner in which the act is organised,
             its international impact and  long-term  objectives,  and  the
             implication for international peace and security'.  And  there
             should be serious reasons  for  considering  that  the  person
             concerned bore individual  responsibility  for  acts  of  that
             character."

10.  The court went on at paragraph 36 to emphasis that  it  is  clear  that
    the phrase "acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the  United
    Nations" must have an autonomous meaning, emphasising that it could not
    be the case that individual member states were free to adopt their  own
    definitions.  Guidance given by the UNHCR was not binding but should be
    accorded considerable weight.  The court endorsed what had been said by
    Sedley LJ in the Court  of  Appeal  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  222  that:  "the
    adoption by section 54(2) of the 2006 Act of the meaning  of  terrorism
    contained in the 2000 Act has where necessary to be  read  down  in  an
    article 1F(c) case so as to  keep  its  meaning  within  the  scope  of
    article 12(2)(c) of the Directive".

11.  The court thought it appropriate to adopt paragraph  17  of  the  UNHCR
    guidelines:

         "Article 1F(c)  is  only  triggered  in  extreme  circumstances  by
         activity  which  attacks  the  very  basis  of  the   international
         community's co-existence.  Such activity must have an international
         dimension.   Crimes  capable  of  affecting  international   peace,
         security and peaceful relations between states, as well as  serious
         and sustained violations of human  rights  would  fall  under  this
         category."

12.  At paragraph 39 the Supreme Court went on to note that the  essence  of
    terrorism was the commission, organisation,  incitement  or  threat  of
    serious acts of violence against persons or property for the purpose of
    intimidating a population or compelling a government  or  international
    organisation to act or not to act  in  a  particular  way.   The  court
    thought it was  very  likely  that  inducing  terror  in  the  civilian
    population or putting such extreme pressures upon  a  government  would
    also have the international repercussions referred to by the UNHCR.

13.  Subsequently, in its attempt to discern the autonomous meaning  of  the
    words "serious reasons for considering" the court  drew  the  following
    conclusions, at paragraph 75:

         "(1) 'Serious reasons' is stronger than 'reasonable grounds'.


         (2)  The evidence from which those  reasons  are  derived  must  be
             "clear and credible" or 'strong'.


         (3)  'Considering' is stronger than 'suspecting'.  In our  view  it
             is also stronger than 'believing'.  It requires the considered
             judgment of the decision- maker.


         (4)  The decision-maker need not  be  satisfied  beyond  reasonable
             doubt or to the standard required in criminal law.


         (5)  It is unnecessary to import our domestic  standards  of  proof
             into the question.  The circumstances of refugee  claims,  and
             the  nature  of  the  evidence  available,  are  so  variable.
             However, if the decision-maker is satisfied that  it  is  more
             likely than not that  the  applicant  has  not  committed  the
             crimes in question or has not been guilty of acts contrary  to
             the purposes and principles  of  the  United  Nations,  it  is
             difficult to see  how  there  could  be  serious  reasons  for
             considering that he had done so.  The reality  is  that  there
             are  unlikely  to  be   sufficiently   serious   reasons   for
             considering the applicant to be guilty  unless  the  decision-
             maker can be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that he
             is.  But the task of the decision maker is to apply the  words
             of the Convention (and the Directive) in the particular case."

14.   It  is  also  relevant  to  note  what  was  said   about   individual
    responsibility at paragraph 15 in Al-Sirri.  The  court  said  that  in
    establishing that there are serious reasons for  considering  that  the
    person concerned had individual  responsibility  for  acts  within  the
    scope of Article 1F(c), this requires an  individualised  consideration
    of the facts of the case, which  will  include  an  assessment  of  the
    person's involvement  in  the  act  concerned,  his  mental  state  and
    possible grounds for rejecting individual responsibility.  As a general
    proposition, individual responsibility arises, it was said,  where  the
    individual committed an act  within  the  scope  of  Article  1F(c)  or
    participated  in  its  commission  in  a  manner  that  gives  rise  to
    individual responsibility, for example through planning, instigating or
    ordering the act in question, or by making a  significant  contribution
    to the commission of the relevant act, in the knowledge that the act or
    omission would facilitate the act.

15.  Mr Mackenzie argued that exclusion must be based on  an  intention  not
    only to carry out or contribute to a particular act but also  to  carry
    out or contribute to an act of a quality which brings it within Article
    1F.  He went on to argue that the Supreme Court in Al-Sirri  could  not
    have  been  indicating  that  incitement  falling   short   of   active
    involvement in a completed or attempted crime could come within Article
    1F(c).

16.  In this  regard  Mr  Mackenzie  attached  weight  to  the  position  in
    international criminal law, and to what was said by the  Supreme  Court
    in R (on the application of JS) (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010] UKSC 15, which  is  a  case  concerned  with
    Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention, and  therefore,  also  Article
    12(2)(a) of the Qualification Directive.  Mr Mackenzie  contrasted  the
    situation in English domestic law under which soliciting,  inducing  or
    inciting an offence would each constitute an "auxiliary" or  "inchoate"
    offence, regardless of whether any primary  offence  was  committed  or
    attempted,  with  the  position  under  the   Rome   Statute   of   the
    International Criminal Court (hereafter the ICC Statute) which makes it
    clear that under Article 25(3)(b) ordering, soliciting or inducing  the
    commission of a crime within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  International
    Criminal Court only gives rise to individual criminal responsibility if
    a crime in fact occurs or is attempted.  The same,  he  says,  is  true
    under sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) in respect of aiding and  abetting  or
    in any other way contributing.  Mr Mackenzie contrasts  this  with  the
    situation in relation to genocide in respect of which it is clear  from
    (e) of Article 25(3) that  an  offence  is  committed  where  a  person
    directly and public incites others  to  commit  genocide,  without  any
    reference to genocide actually having to be committed or attempted.

17.  At paragraph 8 in JS Lord Brown endorsed the view of Toulson LJ in  the
    Court of Appeal [2009] EWCA Civ 364 at  paragraph  115,  that  the  ICC
    Statute should now be the starting point  for  considering  whether  an
    applicant is disqualified from asylum by virtue of Article 1F(a).

18.  Mr Mackenzie, of course, anticipated  the  argument  that  JS  and  its
    reliance on Article 25 of the ICC Statute was  concerned  with  Article
    1F(a) rather than 1F(c).  He argued that  there  were  four  particular
    reasons why what was said by the Supreme Court in JS  in  this  context
    was equally applicable to Article 1F(c) cases.

19.  The first of these came from what was said by the Supreme Court in  JS.
     When Lord  Brown  spoke  at  paragraphs  33  to  40  of  his  judgment
    concerning the correct approach to Article 1F this was not qualified by
    reference to 1F(a) in particular.  At paragraph 33  of  JS  Lord  Brown
    noted the ambit of Article  1F,  referring  to  Article  12(3)  of  the
    Qualification Directive which we have set out above and also paragraphs
    (b), (c), and (d) of Article 25(3) of the ICC Statute, each  of  which,
    as he said, recognises  that  criminal  responsibility  is  engaged  by
    persons other than  the  person  actually  committing  the  crime.   At
    paragraph 34 he referred also  to  the  Statute  of  the  International
    Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and  the  definition
    there of individual criminal responsibility.  He  noted  the  width  of
    these provisions.  He continued to refer  to  Article  1F  rather  than
    limiting what he said to Article 1F(a) at paragraph  35  and  the  fact
    that it disqualified those who made "a substantial contribution to" the
    crime, knowing that their acts or omissions  will  facilitate  it.   He
    bore in mind also what had been said  by  the  ICTY  Chamber  in  Tadic
    [1999] 9 IHRR 1051 that mens rea is defined in a way  which  recognises
    that when the accused is participating in a common plan or purpose  not
    necessarily to commit any specific or identifiable crime but to further
    the organisation's aims by committing Article 1F crimes  generally,  no
    more need be established than that they had personal knowledge of  such
    aims and intended to contribute to their commission (at paragraph  37).
    Mr Mackenzie also referred to what was said by Lord Hope  at  paragraph
    49.  He noted that the words "serious reasons for considering" were  of
    course  taken  from  Article  1F  itself  and  that  the  words  "in  a
    significant way" and "will in fact further that purpose"  provided  the
    key to the exercise and were the essential elements that were  required
    to be satisfied to fix the applicant with personal responsibility.

20.  We do not see this as a basis for supporting Mr  Mackenzie's  argument.
    We agree with Mr O'Connor that the use of Article 1F in these parts  of
    the judgments in JS are effectively shorthand.  That  can  in  part  be
    seen from what is said at paragraph 37  where  there  is  reference  to
    "Article 1F crimes generally".  1F(c) is not of course  concerned  with
    crimes although we accept that the conduct  falling  within  1F(c)  may
    amount to criminal conduct but it is not a prerequisite, and  it  seems
    to us clear that the  reference  at  paragraph  37  for  example  is  a
    reference to 1F(a) and perhaps 1F(b)  also  since  both  of  those  are
    concerned with crimes.  So we do not  accept  that  the  references  to
    Article 1F in JS  can  be  taken  as  clearly  intending  the  personal
    responsibility elements to apply to all limbs  of  Article  1F,  as  Mr
    Mackenzie argued.

21.  His second argument in this respect was  that  when  one  examines  the
    structure of Article 12 of the Qualification Directive it is clear that
    Article 12(3), applying paragraph 2 as it does to persons who instigate
    or otherwise participate in  the  commission  of  the  crimes  or  acts
    mentioned therein is applicable to  all  three  limbs  of  Article  12.
    However we do not consider that it follows from the fact that paragraph
    12(3) of the Qualification Directive applies to all  of  Article  12(2)
    that the same rules on secondary liability apply to all three limbs  of
    Article 12(2).  All paragraph (3) does  in  effect  is  to  extend  the
    applicability of Article  12(2)  to  people  instigating  or  otherwise
    participating in the commission of the  crimes  or  acts  mentioned  in
    Article 12(2), but that says nothing that could justify the  conclusion
    that the secondary liability provisions apply in the same  the  way  to
    all three limbs of Article 12(2).

22.  Nor do we agree with the further argument that it would  be  surprising
    if different elements of secondary liability  were  applicable  to  the
    three limbs of Article 12(3), given the fact  that  as  is  clear,  for
    example from paragraph 3 of Al-Sirri, a particular act may fall  within
    more than one of the three categories.  In particular terrorism,  which
    is relevant in the case before us, may be both a "serious non-political
    crime" and an act "contrary to  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the
    United Nations".

23.  The point of distinction as it seems to us, is the distinction  between
    crimes and other acts.  Article 1F(a) and (b) are both  concerned  with
    crimes and it is not surprising  therefore  that  rules  emanating  for
    example from the ICC Statute should be regarded as applicable  to  both
    of those limbs, though applicability to 1F(b) must be a matter  in  our
    view for future litigation since JS was concerned with 1F(a) only.  But
    the fact that there may be an overlap does not in our view justify  the
    conclusion that there is anything surprising or curious about the  fact
    that different  elements  of  secondary  liability  may  apply  to  the
    different heads under Article 1F bearing in mind the different types of
    matter with which they are concerned.  The fact that a  particular  act
    may fall within 1F(c) and at the same time fall under (a) or  (b)  does
    not in our view invest it with the necessarily criminal character of  a
    kind which would require incorporating the ICC Statute provisions  into
    our assessment of the Rules pertaining to 1F(c).

24.  Nor do we accept Mr Mackenzie's fourth point that the  fact  that  what
    was set out at paragraph 15 in Al-Sirri was said at  the  end  of  that
    paragraph to be consistent with the approach  adopted  by  the  Supreme
    Court in JS means that the assimilation argued for by Mr  Mackenzie  is
    made out.  We read the last sentence of paragraph  15  in  Al-Sirri  as
    doing  no  more  than  noting  the  consistency  of  the  approach   in
    emphasising the need for  an  individualised  assessment  to  establish
    individual responsibility with what is said at paragraphs 33 to  39  in
    JS   which   is   similarly   concerned   with   "individual   criminal
    responsibility", as referred to at paragraph 34 and the final  sentence
    of paragraph 38, summarising the court's  conclusions  and  emphasising
    the voluntary contribution by the person in a significant  way  to  the
    organisation's ability to pursue its purpose of committing war  crimes.
    That in our view is far from being an endorsement of the argument  that
    the ICC Statute approach is applicable in the context of Article 1F(c).
     The latter, as we have said, is not a  provision  concerned  with  the
    commission of a crime, and we do not  accept  Mr  Mackenzie's  argument
    that whether on the basis of what was said in JS or on any other  basis
    can it properly  be  said  to  be  a  requirement  of  Article  1F(c)'s
    applicability that it is necessary to show anything  beyond  incitement
    and/or encouragement of acts of international  terrorism  without  such
    acts having to be shown to have taken place.

25.  The further issue, in light of our conclusions on  the  point  of  law,
    that we have to consider is whether the respondent has shown that there
    are serious reasons for considering that the  appellant  has  knowingly
    incited and encouraged acts of international terrorism contrary to  the
    purposes and principles  of  the  United  Nations.   As  was  noted  at
    paragraph 37 in Al-Sirri, there is as  yet  no  internationally  agreed
    definition of terrorism, but as the court pointed out at paragraph  39,
    as we have set out above, it is very likely that inducing terror  in  a
    civilian population or putting such extreme pressures upon a government
    would also have the international  repercussions  referred  to  by  the
    UNHCR at paragraph 17 of its guidelines which were adopted by the court
    at paragraph 38.  We have also set out above paragraph 75 from Al-Sirri
    containing the Supreme Court's guidelines as to the proper approach  in
    discerning the autonomous meaning of the  words  "serious  reasons  for
    considering".  In this regard it is also relevant to note that, as  was
    said by Stanley Burnton LJ in KJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 292
    paragraph 34, it was not suggested  that  acts  of  a  military  nature
    committed by an independence movement  against  military  forces  of  a
    government were themselves acts contrary to the purposes and principles
    of the United Nation, as summarised by Lord Brown in  JS  at  paragraph
    27:

         "Nor, of course, as Stanley Burnton LJ noted in KJ (Sri Lanka),  is
         military action against government forces to be regarded as  a  war
         crime".

26.  Bearing these points in mind, we turn to the evidence.

27.  As regards the materials upon  which  the  Secretary  of  State  places
    reliance, these are largely speeches, sermons, commentaries  etc.  that
    the appellant has made between  2004  and  2014.   The  respondent  has
    provided extracts from some of these and  the  appellant  has  provided
    entire translations rather than extracts.  There are minor  differences
    between the translations in places and to an  extent  explanations  for
    this have been provided by the translators.  This is a matter we  shall
    come on to in due course.  In addition the respondent  places  reliance
    on a document containing draft reasons  for  a  recommendation  by  the
    Ombudsperson's recommendation to  the  UN  Security  Council  Committee
    retaining the appellant on  the  Al-Qaeda  sanctions  list.   She  also
    placed reliance on a Wikipedia  entry  annexed  to  the  first  witness
    statement of Guy Higginson, which relates to Anwar Al-Awlaki.

28.  Mr O'Connor  structured  his  argument  with  regard  to  the  material
    emanating from the appellant's sermons, speeches,  interviews  etc.  by
    reference to three categories.  The first of these is  praise  for  and
    glorification of the activities of leading Al-Qaeda terrorists.  In  an
    item posted on the internet on 20 July 2006  (all  of  the  items  were
    translated by the respondent in July 2015) the appellant listed several
    terrorist leaders including Mullah  Omar,  Osama  bin  Laden,  Abu  Al-
    Zarqawi and Shamil Basayev as "masters of  the  Ummah".   Referring  to
    them cumulatively the appellant said "these heroes, who did not  submit
    or falter when all the world was against them, knelt only to Allah, the
    Lord of the Worlds!  They are truly masters!."

29.  In a YouTube interview posted on the internet on the day (2  May  2011)
    in which Osama bin Laden was killed, the appellant described bin  Laden
    as "a lion among the lions of Islam" and said that he was "an anthem in
    the hearts of the oppressed from Jakarta to the Hindu  Kush,  to  Egypt
    and the villages and rural  areas".   "Ask  these  poor  and  oppressed
    people and they will be mourning Sheikh Osama bin Laden".  He also said
    that "Sheikh Osama bin Laden was fighting forces of occupation.  He did
    not kill civilians and did not say that."  He also denied that  he  was
    glorying anything or extolling anything but said he  was  describing  a
    reality.

30.  On the same day the appellant issued a statement eulogising bin  Laden,
    describing him as the "reviver of Islam" and the "lion of Islam".

31.  Two years after bin Laden's death the appellant published a  sermon  in
    which among other things he referred to bin Laden as a "hero [who] went
    forth and stood in defence of his Ummah" and also  repeatedly  referred
    to him as a martyr.

32.  In a biography of the appellant he was recorded as having met Ayman Al-
    Zawahiri (who replaced bin  Laden  as  leader  of  Al-Qaeda  after  bin
    Laden's death) and he was recorded as describing him  as  "the  Mujahid
    and the ascetic Sheikh Dr Ayman Al-Zawahiri, may Allah protect him  and
    make him a thorn in the throat of the enemies of Islam - he is a  model
    of humility and selflessness and dedication....".

33.  On 11 September 2012 the appellant posted a tribute to  Abu  Yahya  Al-
    Libi, a senior Al-Qaeda official.  In that the appellant referred to Al-
    Zawahiri as "the Emir of the Qaeda Al Jihad organisation, Holy  Warrior
    Sheikh Dr Ayman Al-Zawahiri".  He described Al-Libi  as  "Holy  Warrior
    Sheikh, the Persistent Patient Sentinel, a  Fundamentalist  Theologian,
    the active scholar, the masterful  and  Exalted  leader,  the  Eloquent
    Preacher, the Holder of the Sword and the Pen".

34.  Anwar Al-Awlaki was killed in a drone attack in Yemen on  September  30
    of 2011.  Two weeks later the appellant posted a sermon on the  website
    which he used regularly referring to Al-Awlaki and saying for example:

         "America and these people will disappear and young men, by the will
         of Allah (May He be praised and exalted) will always  remember  Al-
         Awlaki and  his  tapes.   They  will  remember  Al-Awlaki  and  his
         speeches and they will remember his  incitement  of  his  Ummah  to
         defend the members of his Ummah.  He lived a short time; he  wrote,
         published and preached; he engaged in the Call and recorded and all
         for the sake of defending his religion.  Those hearts delighted  in
         receiving the words of that danced like  brides  in  their  hearts.
         America therefore feared the word because he was  eloquent  in  the
         language they speak."

35.  Mr Mackenzie did not accept that Anwar Al-Awlaki  was,  as  claimed  by
    the respondent, an Al-Qaeda militant.  In relation to this  issue  both
    sides referred to the Wikipedia article about Al-Awlaki.  Certainly  we
    should be wary of treating  Wikipedia  as  evidence  of  the  truth  of
    anything said in it, and as Mr Mackenzie reminded us, from  an  earlier
    discussion of this point at the CMR, many of the people cited  as  text
    sources write  under  what  Mr  Mackenzie  appropriately  described  as
    whimsical pseudonyms, and Mr Mackenzie argued that it is clear there is
    a difference of view as to whether Al-Awlaki was in fact a terrorist or
    a threat to the US.  He referred for example to a quotation at page 11,
    column 2 of the Wikipedia article where  the  Yemeni  Foreign  Minister
    said: "Anwar Al-Awlaki has always been looked at as a  preacher  rather
    than a terrorist and should not be considered as a terrorist unless the
    Americans have evidence that he has been involved in terrorism".   Also
    a journalist and author Glenn Greenwald mentioned  doubt  among  Yemeni
    experts about Al-Awlaki's role in Al-Qaeda  and  called  US  government
    accusations  against  him  unverified  and  lacking  in  evidence.   In
    addition Al-Awlaki's father stated that he believed his  son  had  been
    wrongly accused and was not a member of Al-Qaeda.

36.  Against that however has to be placed a good deal of  evidence  to  the
    contrary.  Mr O'Connor took us to referenced passages  about  Al-Awlaki
    having spoken with and preached to three of  the  9/11  hijackers  when
    Imam at a mosque in Falls Church, Virginia, having presided in 2001  at
    the funeral of the mother of Nidal Malik Hasan an army psychiatrist who
    later e-mailed him extensively in 2008 to 2009  before  the  Fort  Hood
    shootings carried out by Hasan; the fact of his association  with  Umar
    Farouk Abdul Mutallab who attempted the 2009 Christmas Day  bombing  of
    an American airliner, the fact that the Yemeni government began to  try
    him in absentia in November 2010 for plotting to  kill  foreigners  and
    being a member of Al-Qaeda, reference by some US officials to Al-Awlaki
    in 2009 having been promoted to the rank of "regional commander" within
    Al-Qaeda and the fact that he repeatedly called for Jihad  against  the
    United States.  There are many other examples of  this  throughout  the
    article  and  they  satisfy  us  that   Al-Awlaki   can   properly   be
    characterised as he has been by the respondent as an Al-Qaeda  militant
    and as the inspiration of Al-Qaeda terrorists.  The appellant's remarks
    about him have to be seen in that context.

37.  The respondent's second heading is with  reference  to  applauding  the
    international reach  and  aspirations  of  Al-Qaeda,  particularly  the
    targeting of attacks on the US.  Here there is reference again  to  the
    item posted on 2 May 2011 where the appellant referring  to  bin  Laden
    said "you have built a mighty edifice with its base in Afghanistan  and
    its great structures in Jakarta, Malaysia,  Pakistan,  Chechnya,  Iraq,
    Somalia and Islamic Maghreb".  There is also quoted from the item of  3
    May 2013:

         "- - - this hero went forth and stood in defence of his Ummah.   He
         established this idea that has grown strong  hands,  thanks  be  to
         Allah, and these arms that  are  in  Iraq,  Afghanistan,  Chechnya,
         Indonesia, Somalia, or Mali and  now  in  Syria!   These  arms  are
         blessings from this martyr, as we count him to  be,  and  from  his
         pious and devout brethren."

38.  The third heading and  perhaps  the  most  specific  one  to  which  Mr
    O'Connor referred refers to excerpts which he says involve inciting the
    audience to conduct acts of terrorism on behalf of Al-Qaeda.  He argued
    that the praise and glorification offered to the leaders of violent Al-
    Qaeda terrorism in the course of his speeches and sermons  amounted  in
    itself to an implicit encouragement to his audience  to  emulate  them,
    and on occasions the appellant went further and expressly incited those
    reading or listening to his words to take up arms  and  fight  for  Al-
    Qaeda.  Thus, in the interview of 2 May 2011  the  appellant  described
    bin Laden as having "handed over the banner to a generation  that  will
    eliminate this falsehood" and  asserted  that:  "the  Muslims  will  be
    victorious in Afghanistan and Iraq, otherwise how do  you  explain  the
    Islamic state of  Iraq  currently  in  Iraq  and  the  existing  Jihadi
    movements".

39.  In his encomium to bin Laden posted  on  the  same  day  the  appellant
    said: "If you have killed one  Osama,  the  womb  of  the  Ummah  still
    contains a thousand times a thousand Osamas!"

     And also

         "Rest in peace, Abu Abdullah!  You shall remain an  inspiration  to
         ordinary Muslims in the mountains of the Hindu  Kush,  of  Khorosan
         and of Chechnya, and in the  villages,  hamlets,  rural  areas  and
         towns of Iraq, Egypt, Somalia, the land of the two holy sites,  the
         Peninsula,  Yemen,  Oman,  Sudan,  Libya,  Tunisia,  Algeria,   the
         Maghreb, Mauritania, and elsewhere!"

40.  In his eulogy to Al-Awlaki of 14 October 2011 the appellant said:

         "They imagine that by killing the person, by ending  his  life  and
         suppressing his spirit, he will disappear and his words  will  die.
         They do not know that such words have been taken up by thousands of
         young people, who are a thousand Al-Awlakis.  The womb of the Ummah
         is fruitful, praise be to Allah.  Indeed, one better than Al-Awlaki
         has been killed and martyred.  Was the Sheikh of  Islam,  the  Holy
         Warrior, Osama bin Laden not martyred last May? Did the Jihad stop?
          Did the wheels of Jihad ground to a halt?   Has  the  Ummah  died?
         Does the Ummah die with the death of its leaders?"

41.  Finally there is to be found in the appellant's remarks  following  the
    death of Al-Libi posted on 11 September 2012 the following:

         "Our slain are in paradise, Allah willing... and your dead  are  in
         the fire, the Almighty willing! ... O believers,  who  profess  the
         unity of Allah and believe in the promise of  your  Lord!   Do  not
         falter ... do not fall back ... Do not despair  of  the  spirit  of
         Allah.  Only the people who disbelieve despair  of  the  spirit  of
         Allah!  Your slain are martyrs ... those  of  you  who  return  are
         happy ... your captives are rewarded and your enemy is  overwhelmed
         ...".

42.  More  generally  Mr  O'Connor  argued  that  insofar  that  there  were
    differences between the translations he did not wish to overstate these
    and considered it was unsurprising that they were not  identical.   The
    message, the content, emerged just as clearly from all of them.  He did
    make the general point that there was a tendency to paraphrase  in  the
    appellant's translations, and referred to what had been  said  in  that
    respect at paragraph 7 of Mr Bruce Watts' first witness  statement  (he
    being the translator of a number of the  documents  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent).  He also referred to paragraph 5 in the witness  statement
    of the second translator relied on by the government who  had  listened
    to and transcribed four of the  audio  files  and  had  been  asked  to
    comment on a witness  statement  made  by  the  appellant's  translator
    concerning the style of the documents he had been asked  to  translate.
    In the view of the government's second expert it was more  accurate  to
    say that the content was written using both an  archaic  vocabulary  in
    the style.

43.  With regard to the material itself it was a question of the  inferences
    that the Tribunal could draw from it and how it should characterise the
    appellant's intentions in making the statements.  He argued that  where
    items had been referred to as praising and glorifying the activities of
    leading Al-Qaeda terrorists the  inference  was  that  they  implicitly
    encouraged emulation of these people.  Also it formed the  context  for
    the rest of the material.  The reference to "fight the  fight"  was  in
    the context of praise for bin  Laden  and  that  gave  colour  to  that
    phrase.

44.  With regard to the references to the Ummah in the document of  20  July
    2006, Mr O'Connor argued that this was used  clearly  as  a  rhetorical
    device and it was clear that the appellant meant the Jihadi  community,
    bearing in mind that the references were all to Al-Qaeda leaders except
    for Basayev.  The context gave colour to the use of  the  word  "Ummah"
    and it was clear that it was being used as a rhetorical device  by  the
    appellant.  This was not captured in the appellant's  translation,  for
    example  where  at  the  appellant's  translation  "Ummah"  was  simply
    translated as "nation".  Mr O'Connor also referred to  paragraph  9  of
    the appellant's translator's witness  statement  where  when  the  word
    "revolutions" was used for a second time in a sentence he used the word
    "experiences" in order to avoid repetition which Mr O'Connor argued was
    quite concerning.  The main point he made however was the importance of
    the term "Ummah" and what the appellant meant by it  which  had  to  be
    taken from its context.

45.  Another general point made by Mr O'Connor was  that  the  term  "Jihad"
    was capable of a number of meanings.  It could be a spiritual  struggle
    but it was argued that here in context it was to be  taken  as  meaning
    acts of mass terrorism.

46.  Mr O'Connor argued that this was also to be seen in the  context  of  a
    further general point  he  made,  that  the  appellant  had  not  taken
    advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  provide  any  explanation  of  the
    documentation on which the Secretary of State  relied  and  that  could
    have been done with regard to this term, for example.  A  common  sense
    straightforward inference was, Mr O'Connor argued,  violent  Jihad  and
    terrorism as that was what bin Laden had done and the reference in this
    regard to Jihad at for example the interview posted on 2 May  2011  was
    to be seen in this light.  On any reading these were tracts encouraging
    violence.  The items concerning bin Laden taken together amounted to  a
    glorification of him and Al-Qaeda, which he had  built.   Reference  to
    the mighty edifice in the eulogy of 2 May 2011 had clearly to  be  seen
    as support and encouragement to readers and listeners to become a brick
    in the mighty edifice and was clearly a reference to Al-Qaeda.

47.  There was the reference in the post of 2 May 2011 to bin  Laden  having
    not killed civilians and not having said that.  Given that Al-Qaeda had
    been built by bin Laden as a big idea and was responsible for thousands
    of deaths, this had not been explained by the appellant and it was  for
    him to do so and the statement was  simply  untrue.   The  context  was
    important together with the lack of evidence by way of  explanation  on
    the part of the appellant.  In general the same points were  made  with
    regard to the eulogising of Al-Awlaki.  Again no evidence had been  put
    in to explain what had been said or to refute the Wikipedia entry.  The
    Wikipedia article gave context to the  appellant's  remarks  about  Al-
    Awlaki.  The level of praise of  him  as  a  person  who  had  been  so
    intimately linked to Al-Qaeda violence must lead to the conclusion that
    the appellant had intended inciting people to emulate  and  follow  Al-
    Awlaki.

48.  The specific references to incitement were emphasised.  These were  not
    just matters of praise but did actually express incitement to join  Al-
    Qaeda.

49.  With regard to the Ombudsperson's report, the  appellant  had  been  on
    the Al-Qaeda sanctions list since 2005.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
    made it clear that she did not rely on  the  fact  of  the  appellant's
    listing but asked the Tribunal to have regard to the way in  which  the
    Ombudsperson had looked at  the  material  and  had  provided  sensible
    powerful reasoning for her conclusion that she was fully satisfied that
    the  appellant's  statements  and  postings  constituted  speech  which
    evidently crossed the threshold and in which he encouraged and  invited
    participation in, and assistance to,  Al-Qaeda  and  through  which  he
    glorified that organisation and its members.  It was the case that  the
    test employed by the Ombudsperson was different i.e. whether or not the
    appellant was associated with  Al-Qaeda,  and  there  was  a  different
    standard of proof, akin to a reasonable suspicion.  Nevertheless it was
    a valuable exercise and the material  was  useful  though  clearly  not
    binding.  It assisted the Tribunal, which was asked to have  regard  to
    the entirety of the document.

50.  In his submissions Mr Mackenzie argued  that  the  respondent  had  not
    disclosed a single item in which the appellant had mentioned an act  of
    terrorism in approving terms  let  alone  stating  that  anyone  should
    commit one.  His remarks about Osama bin Laden had to be  seen  in  the
    context of his belief that bin Laden "did not kill  civilians  and  did
    not say that".  It was beside the point whether the  Tribunal  regarded
    that as a correct summary of bin Laden's career;  the  point  was  that
    that was what the appellant believed.  It was  important  to  note  his
    clear opposition to Islamic State on account  of  its  brutal  acts  of
    terrorism.  In a co-authored article posted on 25 August  2014  he  had
    spoken critically of Islamic State, listing a number of its crimes  and
    particularly  criticising  it  for  murdering  civilians.    The   only
    references to terrorism referred to by  the  appellant  therefore  were
    matters mentioned in critical terms.

51.  All the matters referred to by Mr  O'Connor  had  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of the appellant's firm refusal  to  accept  that  any  of  the
    people of whom he spoke had done anything wrong.   Nor  was  there  any
    evidence that anyone had ever been in fact encouraged to commit any act
    of terrorism or join a terrorist organisation or to commit  support  or
    contribute to any such act or  any  such  organisation  by  reading  or
    listening to the appellant's views.   There  was  only  the  fact  that
    people had visited the web pages where the comments  were  posted,  but
    that did not show how many  if  any  of  them  had  agreed  with  those
    comments let alone how many if any were encouraged by them to take  any
    action of any sort.  The tone and content of  the  speeches,  which  Mr
    Mackenzie characterised as dense, wordy and full of  scholarly  Koranic
    illusions were hardly likely, Mr Mackenzie argued, to attract potential
    terrorists, in  particular  impressionistic  or  vulnerable  people  as
    contended by Mr O'Connor, in comparison  to  the  graphic  and  violent
    internet postings of organisations such as  Islamic  State.   The  fact
    that the appellant had not provided  a  statement  or  chosen  to  give
    evidence in respect of the allegations against him was by the  way,  in
    that the respondent had chosen to put her case entirely on the basis of
    his public pronouncements.  At no point had he  expressed  approval  of
    any act of terrorism and never said that anyone should commit an act of
    terrorism and had actively criticised people who did and praised people
    who in his view did not commit acts of terrorism.

52.  Mr Mackenzie submitted that there was nothing in the  various  excerpts
    from the appellant's pronouncements which made good  the  Secretary  of
    State's claim.  For example the sermon of  3  May  2013  addressed  the
    second anniversary of the killing of bin Laden by US Special Forces, in
    respect of which much technical detail was given as to  what  happened,
    and bin Laden was referred to in the context of the Islamic leaders who
    expanded Islamic rule as far as  Spain  and  Portugal  i.e.  he  was  a
    military leader and referred to him as  resisting  "the  evil  American
    power".  The item concerning Al-Libi referred  to  him  as  a  warrior,
    scholar and martyr  and  again  there  was  no  reference  to  acts  of
    terrorism or call to others to commit such acts.   All  that  was  said
    about Al-Awlaki was that he wrote, published  and  preached,  and  that
    people delighted in receiving his words and  that  America  feared  the
    word.  There was no reference to incitement of Al-Qaeda  violence,  and
    defending the members of his Ummah was not  the  same  thing.   It  was
    relevant to note that the appellant added that Al-Awlaki  "told  us  to
    fight against the unbelievers 'with  your  tongues',  with  words"  and
    asking rhetorically  whether  Al-Awlaki  carried  weapons  he  answered
    himself: "he used the word and the word was a missile".

53.  As noted above,  the  interview  with  the  appellant  on  2  May  2011
    contained an express denial on the part of the appellant that bin Laden
    killed civilians.  The item of 18 November 2007 contained no  approving
    reference to any acts of terrorism but in fact the appellant criticised
    practices such as killing people on sectarian grounds and  using  human
    shields.  He defended Jihadi groups against allegations of carrying out
    such things, saying it was  the  Americans  and  despotic  Middle  East
    regimes who did this.  Again this was a matter of his belief and  could
    not sensibly be read as a call  to  others  to  commit  acts  which  he
    attributed to those whom he regarded as enemies.  Sympathetic  comments
    about Al-Zawahiri in the biography  fell  far  short  of  demonstrating
    involvement in acts falling within Article 1F(c).

54.  As regards the Ombudsperson's report, it was important to bear in  mind
    that she was answering a different question  from  that  posed  to  the
    Tribunal, applying a different standard of proof, not inclined to  take
    any account of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  she  applied  a
    broad definition of "support" for Al-Qaeda as an organisation which she
    treated as including expressions of sympathy.  Her focus was not on the
    question which was before the Tribunal.  It was also clear that she had
    taken account of evidence  which  was  not  before  the  Tribunal,  for
    example there was reference to a telephone interview of April 2007  and
    reference to material which indicated uses made of  the  website  which
    was a forum for many of the appellant's emanations.

Discussion of the Evidence

55.  We have set out above the legal tests which  must  be  applied  to  our
    assessment of the evidence in this case.  We should emphasise  that  we
    have done no more than note the Ombudsperson's  report  as  background,
    but have not based our  reasoning  or  conclusions  on  it,  given  the
    different standard of proof, different  evidence  and  different  legal
    test with which she was concerned.  What she has to say is  clearly  of
    interest but it can in no sense be a guide to us as to how we determine
    this appeal.  We have considered the evidence otherwise in  the  round.
    We have not just looked at the extracts provided by  the  Secretary  of
    State from the appellant's speeches but looked at the  broader  content
    to be found in the full translations provided by the appellant.  We see
    no materiality to any differences between the translations except as to
    the instances that we refer to specifically below.   We  consider  that
    the language used by the appellant is such  that  it  can  properly  be
    characterised as explicit direct encouragement or incitement to acts of
    terrorism (which we use as shorthand for Article 1F(c)), given the very
    significant equation to be made, and which we find  to  exist  in  this
    case,  between  terrorism  and  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes   and
    principles of the United Nations: see Section 54(1) of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (set out at paragraph 8 above).  In the
    alternative, knowing incitement and encouragement can  be  implicit  as
    well as explicit.  It is a question of degree.  The reference to Mullah
    Omar, Osama bin Laden and Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi and the praise given  to
    them in the post of 20 July 2006 and the particular praise of bin Laden
    in the  YouTube  interview  of  2  May  2011  give  a  context  to  the
    appellant's remarks as a whole.  In that interview on the  day  of  bin
    Laden's death the appellant referred to bin Laden as a lion  among  the
    lions of Islam who left for Jihad, and was loved by millions of  people
    from the Ummah.  In light of bin Laden's  history  the  statement  that
    "bin Laden did not kill civilians and did not say that" has to be taken
    in context.  It cannot be seen as in effect  justifying  or  clarifying
    everything else said by the appellant about bin Laden or otherwise.  It
    simply flies in the face of reality.  We do not accept that this  is  a
    belief that the appellant could rationally claim to have held.  On  any
    understanding bin Laden was the  mastermind  behind  terrorist  attacks
    such as those  in  New  York  on  11  September  2001,  in  which  very
    significant numbers of civilians died.  The appellant simply  chose  to
    ignore the point made to him by the interviewer that bin Laden used  to
    boast about and call  for  military  operations  including  those  that
    targeted civilians in the West.  He simply avoided  that  question  and
    came out with a statement subsequently  about  bin  Laden  not  killing
    civilians which is untrue and which we consider he must have  known  to
    be untrue.

56.  The further eulogies of bin Laden, Zawahiri and  Al-Libi  to  which  we
    have referred to above also form part of a climate of  praise  for  and
    glorification of the activities of these people.  Taken  together  with
    the applauding of the internal reach and aspirations of Al-Qaeda and in
    particular the targeting of attacks on the USA, they  can  be  seen  as
    background to and part of the more specific matters referred to  in  Mr
    O'Connor's third category of case.  In referring to  bin  Laden  having
    "handed over the banner  to  a  generation  that  will  eliminate  this
    falsehood", and that the Muslims will be victorious in Afghanistan  and
    Iraq; the reference to "if you have killed one Osama the  womb  of  the
    Ummah will still contain a thousand times a thousand  Osamas,  and  the
    further eulogistic remarks and the post of 2 May  2011  concerning  the
    inspiration to ordinary Muslims that bin Laden represents to people  in
    the various places cited there,  together  with  the  14  October  2011
    eulogy to Al-Awlaki referring to his words  having  been  taken  up  by
    thousands of young people or a thousand Al-Awlakis and that the womb of
    the Ummah is fruitful; that one better than Al-Awlaki has already  been
    killed and martyred, and the rhetorical question: did the  Jihad  stop,
    and does the Ummah die with the death of its leaders, we consider  this
    is sufficient as contended on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    amount to at least  implicit  and  indeed  explicit  encouragement  and
    inducement to the appellant's audience to emulate these people in their
    activities which are activities of terrorism and activities contrary to
    the purposes and principles of the  United  Nations.   Consequently  we
    consider that the respondent has made out her case.  We do not consider
    that these words can be taken as falling short of the test as contended
    by Mr  Mackenzie.   These  are  statements  comprising  incitement  and
    encouragement made by a man whose words, in our view, clearly cross the
    border of implicit encouragement and incitement and  indeed  amount  to
    explicit encouragement and incitement such that his actions fall within
    the exclusion clause as set out in Article 1F(c) and  as  expressed  in
    the Qualification Directive in Article 12(2)(c).

57.  Accordingly his appeal is dismissed.

58.  No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



                            Error of Law Decision



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HY
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Giovannetti, QC, instructed by Treasury
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by Birnberg Pierce &
Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   For convenience we shall refer to HY as the appellant,  as  he  was  in
    the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal, and to  the  respondent
    as the Secretary of State.

2.   The appellant was born on 1 March 1961 and is a citizen of  Egypt.   He
    was  involved  in  political  activity  in  Egypt   with   the   Muslim
    Brotherhood.  He also acted as a defence lawyer.  He  was  arrested  in
    1981 and, as the FTT noted at paragraph 16 of  the  determination,  was
    badly treated. He fled Egypt and came to the United Kingdom.  Whilst in
    the UK he was found guilty in his absence of crimes, the  evidence  for
    which was obtained by torture.  It is  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that the appellant cannot be returned to Egypt.

3.   The Secretary of State has  granted  the  appellant  limited  leave  to
    remain but, in considering  the  appellant's  application  for  further
    leave to remain, excluded him from the Refugee Convention on the  basis
    of Article 1F(c).  An appeal  under  Section  83  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State to grant the appellant limited leave to remain was heard by  a
    panel of FTT Judges Lobo and Kamara.  In a determination dated 5  March
    2013 the FTT allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  against  the  decision   and
    permission was given on 31 March  2014.   Two  grounds  of  appeal  are
    advanced. The first is to the effect that the Tribunal erred in law  in
    failing to apply the correct standard of  proof.   The  second  asserts
    that the Tribunal made a series of  errors  in  the  way  in  which  it
    analysed the submissions advanced and the evidence relied upon  by  the
    Secretary of State.  As a result, when looked at both individually  and
    cumulatively, these errors amounted to an error of law.

5.   Skeleton arguments were lodged on behalf of the Secretary of State  and
    a Rule 24 response was lodged by the appellant.

Ground 1 - Standard of proof

6.   The Geneva Convention on  the  status  of  refugees  at  Article  1F(c)
    excludes from refugee status or protection "any person with respect  to
    whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has been  guilty
    of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations".
      In Al-Sirri v Secretary of State [2013] 1AC  745  the  Supreme  Court
    considered the standard of proof that is to be applied by the  decision
    maker in  determining  whether  a  person  claiming  asylum  should  be
    excluded from the protection of the Refugee  Convention  under  Article
    1F(c).

7.   It concluded at paragraph 75 as follows:

         "75.  We are, it is clear, attempting  to  discern  the  autonomous
             meaning of the words 'serious reasons for considering'.  We do
             so in the light of the UNHCR view, with which we  agree,  that
             the exclusion  clauses  in  the  Refugee  Convention  must  be
             restrictively interpreted and cautiously applied.  This  leads
             us to draw the following conclusions: (1) 'Serious reasons' is
             stronger than 'reasonable grounds'.   (2)  The  evidence  from
             which those reasons are derived must be 'clear  and  credible'
             or 'strong'.  (3) 'Considering' is stronger than 'suspecting'.
              In our  view  it  is  also  stronger  than  'believing'.   It
             requires the considered judgment of the decision  maker.   (4)
             The decision-maker need not  be  satisfied  beyond  reasonable
             doubt or to the standard required in criminal law.  (5) It  is
             unnecessary to import our domestic standards of proof into the
             question. The circumstances of refugee claims, and the  nature
             of the evidence available, are so variable.  However,  if  the
             decision-maker is satisfied that it is more  likely  than  not
             that the application has not committed the crimes in  question
             or has not been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations, it is difficult to  see  how
             there could be serious reasons for  considering  that  he  has
             done so.  The  reality  is  that  there  are  unlikely  to  be
             sufficiently serious reasons for considering the applicant  to
             be guilty unless a decision-maker  can  be  satisfied  on  the
             balance of probabilities that he is.   But  the  task  of  the
             decision-maker is to apply the words of  the  Convention  (and
             the Directive) in the particular case."

8.   The test was applied by the Upper  Tribunal  in  AH  (Article  1F(b)  -
    'serious') Algeria [2013] UKUT 00382 (IAC) by  a  panel  consisting  of
    Blake J sitting as the President and Upper Tribunal Judges Gleeson  and
    King.  At paragraph 82 the Upper Tribunal said this:

         "82.  The test is whether there are  serious  reasons  to  consider
             that the appellant is guilty of  conduct  that  amounts  to  a
             serious non-political offence. This is something stronger than
             reasonable suspicion but less  than  proof  of  guilt  on  the
             criminal standard.  We conclude from the relevant authorities,
             including those discussed by the Court of Appeal in  remitting
             this matter to ourselves and the conclusions  of  the  Supreme
             Court in Al-Sirri that is sufficient so to consider if  it  is
             more probable than not on the information before us, that  the
             appellant personally participated in such a crime."

The FTT's Approach

9.   In its determination the FTT quoted paragraph  75  from  Al-Sirri  (see
    paragraph 8).  At paragraph 17 the FTT  asked  what  it  was  that  the
    Secretary of State must persuade them of "to the appropriate  standard"
    to enable them to decide that the appellant should be excluded from the
    Refugee Convention under Article 1F(c).  They answered that question at
    paragraph 18 as follows:

         "18.  The respondent has to adduce clear, reliable  and  admissible
             evidence showing, at least to the  balance  of  probabilities,
             that:-


             (a) Mr Y perpetrated, or  made  substantial  contribution,  to
                  particular crimes;


             (b)   those   crimes   constituted   acts   which   threatened
                  international peace and security,  and,   particular,  but
                  not purely domestic matters;


             (c)      insofar as reliance is placed on crimes said to  have
                  been committed by other members of an organisation,  Mr  Y
                  was not only a member of that organisation, but had a role
                  within it, and knowledge of its activities, sufficient  to
                  show that he had responsibility for the actions  of  those
                  others."

10.  Having considered the evidence the FTT concluded  at  paragraph  34  as
    follows:

         "34.     The respondent has failed to provide sufficient  evidence,
             for us to conclude to the required standard,  at  the  highest
             (and to the balance of probability, at the  lowest)  that  the
             appellant should be excluded from the Refugee Convention under
             Article  1F(c)  because  there   are   serious   reasons   for
             considering that he has been guilty of acts  contrary  to  the
             purposes and principles of the United Nations."

Submissions for Secretary of State

11.  In the skeleton argument the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  when
    the determination is read as a whole it is apparent that the FTT quoted
    verbatim from the Supreme Court's guidance at paragraph 75 of  Al-Sirri
    but then failed to understand and/or to apply  that  guidance  properly
    when it came to reach its conclusion on the facts of this case.  On the
    only two occasions when the FTT used its  own  words  to  describe  the
    standard  of  proof  it  used  formulations  that  were  not  obviously
    consistent with Al-Sirri.

12.  Miss Giovanetti submitted that  read  properly  paragraph  75,  and  in
    particular subparagraph (5) did not say that the standard of proof  was
    proof on a balance of probabilities. Most particularly it did  not  say
    that  the  standard  of  proof  was  one  higher  than  a  balance   of
    probabilities.

Submissions for the Appellant

13.  In the Rule 24 response and in the oral submissions  by  Mr  Mackenzie,
    the appellant maintained that there was no error of law.  The  FTT  had
    correctly set out the test at paragraph 75 of Al-Sirri.  Having done so
    it was inconceivable that they would have forgotten it by the time they
    came to make their determination.  In any event , while it was  correct
    that the Supreme Court did not directly equate the standard of proof in
    the Refugee Convention with the domestic civil  standard,  it  did  say
    that the former was unlikely to be made out unless the latter was  also
    made out.  This accorded with the approach taken in  AH  at  paragraphs
    82,  101  and  102.   It  was  accepted  that  paragraph  34   of   the
    determination was not well worded but infelicitous words should not  be
    interpreted as errors of law.



Decision on Ground 1 - Standard of proof

14.  The words "serious reasons for considering" in Article  1F(c)  have  an
    autonomous meaning.  In Al-Sirri the Supreme Court  gave  authoritative
    guidance on the meaning and application of the test.  In particular the
    court said that it was unnecessary  to  import  domestic  standards  of
    proof into the question as the circumstances of refugee claims and  the
    nature of evidence available is so variable.  The court  said  that  if
    the decision maker is satisfied that it was more likely than  not  that
    the applicant has not committed the crime or has  not  been  guilty  of
    acts contrary to the purposes of the United Nations it is difficult  to
    see how there could be serious reasons for considering that he had done
    so.  As  Miss  Giovanetti  pointed  out,  that  observation,  which  is
    carefully worded, does not mean that the opposite is true.

15.  It is the next sentence which potentially gives rise to some  confusion
    if not read in context.  "The reality is that there are unlikely to  be
    sufficiently serious reasons for considering the applicant to be guilty
    unless  the  decision  maker  can  be  satisfied  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities that he is".

16.  We do not accept Mr Mackenzie's submission that the  Supreme  Court  in
    effect decided that the  standard  of  proof  was  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, for the following reasons.  First, in the next  sentence
    the court says "But the task of the decision  maker  is  to  apply  the
    words of the Convention ... in the particular  case".  Secondly,  while
    the court notes the reality that there are unlikely to be  sufficiently
    serious reasons for considering the applicant to be guilty  unless  the
    decision maker can be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that he
    is, the formulation leaves open the possibility that  in  a  particular
    case the test in Article 1F(c) may be met even if the civil standard of
    proof is not met.  While that may seem a theoretical  possibility,  the
    cases cited by the court  at  paragraph  73  and  74  show  that  other
    jurisdictions have adopted such an approach.

17.  AH is cited for the proposition that a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    determined the civil standard of proof applied.  However,  despite  the
    misleading head note at paragraph 2 we do not  consider  that  this  is
    what the UT determined. It does not appear from our reading of the case
    or the proceedings in the Court of Appeal (AH (Algeria) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 395), which  resulted  in
    the remittal to the UT, that there was  an  issue  in  considering  the
    standard of proof; the focus of debate was on the word  "serious".   In
    any event, the UT at paragraph 82 correctly  states  the  test  in  the
    first sentence.  It is repeated in their conclusion at  paragraph  102.
    The UT were able in that case to answer the question whether or not the
    test was met by asking themselves whether or not it was  more  probable
    than not that the appellant  personally  participated  in  the   crime.
    That was no doubt the correct approach given the evidence in  the  case
    and the issue which was whether or not  the  appellant  had  personally
    participated in a serious crime.

18.  Turning to the present case and adopting the analysis, it is  clear  in
    our view that the FTT did not  apply  the  correct  test.   While  they
    correctly quote the relevant passage from Al-Sirri  it  appears  to  us
    that they misinterpreted  what  it  said.   There  is  no  evidence  in
    paragraphs 18 or 34 of the determination that they applied the words of
    the Convention as they are required to do.   Moreover  they  appear  to
    have considered that the "required" test is higher than the balance  of
    probabilities.  Whatever else may be said about the comparison  between
    the civil standard of proof and the test in Article 1F(c) there  is  no
    authority that supports such an approach.

19.  Accordingly we are satisfied that there is an error  of  law  and  that
    the appeal by the Secretary of State should be allowed.

Ground 2

20.  The Secretary of State maintained that there were a number of  findings
    which disclosed a series of errors in the way  in  which  the  FTT  had
    analysed the submissions and the evidence relied upon by the  Secretary
    of State.  In particular the FTT had recorded that  the  appellant  was
    never arrested in connection with the alleged planned  bombing  of  the
    United States Embassy in Albanian.  While it was true he had never been
    prosecuted or convicted, that did not accord with the  evidence  before
    the FTT from the Security Service.

21.  Secondly, while it was said that the FTT  was  technically  correct  to
    state that it had received no evidence as to the reasons for redactions
    to the Security Service documents, it  had  in  fact  received  a  full
    explanation of this point and the court in Youssef v Foreign  Secretary
    [2012] EWHC 2091 (Admin) had approved the redactions on the grounds  of
    public interest immunity.  Thirdly, the Tribunal had erred  in  failing
    to address the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State  to
    the effect  that  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  denials  were
    weakened by  his  refusal  to  give  oral  evidence  to  the  Tribunal.
    Fifthly, it was submitted that the Tribunal had failed  to  address  in
    its determination the material relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State
    (at Annex Y).  Further, the Tribunal had erred  in  stating  that  "the
    evidence upon which the respondent relies for corroboration  is  either
    inadmissible or, if admissible, questions arise as to its  translation,
    or it has been the subject of denial by the appellant".  None  of  that
    was true of the material at Annex Y.

22.  In oral submissions Miss Giovanetti submitted that in  effect  the  FTT
    had taken an over-formalistic approach to the admissibility of evidence
    and that was an error of law.   She  referred  us  to  MN  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State [2014] UKSC 30 at paragraph 24 where  Lord  Carnwath
    said that "Generally  ...  the  area  of  legitimate  debate  is  about
    relevance and weight, not admissibility".



23.  Mr Mackenzie accepted that there was evidence that  the  appellant  had
    been arrested in connection with the alleged conspiracy to bomb the  US
    Embassy in Tirana but the important point was  that  he  had  not  been
    prosecuted.  Accordingly  nothing  turned  on  this.   So  far  as  the
    redactions were concerned, the  fact  was  that  the  Security  Service
    documents were redacted and the Tribunal was  entitled  to  place  less
    weight on the documents for that reason.  While individual mention  had
    not been made of Annex Y, it was clear  from  a  full  reading  of  the
    determination that it had been considered by the FTT.

Decision on Ground 2

24.  Since we are clear there is an error of law in relation  to  ground  1,
    it is not necessary for us to reach a concluded view on ground  2.   We
    note the criticisms but  do  not  think  that  either  individually  or
    cumulatively these would amount to an error of law  which would justify
    us overturning the FTT's decision on this ground.

Further Procedure

25.  We invited submissions on  further  procedure  in  the  event  that  we
    allowed the appeal.  Miss Giovanetti submitted that we should remit the
    case to the FTT for a rehearing. That would allow  the  appellant,  who
    had not given evidence before the FTT, to do so should he so wish.   Mr
    Mackenzie submitted that the case should remain in the UT.  He  had  no
    instructions that the appellant had changed his mind and now wished  to
    give evidence.

26.  Having regard to the Practice Statement at 7.2, we  are  not  persuaded
    that this is a case that should be remitted to the FTT and  accordingly
    the appeal  will  be  listed  for  further  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and subject to the Directions set out below.  oHJHo

                                        DIRECTIONS

         (1) No later than 14 days before the next hearing, both parties are
         to file and serve a skeleton argument.


         (2) It is not anticipated that there  will  be  the  need  for  any
         further evidence to be given. In the event that either party  seeks
         to rely on further evidence, such is to  be  filed  and  served  no
         later than 14 days before the next hearing.  It  will  be  for  the
         judge or judges seized of the appeal to determine whether to  admit
         further evidence.

Anonymity Order

We make an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008)   and   consequently,   this   determination
identifies the appellant by initials only.




Lord Boyd of Duncansby                                             17/10/14

