
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on  the  application  of  Zhang)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00138(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                  THE QUEEN
                           (ON THE APPLICATION OF)
                                  LEI ZHANG
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                   BEFORE

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr D Cheung, Solicitor Advocate,  instructed  by  Maxwell  Alves  Solicitors
appeared on behalf of the Applicant.

Ms L D'Cruz, Counsel, instructed  by  the  Treasury  Solicitor  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                        Handed down 26 February 2015
    JUDGE O'CONNOR:

1.   This application for judicial review was lodged  on  18  November  2013
    and permission to bring these proceedings was granted by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul in a decision dated the 14 April 2014.

 2. On 9 April 2013 the Applicant made an application for  entry  clearance
    as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).  This application was refused by  an  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  ("ECO")  pursuant  to  paragraph  245DB(f)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in a decision dated the 3 June 2013.

 3. The reasons given for such refusal are  lengthy.  It  is  not,  though,
    necessary for me to recite them herein. The following paragraphs of the
    decision letter are, however, of relevance:

          "If you believe that the decision  made  by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer was incorrect you may apply for an administrative review of
         your case.  You may  request  one  administrative  review  of  this
         decision...

         The review of this decision will be a full reconsideration of  your
         application.   This  may  lead  to  the   reviewer   upholding   or
         overturning the original refusal decision."

 4. The Applicant sought an administrative review of her case by way  of  a
    letter dated 27 June 2013.  The grounds upon which she did  so  can  be
    summarised as follows:

        i)   The ECO erred in law by failing to refer to paragraph  320(7B)
           of the Immigration Rules;

       ii) The Applicant denies that she acted deceptively in any  way  and
           the ECO was incorrect in coming to such conclusion;

      iii) The ECO erred in failing to consider and apply paragraph 320(11)
           of the Immigration Rules or the guidance relevant thereto;

       iv)  The  ECO  failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
           Applicant's mother lives in the United Kingdom.

 5. Having reviewed the Applicant's case an Entry Clearance Manager ("ECM")
    maintained the decision to refuse  entry  clearance,  the  reasons  for
    doing so being set out in the following terms a decision letter of  the
    27 July 2013:

         "...The ECO has refused because of your previous failure to  comply
         with the  conditions  of  your  leave  and  your  previous  use  of
         deception in order to obtain entry to the UK.   The  ECO  has  only
         refused under paragraph 245DB(f) of the Immigration Rules  and  has
         not applied paragraph 320(7B) or 320(11) as is  intimated  in  your
         legal representative's grounds for review.

         You were interviewed  on  14  May  2013  and  asked  very  specific
         questions about your proposed business venture in the UK, knowledge
         and experience of this field of  business,  your  circumstances  in
         China, your circumstances surrounding your previous stay in the  UK
         and your finances.   The  answers  you  gave  did  not  demonstrate
         sufficiently that you were a genuine Tier  1  (Entrepreneur).   You
         have failed to satisfy the ECO in these areas of questioning.   You
         first entered the UK as a student in 2003.  On 19 February 2009 you
         were issued a biometric residence permit as a Tier 4 Student due to
         your studies at Kingston University.  This permit was  valid  until
         31 October 2011.  At interview you stated that  you  withdrew  from
         your course at Kingston University after completing the second year
         in 2009 due to ill-health.  Other than a short period back in China
         from January 2011 until April 2011 you remained in the UK until  17
         September 2011 (refusal notice stated 2013 which is incorrect) when
         you returned to China.  You entered the UK on 19 December 2009  and
         you informed that Immigration Officer that you were entering the UK
         in  order  to  continue  your  studying.   Checks   with   Kingston
         University have revealed the following:

             .    You enrolled on 17/09/2007 on BA Media & Cultural Studies
                  but were withdrawn for academic failure on 04/07/2008.

             .    You then enrolled on 22/9/2008 on BSc Geography  and  was
                  also withdrawn for academic failure 10/07/2009.

             .    You were not reported to the UKBA as you  attended  prior
                  to the Tier 4 requirements.

         The over-riding factor is that you re-entered the UK on 19 December
         2011 knowing that you were not a student at Kingston University and
         no longer studying at all in the UK.  The ECO is therefore  correct
         to state you had been withdrawn from your previous course of  study
         for a period of approximately 5 months and you could therefore  not
         be intending to enter the UK  in  order  to  continue  this  study.
         Whilst I accept that you did not overstay your visa you then stayed
         in the UK for a period of over 18 months with leave  as  a  Tier  4
         Student, despite the fact that you were not enrolled on any courses
         of study.  During this period you also made no  attempt  to  inform
         the Home Office of the change in your circumstances and  given  all
         of the above.

         You have spent approximately 8 years in the UK  as  a  student  and
         have failed to obtain any noteworthy qualifications and have failed
         two separate degree courses.  I acknowledge that you have submitted
         further documents concerning your business venture but taking  into
         consideration your previous failure to comply with  the  conditions
         of your leave, approximately 8 years of study in the UK without any
         noteworthy qualifications I am not  satisfied  that  you  genuinely
         intend to establish or take over a business or businesses in the UK
         and that you genuinely intend to invest your money in the  business
         or businesses."

 6. Paragraph 245DB of the Immigration  Rules  reads,  relevantly  for  the
    purposes of this application, as follows:

         "245DB. Requirements for entry clearance

         To qualify for entry clearance as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant,
         an applicant must meet  the  requirements  listed  below.   If  the
         applicant  meets  those  requirements,  entry  clearance  will   be
         granted.  If the applicant does not meet  these  requirements,  the
         application will be refused.

         Requirements

         (a)-(e)...

         (f) Except where the applicant has had entry  clearance,  leave  to
             enter or leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant, a
             businessperson  or  an  innovator   in   the   twelve   months
             immediately before  the  date  of  application  and  is  being
             assessed under table 5 of  Appendix  A,  the  Entry  Clearance
             Officer must be satisfied that:

             (i)  the applicant genuinely intends and is able to establish,
                  take over or become a director of one or  more  businesses
                  in the UK within the next six months;

             (ii) the applicant  genuinely  intends  to  invest  the  money
                  referred to in table 4 of Appendix A in  the  business  or
                  businesses referred to in (i);

             (iii)that the money referred to in table 4 of  Appendix  A  is
                  genuinely available  to  the  applicant  and  will  remain
                  available to him until such time as it is  spent  for  the
                  purposes of his business or businesses;

             (iv) that the applicant does not intend to take employment  in
                  the UK other than under the terms of paragraph 245DC;

         (g)  In making the assessment in (f), the Entry  Clearance  Officer
             will assess the balance of probabilities.  The Entry Clearance
             Officer may take into account the following:

              ...

             (v)  the applicant's immigration history and previous activity
                  in the UK."

 7. Part 9 of the Immigration Rules sets out general grounds of refusal  of
    entry clearance or leave to enter, paragraph 320(7B) thereof reading:


         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused:

        ...

        (7B)  Where  the  applicant  has  previously  breached   the   UK's
              immigration laws (and was 18 or over at the time of his  most
              recent breach) by:

             (a)  overstaying;

             (b)  breaching a condition of his leave;

             (c)  being an illegal entrant;

             (d)  using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain, or in order to obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether it  is  successful  or
                  not);

          Unless the applicant:

                  (i)  overstayed for 90  days  or  less  and  left  the  UK
                      voluntarily, not at the expense of the  Secretary  of
                      State;

                  (ii) used deception in an application for entry  clearance
                      more than ten years ago;

                  (iii)left the UK voluntarily, not at the expense (directly
                      or indirectly) of the  Secretary  of     State,  more
                      than twelve months ago;...".

 8. Paragraph 320(11) of the Rules is to be found under the heading:



         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused", and reads as follows:

             "(11)    Where the applicant has  previously  contrived  in  a
                   significant way to frustrate the intentions of the  Rules
                   by:

                  (i) overstaying; or

                  (ii)     breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

                  (iii)being an illegal entrant; or

                  (iv)     using deception  in  an  application  for  entry
                       clearance, leave to  enter  or  remain  in  order  to
                       obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a
                       third party required in support of  the  application;
                       and

                  there  are  other  aggravating  circumstances,  such   as
                  absconding,  not  meeting  temporary  admission/reporting
                  restrictions  or  bail  conditions,  using   an   assumed
                  identity or multiple identities,  switching  nationality,
                  making frivolous applications or not complying  with  the
                  re-documentation process."

 9. In the grounds originally pleaded in support  of  the  application  for
    judicial review it was submitted that refusal of the British Embassy in
    Beijing to  provide  Maxwell  Alves  solicitors  with  a  copy  of  the
    administrative review decision of 27 July 2013 was perverse, given that
    the Applicant had at all material times been represented by this  firm.



10. This ground was rooted  in  an  e-mail  sent  by  the  Embassy  to  the
    Applicant's  solicitors  on  8  November  2013,  in  response  to   the
    solicitors having made a request  for  a  copy  of  the  administrative
    review decision by way of e-mails dated 10 October, 25  October  and  6
    November; the e-mail of the 25 October 2013 also  indicating  that  the
    Applicant had not received the copy of the  review  decision  that  had
    been sent to her by post on 19 August 2013.

11. The email from the British Embassy, dated 8 November  2013,  stated  as
    follows:

        "Thank you for your email

        Due to the Data Protection  and  Freedom  of  Information  Act,  we
        cannot comment on individual applications of  any  sort.   This  is
        personal information that we cannot divulge or discuss with a third
        party."

12. It was on the basis of the continuing refusal of the Embassy to provide
    the Applicant's solicitors with a copy  of  the  administrative  review
    decision of 27 July 2013, in circumstances where the Applicant  herself
    had not received the copy purportedly sent to her, that Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul granted permission.  He made no observations  when  doing
    so as to the merits of the other pleaded grounds but, nevertheless, did
    not refuse permission for them to be argued.

13. The aforementioned ground is no longer a live issue before  me  because
    the Applicant's solicitors accept that they  received  a  copy  of  the
    administrative review decision on 13 May 2014. I pause at this stage to
    observe that whilst the Respondent asserts that this decision was  also
    sent to the Applicant's solicitors on 26 November 2013 and 19  December
    2013 I  have  been  provided  with  no  evidence  in  support  of  such
    contention.

14. I move on to consider  the  grounds  that  are  in  issue.  First,  the
    Applicant submits, both in the  grounds  of  application  for  judicial
    review and in the skeleton argument  drawn  for  the  purposes  of  the
    substantive hearing, that the ECO's decision of 3 June 2013  is  flawed
    by legal error.

15. However, the challenge brought to the decision of 3 June 2013 must fail
    irrespective of the merits of the grounds, because the Applicant had  a
    suitable alternative remedy against such decision, which she  exercised
    i.e. the request for an administrative  review.  As  explained  in  the
    decision of 3  June  2013  itself  (paragraph  3  above),  such  review
    consists of "a full reconsideration" of the Applicant's case.  The fact
    that the conclusion on  this  review  was  ultimately  adverse  to  the
    Applicant is not a matter to be weighed in the consideration of whether
    the review process itself amounted to a suitable alternative remedy.  I
    find that it did.

16. The core of this application, as it now stands, is a challenge  brought
    to the administrative review decision of 27  July  2013.   Despite  the
    Applicant not knowing the contents of such decision when she lodged the
    application for judicial review,  she  did  plead  an  unparticularised
    challenge to it in the Claim  Form.  This  challenge  was  subsequently
    particularised on 22 December 2014, the grounds  ostensibly  being  the
    same as those pleaded in support of the challenge brought to the  ECO's
    decision. It is not said that the Respondent has suffered any prejudice
    as a consequence of the delay in the challenge to the  decision  of  27
    July 2013 being particularised.

17. Insofar as it is submitted that the ECM was required to make a reasoned
    decision as to the application of paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules to the
    Applicant's case, this is misconceived.

18.  Paragraph  320(7B)  provides  that  it  is  not  of   application   in
    circumstances where a person left the United Kingdom  voluntarily,  not
    at the expense of the Secretary of State, "more than twelve months ago"
    (paragraph 320(7B)(iii)). On the Applicant's own  chronology  she  left
    the United Kingdom voluntarily prior to the expiry of her leave  on  14
    September 2011 i.e. well over a year prior to the ECO's decision  of  3
    June 2013. Paragraph 320(7B) is therefore not  of  application  in  the
    instant case. In such circumstances I can see  no  rational  basis  for
    requiring the ECM to set out reasons in her review decision as  to  why
    paragraph 320(7B) is not of relevance.

19. As to paragraph 320(11) of the Rules, if an Applicant falls foul of the
    requirements therein an ECO nevertheless retains a  discretion  not  to
    refuse such a person's application in reliance upon such provision.  In
    the instant case neither the ECO nor  the  ECM  relied  upon  paragraph
    320(11) when refusing the Applicant's application. The decision not  to
    rely on this paragraph of the Rules operated  to  the  benefit  of  the
    Applicant, not to her detriment. In such circumstances it is  difficult
    to comprehend how it can be successfully argued that the failure of the
    ECM to make reference in her decision to paragraph 320(11) of Rules, or
    the relevant guidance drawn in relation to such Rule, could be unlawful
    and I find that it is not.

20. At the hearing Mr Cheung submitted that the ECM took  into  account  an
    irrelevant consideration when refusing the Applicant's  application  in
    reliance on paragraph 245DB(f) of the Rules, that being the Applicant's
    immigration  history.  In  particular  it  was  asserted  that  it  was
    irrational  or  otherwise  unlawful  for  the  ECM  to  consider,  when
    determining whether the requirements of  paragraph  245DB(f)  had  been
    met, those features of the Applicant's history which are also  relevant
    to  a  consideration  under  paragraphs  320(7B)  and  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. In summary, it was submitted that the ECM implicitly
    relied upon paragraphs 320(7B) and 320(11) to  refuse  the  Applicant's
    application in circumstances where neither  provision  applies  to  the
    Applicant's case.

21. I reject this submission for the following reasons.

22. Paragraph 245DB(g)(v) of  the  Rules  identifies  that  an  Applicant's
    immigration history and previous activity in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    factors which an ECO may take into account when determining whether the
    requirements of paragraph 245DB(f) of the Rules have been met. That  is
    exactly what the ECO and ECM did in the instant case.

23. Had Parliament intended that an ECO considering paragraph  245DB(f)  of
    the Rules could only take  into  account  features  of  an  Applicant's
    immigration history and previous activity in the UK that had no bearing
    on the application of the provisions in Part 9 of the Rules I  have  no
    doubt it would have said so in explicit terms in the Rule. It did  not.
    Mr Cheung's submission requires words to be read into  paragraph  245DB
    of Rules in circumstances where the terms  of  this  Rule  are  already
    clear and precise. I can see no justifiable legal basis for doing so.

24. Furthermore, as a matter of  commonsense,  when  an  ECO  is  assessing
    whether an Applicant genuinely intends to establish, and  invest  money
    in, a business in the United Kingdom, all of the relevant circumstances
    pertinent to such a consideration should be assessed in  the  round.  I
    can find no rational reason  for  adopting  an  interpretation  of  the
    paragraph 245DB which leads  to  the  possibility  of  highly  relevant
    circumstances being excluding from an assessment  of  Applicant's  case
    made pursuant to it.

25. In the instant matter I have no doubt that the Applicant's  immigration
    history is relevant to an assessment of both  whether  she  intends  to
    establish a business in the United Kingdom and whether she  intends  to
    invest the money referred to in table 4 of Appendix A in such business.
     The weight to  be  attached  to  those  features  of  the  Applicant's
    circumstances was a matter for the ECO and thereafter the ECM. Contrary
    to Mr Cheung's submissions these were not matters which were treated by
    either  decision-maker  as  being  determinative  of  the   Applicant's
    application, they were rationally considered as  part  of  the  overall
    factual matrix of the Applicant's case.

26. In my conclusion the  ECM  gave  clear  and  careful  reasons  for  her
    decision and such decision was rational.  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    decision lacks a lawful adequacy of reasoning and I find that  the  ECM
    took full account of all, and only, the relevant circumstances  of  the
    Applicant's case. A decision maker is not required to set out each  and
    every feature of an Applicant's case and explain its relevance to their
    decision, it is sufficient that relevant matters are taken into account
    and sufficient reasons  are  given  such  that  the  losing  party  can
    understand why they lost. That is the case with both  the  decision  of
    the ECO of 3 June 2013 and the subsequent decision of the ECM dated  27
    July 2013.

27. For these reasons I dismiss this application for Judicial Review.

