
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application  of  Dulagan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00136 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                             11 January 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                             Vema belao dulagan
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE Mcgeachy


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, instructed by Universal Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE mcgeachy: The applicant applies for judicial review of a decision
    dated 20 May 2014 in which her application for leave to remain on human
    rights grounds was refused.  Although  her  application  was  initially
    refused on the papers permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul on 10 July 2015.


2.   The applicant is a citizen of the Philippines who entered Britain as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student on 28 October 2009. On 7 March 2011 while  she
    had leave to remain she made an application outside the  Rules  on  the
    basis of her relationship with a  British  citizen,  Mr  Rasool.   That
    application was rejected as no fee was paid.  Her leave to remain ended
    on 13 March 2011.  On 14 December 2011 she made an application  outside
    the Rules for leave to remain on the  same  basis  as  before.   On  11
    October 2012 she married Mr Rasool.  On 21 November 2012 she was  asked
    to provide further  information  regarding  her  relationship  with  Mr
    Rasool.  She informed the respondent that they had married.


3.   On 8 January 2013 her application of 14 December 2011 was refused.   It
    was not accepted that the  relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting.
    There was no right of appeal as the application had been  made  out  of
    time.


4.   On 21 March 2014 she made an application for leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a British spouse.  That application was refused  on  20  May
    2014 without a right of appeal.


5.   The notice of refusal dated 20 May 2014  accepted  that  the  applicant
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with her British partner  but
    stated  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  there   were
    insurmountable   obstacles   preventing   her   from   continuing   her
    relationship with her British partner in the Philippines and  therefore
    she could not succeed under the provisions  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  of
    Appendix FM.  It was also considered that the applicant could not  meet
    the provisions under Rule 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules in respect
    of her private life  and  with  regard  to  the  issue  of  exceptional
    circumstances it was stated that this had been considered but there was
    nothing which might warrant consideration  for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.


6.   The application for Judicial Review was made on  20  August  2014.  The
    grounds of application stated that the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain was challenged and in particular  "the  lawfulness/compatibility
    of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  with   the   1950
    Convention".  The grounds asserted that the respondent had erred in her
    approach to the rights of the applicant under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
    They set out the  provisions  of  Section  R-LTRP  -  requirements  for
    limited leave to remain  as  a  partner,  and  Section  EX.1.   In  the
    detailed grounds it was asserted that the respondent had erred  in  her
    application  of  the  "insurmountable   obstacles"   test   which   was
    incompatible with the applicant's and her spouse's  Convention  rights,
    that the change in the Rules was an attempt to circumvent the  test  of
    "exceptionality" expressly ruled out by the House  of  Lords  in  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11 and set forth some case law regarding the reasonableness
    or otherwise of the sponsor being expected to follow his spouse to  his
    or her own country.


7.   It was also asserted that there been a failure to  consider  Article  8
    itself directly and reference was made to the decision of the House  of
    Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 with regards to the  issue  of
    whether or not the applicant should be expected to make an  application
    for leave to enter from the Philippines.  It was argued that the  terms
    of paragraph EX.1.(b)  were  satisfied  stating  that  the  applicant's
    spouse had no  connection  with  the  Philippines  and  had  spent  the
    formative years of his life in Britain, had no other nationality and no
    experience of life in the Philippines and had earnings in excess of the
    required �18,600 threshold.   The  application  also  stated  that  the
    applicant was pregnant and due to give birth soon to their first child.


8.   Amended grounds of claim asserted that anxious scrutiny  had  not  been
    applied when considering the applicant's application for further  leave
    to remain and when considering the applicant's  Article  8  rights  and
    again emphasised that Mr Rasool had no connections with the Philippines
    and was British.


9.   Emphasis was again placed on the judgment of  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Chikwamba.  It was claimed that there were exceptional circumstances in
    this case.


10.   The  respondent's  detailed  grounds  of  defence  referred   to   the
    provisions of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(c) which required the applicant  to
    satisfy all the eligibility requirements set out in  paragraph  E-LTRP.
    It was pointed out that the applicant failed to  meet  the  immigration
    status requirement that she had remained in Britain in  breach  of  the
    immigration laws contrary to paragraph E-LTRP.2.2. and  was  unable  to
    meet the financial  threshold  as  set  out  in  paragraph  E-LTRP.3.1.
    Moreover there was nothing to indicate that the applicant had  provided
    the specified evidence in accordance with Appendix  FM-SE  or  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  She could therefore not qualify
    under the Immigration Rules and the grounds of defence went on to argue
    that she could not qualify under the provisions of paragraph EX.1.  The
    applicant could not meet the requirements of those  provisions  as  not
    only did she not have a child in Britain but that in any event  express
    consideration had been given to  the  citizenship  of  the  applicant's
    partner, the nature of her relationship with her partner, her residence
    in Britain,  employment  in  Britain,  degree  of  hardship  caused  by
    relocation and the  absence  of  credible  evidence  of  insurmountable
    obstacles.  It was argued that everything had been properly  considered
    and the decision was one which was open to the decision maker to  make.
    The position of insurmountable obstacles was considered in the  context
    of the Court of Appeal judgment in Agyarko v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  440
    and it was argued that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    applicant and her husband living together in her country of origin.


11.  It was further argued that it was clear that anxious scrutiny had  been
    given to all relevant factors and that  an  intelligible  and  adequate
    decision had been reached.  With regards to the issue of whether or not
    the respondent had properly considered the issue of whether or not  the
    applicant could make an application  outside  Britain  the  grounds  of
    defence referred to the judgment in Chikwamba and the judgment in  R(on
    the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) and that, although there might  be  circumstances
    in which temporary absence when an application for entry  clearance  is
    made was disproportionate,  evidence  that  that  temporary  separation
    would be a disproportionate interference with her right to  private and
    family life would have to be put forward by the applicant.  It was  not
    enough merely to refer to the judgment in Chikwamba.


12.  At the hearing of the appeal Mr Biggs relied  on  a  skeleton  argument
    which referred to the grounds of  application  and  with  reference  to
    witness statements from the applicant and a witness statement  from  Mr
    Rasool amplified the assertion  that  anxious  scrutiny  had  not  been
    applied, setting out considerable case law regarding the application of
    anxious  scrutiny.   The  position  of  Mr  Rasool's  citizenship   was
    emphasised and it was argued that the decision  that  the  relationship
    between the applicant and Mr Rasool was not genuine  had  clearly  been
    shown to be incorrect and in effect therefore she should not have  been
    refused initially when she made the first  application.   It  was  also
    argued that there was some evidence that her first  application  should
    not have been rejected for non-payment of the fee.


13.  Moreover it was argued that there was no or insufficient  reasoning  in
    the  decision  and  that   the   conclusions   regarding   "exceptional
    circumstances" were irrational.


14.  Mr Biggs relied on the grounds of  appeal  stating  that  the  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny was a material public law error and  that  there  were
    exceptional factors in  this  case  which  are  not  addressed  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  He argued that when the decision was  made  on  the
    second human rights application that the relationship was not  genuine,
    that clearly was irrational given that by that stage the applicant  and
    Mr Rasool were married and the Secretary of State  was  aware  of  that
    fact.  Given that if those incorrect decisions had not  been  made  the
    applicant would have had leave when the marriage application was put in
    then her marriage application should have succeeded.


15.  He went on to emphasise the "Chikwamba" principles and put forward  the
    argument that there was now evidence that the applicant was pregnant  -
    she is to give birth in March of this year - and that  in  effect  that
    was a factor which should have been taken into account - this  being  a
    human rights judicial review when the decision was  considered.   While
    he accepted that the fact that the Secretary  of  State  had  not  been
    aware of the pregnancy when the application  for  judicial  review  was
    made lessened the significance of that point he  still  argued  that  I
    should take it into consideration.


16.  He accepted that the "insurmountable obstacles"  test  could  not  have
    been met but reserved his position on that point on the basis that  the
    judgment in Agyarko had been appealed to the Court of Appeal.


17.  He referred to the decision in SA  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00536  (IAC)  and
    stated that it was important to distinguish between a public  challenge
    and a human rights challenge and on the basis that there  was  a  human
    rights challenge take into account the fact that the applicant was  now
    pregnant. I should have regard in particular to the fact that the child
    would be British.


18.  In reply Mr Malik also took me to the decision in SA and in  particular
    to paragraph 10 thereof which dealt with the challenge to the grant  of
    permission.   That  paragraph  made  it  clear  that  focusing  on  the
    arguability of something which at no time had  been  contested  by  the
    Secretary of State was an error and moreover that at paragraph  17  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal had pointed out that where there  is  a
    "pure human rights  claim"  that  is  put  within  the  context  of  an
    allegation  of  public  law  misdemeanours  that  is  an  impermissible
    conflation.  He stated that this was made clear by paragraph 2  of  the
    head note in that case which stated:


         "In  judicial  review  challenges  which  include  Article  8  ECHR
         grounds, the question is  not  whether  the  impugned  decision  is
         vitiated  by  one  or  more   of   the   established   public   law
         misdemeanours.  Rather, the question is whether a breach of Article
         8 has been demonstrated."


    He stated that it was  clear  that  the  evidence  of  the  applicant's
    pregnancy was not before the Secretary  of  State  and  therefore  that
    matter should not be taken into account when I assessed  the  issue  of
    the decision made by the Secretary of State  refusing  the  application
    for leave to remain.


19.  He went on to argue that the decisions made earlier  should  have  been
    challenged at the time but they had not been  and  that  any  challenge
    thereto was woefully out of time.  A lack  of  consideration  of  those
    decisions could therefore not indicate  a  lack  of  anxious  scrutiny.
    Moreover, there was an alternative remedy which could have been used in
    those cases in that when it was stated that no fee had been  paid  that
    could have been challenged by way of judicial review or indeed  by  way
    of an appeal in the First-tier Tribunal if it was being argued that the
    application was made while the  applicant  should  have  had  leave  to
    remain.  In this he referred to the judgment of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor in the case of Khan v SSHD  (right  of  appeal  -  alternative
    remedy) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 353 (IAC).


20.  Moreover, insofar as Mr Biggs was arguing that  there  was  a  historic
    injustice that was not  a  matter  which  should  have  influenced  the
    Secretary of State.   In  this  he  referred  to  the  judgment  in  TN
    (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40.


21.  He went on to state that there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Chikwamba
    principle was relevant in this case.  There  was  nothing  to  indicate
    that an application could not be  made  outside  Britain  or  that  the
    applicant would be significantly inconvenienced by so doing.  He  asked
    me to find that the reasons of the Secretary of State were properly set
    out and clear and fully open to the Secretary of State.


Discussion


22.  The facts of this case are relatively simple.  The  applicant  came  to
    Britain as a student and before her leave to remain as a student  ended
    she made an application for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.
    That application was not accepted for lack of payment of a  fee.   That
    decision was not challenged.  A further human  rights  application  was
    made which was refused.  There is nothing to indicate that that  second
    application was refused irrationally.  In any  event  that  application
    was not challenged.  The applicant therefore  did  not  have  leave  to
    remain when the marriage  application  was  made.   Not  only  did  the
    marriage application not  contain  the  specified  documents  required,
    although there is evidence that the sponsor's earnings would  meet  the
    financial requirements, but it  was  an  application  which  could  not
    succeed because the applicant was an  overstayer.   The  applicant  was
    therefore thrown back on the assertion,  which  is  the  basis  of  the
    application for judicial review, that her rights  under  the  ECHR  are
    infringed by the decision.  The Rules clearly set out  the  appropriate
    guidelines for assessing such a claim and in particular  the  issue  of
    whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles to the applicant  and
    her husband living in the Philippines.   Mr  Biggs  correctly  accepted
    that there were no such insurmountable obstacles (although I note  that
    he reserved his position on this point) and  I  consider  that  he  was
    right to do so.  There is simply no  evidence  whatsoever  to  indicate
    that Mr Rasool and the applicant could not  live  in  the  Philippines.
    Although much has been made of Mr Rasool's  nationality  what  was  not
    stated in the application was  that  not  only  had  he  been  born  in
    Pakistan but he had previously been  married  there.   He  has  clearly
    therefore not spent all his life in Britain and has lived in a  country
    other than Britain.


23.  In any event the reality is that the provisions of Section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 make it  clear  that  when
    assessing the proportionality in an Article 8 decision various  factors
    including whether or not an applicant has overstayed  should  be  taken
    into account as indeed should the ability to speak English.


24.  Mr Biggs put forward two particular arguments relating  to  whether  or
    not the Secretary of State had  considered  the  human  rights  of  the
    applicant with anxious scrutiny.  The first related to what he referred
    to as historic injustice of the applications for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds which had not succeeded.  I consider that there is
    simply no merit in that argument.  I accept Mr  Malik's  argument  that
    the judgment in TN (Afghanistan) in the Supreme Court  makes  it  quite
    clear  that  historic  injustice  does  not  weigh   heavily   in   the
    consideration of an applicant's Article 8 rights but in any  event  the
    reality is that in respect of both refusals  of  the  applications  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds there was an alternative remedy
    which the applicant did not exercise.  It is simply too late now to, in
    effect, argue that those decisions were incorrect and that that  should
    have a bearing on the present case.   Secondly,  there  is  the  rather
    convoluted argument that because the applicant  is  now  pregnant  that
    should somehow have influenced the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    made when not only did the Secretary of State not know that she was not
    pregnant but also the reality is that she was probably not pregnant  on
    20 May last year when the decision was made.  I consider that there  is
    simply no merit in that argument.  It is clear that the issue before me
    is whether or not the decision of the Secretary of  State,  when  made,
    was one which was open to her.


25.  Finally there is the issue raised  on  whether  or  not  the  applicant
    should be expected to make an application from her own  country  -  the
    "Chikwamba" point.  I consider that there is no merit in that argument.
     It is not the case  that  it  is  an  application  which  could,  with
    certainty, succeed.  The specified documents themselves have  not  been
    put forward - the marriage application was not one which contained  all
    relevant documentation.  Moreover there is  nothing  to  indicate  that
    there would be any undue hardship  for  the  applicant  or  her  spouse
    should such an application be made.  There was  nothing  before  me  to
    indicate that it would take an unduly long time for the application  to
    be made and considered, whether or not an interview could have been set
    up before the applicant went out to the Philippines  for  interview  or
    that she  would  be  unable  to  live  in  the  Philippines  while  the
    application was made.  Moreover there is  simply  nothing  to  indicate
    that Mr Rasool could not accompany her to  the  Philippines  while  the
    application was made let alone, of course, that, as has been  accepted,
    there would be any insurmountable obstacles  to  his  living  with  her
    there.


26.  Taking all  these  factors  into  consideration  I  consider  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State adequately dealt with  all  relevant
    matters and the reality is that the Secretary of State was  correct  to
    find that there were no exceptional factors in this  case  which  would
    mean that it  would  have  been  appropriate  to  grant  the  applicant
    permission for leave to remain outside  the  Rules.  The  decision  was
    unarguably one which was open to the respondent on the evidence  before
    her.

27. For these reasons the application fails and I refuse the application.

28.  The applicant to pay the respondent's reasonable costs. In  default  of
    agreement costs to be subject to detailed assessment by a Costs  Judge.




29.  When this judgment was handed down there was no  appearance  by  or  on
    behalf of the applicant. There was therefore no application  for  leave
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal. I formally refuse permission.


