



                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of SB and ABD) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00136(IAC)


                                                        Heard at Field House

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  tHE QUEEN
                            on the application of

                                    1) SB
                              2) ABD (A MINOR)
                                                                  Applicants
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Applicant:     Ms R. Chapman, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms I. McArdle, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor


                                  JUDGMENT
                       handed down on 26 February 2015

Judge O'Connor:

Introduction


  1. The first Applicant, born 6 February 1994, is the mother of the  second
     Applicant, born 30 May 2011. I refer to the  first  Applicant  as  'the
     Applicant' herein. The Applicant entered the United Kingdom  in  August
     2001 as a visitor. On 14 June 2010 she was granted Discretionary  Leave
     to Remain until 13 June 2013 - as was her father. On 11 June 2013  both
     of the Applicants sought leave to remain on human rights grounds and by
     way of a decision of 8 October 2013 the Respondent granted  such  leave
     to each of them for a period of 30 months i.e. until 8 April 2016.  The
     Respondent  imposed  a  condition  on  this  leave,   prohibiting   the
     Applicants from having recourse to public funds (the "NRPF condition").


  2. The Respondent has given further consideration to the Applicant's  case
     during the course of these proceedings, concluding in a decision  of  8
     October  2014  that  the  imposition  of  the  NRPF  condition  of  the
     Applicants' leave should be maintained.


  3. At  the  core  of  this  application  is  the  lawfulness  of  (i)  the
     Respondent's decision of 8 October  2013  to  grant  Limited  Leave  to
     Remain as opposed to Discretionary Leave and (ii) her  decisions  of  8
     October 2013 and 8 October 2014 to impose, and refuse  to  remove,  the
     condition prohibiting the Applicants recourse to  public  funds.  Upper
     Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission to bring  these  proceedings  by
     way of an order dated 17 July 2014.


      Decisions under challenge


      Decision of 8 October 2013


  1. The Respondent's decision of 8  October  2013  states,  insofar  as  is
     relevant to these proceedings:


        "...[y]ou were granted discretionary leave to remain in the  United
        Kingdom under Article 8 European  Convention  Human  Rights,  as  a
        dependent on your fathers application for leave to remain. From the
        evidence you have provided, it is clear that  you  are  leading  an
        independent life and no longer dependent on your father.


        Therefore, after carefully reviewing your  application  for  active
        review of discretionary  leave,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not
        satisfied that the grounds under which you were previously  granted
        discretionary leave still persist and your application for  further
        discretionary leave is refused...


        Because of your particular circumstances,  you  have  been  granted
        leave within the  Immigration  Rules  under  paragraph  276BE  with
        reference to 276ADE.


        Conditions attached to your stay in the UK


        The conditions attached to  this  period  of  stay  in  the  United
        Kingdom permit you to work... However, access to  Public  Funds  is
        not permitted as explained below.


        Employment


        You may establish yourself in business or take  employment  without
        the need to apply for a work permit.


        Public Funds


        Under the Immigration Rules you are not entitled to receive  public
        funds to help meet your living and accommodation costs (or those of
        any dependents). In addition your sponsor is not entitled to  claim
        or receive public funds on your behalf. The term "public funds"  is
        defined in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules..."


Decision of 8 October 2014


 2. The Respondent's decision of 8 October 2014 reads:

         "...You stated that you now have a child [ABD] who was born in the
         United Kingdom.  You  also  provided  information  regarding  your
         tenancy arrangements, which  were  in  your  own  name.  You  also
         provided a letter of employment.


         As previously mentioned these factors were considered and  it  was
         found that your circumstances had materially  altered  since  your
         first grant of Discretionary Leave  to  Remain.  In  order  to  be
         granted a further period of Discretionary  Leave  to  Remain  your
         circumstances have to remain the  same  as  when  that  leave  was
         given. As previously mentioned these facts were considered and  it
         was found that your circumstances  had  materially  altered  since
         your first grant of Discretionary Leave to Remain. As set  out  in
         the policy  on  Discretionary  Leave  (...)  if  there  have  been
         significant changes in  an  applicant's  circumstances  since  the
         original grant of leave, the application for  Discretionary  Leave
         should  be  refused.  That  is  the  case   here.   Clearly   your
         circumstances had altered substantially. Not only where (sic)  you
         living independently, as shown by the fact that you held a tenancy
         and employment, but you had also gone on to create an  independent
         family unit distinct from that of your parent.


         It was because you were a dependent child that you were  initially
         granted Discretionary Leave  to  Remain  as  has  previously  been
         mentioned a consideration was given to your current situation  and
         if you should be granted a further period of  Discretionary  Leave
         to  Remain.   However   as   your   circumstances   have   changed
         substantially, you no  longer  qualify  for  Discretionary  Leave.
         Discretionary Leave is granted outside the Immigration  Rules.  It
         must  not  be  granted  where  a  person  qualifies  for   asylum,
         Humanitarian Protection (HP), or where there is  another  category
         within the Immigration Rules under which  they  qualify.  As  your
         application did not meet the requirements for Discretionary  Leave
         to Remain it was considered under the Appendix FM Regulations  and
         it was found that you now meet the requirements of the Immigration
         Rules and therefore you now qualify for leave to remain under  the
         Immigration Rules.


         ...

         In view of the above the Secretary of State is not satisfied  that
         you meet the requirements of the transitional arrangements  for  a
         grant of further Discretionary Leave to Remain.


         ...

         Request for a Change of Conditions of leave granted  on  basis  of
         family or private life.

         You have now requested permission to apply for Judicial Review  of
         this decision because you were granted  leave  to  remain  for  30
         months  on  code  1  conditions.  Your  circumstances  were  fully
         considered  in  your  original   application   and   within   this
         supplementary letter. It has been explained to you  that  you  are
         not entitled to a grant of Code 1A conditions because you are  not
         regarded as being destitute for the purposes of this  application.
         As previously explained above you are now in employment and whilst
         you may rely on your father for extra funds this fact  alone  does
         not  make  you  destitute  for  the  purposes  of  deciding   your
         immigration status and  what  code  of  conditions  you  would  be
         entitled to.


         The policy is clearly explained in  the  document  "Request  for  a
         Change of Conditions of leave granted on the  basis  of  family  or
         private life"


         ...

         Consideration  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009

         We have taken into account the need to safeguard  and  promote  the
         welfare of children in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  our
         duties under section 55...

         ...You are allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, your child  is
         also allowed to remain and they will have  the  full  benefits  of
         being resident in the United Kingdom. Your child will be  able  to
         access  education,  health  and  social  services  and   all   the
         components open to a child resident in the  United  Kingdom.  Your
         child will continue to live with you  and  continue  to  have  the
         benefits of her close relationship with other family members.

         You will not be forbidden to work therefore you will  be  able  to
         continue to support your child as can their grandparent and  other
         family members. You have stated that because your father  has  and
         is helping to support both you and  your  child  that  their  best
         interests have not been served by a  grant  of  30  months  and  a
         condition of code 1. It has been considered whether  the  decision
         to grant you leave to remain with a code 1 decision of no recourse
         to public funds should be changed in light of the help you receive
         from your family should change the decision to grant  you  code  1
         (sic). However as previously stated you  are  not  destitute,  you
         have employment and also a separate place of abode. The fact  that
         your father makes a financial contribution to your living expenses
         is not a sufficiently engaging argument for you to  be  considered
         destitute and therefore qualify for a change  of  condition  code.
         These circumstances show that you and your family are  capable  of
         supporting yourself and your child and as such,  neither  you  nor
         your child are in a situation that would be  deemed  to  put  your
         child in danger or risk,  so  as  to  engage  Section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009..."


      Grounds of Challenge


  3. The Applicants submit that the Respondent has acted unlawfully by:


       (i)    irrationally failing to  grant  them  Discretionary  Leave  to
             Remain;


       In the alternative by:


       (ii)   failing to lawfully consider the exercise  of  her  discretion
             under the Immigration Rules when imposing the NRPF condition;


       (iii)  failing to comply with her duties  under  section  55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009; and/or


       (iv)   breaching their protected rights under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention.


   4. On the second day of the hearing of this application Ms  Chapman  also
      submitted, for the first time, that the  Respondent's  decisions  were
      unlawful as a consequence of  her  failure  to  abide  by  the  duties
      imposed on her by section 149 of the Equalities Act 2010. Having first
      carefully considered all of the circumstances of the case,  I  refused
      to admit this ground for consideration. This ground was not pleaded in
      the grounds of application and neither  is  it  to  be  found  in  the
      Applicant's skeleton argument or written  submissions  drawn  for  the
      purposes of the substantive hearing; indeed, the ground has  not  been
      reduced to writing at any stage. Neither,  significantly,  was  notice
      given to the Respondent of the Applicant's intention to rely  on  such
      ground.


   5. Ms Chapman did not pursue the pleaded ground founded in Article 14  of
      the ECHR at the hearing and, as a consequence, I  say  no  more  about
      this ground herein.


      Issue (i): Did the Respondent irrationally fail to grant the Applicant
      Discretionary Leave to Remain?

Summary of the parties' submissions

  6. Ms Chapman submits that the  Respondent's  Discretionary  Leave  policy
     mandates that those persons previously granted Discretionary Leave will
     continue to be dealt with under the pre 9 July 2012 regime and that, as
     a consequence, the Applicant's Discretionary Leave application ought to
     have been dealt with in accordance with the terms of such policy.


  7. The Respondent, it  was  said,  was  obliged  to  grant  the  Applicant
     Discretionary Leave unless there had been a significant change  in  her
     circumstances. In the context of the Applicant's case that  could  only
     mean where the Applicant's removal would no longer lead to a breach  of
     Article 8 ECHR.


  8. Ms Chapman continued by asserting that: (i)  the  Applicant's  personal
     circumstances have not materially altered to this extent; (ii) she  now
     has greater family and private life ties to the UK than she did in 2010
     and (iii) she is also dependent on her father financially  to  an  even
     greater extent than she  was  in  2010.  The  Respondent's  refusal  to
     consider a grant of Discretionary Leave under the policy  was,  it  was
     said, therefore irrational.


  9. It was further submitted that the Respondent determined the Applicant's
     application on an incorrect factual  basis  because,  contrary  to  the
     Respondent's statements in her decision letters, the Applicant was  not
     granted Discretionary Leave in 2010 on the sole basis of her being  her
     father's dependent child; rather, she was granted leave  at  that  time
     because the Respondent had delayed in determining  her  application  of
     2005 during which time she had built up significant private and  family
     life ties in the United Kingdom.


 10. In response, Ms McArdle submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  lawfully
     interpreted  and  applied  the   transitional   arrangements   of   the
     Discretionary Leave policy. In particular she asserted that:


      (i) the Applicant had no legitimate  expectation  that  she  would  be
           granted Discretionary Leave because she had not accrued 6 years'
           continuous leave in this capacity;


      (ii)    the  Respondent  rationally  concluded  that  the  Applicant's
           circumstances had  significantly  changed  since  the  grant  of
           Discretionary Leave in 2010;


      (iii)the interpretation placed on the words "significantly changed" by
           the Applicant is untenable and is contrary to the  ordinary  and
           natural meaning of the words;


      (vi)    the policy "aims to use discretionary leave sparingly";


      (v) the Applicant was granted leave in 2010 because she was named as a
           dependent on her father's successful application for leave.  Her
           circumstances, as disclosed in her application of 11 June  2013,
           were significantly different because: (a) she was employed;  (b)
           she no longer lived with her father; (c) she had formed her  own
           family unit with the second Applicant; and, (d)  she  had  taken
           out a tenancy of a property in her own name;


      (vi)    the evidence before the Respondent did not disclose  that  the
           Applicant received more financial support  from  her  father  in
           2013 than she did in 2010. However, even if this were  the  case
           this  would  not  undermine  the  conclusions  reached  by   the
           Respondent.


      Legal Framework


 11. On 24 June 2013 the Respondent amended her Discretionary  Leave  policy
     so as to read as follows:

        "1. Introduction
        ...


        This instruction explains the limited circumstances in which it may
        be appropriate to grant DL...


        1.1 Key points


        DL to be granted only if a case falls within the limited categories
        in the section below "Criteria for granting  Discretionary  Leave".
        It is intended to be used sparingly.


        DL is granted outside the Immigration Rules. It must not be granted
        where a person qualifies for asylum, HP, or where there is  another
        category within the Immigration Rules under which they qualify.


        From 9 July 2012 DL must not be granted for  Article  8  family  or
        private life reasons...


        ...


        Those granted DL on or after 9 July 2012 will normally be  expected
        to make charged applications for subsequent  periods  of  leave  or
        settlement and meet the criteria in place at the time of  decision.
        However, see the section on Transitional Arrangements  which  apply
        to cases granted an initial period of Discretionary Leave before  9
        July 2012.


        Those granted Discretionary Leave have access to public  funds  and
        are entitled to work.


        1.2 Application of this instruction  in  respect  of  children  and
        those with children


        ...


        In cases where it is considered appropriate to grant  DL,  decision
        makers  must  also  consider  whether  to  exercise  discretion  in
        relation to the length of leave to be granted. This  is  because  a
        decision about duration of leave granted outside the  rules  is  an
        immigration function to which section 55 applies.  Decision  makers
        must demonstrate they have had regard to the child's best interests
        when considering the type and length of leave granted  following  a
        decision to grant a period of leave outside the rules


        4. Duration of grants and Discretionary Leave


        The duration of Discretionary Leave granted will be determined by a
        consideration of the individual facts of the case but leave  should
        not normally be granted for more than 30 months (2.5  years)  at  a
        time.


        Subsequent periods of leave can be granted providing the  applicant
        continues to meet the relevant criteria.


        From 9 July 2012 an applicant normally needs to complete  at  least
        120 months, (i.e. a total of 10 years normally consisting  of  four
        2.5 year periods of leave), before  being  eligible  to  apply  for
        settlement. Separate arrangements exist for cases granted  3  years
        DL prior to 9 July 2012. See Transitional Arrangements below.


        ...


        10. Transitional Arrangements


        All decisions made on Discretionary Leave on or after 9  July  2012
        will be subject to the criteria set out in this guidance.


        Where the decision was taken before 9 July 2012 but  an  appeal  is
        allowed on or after 9 July on Article 8 family life or private life
        grounds, staff must refer to IDI CH8 (Family  Members  transitional
        cases).


        Individuals granted DL on a date prior to and including 8 July 2012
        may apply to extend that leave when their  period  of  DL  expires.
        Decision makers must apply the following guidance:


        Applicants granted Discretionary Leave before 9 July 2012


        Those who, before 9 July 2012, have been granted leave under the DL
        policy in force at the time will normally continue to be dealt with
        under that policy through to settlement  if  they  qualify  for  it
        (normally after accruing 6  years  continuous  DL).  Further  leave
        applications from those granted up to 3 years DL before 9 July 2012
        are subject to an active review.


        Consideration of all further leave applications will be subject  to
        a  criminality  check  and  the  application  of  the   criminality
        thresholds, including in respect of cases awaiting a decision on  a
        further period of DL on that date. See  Criminality  and  Exclusion
        section above.


        Decision makers must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing
        at the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date  of
        the  decision.  If  the  circumstances  remain  the  same  and  the
        criminality thresholds do not apply, a further period of 3 years DL
        should normally be granted. Decision makers must  consider  whether
        there are any circumstances that may  warrant  departure  from  the
        standard period of leave. See section 4.4 above.


        If there have been significant changes or the  applicant  fails  to
        meet the criminality  thresholds  (see  criminality  and  exclusion
        section  above),  the  application  for  further  leave  should  be
        refused... "

      Discussion and Decision


12. The crux of  the  dispute  between  the  parties  is  not  whether  the
    Respondent gave consideration to the Discretionary  Leave  policy  when
    determining  the  Applicant's  application  but  whether  she  lawfully
    applied the transitional arrangements therein to the Applicant's case.


13. Being granted Discretionary Leave as opposed to leave granted  pursuant
    to the Immigration Rules is important to the Applicant for two reasons:




         (i)  if she had been  granted  Discretionary  Leave  the  Applicant
             would have remained on a six-year track to settlement.  Having
             already completed three of those  six  years  she  would,  all
             other things being equal, be eligible for settlement in  2016.
             However, having been granted limited leave to remain  pursuant
             to the Immigration Rules she is now  on  a  10-year  route  to
             settlement;


         (ii)if the Applicant had been granted Discretionary Leave she would
             be entitled to access  public  funds  (paragraph  1.1  of  the
             Discretionary Leave  policy);  however,  having  been  granted
             limited leave to remain pursuant to the Immigration Rules  she
             is not entitled to recourse to public funds, save  in  certain
             exceptional circumstances which the  Respondent  concludes  do
             not apply to her.


14. The lawfulness of the Discretionary Leave policy is not in  issue.  The
    centrepiece  of  Ms  Chapman's  case  is  that   the   Respondent   has
    misunderstood, and therefore misapplied, the transitional  arrangements
    found in section 10 of the Discretionary Leave policy ("section 10").


15. Persons who apply for an extension of Discretionary  Leave  where  such
    leave has previously been granted to them prior  to  9  July  2012  are
    eligible for consideration under section 10. Normally such persons will
    be  dealt  under   the   Discretionary   Leave   policy   "through   to
    settlement..."


16. Both parties agree that  for  the  purposes  of  this  application  the
    following paragraphs of section 10 are of importance:


         "Decision makers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing
         at the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date  of
         decision. If the circumstances remain the same ... a further period
         of 3 years DL should normally be granted.


         If  there  have  been  significant  changes...the  application  for
         further leave should be refused"


17. Ms Chapman's primary submission is that in the context of this case  it
    would only be permissible for the Respondent  to  refuse  to  grant  an
    extension of Discretionary  Leave  if  she  first  concluded  that  the
    Applicant's removal would no longer lead to a breach of  Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  Given  that  the  Applicant  was  granted
    limited leave to remain under the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that
    requiring her to leave the United Kingdom would lead to such a  breach,
    the Respondent's conclusion not to grant  the  Applicant  Discretionary
    Leave must be irrational.


18. Ms McArdle submits that such an interpretation of  section  10  is  not
    warranted when the transitional arrangements are viewed in their proper
    context i.e. as part of the framework  of  reforms  introduced  by  the
    Respondent in July 2012.


19. The approach to be taken by the courts to the meaning of  policies  and
    guidance has most recently been considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Tesco Stores Limited v Dundee City Council [2012] UKSC 13,  a  planning
    case, in which Lord Reed JSC  (with  whom  all  other  members  of  the
    Supreme Court agreed) said:

         "[18]... As in other areas of  administrative  law,  the  policies
         which it sets out are designed to secure consistency and direction
         in the exercise of discretionary powers, while allowing a  measure
         of flexibility to be retained.  Those  considerations  point  away
         from the view that the meaning of  the  plan  is  in  principle  a
         matter which each planning authority is entitled to determine from
         time to time as it pleases, within the limits of  rationality.  On
         the contrary, these considerations suggest that in  principle,  in
         this area of public administration as in others (as discussed, for
         example,  in  R  (Raissi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department), policy statements should be  interpreted  objectively
         in accordance with the language used, read as always in its proper
         context. (emphasis added)



         [19] That is not to say that such statements should be construed as
         if they  were  statutory  or  contractual  provisions.  Although  a
         development plan has a legal status and legal effects,  it  is  not
         analogous in its nature or purpose to a statute or a  contract.  As
         has often been  observed,  development  plans  are  full  of  broad
         statements of policy, many of which may be mutually irreconcilable,
         so that in a particular case one  must  give  way  to  another.  In
         addition, many of the provisions of development plans are framed in
         language whose application to a given set  of  facts  requires  the
         exercise of judgment. Such matters fall within the jurisdiction  of
         planning authorities, and their exercise of their judgment can only
         be challenged on the ground  that  it  is  irrational  or  perverse
         (Tesco Stores Ltd v Secretary of State for the Environment and ors,
         per Lord Hoffmann, p 780). Nevertheless,  planning  authorities  do
         not live in the world  of  Humpty  Dumpty:  they  cannot  make  the
         development plan mean whatever they would like it to mean."


20. Having considered the parties competing submissions  on  the  issue  of
    whether  the  Respondent  rationally  applied   section   10   of   the
    Discretionary Leave policy to the facts  of  the  Applicant's  case,  I
    unhesitatingly prefer those made by Ms McArdle.


21. First, in my  view  Ms  Chapman's  submission  as  to  how  the  phrase
    "significant changes" should be applied  in  practice  is  inconsistent
    with the ordinary and natural meaning of  those  words.  The  adjective
    'significant' is not apt to quantify with any precision the  degree  of
    change required in an applicant's circumstances before  the  Respondent
    can  depart  from  the  norm  and  refuse  to  grant  an  extension  of
    Discretionary Leave, yet this is exactly the  effect  of  applying  the
    policy in the manner suggested by Ms Chapman.


22. I reach the same conclusion when considering  the  phrase  'significant
    changes' and section 10 as a whole in the wider context.


23. The Discretionary  Leave  policy  covers  a  large  range  of  possible
    scenarios in which leave may be granted to an applicant,  despite  that
    applicant not having met the requirements of the Immigration Rules. For
    example, Discretionary  Leave  may  be  granted  where  removal  of  an
    applicant would lead to a breach of  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, where an applicant has  been  identified  as  a  victim  of
    trafficking or where it has been established that they  are  a  refugee
    but are excluded from a grant of asylum for certain specified  reasons.
    Prior to 9 July 2012 an applicant whose removal would lead to a  breach
    of Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  would  also  have  been
    granted Discretionary Leave[1].


24. On 9 July 2012 the Respondent introduced a package of reforms aimed  at
    reducing the burden on the taxpayer, promoting integration and tackling
    abuse. The reforms were preceded by a  major  public  consultation  and
    they were debated at length in  Parliament.  After  this  date  persons
    whose removal would lead to a breach of Article 8  are  either  granted
    leave pursuant to the Immigration Rules or Limited  Leave  Outside  the
    Rules (LLOR), which is to be distinguished  from  Discretionary  Leave.
    The reforms also made reliance on public funds by persons granted leave
    to remain on family or private life grounds an exception to the default
    position precluding such reliance.


25. In my view, reading the transitional arrangements in section 10 of  the
    Discretionary Leave policy in the aforementioned context  supports  the
    interpretation advocated by Ms McArdle.


26. This is also the case if section 10 is considered in the context of co-
    existing  instructions  to  caseworkers  issued   by   the   Respondent
    specifically in relation to applications made  on  private  and  family
    life grounds - such instructions being found in  the  document  headed:
    "Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration:  Chapter   8
    Transitional Provisions:  Family  Members  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules".


27. Paragraph 2.3 of these instructions provide the following  guidance  to
    caseworkers[2]:


         "Individuals granted Discretionary Leave before 9 July 2012


         Applicants who were granted leave  under  the  Discretionary  Leave
         policy before 9 July 2012 will continue to be considered under  the
         discretionary leave policy  through  to  settlement  provided  they
         continue to qualify for leave  and  their  circumstances  have  not
         changed" (emphasis added)


28. Although these instructions should not be construed as if  they  are  a
    statute, it is readily apparent that paragraph 2.3 anticipates  that  a
    person applying for an extension of Discretionary Leave on private  and
    family  life  grounds  will  be  granted  such  an  extension  only  in
    circumstances where they qualify for leave and their circumstances have
    not changed.  This  dual  requirement  does  not  fit  easily  with  Ms
    Chapman's submission that, in  the  context  of  a  case  in  which  an
    applicant has previously been granted Discretionary Leave because their
    removal would breach Article 8, the only  change  in  that  applicant's
    circumstances significant enough to justify a departure from  the  norm
    of granting a further period of Discretionary Leave would  be  if  that
    applicant's removal would no longer lead to such a breach.


29. For all the reasons I give above, I reject Ms Chapman's submission that
    "a change [in a persons circumstances for the purposes of section 10 of
    the Discretionary Leave policy] can only be  significant  if  it  is  a
    change capable of rendering removal from the United Kingdom lawful."[3]


30. Ms  Chapman  submits  in  the  alternative  that:  (i)  the  Respondent
    determined  the   Applicant's   application   on   the   basis   of   a
    misunderstanding of fact and (ii) her conclusions on  this  issue  were
    irrational, irrespective of whether the policy should be  read  as  she
    submits.


31. Taking these  submissions  in  turn.  In  both  of  her  decisions  the
    Respondent considered the application on the basis that  the  Applicant
    had been granted leave in 2010 as a dependent on her father. Ms Chapman
    submits this was not the case and consequently  that  the  Respondent's
    decision-making process was fundamentally flawed.


32. Although the chronology provided by the Applicant asserts that  it  was
    in 2005 that she made the application that led  to  her  being  granted
    leave in 2010 I have not been provided with copies of such application,
    or any other evidence to support this assertion. I  do,  however,  have
    before me a letter to the Respondent dated 19  April  2007  written  by
    Duncan Lewis solicitors on behalf of the Applicant and her father. This
    letter focuses primarily on the Applicant's father's  circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom but does also refers to  circumstances  specific  to
    the Applicant. The letter ends by requesting that the Respondent  grant
    the Applicant's father "and his dependent" (i.e. the  Applicant)  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom. It makes no mention of an  application
    having previously been made in 2005.


33. I have further been provided with an incomplete copy  (8  pages)  of  a
    FLR(O) application form drawn in the Applicant's father's  name,  which
    is stamped as having been received by the Respondent on the 12  October
    2007. Section 2 to this  form  identifies  the  Applicant  as  being  a
    "Dependent included in" the application of her father.


34. The Secretary of State's response to a subject access request  made  by
    the Applicant's father revealed the following file  note  made  by  the
    Respondent on the Applicant's father's file on 15 June 2010:


         "Does the applicant meet ALL the following, as a result of delay by
         UKBA?


   1. Application has been outstanding for over 2 years and


   2. No decision has been received from UKBA during that time and


   3. They have built up significant private and family life as a result  of
      the delay


         Applicant has met the criteria above, applicant and dependent child
         granted 3 yrs DL under Paragraph 395C, until 13 June 2013."


35. Reference to "the Applicant" in this file note is a  reference  to  the
    instant Applicant's father. Although it is possible to infer  from  the
    file note that there were features  of  the  instant  Applicant's  case
    other than her dependency on her father that led to her  being  granted
    leave to remain in 2010 - the fact that this is so is far from clear.


36. Having viewed the Respondent's file note in the context of the terms of
    the application made to the Respondent, which on the evidence before me
    I treat as being formed by the letter and FLR(O) of  2007,  I  conclude
    that it has not  been  demonstrated  that  the  Respondent  misdirected
    herself in fact in either the decision of 8 October 2013 or that  of  8
    October 2014. I find that it was open to her to proceed on the  factual
    matrix identified within those decisions.


37. However, if  I  am  wrong  in  this  conclusion,  and  the  Applicant's
    dependency on her father was not the sole reason for her being  granted
    Discretionary Leave in 2010, I find that the Respondent's  misdirection
    of fact on this issue is not a matter capable of affecting the  outcome
    of her considerations. Even if the Applicant's dependency on her father
    in 2010 was not the sole reason for  her  being  granted  Discretionary
    Leave at that time there can be no doubt that it was a matter of  great
    importance in the mind of the decision maker.


38. I also reject Ms Chapman's  submission  that  because  the  Applicant's
    dependency on her father was greater in 2013 than it was in 2010 it was
    irrational of  the  Respondent  to  conclude  that  there  had  been  a
    significant change in the Applicant's circumstances.


39. I was not drawn to any evidence to support the contention that once the
    Applicant had left her father's household she remained dependent on him
    for anything other than financial  support.  In  such  circumstances  I
    conclude that, on the basis of  the  evidence  available  to  her,  the
    Respondent did not irrationally fail to take into  account  a  material
    matter i.e. the fact that the Applicant had a greater dependency on her
    father in 2013 than she did in 2010.


40. Ms Chapman's submission, that it was perverse of the Respondent not  to
    extend the Applicant's Discretionary Leave having extended her father's
    leave in this capacity, is equally unattractive. The evidence before me
    does not demonstrate that the circumstances of the  Applicant  and  her
    father are comparable and the submission  must  fail  for  this  reason
    alone.


41. In summary I find that the Respondent was entitled to conclude that the
    Applicant's circumstances have significantly  changed  since  2010  and
    that, consequently, she was entitled to refuse to grant the Applicant a
    further period of Discretionary Leave.


      Issue (ii): Discretion under the Immigration Rules to impose/refuse to
      remove the NRPF condition.

Summary of the parties' submissions

  42. Ms Chapman's submissions on  this  issue  can  be  summarised  in  the
      following  terms:  having  granted  the  Applicants  leave  to  remain
      pursuant to the Immigration Rules (i) the Respondent had a  discretion
      as to whether to impose an NRPF  condition  on  such  leave  (ii)  she
      failed to  consider  the  exercise  of  such  discretion  or,  in  the
      alternative (iii) if she did consider the exercise of such discretion,
      she failed to do so lawfully.


  43. Ms McArdle submitted in response that the  Respondent  had  rationally
      considered the exercise of her discretion in line with  the  terms  of
      her published policy. In any event, the facts of the Applicant's  case
      as presented to the Respondent  were  not  capable  of  leading  to  a
      conclusion that  the  Applicant  was  either  destitute  or  that  the
      "welfare  of  her  child  requires  recourse  to  public  funds".  The
      Applicant has not  brought  a  challenge  to  the  lawfulness  of  the
      Respondent's policy.










      Legal Framework


      Statute


  44. Part 1 of the Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971 Act") is concerned  with
      the regulation of entry into and stay in the United  Kingdom.  Section
      1(2) provides that those not having a right of  abode  in  the  United
      Kingdom may live, work and settle here by permission and:


         "...subject to such regulation and control  of  their  entry  into,
         stay in and departure from the United Kingdom as is imposed by this
         Act..."


  45. By section 3(1)(c) of the 1971 Act:

        "Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act where a person is
        not a
        British citizen...
        ...
        c) If he is given limited leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, it may be given subject to all or  any  of  the  following
        conditions, namely
        ...
        ii) A condition requiring him to maintain and accommodate  himself,
        and any dependants of his, without recourse to public funds...."

      Immigration Rules


   4. As referred to above, on 9 July 2012 the Respondent introduced (by  HC
      194) a large number of new Immigration Rules, including those relating
      to the grant of leave on private life (paragraph  276ADE)  and  family
      life (Appendix FM) grounds. Amongst the rules introduced by HC 194 was
      Paragraph 276BE:

          "Leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK


          276BE. Limited leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in
          the UK may be granted  for  a  period  not  exceeding  30  months
          provided that the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
          requirements in paragraph 276ADE are met.  Such  leave  shall  be
          given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State  deems
          appropriate."

   5. This rule was subsequently amended on 28 July 2014 by HC 532 so as  to
      read:


          "276BE(1) - Limited leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private
           life in the UK may be granted for  a  period  not  exceeding  30
           months provided that the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that
           the requirements in paragraph 276ADE are met, or, in respect  of
           the requirement in paragraph 276ADE(vi) and (v), were met in the
           previous application which led to a grant  of  leave  to  remain
           under this sub-paragraph.


             Such leave shall  be  given  subject  to  a  condition  of  no
           recourse to public funds unless the Secretary of State considers
           that such a person should not be subject to such a condition."


The Respondent's guidance


  46. The guidance relevant to the Respondent's consideration in the instant
      case of whether to impose a NRPF condition on a grant of limited leave
      is to be found in Part  8  of  the  chapter  on  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Directorate Instructions ("RPF Guidance") which, as of May
      2013, read[4]:

          "Those seeking to establish  their  family  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom must do so on a  basis  that  prevents  burdens  on  the
           taxpayer. The changes to the Immigration Rules implemented on  9
           July 2012 are predicated in part on  safeguarding  the  economic
           well-being of the UK, which is a legitimate aim under Article  8
           of the ECHR (the right to respect for private and  family  life)
           for  which  necessary  and  proportionate  interference  in  the
           Article 8 rights can be justified.

           Under Appendix FM, limited leave:


    .     Under the 5 year partner and parent routes;


    .     As a bereaved partner;


    .     As a fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner.


           will be granted subject to a condition of no recourse to  public
           funds.

           In:


    . All other cases in which limited leave is granted as a  partner  or  a
      parent under Appendix FM;


    . All cases in which leave on the grounds of  private  life  is  granted
      under paragraph 276BE or paragraph 276DG; and


    .     All cases in which limited leave is granted outside the  rules  on
      the grounds of family or private life

           leave will be granted subject to a condition of no  recourse  to
           public funds, unless there are exceptional circumstances set out
           in the application which require access to public  funds  to  be
           granted.  Exceptional  circumstances  which  require  access  to
           public funds to be granted will exist  where  the  applicant  is
           destitute, or where there are  particularly  compelling  reasons
           relating to the welfare of a child of a  parent  in  receipt  of
           very low income...


           ...


           ...[t]he  onus  is  on   the   applicant   to   evidence   their
           destitution...


           ...


           When an applicant who was granted access to public funds at  the
           initial grant of leave applies for further leave to remain, they
           will be re-assessed and only granted further leave  with  access
           to public funds if they continue to be destitute, or where there
           continue to be particularly compelling reasons relating  to  the
           welfare of a child of a parent in receipt of a very low income."




 47. In January 2014 the  Respondent  introduced  guidance  identifying  the
     circumstances in which she will remove a NRPF condition imposed  on  an
     applicant's leave; such guidance being headed: "Request for a change of
     conditions of leave granted on the basis of  family  or  private  life"
     ("2014 Guidance").


 48. The 2014 Guidance  reproduces  parts  of  the  Respondent's  policy  of
     October 2013[5] and states that a NRPF condition may be removed if:


        "1.   Since  being  granted  leave   to   remain   your   financial
            circumstances have changed and you  have  become  destitute  or
            there are now particularly compelling reasons relating  to  the
            welfare of your child; or


         2.  You were destitute,  or  there  were  particularly  compelling
            reasons relating to the welfare of your child, at the  time  of
            your application was being considered but you failed to provide
            evidence of this and you now wish to send in this evidence"


Discussion and Decision


49. There is no dispute that the Respondent has a discretion whether or not
    to impose a NRPF condition on a grant a leave. The manner in which such
    discretion is to be exercised is informed by detailed guidance provided
    by the Respondent to her caseworkers - the RPF  Guidance.  There  is  a
    presumption that a NRPF condition will be imposed on a grant  of  leave
    made pursuant to the  Immigration  Rules  on  private  or  family  life
    grounds; however, that presumption is displaced, and a  NRPF  condition
    is not imposed on a grant of leave, in circumstances where an applicant
    has demonstrated that they are destitute  or  "there  are  particularly
    compelling reasons relating to the welfare of a child of  a  parent  in
    receipt of a very low income."


50. The covering letter to the Applicants' application for leave, dated  11
    June 2013 and headed "Application  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights", sets out, inter alia: (i) brief details of
    the Applicant's history in the United Kingdom; (ii)  the  fact  of  the
    second Applicant's birth and that she is no longer in contact with  her
    father; (iii) the Applicant's familial connections to the UK  including
    with her  father  who,  at  that  time,  provided  the  Applicant  with
    fortnightly financial support;(iv) that the Applicant had recently (May
    2013) taken up employment as a steward; and, (v) that the Applicant  is
    also a student.


51. This letter initially requests that a further period  of  Discretionary
    Leave be granted to the Applicant. Thereafter,  detailed  reference  is
    made to the Immigration Rules and  paragraph  276BE  of  the  Rules  is
    cited. Immediately following  this  citation  is  a  request  that  the
    Applicant be granted 30 months leave to remain on the  basis  that  she
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


52. No reference  is  made  within  the  letter  either  to  the  potential
    imposition of a NRPF condition on the Applicant's leave, or to the  RPF
    guidance. Furthermore, no submissions were advanced in  the  letter  to
    the effect that there were  in  existence  "exceptional  circumstances"
    which would require the Applicants  to  be  granted  access  to  public
    funds.


53. Significantly the letter states as follows on its page eight:


         "While the applicant is currently in receipt of  various  benefits,
         she has recently secured employment; she is being supported by  her
         family members; she is working towards  furthering  her  education;
         and she aims to secure stable employment to enable her  to  support
         herself and her daughter in the future. It is hence submitted that,
         should she be granted further leave to remain in the UK, she  would
         not be seeking recourse to public funds  for  much  longer  and  so
         interference with her rights that would  result  from  her  removal
         would not be in the interests of the  economic  well-being  of  the
         country." (emphasis added)


54. Appended to the application of 11 June 2013 was, amongst other  things,
    a tenancy agreement in the Applicant's sole name and evidence as to her
    receipt of public funds in the tax years to 5 April 2013.


55. The Applicant's solicitors wrote to the Respondent on 8  July  2013  in
    relation to the  inability  of  the  second  Applicant  to  supply  her
    biometrics,  but  made  no  reference  therein   to   the   Applicants'
    circumstances  having  materially  changed  since  the  date   of   the
    application.


56. The Respondent's decision of 8 October 2013 to impose a NRPF  condition
    must be viewed in the context of the evidence and information that  was
    before her when she made  such  decision.  It  forms  no  part  of  the
    Applicant's case that the Respondent ought to  have  requested  updated
    information from her prior to making the decision of  8  October  2013,
    nor in my view was there any requirement on the Respondent to have done
    so.


57. Despite being  legally  represented  there  was  no  assertion  in  the
    application letter that the Applicant should be provided with access to
    public funds, neither was there any identification of the circumstances
    it was thought would exist for the Applicants if their continued access
    to public funds were to be denied. Indeed, if anything can  be  gleaned
    from the application letter it is the Applicant's belief that she would
    not require recourse to public funds 'for much longer' because she  had
    taken up employment. It is to be recalled that the Respondent made  her
    decision approximately three months after the date of  the  Applicant's
    application and it was made in the absence of any  further  information
    having been provided by the Applicant regarding  her  claimed  need  to
    have recourse to public funds.


58. It is in this context that the Respondent's decision of 8 October  2013
    to prohibit the Applicant's access to  public  funds  must  be  viewed.
    Having considered the Respondent's decision through  the  lens  of  the
    information put before her I have no hesitation in concluding that  the
    it is one that was rationally open to her; indeed in  my  view  it  was
    inevitable given the terms in which  the  Applicant's  application  was
    drawn.


59. Furthermore, in light  of  evidence  and  information  put  before  the
    Respondent, I do not accept that the Respondent was required to provide
    anything more by way of reasoning than is to be found in  her  decision
    letter of 8 October 2013.


60. Ms Chapman also submits that  the  Respondent's  later  decision  of  8
    October 2014 refusing to remove  the  NRPF  condition  is  unlawful  on
    ostensibly the same basis as the October 2103 was said to be  unlawful.
    Again, I reject this submission.


61. In  a  Pre-Action  Protocol  (PAP)  letter  of  18  December  2013  the
    Applicants positively put the case for the first time that  they  ought
    to be provided with access to public funds. They did  so  initially  on
    the basis that they should have been granted  Discretionary  Leave  and
    thus, following the terms of the Discretionary Leave policy, access  to
    public funds. This submission fails as a consequence of my  conclusions
    on the first issue above.


62. The PAP letter continues by making submissions  broadly  in  line  with
    those made by Ms Chapman to this Tribunal.


63. Insofar as to the relevant factual circumstances are alluded to in  the
    PAP, the following is stated:


         "Furthermore, the imposition of a ten year ban on  claiming  access
         to public  funds  is  manifestly  excessive,  especially  when  the
         imposition of such an absolute  bar  inevitably  impacts  adversely
         upon the welfare of our client's two year old child...


         ...


         Furthermore, in placing an absolute  prohibition  upon  our  client
         having access to public funds, the SSHD has  manifestly  failed  to
         have due consideration to the fact that our  client's  daughter  is
         just two years old, and is  therefore  solely  dependent  upon  our
         client for daily care and support.


         It is accordingly extremely difficult for  our  client  to  support
         herself and her two year old daughter solely from working, in  view
         of the level of dependence that her two year  old  child  currently
         has upon  her,  which  necessitates  our  client  being  physically
         present with her child on a continuous day to day basis."


64. In her decision of 8 October 2014 the Respondent gives consideration to
    exercise of her discretion to remove the NRPF condition imposed on  the
    Applicant's leave. When doing so she concludes that the  Applicant  has
    not demonstrated that she is destitute. This I find to be  an  entirely
    rational conclusion  on  the  limited  evidence  and  information  made
    available to the Respondent. Her reasons for coming to this  conclusion
    are clear and the Applicant is able to understand  from  them  why  the
    Respondent concluded as she did on this issue.


65. Although the Respondent does  not  address  as  a  discrete  issue  the
    question  of  whether  the  NRPF  condition  should  be  removed  as  a
    consequence of  the  Applicant  having  established  the  existence  of
    particularly compelling reasons relating to the welfare of  the  child,
    it is clear from reading the decision as a whole that  she  did  so  in
    substance. She gave  consideration  to  all  of  the  features  of  the
    Applicants' circumstances relevant to this issue, and in particular she
    also gave consideration to issues relating to the welfare of the second
    Applicant, insofar as there were any, within the context of her  duties
    under section 55 of the 2009 Act.


66. In any  event,  in  my  conclusion  neither  the  Applicants'  original
    application nor their subsequent  correspondence  with  the  Respondent
    disclose any features of their circumstances capable of  leading  to  a
    finding that there existed particularly compelling reasons relating  to
    the welfare of the child such that they should be provided with  access
    to public funds.


67. In summary I find, irrespective of whether the decisions of  8  October
    2013 and 8 October 2014 are considered separately or together, that the
    Applicants have not demonstrated that the Respondent failed to lawfully
    consider the exercise of her discretion not to impose,  or  to  remove,
    the  NRPF  condition.  Furthermore,  the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    Respondent in this regard were entirely rational  when  viewed  in  the
    context the evidence and information put before her.


      Issue (iii): Section 55 of the 2009 Act

Summary of the parties' submissions

68. Ms Chapman observed that one consequence of the Applicant being granted
    leave to remain pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  opposed  to
    Discretionary Leave, is that she is now on a 10-year path to settlement
    and will not be eligible for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  under  this
    route until 14 June 2020. Had she been granted Discretionary Leave  she
    would have been eligible for settlement in 2016.


69. This extended period of stay in the United Kingdom  without  settlement
    must, it was submitted, have an adverse impact on the  welfare  of  the
    second Applicant, a minor, who will have  to  live  without  access  to
    public funds,  and  below  the  minimum  level  of  subsistence,  until
    settlement is granted.


70. It was further asserted that the Respondent failed to have  any  regard
    to her obligations under section 55 of the 2009 Act when  imposing  the
    NRPF condition on the Applicants' leave  and  that,  consequently,  she
    failed in her duty to safeguard  and  promote  the  second  Applicant's
    welfare.


71. Ms Chapman additionally submitted that given: (i) the Applicant arrived
    in the United Kingdom aged seven; (ii)  she  and  her  father  made  an
    application for leave to remain in 2005; and, (iii) it  was  not  until
    June 2010 that a decision was made in  relation  to  such  application,
    that the Respondent's entire approach to the  Applicant's  case  is  in
    breach of her  section  55  obligation  to  make  timely  decisions  in
    relation to children.


72. In response Ms McArdle asserted that:


      (i) the ordinary position for a person  granted  leave  on  Article  8
           grounds pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules  is  that  a  NRPF
           condition is imposed on such leave. However, the Respondent  has
           a power to permit recourse to public funds and she  does  so  in
           accordance with the terms of her published policy i.e.  when  an
           applicant  is  destitute  or  where   there   are   particularly
           compelling reasons to do so relating to the welfare of  a  child
           of a parent in receipt of a very low income;


      (ii)    the Applicants can apply for the NRPF condition to be  removed
           at any time and it will be removed if the conditions  for  doing
           so, as set out published policy, are met;


      (iii)the Tribunal should not entertain the Applicant's submission that
           the historic delay in considering the 2005  application  led  to
           the Respondent failing in her obligations under  section  55  of
           the 2009 Act. Permission has not been  granted  in  relation  to
           such  ground  and  it  was  pleaded  at  a  late  stage  of  the
           proceedings.





Legal Framework


73. Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,
    provides:


         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
         that-


           (a) the functions mentioned in  subsection  (2)  are  discharged
           having regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare
           of children who are in the United Kingdom...


         (2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-


           (a) any function of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to
           immigration, asylum or nationality:


           (b) any function conferred by or by virtue  of  the  Immigration
           Acts or an immigration officer;


           (c) any general customs function of the Secretary of State;


           (d) any customs  function  conferred  on  a  designated  customs
           official


         (3)A person exercising any of those functions must,  in  exercising
         the function, have regard to any guidance given to  the  person  by
         the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1)"


  74. The relevant guidance introduced by the Respondent pursuant to section
      55 is headed "Every Child Matters..." and amongst other things defines
      "Safeguarding and promoting the welfare  of  children"  as  protecting
      children from maltreatment, preventing impairment of children's health
      or development, ensuring that children are growing up in circumstances
      consistent  with  the  provision  of  safe  and  effective  care   and
      undertaking that role so as to enable those children to  have  optimum
      life chances and to enter adulthood successfully.


  75. In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4; the Supreme Court observed that
      as a consequence of the introduction of section 55:


         "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by  public
         or  private  social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
         administrative  authorities  or  legislative  bodies,   the   best
         interests of the child shall be a primary consideration...


         ...any decision which is taken without having regard to  the  need
         to safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will
         not be 'in accordance with the law' for  the  purpose  of  article
         8(2). Both the Secretary of State and the tribunal will  therefore
         have to address this in their decisions."


Discussion and Decision


  76. Ms Chapman's  first  submission  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the
      Applicant will not now be eligible  for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
      until 2020, whereas had she been granted Discretionary Leave she would
      have been eligible for settlement in 2016.


  77. In the present case both Applicants have been granted limited leave to
      remain in the United Kingdom for 30 months. My attention has not  been
      drawn to any features of their circumstances that  could  be  said  to
      require a longer period of leave to be granted. In particular there is
      an absence of evidence relating to the disadvantages that it  is  said
      will be faced by the second Applicant by reason of her, and the  first
      Applicant, having only been granted leave  for  30  months  under  the
      Immigration Rules and now being on a 10-year track to settlement.


  78. In addition, contrary to the  submissions  made  by  Ms  Chapman,  the
      Applicants will not "effectively be barred from claiming any  form  of
      benefits" during the period prior to them  being  granted  settlement.
      They will  be  permitted  to  access  to  public  funds  if  they  can
      demonstrate the existence of exceptional circumstances requiring  that
      such access to be granted - as set out in the  RPF  Guidance  and  the
      January 2014 policy. This is an  important  safeguard  protecting  the
      welfare of the second Applicant.


  79. In reality Ms Chapman's  first  submission  under  this  head  of  her
      grounds  is  ostensibly  the  same   argument,   albeit   dressed   up
      differently, as was rejected  by  Kenneth  Parker  J  in  NS  -  whose
      conclusions I am in full agreement with. At [59]-[62] of his  judgment
      Kenneth Parker J found as follows:


          "[59] On this evidence I am satisfied  that  there  were  powerful
         reasons of public policy that led the Defendant to consider that in
         principle those granted LTR in the circumstances of  C1  should  be
         prohibited from having recourse to public funds. However, when  the
         policy is considered as a  whole,  I  do  not  accept  Ms  Weston's
         submission that the reasons for the policy have  been  elevated  to
         the primary considerations or the paramount considerations for  the
         decision maker who seeks to apply  the  policy  in  any  particular
         case, with the result that the policy would  prevail  whatever  the
         impact on the welfare of any child concerned. The Defendant clearly
         recognised that under section 55 the best interests  of  any  child
         concerned in the  decision  is  a  primary  consideration  for  the
         decision maker, and that, depending on  the  specific  impact,  the
         welfare of  a  child  concerned  would  prevail  over  the  general
         policy....


         [60] It is clear from the case law on section  55  (...)  that  the
         best interests of a child do not in each case  necessarily  dictate
         the outcome. Such interests may yield to other demands  of  policy,
         so long as the decision maker has genuinely given weight  to  those
         interests as a primary consideration. The  primary  nature  of  the
         best interests of any child concerned has in this context been duly
         recognised by mandating the decision maker not  to  impose  a  NRPF
         condition where there are particularly compelling reasons  relating
         to the welfare of  a  child  concerned.  The  policy  requires  the
         welfare of a child concerned to trump the general policy  in  those
         circumstances. In carrying out that analysis the caseworker must no
         doubt consider  how  lack  of  access  to  what  Ms  Weston  called
         'passported benefits' would affect the welfare of a child concerned
         in the specific case.... (emphasis added)


         [61] At the end of the day Ms Weston's case is in effect that under
         the guidance the decision maker should be mandated  to  remove  the
         NRPF condition if he was satisfied that such a condition would,  or
         might, have a significant effect on the welfare of  a  child.  That
         case implicitly rests on an interpretation of section 55 that would
         place a very substantial fetter on the making and implementation of
         public policy,  in  this  case  to  achieve  a  fair  and  coherent
         immigration regime and to promote what the Defendant believes to be
         a more equitable distribution of fiscal  burdens  in  a  period  of
         relative economic austerity. Such an interpretation,  in  my  view,
         was not intended by section 55 and is not  supported  by  the  case
         law.


         [62] I readily recognise that many people  are  likely  to  believe
         strongly that the Secretary of State ought to  have  given  greater
         weight, in the adoption of her policy, to the welfare of any  child
         concerned by the decision, and ought to have  directed  caseworkers
         to override the general policy if there were  adverse,  albeit  not
         exceptionally serious,  consequences  for  the  child  or  children
         concerned. However, in my view, that final decision as  to  how  to
         weigh important and competing considerations was  a  political  one
         for  the  elected  government  which  ultimately  chose   to   give
         significant, though far from controlling, weight to  the  perceived
         needs  of  a  fair  and  coherent  immigration  policy  and  fiscal
         equity..."


  80. Despite Ms Chapman's assertions to the contrary I do not  accept  that
      the decision in NS is distinguishable on its facts and the  submission
      that the Respondent has failed to abide by her section  55  duties  by
      granting the Applicants limited leave to remain with a NRPF  condition
      also fails, in my conclusion, for the same reasons that the submission
      in NS failed. The RPF Guidance itself  caters  for  and  protects  the
      welfare of the child.


  81. Turning to a consideration of the issue of whether the Respondent  has
      given specific consideration in the instant case  to  her  section  55
      duties.


  82. I accept Ms Chapman's submission that the decision letter of 8 October
      2013 does not reflect the fact that the Respondent gave  consideration
      at that time to her section 55 duties,  either  when  determining  the
      length of the period of leave that should be granted to the Applicants
      or when determining whether to impose a NRPF condition of their leave.




  83. Nevertheless, the Applicants have not identified any features of their
      circumstances that could be said to require a consideration of whether
      to grant a period of leave than longer that specified in the Rules. An
      Applicant who wishes to persuade the Secretary of State to grant leave
      for a longer period longer than that provided for in the Rules has  to
      do more than simply point to the fact that she is, or has, a child.


  84. Furthermore, although it was submitted on  behalf  of  the  Applicants
      that there would be  an  adverse  impact  on  the  second  Applicant's
      welfare if access to public funds were  not  granted,  the  evidential
      foundation for this submission is not even close to having  been  made
      out on the evidence put before the Respondent.


  85. Given what I say above, even if the Respondent's decision of 8 October
      2013 was unlawful for  the  failure  of  the  Respondent  to  consider
      therein her duties under section 55 of the 2009 Act, I would not grant
      the relief sought by the Applicants in relation to such decision.


  86. This conclusion is further reinforced by the fact that the  Respondent
      has now given detailed consideration to her section 55 duties  in  the
      decision of 8 October 2014. Ms Chapman submits that I should not  take
      account of this decision because it is no more than an  ex-post  facto
      rationalisation by the Respondent  of  her  "previously  unlawful  and
      irrational decision". I do not accept this to be so. It is quite clear
      to me that the Respondent has given fresh  thought  to  this  case  in
      October 2014 on the basis of the evidence she had before her.


  87. In the absence of any evidence or information which called for further
      consideration by the Respondent of the best interests  of  the  second
      Applicant I find that the considerations and reasoning on  this  issue
      set out in the 8 October 2014 decision are sufficient to discharge the
      Respondent's duties under section 55.


  88. As to the final submission made by Ms Chapman  under  this  head  i.e.
      that the  five  year  delay  by  the  Respondent  in  considering  the
      application made in 2005 was in breach of her section 55 obligation to
      make a timely decision - I find this to be entirely misconceived.


  89. First, even if Ms Chapman is correct in her submission,  she  has  not
      established the existence of a nexus between the aforementioned breach
      and the decisions under challenge in the instant proceedings.


  90. Second, in any event, the Respondent took into account the fact of the
      delay when granting the Applicant, and her father, Discretionary Leave
      in 2010. If the granting of such leave was not thought to be  adequate
      recompense for the delay, then proceedings in this regard should  have
      been brought at that time. Any attempt to re-open this  issue  now  is
      clearly brought significantly out of time and it is not appropriate in
      such circumstances for me to entertain it.


  91. For all the reasons I have given above I conclude that the  Respondent
      has discharged her section 55 duties to the Applicants, and  I  reject
      Ms Chapman's submissions to the contrary.


Issue (iv): Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention

Summary of the parties' submissions

  92. Ms Chapman asserts that the imposition of the NRPF  condition  on  the
      Applicants'  leave  disproportionately  interferes  with  the   second
      Applicant's family and private life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  is
      therefore in breach of Article 8 ECHR.


  93. It is further said that the foreseeable consequence of the  imposition
      of the NRPF condition is that the Applicants will be required to  live
      on less than the minimum level of income  considered  adequate  for  a
      family to live on in the United Kingdom and that this interference  is
      based  on  an  arbitrary  application  of  policy  and   without   any
      consideration of the individual circumstances of the Applicant's case.
      It is  thus  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  Applicants'
      Article 8 rights.


  94. In response to these submissions Ms McArdle largely  relied  upon  the
      same points she made in response to the previous ground. She  reminded
      the Tribunal that the Applicant has permission to work and can at  any
      time  apply  for  the  NRPF  condition  to  be  removed.  If  such  an
      application is made the Respondent will consider it in line  with  the
      published criteria, which have not been challenged as being  unlawful.
      The imposition of an NRPF condition on those granted leave on  Article
      8 grounds pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  is  legitimate  in  this
      "time of straightened economic circumstances"


      Discussion and Decision


  95. The Applicants have not established on the available evidence that the
      imposition of the NRPF  condition  has  led,  or  would  lead  to,  an
      interference with any of their protected Article 8 rights.


  96. The Applicants remain living together as a family unit and it  is  not
      contended that this situation will change  as  a  consequence  of  the
      imposition of the NRPF condition on their leave. In such circumstances
      there can be no interference caused to their  family  life  with  each
      other.


  97. As to the assertion that the Applicants will find themselves  required
      to live on less than the minimum level of income  considered  adequate
      for a family entitled to be in the United Kingdom,  this  is  entirely
      speculative and has no foundation in the evidence before  me.  Insofar
      as the evidence does throw light on such matters it discloses that the
      Applicants receive  monies  fortnightly  from  the  first  Applicant's
      father  and  that  the  first  Applicant  is  lawfully  in  employment
      (although Ms Chapman asserted that  the  Applicant  is  no  longer  in
      employment this  is  not  evidenced  before  me).  In  any  event  the
      Applicants also have the safeguard of being able to apply for the NRPF
      condition to be removed should they meet the requirements laid down in
      the January 2014 policy and RPF Guidance. If such  an  application  is
      made  the  Respondent  will   consider   the   Applicants   particular
      circumstances against the published criteria.


  98. If I am wrong, and the Applicants can establish on the facts that  the
      imposition of the NRPF condition has led, or will foreseeably lead, to
      an interference with their protected Article 8 rights I, nevertheless,
      conclude that such interference is justified and  proportionate  given
      (i) the powerful public policy reasons  for  prohibiting  recourse  to
      public funds for those granted leave to remain on  family  or  private
      life grounds[6] (ii) the  fact  that  the  Applicant  has  been  given
      permission to work and  (iii)  the  safeguards  provided  for  in  the
      January 2014 policy and the RPF Guidance.


      Conclusion


  99. For all the reasons I give above I reject the Applicants' claims  that
      the  Respondent  has  (i)  acted  irrationally  in  failing  to  grant
      Discretionary Leave to remain (ii) failed  to  lawfully  consider  the
      exercise of her discretion under the Immigration Rules  when  imposing
      the NRPF condition (iii)  failed  to  comply  with  her  duties  under
      section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  or
      (iv) breached their protected rights under  Article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention.


 100. Consequently, this application for Judicial Review is dismissed.





-----------------------
[1] See for example the judgment of Kenneth Parker J at  [55]  in  R  (NS  &
Ors) v SSHD [2014]  EWHC  1971  (Admin)  -  summarising  and  accepting  the
evidence of Ms Kajita, a Grade 7 officer  in  the  Family  Migration  Policy
Team in the Immigration and Border Policy Directorate  of  the  Home  Office
overseeing "policy  in  respect  of  immigration  cases  engaging  the  ECHR
Article 8".
[2] As introduced in April 2013 -  paragraph  3.3.1  of  the  November  2014
version of the policy being in identical terms
[3] Paragraph 61 of the Applicants skeleton argument of the 24 October 2014
[4] It was agreed by the parties  that  the  relevant  version  of  the  RPF
Guidance for the purposes of the instant application was introduced  in  May
2013;  it  having  been  subsequently  amended  on  the  numerous  occasions
including on 8 October 2013.
[5] Which is not materially different to the May 2013 NRPF guidance
[6] As to which see the decision in NS at [54] - [59]

