


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 00131(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2015                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                   Between

                                 JUNED MIAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation

For  the  Appellant:      Mr  D  Balroop,  of  counsel,  instructed  by   KC
             Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.



   i) In section 117B(1)-(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
      2002 parliament has  made  no  distinction  between  adult  and  child
      immigrants.

  ii)      The  factors  set  out  at  section  117B(1)-(5)  apply  to  all,
      regardless of age. They are not however an exhaustive  list,  and  all
      other relevant factors must also be weighed in the balance.  These may
      include age, vulnerability and immaturity.

 iii)     The juridical status of the  relevant  Home  Office  'Immigration
      Directorate  Instructions'  must  be  appreciated.  While  these   are
      subservient to primary and secondary legislation and  the  Immigration
      Rules, they rank as  a  relevant  consideration,  framed  in  flexible
      terms, to be taken into account by decision makers in every case where
      they apply.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Framework of this appeal

 1. This  is  the  decision  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.

 2. By its decision dated 13 July 2015 (appended), the Upper  Tribunal  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT"),  promulgated
    on 09 February 2015, dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (the
    "Secretary of State") dated 29 October 2014,  whereby  the  Appellant's
    application for further leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    refused.

 3. We summarise the uncontentous history thus.  The  Appellant's  date  of
    birth is 11 January 1995 and he is, therefore, now aged 20  years.   On
    16 October 2008, then aged 13, he entered  the  United  Kingdom  having
    travelled  on  a  direct  flight  from  his  country  of   nationality,
    Bangladesh.  He promptly made a claim for asylum, which was refused  on
    12 February 2009.  On account of his status of unaccompanied minor,  he
    was granted discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  until
    11 February 2012.  This was later extended to 11 July 2012. On 07  July
    2012 the Appellant made an application for  further  leave  to  remain.
    This application, for reasons which are  unclear,  was  not  determined
    until 29 October 2014, in the form of a refusal.

The Secretary of State's Decision


 4. In the first of the two major decisions of the Secretary of State, that
    dated 15 March 2012,  the  decision  maker  repeated,  at  considerable
    length, the previous refusal of the Appellant's asylum claim.  Next, in
    purported consideration of section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 (the "2009 Act"), the decision maker concluded:

         "While present  in  the  United  Kingdom,  you  are  provided  with
         necessary medical care, education and housing.  While  resident  in
         the United Kingdom, you may achieve numerous  qualifications  which
         ultimately will benefit the nationals of the United Kingdom  and/or
         Bangladesh.  It is considered that the obligations necessitated  by
         section 55 are satisfied by the actions of the UKBA and  the  local
         authority."

    The narrow context and focus of this discrete assessment are  striking.
    Next, the decision maker concluded  that  the  Appellant's  removal  to
    Bangladesh would not infringe his rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The second of the major decisions of the Secretary of State,  dated  29
    October 2014, provides the impetus for this appeal.   By  this  further
    decision, the Appellant's application for further leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom was refused, the decision maker, in the  context  of
    purporting to consider section 55 of the 2009 Act, stated:

         "It is considered  that  your  family  were  responsible  for  your
         emotional and physical welfare during your residence in  Bangladesh
         and it is not accepted that you have no family to return to.  It is
         noted that the Bangladeshi authorities actively  support  returning
         refugees and that independent financial assistance and  support  is
         available to you should you choose to request it. It is  considered
         that on return to Bangladesh you can choose to return  to  residing
         with your relatives or to live independently with the assistance of
         RA on your  return.   It  is  not  accepted  that  your  return  to
         Bangladesh would be against your best interests."

    Next, under the rubric of "Family Tracing", the decision maker appeared
    to accept that the  Government  had  failed  to  discharge  its  family
    tracing obligations (a concession formally - and properly - made at the
    hearing by the Secretary of State's representative), continuing:


         "You have failed to demonstrate that there would  be  a  risk  upon
         return or that there  would  be  any  causative  link  between  the
         Secretary of State's breach of duty and your  claim  to  protection
         ....  You have failed to establish that you have been disadvantaged
         to any degree."

 6. The decision maker then proceeded to  consider  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he had lost contact with his family in Bangladesh, concluding:

         "For the reasons given above, it is  not  accepted  that  you  have
         provided a credible account of having lost touch with them."

    Reference was then made to the uncontested fact that the Appellant  had
    not sought the assistance of the British Red Cross for the  purpose  of
    re-establishing family contact. We shall revisit this topic infra.

 7. The decision maker then turned to consider the Appellant's  case  under
    the umbrella of Article 8 ECHR. It was noted that in making his further
    leave to remain application, the Appellant had disclosed  a  conviction
    consisting of a breach of a non-molestation order, while not disclosing
    a police reprimand in  respect  of  an  alleged  shoplifting  incident.
    These events are dated 19 March 2014 and 02  March  2010  respectively.
    The penalty imposed consisted of  a  one  year  community  order.   The
    Appellant  was  also  convicted  of  a  second,  related   offence   of
    harassment, giving rise to a  protection  from  harassment  restraining
    order of indefinite duration.  Both orders remain current.  At the time
    when the decision was made, the decision maker noted,  correctly,  that
    both prosecutions were pending. This is followed by the conclusion:

         "For these reasons, the Secretary  of  State  considers  that  your
         presence in the United Kingdom is  undesirable  and  you  therefore
         fail to fulfil S-LTR1.6 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules."

 8. Having, notably, made no distinction between the Rules  and  Article  8
    simpliciter,  the  decision  continues,  making   two   free   standing
    conclusions:


         "Consequently it is considered that you do not qualify  under  ....
         the Immigration Rules .....


         Therefore any Article  8  claim  is  refused  under  .......    the
         Immigration Rules and it is considered that your removal  from  the
         United Kingdom is proportionate and in pursuit of a legitimate  aim
         under Article 8(2) of the ECHR."

    The decision  then  drifts  back  into  the  territory  of  the  Rules,
    rehearsing  the  private  life  provisions  of   paragraph   276(1)ADE,
    reasoning that the only route conceivably available  to  the  Appellant
    was that provided by subparagraph (vi), which enshrines the test of:


         "There would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
         integration into [his country of origin]."

         This was followed by the assessment:

         "It has not been accepted that you have  lost  contact  with  [your
         parents and grandmother in Bangladesh] ....  All would be  able  to
         provide you with a network of support upon your return,  should  it
         be required.   You remain fluent in Bengali and you have  submitted
         no evidence to suggest that you  would  be  unable  to  enter  into
         employment upon your return to maintain and accommodate yourself."

    Next, the  decision  maker  purported  to  consider,  and  reject,  the
    Appellant's case outwith the Rules.

 9. Finally, consideration was given to paragraph 353B of the  Rules.   The
    core of the text which follows is found in the following passage:

         "There is nothing in either your character or conduct  which  would
         warrant a grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  You have
         been issued with a police reprimand for  theft,  have  had  a  non-
         molestation order issued against you  and  have  a  conviction  for
         breaching that order, as well as three impending prosecutions .....


         Furthermore, whilst it is accepted that there has been a  delay  in
         the consideration of your application you  have  been  aware  since
         2012 that your continued presence in the United Kingdom was  solely
         down to your  status  as  an  unaccompanied  minor  and  that  upon
         reaching the age of 18 you would be returned to Bangladesh.  It  is
         not accepted that you have spent any significant period of time  in
         the United Kingdom for reasons beyond your own control."

    The omnibus conclusion expressed was that, based  on  the  grounds  and
    reasons summarised above, the removal of the Appellant from the  United
    Kingdom would be appropriate.

Statutory Framework and Immigration Rules

10. Paragraph 276(1)ADE of the Immigration Rules (the "Rules") provides, in
    material part:


        "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
        the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
        application, the applicant:


         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  section
         S-LTR.1.2 to  S-LTR.2.3 and S-LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM; and
         ...
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

         Paragraph S-LTR1.6, which forms part of Appendix FM, provides:

        "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
        public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
        not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to   1.5.),   character,
        associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
        to remain in the UK."


11. Paragraph 353B of the Rules provides:

        " Where further submissions have been made and the  decision  maker
        has established whether or not they amount to a fresh  claim  under
        paragraph 353 of these Rules,  or  in  cases  with  no  outstanding
        further submissions whose appeal rights  have  been  exhausted  and
        which are subject to a review, the decision maker  will  also  have
        regard to the migrant's:


          i) character, conduct and  associations  including  any  criminal
             record and the nature of any  offence  of  which  the  migrant
             concerned has been convicted;


         ii) compliance with any conditions attached to any previous  grant
             of leave to enter or remain and compliance with any conditions
             of temporary admission or immigration bail where applicable;


        iii) length of time spent in the United Kingdom spent  for  reasons
             beyond the migrant's control after the human rights or  asylum
             claim has been submitted or refused; in deciding whether there
             are exceptional circumstances which mean that removal from the
             United Kingdom is no longer appropriate.


        This paragraph does not apply to submissions made overseas.


        This paragraph does  not  apply  where  the  person  is  liable  to
        deportation."


12. The new provisions of Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") must also be  applied.   Section  117A
    provides:
        "117A Application of this Part
        (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
        determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
             (a)  breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and
             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.
        (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
        tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
             (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
             and
             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.
        (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
        question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
        respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
        8(2). "
         By section 117B:
        "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
        cases
        (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
        public interest.


        (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
        interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
        persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
        to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
        interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
        persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
        financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (4) Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
        a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
        precarious.


        (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             United Kingdom."


The Issues

13. The main issue which was argued before us  was  whether  the  Appellant
    satisfies the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").
    Both parties were further agreed that the Appellant's case  would  also
    have to be considered outwith the framework of the Rules if it does not
    satisfy their requirements.  We also  received  some  argument  on  the
    question of the applicability  of  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") to a child.


Factual Matrix


14. In evidence, the Appellant adopted his witness statement.  The gist  of
    the story recounted by him since arriving in the United Kingdom is that
    when aged eight years he was (in effect) hired  by  his  parents  to  a
    master, to whom he became effectively enslaved, in a distant city.   He
    claimed that he was beaten and ill treated generally.  There were  very
    few visits by his parents and contact  was  eventually  lost.   He  was
    accompanied by his master to the  United  Kingdom  and  abandoned  upon
    arrival.  Since then he has lived with various foster parents  and,  at
    present, lives alone as a private tenant.  He has had no interest in re-
    establishing contact with his parents since they abandoned him at  such
    a young age and exposed him to the ordeal which he  then  suffered  for
    some five years.  His evidence includes the following:


         "...  I have no source of income, no  place  of  accommodation,  no
         social network or  any  family  in  Bangladesh.   I  do  not  speak
         properly Bangla anymore.  I  have  no  idea  about  the  Bangladesh
         employment market.  Therefore any removal direction will  cause  me
         to become a destitute and totally disrupt my future life."

    Having considered  all  the  evidence  and  evaluated  the  Appellant's
    account at first hand, we  find,  as  a  tribunal  of  fact,  that  the
    aforementioned claims are true.  We  are  further  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has had no ties, family or otherwise, with  Bangladesh  since
    his arrival in the United Kingdom six years ago, aged 13.



Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), Immigration Rules


15. These findings made, we turn to consider whether the  Appellant's  case
    satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. It is common case that,
    in determining this issue, we should take  into  account  the  relevant
    Home Office Immigration Directorate's Instruction ("the IDI"). This  is
    entitled  'Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM,  Section  1.0b'  and   was
    published in August 2015. This states, in material part,  at  paragraph
    8.2.3.4:

         "When assessing whether there are 'very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration into the country to which they  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK', the starting point is to assume that the
         applicant will be able to integrate into their country  of  return,
         unless they can demonstrate why that is not the case.  The onus  is
         on the applicant to show that there are very significant  obstacles
         to that integration, not on the decision maker to show  that  there
         are not.   The  decision  maker  should  expect  to  see  original,
         independent and verifiable documentary evidence of any claims  made
         in this regard and must place less weight on assertions  which  are
         unsubstantiated.   Where   it   is   not   reasonable   to   expect
         corroborating evidence to be provided, consideration must be  given
         to the credibility of the applicant's claims ....


         A very significant obstacle to integration  means  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the Applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return ....


         Very  significant  obstacles  will  exist   where   the   applicant
         demonstrates that they would be unable to establish a private  life
         in the country of return, or where establishing a private  life  in
         the country of return would entail very serious  hardship  for  the
         applicant ....  The decision  maker  should  consider  whether  the
         applicant has the ability to form an adequate private life  by  the
         standards of the country of return - not by UK standards  ....   To
         establish a private life in all of its essential elements ...."

              [our emphasis]

    We highlight also the following significant passage, under  the  rubric
    "Family, Friends and Social Network":


         "An applicant who has family or friends in the  country  of  return
         should be able to  turn  to  them  for  support  to  help  them  to
         integrate into that country .....


         The decision maker must consider the quality of  any  relationships
         with family or friends in the country of return ...


         Where there are no  family,  friends  or  social  networks  in  the
         country of return that is not in itself a very significant obstacle
         to integration.....


         Lack of  employment  prospects  is  very  unlikely  to  be  a  very
         significant obstacle to integration."

              [Our emphasis.]

16. Decision makers and Judges should take care to apply the correct  prism
    when considering this IDI.  Its legal status must be  appreciated.   It
    is not a statutory measure.  It is, rather, a policy  document.   Being
    of this character, it attracts the application  of  a  series  of  well
    established principles, four in particular.  First, it is an obligatory
    material consideration in decision making processes.  Second, it is not
    writ in stone.  Rather, its contents are to be viewed as  a  series  of
    flexible and inexhaustive requirements.  See Lumba (WL) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 12, at [21], [26]  and  [35],
    per Lord Dyson JSC.  We would further emphasise that the  IDI  is  not,
    and does not claim to be, an exhaustive code.   To  approach  it  as  a
    collection of  rigid  rules  and/or  a  comprehensive  edict  would  be
    erroneous in law. Finally, it is  trite  law  that  IDI's  and  kindred
    instruments do not have the status of law and, thus, are subservient to
    primary legislation, secondary legislation and the Immigration Rules.

17. We also draw attention to two particular features of the  text  of  the
    IDI,  highlighted  above.   The  first  is  the  passage  dealing  with
    "original,  independent  and  verifiable  documentary  evidence".    We
    consider that this is to be applied with caution.  Decision makers  and
    Judges should be alert to the entire context, including relevant social
    and cultural factors, with their eyes firmly focused on  the  realities
    of life.  Furthermore, the instruction to  decision  makers  that  they
    "must place less weight on assertions  which  are  unsubstantiated"  is
    equally troubling, as it neglects two truisms.  The first is  that,  in
    certain cases, assertions may not be capable  of  being  substantiated.
    The second is that the applicant may be able to satisfactorily  explain
    the absence of substantiation in respect of  matters  which  one  would
    expect to be substantiated.  The final aspect  of  the  IDI  worthy  of
    comment is its  tendency  to  highlight  individual  considerations  in
    isolation, detached from other factors.  We would  emphasise  that  the
    public  law  duty  engaged  is  to  take  into  account  all   material
    considerations, weighing them in the round.  In this context, we record
    that, in response to a question from the bench, it was acknowledged  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the  age,  gender,  educational
    achievements and linguistic  abilities  of  the  person  concerned  are
    (inexhaustively) all material considerations.

18. We consider that paragraph 276(1)ADE(vi) of the  Rules,  considered  in
    conjunction with the associated IDI, is to be applied to the  Appellant
    in the following way. He has spent approximately two thirds of his life
    in  his  country  of  nationality,  Bangladesh.  He  has   unmistakable
    linguistic, cultural and social attachments to that country.  Any  loss
    of linguistic fluency will be quickly recovered.  We have found that he
    has had no contact, direct or indirect, with his family since  arriving
    in the United Kingdom aged 13.  However, there is  nothing  to  suggest
    that he does not know where they resided before he left. We  take  into
    account that  he  has  no  educational  or  vocational  qualifications.
    However, we consider that as a matter  of  probability  he  would  have
    remained the servant, or slave, of his master for  several  more  years
    and he would not have  secured  any  qualifications  of  this  kind  in
    Bangladesh. Having regard to the period during which he has resided  in
    the United Kingdom and the very different culture, language, traditions
    and social setting to which he has become accustomed, the  exercise  of
    reintegrating  in  his  country  of  nationality  will  undoubtedly  be
    challenging and difficult.   We  are  satisfied  that  it  will  entail
    hardships for the Appellant.  However, taking everything into  account,
    our confident expectation is that such reintegration will  be  achieved
    and will not,  in  the  language  of  the  rule,  give  rise  to  "very
    significant obstacles".

19. As regards paragraph 353B of the Rules, there can be no  dispute  about
    the decision maker's entitlement to take into account the  offences  of
    which the Appellant  has  been  convicted.  However,  a  (mere)  police
    reprimand  does  not  have  the  status  of  a  conviction,  while  the
    Appellant's two actual convictions belong to  the  bottom  end  of  the
    scale of criminality and appear to have been actuated by a  mixture  of
    immaturity and emotional instability.  We consider that refusal of  his
    application on this ground alone would not  have  been  sustainable  in
    law. We now turn to consider Article 8 outwith  the  framework  of  the
    Rules and section 117B of the 2002 Act.

     Article 8 & Section 117B of the 2002 Act

20. In setting aside the determination of the FtT the Upper  Tribunal  said
    the following of s117B:

     "Whilst it is easy to understand why Parliament intended to weaken  the
         private  life  claims  of  adults  who  have  failed  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules,  it  is  less  easy  to  understand  why
         children brought, born or left here through no fault of  their  own
         should  have  the  weight  attached  to  their  Article  8   rights
         diminished.  Section  117B(5)  mandates  that  the  decision  maker
         should attach 'little weight' to a private life established  whilst
         the person only had precarious leave.  If that were to  be  applied
         to the case of a child who had, say,  spent  seven  years  or  more
         growing up in the United Kingdom, it  would  appear  to  contradict
         numerous policy statements made by the Secretary of State about the
         importance of stability, roots and relationships for such children.
         Of the six years that the Appellant has spent here, five were as  a
         child."

      We  consider  and  develop  these  observations   in   the   following
    paragraphs.

21. The Judge's observations are understandable and unexceptional.  In  the
    context of any young child or teenager trafficked to the United Kingdom
    it would be unlikely that he would be financially independent  or  have
    complied with immigration control or have learned to speak  English  to
    the minimum standard required.  Notwithstanding,  and  irrespective  of
    the circumstances of the child's arrival, Part  5A  mandates  that  all
    these matters weigh against such  a  claimant  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise.  We juxtapose this new statutory provision with the
    indelible fact that the United Kingdom government has  long  recognised
    the particular significance to be attached  to  the  private  lives  of
    children. Since the 'seven year policy' was set out   in  DP5/96,  some
    two decades ago, successive governments have  acknowledged  that  where
    children have spent a moderate period of time  in  the  United  Kingdom
    this will be a weighty factor in determining  whether  they  should  be
    removed (either with or without their parents)[1]. This policy is today
    expressed in the IDI noted in [14] above, at 11.2.4:

         "Over time children start to put down roots and integrate into life
         in the UK, to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK  and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than seven years".

22. These statements reflect the recognition that the  private  life  of  a
    child is of a qualitatively different nature from  that  of  an  adult.
    Quite apart from the fact that a moderate period of residence is likely
    to be of greater impact,  influence  and  temporal  significance  in  a
    relatively short life, it is less likely that a child will be aware of,
    much less responsible for, his immigration status.

23. That said, such policy statements cannot dilute the  juridical  reality
    of the new statutory regime. The primary legislation now  enshrined  in
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act makes no distinction between adult migrants and
    child  migrants.   There  is  no  legitimate  exercise   of   statutory
    construction which would entitle Judges to devise any such distinction.
     While the legislature has made special provision for children  in  the
    new regime, this has been confined to parental  relationships  with  "a
    qualifying child", per section 117B(6).  Accordingly,  the  legislative
    requirement  that  little  weight  be  allocated  to  a  private   life
    established at a time when a person's immigration status is  precarious
    applies to both children and adults, without distinction.

24. While the impact of sections 117B (1)-(5) on children will appear harsh
    and unfair  to  many,  this  is  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  the
    legislative choice which Parliament has made.  In this context, we draw
    attention to what this Tribunal decided in Forman (Sections  117A  -  C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC).  This decision  emphasises  that
    while it is obligatory to have regard to the considerations  listed  in
    Section 117B in all cases where proportionality under Article 8(2) ECHR
    is  being  determined,  the   statutory   list   is   not   exhaustive.
    Accordingly, in any given case, the obligatory statutory considerations
    will be weighed by the Tribunal with all other facts and factors  which
    have a legitimate bearing on the issue of proportionality.  In the case
    of a child it is possible to envisage, in the  abstract,  a  series  of
    considerations which could potentially outweigh  the  public  interest.
    These might include matters such as parental dominance  and  influence;
    trafficking;  other  forms  of  compulsion;  and  the  absence  of  any
    flagrant, repeated or  persistent  breaches  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    immigration regime by the child concerned. Furthermore, the child's age
    and personal circumstances at the  commencement  of  the  period  under
    scrutiny and thereafter  will  be  obviously  material  considerations.
    Viewed panoramically, it  seems  uncontroversial  to  suggest  that  an
    Article 8(2) proportionality exercise which strikes the  balance  in  a
    manner which overcomes the public interests engaged is more  likely  to
    occur in the case of a child than that of an adult.

25. We give effect to the provisions of part 5A of  the  2002  Act  in  the
    present case in the following way.  As mandated by the legislature,  we
    attribute little weight to the private life formed by the Appellant  in
    the United Kingdom because his immigration  status  was  at  all  times
    precarious.  Furthermore, we must give effect to  the  discrete  public
    interest that persons who seek to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    financially independent: the Appellant  is  not  now,  even  though  an
    adult, such a person.  We further give effect to the overarching public
    interest in the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls,  per
    section 117B(1).  In the balancing exercise, we take into account  that
    the Appellant's transition to the United Kingdom clearly involved  some
    form of  compulsion,  possibly  parental  and/or  involving  his  slave
    master; he has lived in the United Kingdom throughout the  entirety  of
    his teenage years, a period which is widely acknowledged to be the most
    important in every person's development; he has  become  integrated  in
    United Kingdom society; and he has developed firm social, cultural  and
    linguistic ties with this country.

26. The Appellant is a young adult, whose 21st birthday is approaching.  He
    is wiser, more mature, more resourceful and better educated than he was
    upon his arrival in the United Kingdom.  He  suffers  from  no  special
    vulnerability. He has no family  ties  with  this  country.   While  we
    acknowledge that he spent five years in the United Kingdom as a  minor,
    his private life today is not defined by any particular  relationships,
    beyond friendships that could be maintained or replicated  abroad.   We
    weigh all of these factors  with  our  findings  set  out  above.   The
    conclusion, which follows inexorably is that this is a  case  in  which
    the public interest prevails, clearly and decisively.

Conclusion

27. Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  and,
    outwith the Rules, Article 8 ECHR.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date: 16 November 2015



                                  APPENDIX


                                    [pic]
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On: 21st May 2015                       |                           |
|                                        |...........................|
|                                        |............               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     JM
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Karim, Counsel instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The Appellant is a  national  of  Bangladesh  born  January  1995.   He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Chamberlain) to dismiss his appeal against a decision to  refuse
    to vary his leave and to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to
    s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK in October 2008. It is accepted that he
    was then aged 13.  He was granted  Discretionary  Leave  in  accordance
    with Home Office policy but was refused asylum.   The appeal before the
    First-tier Tribunal arose after an application  for  further  leave  to
    remain was refused on the 29th October 2014.

 3. The Appellant did not  pursue  asylum  grounds  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. His case was that he should be given leave to remain  on  the
    basis of his long residence/ private life.  The Tribunal heard evidence
    from the Appellant. It rejected his claims to  have,  in  effect,  been
    trafficked here by an "employer", and his claim to  have  lost  contact
    with his family in Bangladesh.  It followed that  the  Appellant  could
    not succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). Even  if  the  Tribunal  was
    wrong about his contact with his family,  it  reasoned,  he  still  had
    cultural, linguistic and religious ties  to  Bangladesh  such  that  he
    could not meet the high Ogundimo test in sub-paragraph (vi).

 4. In respect of Article 8 'outside of the Rules' it was accepted that the
    Appellant had established a private life in the six years that  he  had
    spent growing up in London and  that  if  removed  there  would  be  an
    interference with that right such that Article 8 would be  engaged.  In
    its assessment of proportionality the Tribunal properly directed itself
    to consider the  public  interest  matters  set  out  in  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is noted that  it  is
    in the  public  interest  to  maintain  immigration  control.  Applying
    s117B(5) it is noted that as a person with DL  his  status  was  always
    precarious, and as such little weight should be attached to his private
    life.  The Tribunal further weighs against the Appellant the fact  that
    he has a criminal record for shoplifting, breaching  a  non-molestation
    order and failing to abide by bail conditions.  Taking  all  the  other
    factors into account the Tribunal was satisfied that  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellant was proportionate and the appeal was dismissed.

 5. The grounds of appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  the
    following respects:

        i)      Improperly   characterising    Discretionary    Leave    as
           "precarious";


       ii)    In weighing in against the Appellant his  criminal  offending
           the Tribunal has failed to have regard to his young age and  the
           submission that he is a "home  grown  criminal":  Maslov  [2009]
           INLR 47 ECtHR;


      iii)    The finding that the Appellant has contact with his family in
           Bangladesh is based on inference alone and was  against  all  of
           the other evidence, including the fact  that  the  Secretary  of
           State  had failed in her attempts to trace his family;


       iv)    In its consideration of 276ADE(1)(vi)  the  Tribunal  applied
           the "no ties" test whereas by the date of decision the rule  had
           been  amended  to  contain   the   "significant   obstacles   to
           reintegration" test;


        v)    Failing to consider or make findings on  the  extent  of  the
           Appellant's private life in the UK.

Error of Law

At the outset of  the  hearing  we  brought  to  Mr  Karim's  attention  the
decision of the Upper Tribunal (Judge  Ockelton  and  Judge  Holmes)  in  AM
(s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 00260 (IAC), reported for what it says about  the
meaning of the term "precarious" in s117B:

         "Those who at any given date held a precarious  immigration  status
         must have held at that date an otherwise lawful grant of  leave  to
         enter or remain. A person's immigration status is  "precarious"  if
         their continued presence in the UK will  be  dependent  upon  their
         obtaining a further grant of leave"

Mr Karim was aware of the decision and sought to persuade  us  that  it  was
wrong.   It is not a binding decision, merely persuasive,  and  as  such  we
are under no obligation to follow it.  He submitted that the term was  drawn
from the European jurisprudence and in that context it was  used  to  denote
persons on, for instance Temporary Admission.

We do not accept that to be the case. The person who has no  status,  either
because of illegal entry or overstaying, is here "unlawfully" -  that  much,
we presume, is uncontroversial. The person on temporary  admission  is  not,
as a matter of law, in the UK at all.    That leaves persons  who  are  here
"precariously".   Whilst it might be argued that  the  Tribunal  in  AM  has
cast the net very  wide  in  defining  this  category  of  persons,  we  are
satisfied that persons with  DL  must  be  caught  firmly  within  it.   The
Appellant's continued presence is dependent upon  his  obtaining  a  further
grant of leave and as such his status must be "precarious".

That is not however the end of the matter. Mr Karim raises a  further  query
about the application of s177B. It is apparent  from  the  statutory  scheme
that it is intended to apply to anyone subject to  immigration  control  who
raises Article 8 arguments, and yet it does not appear to  contemplate  that
the applicant himself may be, or have been, a minor.  Whilst it is  easy  to
understand why parliament intended to weaken  the  private  life  claims  of
adults who have failed to meet the requirements of the  Rules,  it  is  less
easy to understand why children brought, born or left here through no  fault
of their own should have the weight  attached  to  their  Article  8  rights
diminished. Section 117B(5) mandates that the decision maker  should  attach
"little weight" to a private life established whilst  the  person  only  had
precarious leave. If that were to be applied to the case of a child who  had
say, spent seven years or more growing up in the  UK,  it  would  appear  to
contradict numerous policy statements made by the Secretary of  State  about
the importance of stability, roots and relationships for such children.   Of
the six years that the Appellant has spent here, five were as  a  child.  We
find that this is a relevant factor and that some consideration should  have
been given to his young age in determining what weight  should  be  attached
to his private life.  We find ground (i) to be  made  out,  and  it  follows
from what we have said that (ii) and (v) are infected by the same error.

Ground (iv) is also made out. Mr Duffy accepted that at  the  relevant  date
paragraph 276ADE had been amended. The test was  no  longer  the  "no  ties"
Ogundimo question, but was one of "significant  obstacles  to  integration".
Mr Duffy may in the end be proven correct in  his  submission  that  nothing
will turn on the distinction, but given our  findings  about  the  remaining
grounds we are prepared to re-make the decision as a whole. The same can  be
said for ground (iii). The submission made is that the  First-tier  Tribunal
failed to take relevant evidence into account,  namely  the  fact  that  the
Secretary of  State  had  attempted  to  trace  the  Appellant's  family  in
Bangladesh, and  failed.   Whilst  that  factor  does  not  feature  in  the
Tribunal's reasoning, it remains to be seen how relevant  that  is.  If  the
Appellant had provided full details of his parents and former home,  it  may
prove extremely relevant. If he furnished the Secretary  of  State  with  no
details at all,  it  will  count  for  very  little  in  the  assessment  of
276ADE(1)(vi).

Decisions and Directions

The determination contains an error of law and it is set aside.

The matter will be remade before us.

We were not asked to make a direction as to anonymity and on  the  facts  we
see no reason why one should be made.

The parties are to file and serve skeleton arguments addressing the  matters
raised in this appeal, including Mr Karim's submission  that  s117B  is  not
intended to, or cannot sensibly be  thought  to,  apply  to  children.   The
skeletons must be served no later  than  7  working  days  before  the  next
hearing.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              13th July 2015

-----------------------
[1] See paragraphs 9-13 of Munir and Anr v SSHD  [2012]  UKSC  32  for  Lord
Dyson's concise narration of government policy in  respect  of  the  private
lives of children.

