
Heard at: Field House | |SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus)
Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137                     | |
|On 7 March 2005            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|07th October 2005                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Miss B Mensah (Vice President)                                    |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANTS                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the 1st and 2nd appellants:   Ms Amanda Jones of Counsel, instructed
                             by Bhogal Lal, Solicitors
For the 3rd appellant: Mr M Saleem, a Solicitor of Malik & Malik (232  High
                            Road)
For the respondent:    Mr J McGirr, a Home Office Presenting Officer

Afghanistan - country guidance as to whether as a class  Afghan  Sikhs  and
Hindus are entitled to international surrogate protection - Held: (1) there
is no evidence to  support  the  claim  that  the  Afghan  Sikh  and  Hindu
minorities in Afghanistan are persecuted or  treated  in  breach  of  their
protected human rights under Article 3 of the European  Convention  by  the
State or that  the degree of societal discrimination against them  is  such
as to give rise to any such persecution or treatment of them as a class  (2
)following UNHCR guidance their status as Afghan  Sikhs  and  Hindus  is  a
factor to be taken into account in assessing individual claims on a case by
case basis


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     This  determination  gives  country  guidance  in  relation  to   the
      situation of Sikhs and Hindus who are citizens of Afghanistan  and  is
      based upon objective evidence from a number of  international  sources
      including the Country Information and Policy  Unit  (CIPU)  report  of
      October 2004 (which summarises or extracts information from  a  number
      of the other international sources), United  States  State  Department
      report for 2003 published in February 2004, the United Nations General
      Assembly Security Council Report of 12 August 2003, the ECRE Report of
      April 2003 giving guidelines of treatment of Afghan Asylum Seekers and
      Refugees in Europe, and various Amnesty International and Human Rights
      Watch Reports.   In addition, there were a number of statements from a
      Sikh leader in Kabul to whom we shall refer simply as RS. We  do  this
      because Ms  Jones  requested  that  his  name  should  be  anonymised,
      although we observe that he makes it clear that he  has  in  the  past
      given statements to various bodies and none of his  statements  before
      us contained such a request. Nevertheless it seems to  us   to  be  in
      accordance with the general willingness on the part of  the  judiciary
      as a matter of policy to grant anonymity  to  parties  in  asylum  and
      human rights  appeals.  These  statements  are  dated  respectively  3
      December 2003, 23 April 2004, 14 June 2004, 9  February  2005  and  25
      February 2005. There are finally a report dated 13 December 2004 of an
      interview with RS  by  a  member  of  the  British  Embassy  in  Kabul
      supplemented by a further statement dated 1 February 2005  as  to  the
      methodology employed in that interview.

2.    In the course of argument,  there  has  been  extensive  reference  to
      three recent reported Tribunal decisions concerned with the  situation
      of Afghan Sikhs in which the evidence of RS, as  it  then  stood,  was
      considered.    These decisions are respectively IB  and  TK  (Sikhs  -
      risk on Return - Objective Evidence) Afghanistan [2004]  UKIAT  00150,
      KK (Evidence - Late Filing - Proper Notice) Afghanistan  [2004]  UKIAT
      00258 and an unreported decision of the Tribunal in the case of  Sarla
      and Others (AS 58985 -03) heard in December  2004.   We  mention  this
      latter case only in the context that there was then reference  to  the
      report of the interview of RS by a British Embassy official which  the
      Secretary of State was unable to produce so that the Tribunal in  that
      and the three other appeals associated with it saw no reason to differ
      from the approach which had been  established  in  the  preceding  two
      reported cases.  We shall later in the course  of  this  determination
      refer more extensively to the reported cases and, in particular,  that
      of  IB  and  TK  heard  in  March  2004  where  there  was   extensive
      consideration of the then existing objective evidence.

3.     We  turn  now  to  summarise  the  claims  of  the  three  individual
      appellants and the findings of the Adjudicators in respect of them.

The claim of the first Appellant - Mr L

4.    The first appellant, to whom we shall refer as Mr L, is a  citizen  of
      Afghanistan born on 25  April  1980  and  is  of  Sikh  ethnicity  and
      religion.    He originates from Jalalabad and arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom on 8 June 2002 when he applied immediately for asylum.    That
      application was refused for the reasons set out in a letter  dated  29
      July 2002 and on 31 July 2002 the Secretary of State issued directions
      for his removal to Afghanistan following refusal  of  leave  to  enter
      after refusal of his asylum application.   He appealed  unsuccessfully
      against that decision to an Adjudicator and his appeal was  heard  and
      dismissed on 27 February 2003 by Ms G Elliman,  an  Adjudicator.   She
      found his account of his past history in Afghanistan credible but  the
      appeal was dismissed because there had  then  been  a  change  in  the
      circumstances in Afghanistan following the overthrow  of  the  Taliban
      and the effect of that change was, she held,  that  the  appellant  no
      longer had any basis for claiming a well-founded fear  of  persecution
      or of breach of his protected human rights if returned.     There  was
      no appeal against that decision but new  representatives  subsequently
      applied  on  16  June  2003  for  discretionary  leave  and,  although
      initially refused, there was then an application for judicial  review.
       The upshot of this was that the certificate that the fresh claim  was
      manifestly unfounded was withdrawn  by  the  respondent  and  a  fresh
      refusal notice of 19 November 2003  substituted,  giving  a  right  of
      appeal which has led to the present appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
      only. It was heard on 3 March  2004  by  another  Adjudicator,  Mrs  S
      Kebede.   She, too,  dismissed  his  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
      objective evidence before her did not show that the situation of Sikhs
      had changed from that which applied at the previous hearing before  Ms
      Elliman and that in consequence there were no substantial  grounds  to
      believe that he would  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment  or  punishment  contrary  to  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention.   His  appeal  under  Article  8  concerned  with
      whether or not he had a  established  a  family  life  in  the  United
      Kingdom,  following  a  late  marriage  to  an  Afghan  Sikh  who  had
      subsequently been granted refugee status, was also  dismissed  on  the
      alternative grounds that the Adjudicator did not consider that he  had
      established a family life in the United Kingdom but that, if  she  was
      wrong in that respect, removal would be proportionate having regard to
      the ratio in Mahmood v SSHD [2001] Imm AR 229 because he would be able
      to make an appropriate application for leave to enter as a  spouse  if
      now returned.

5.    Mr L then sought permission to appeal against that decision which  was
      initially refused by the Tribunal but subsequently allowed by Silber J
      on statutory review in the following terms:

           "The  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal   did   not   consider   the
           applicant's ground  of  appeal  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not
           consider the risk of persecution in the applicant's home area of
           Jalalabad as the Adjudicator appeared to focus on  the  position
           in Kabul (see paragraph 19 of the determination)."

6.    At an earlier hearing Miss Jones had applied for  permission  to  vary
      the grounds of appeal before the Tribunal to those  contained  in  the
      application for statutory review  in  substitution  for  the  original
      grounds which would  otherwise  have  stood  following  the  statutory
      review decision.   Those grounds included challenges to the Article  8
      decision and a complaint that there had been  a  failure  to  consider
      other articles of the European Convention raised,  especially  Article
      9.    In both her written skeleton argument filed in  advance  of  the
      hearing and in  her  oral  submissions,  however,  Miss  Jones  relied
      exclusively on the challenges under Article 3, making no reference  to
      any other articles of the European Convention so that we consider  her
      effectively to have abandoned those challenges.   This seems to us  to
      be entirely appropriate since, on any approach, we take the view  that
      we would be required to find that removal was proportionate even if in
      breach of Article 8 rights by reason of the application of  the  ratio
      in Mahmood, and there is no evidence that there  is  such  a  flagrant
      denial of the right of Sikhs or Hindus to practice their own religions
      in Afghanistan as would support a successful claim under Article 9  of
      the European Convention.  We have therefore  confined  our  review  to
      Article 3 issues and the grounds of appeal taken from the  grounds  of
      application for statutory review which are relevant  to  such  issues.
      The challenges raised in the grounds of appeal may  be  summarised  as
      follows: (a) that the background evidence in existence at the date  of
      the hearing before the second Adjudicator was such that  her  findings
      as to lack of risk were unsustainable as a matter of law; (b) that the
      Adjudicator erred in failing to address herself to  the  situation  in
      the home area or to consider internal flight; and (c) that the  second
      Adjudicator wrongly and unnecessarily limited her consideration of the
      background material to that which had come into  existence  after  the
      first Adjudicator's determination.

7.    We now summarise the factual basis of Mr L's claim.

8.    The first Adjudicator summarises the basis of his claim  at  paragraph
      2.1 of her determination in the following terms:

           "The basis for the appellant's claim is set out in  the  SEF,  a
           separate statement and in the interview.   He says  that,  as  a
           Sikh, he has a fear of persecution in Afghanistan because of his
           religious beliefs.   He is from Jalalabad  and  he  ran  a  shop
           there selling textiles and other goods.   The appellant, in  his
           statement, details problems that Sikhs have had for  many  years
           at the hands of the Muslims in Afghanistan,  including  lack  of
           access to education, lack of religious freedom, and  attacks  on
           the Gurdwara.   The appellant says that his father was arrested,
           beaten, tortured and detained in 1995 by the Mujahideen who were
           in power at the time (now the Northern Alliance  Forces).    The
           appellant's father was held for 15 days and the  family  had  to
           pay a large amount of money for his release.      The  appellant
           himself was, he says, beaten and tortured by the Taliban in 1998
           whilst he was returning from Kabul and they also took his  money
           and possessions.   He had problems again in  2001  when  he  was
           beaten because he had not  locked  up  his  shop  during  Muslim
           prayers and the shop was closed for 15  days  as  a  punishment.
           In April 2002 (after the Northern Alliance had  taken  power  in
           the country following the fall of  the  Taliban)  the  appellant
           says that his brother,  [JS]  and  [J]'s  son  were  beaten  and
           detained by the Northern Alliance Forces, the brother was killed
           and  the  appellant's  nephew  disappeared  but  this   incident
           triggered the appellant's departure from his country  -  in  his
           interview he states that this incident was in March  not  April.
            The appellant left in May 2002 and travelled with an agent  via
           Pakistan and other countries."


9.    At paragraph 6.1 in her  determination  the  first  Adjudicator  deals
      with her findings saying that she accepts that the appellant's account
      of past problems because of his religious beliefs is  credible.    She
      accepts that his father was arrested by the Taliban in  the  past  but
      the situation had subsequently changed and then deals with the current
      situation of the appellant as at the date of his departure as follows:

           "The appellant's claim in relation to the more recent events was
           that he himself was attacked and forced to  close  his  shop  at
           some stage and that in April 2002 his brother was  detained  and
           killed by the authorities.   I accept  that  the  appellant  may
           have had some problems and  may  have  been  approached,  as  he
           claims, by people and harassed by them.   However, there  is  no
           evidence at all that his problems  were  at  the  hands  of  the
           authorities nor  that  they  were  necessarily  related  to  his
           religious beliefs.   The appellant was sure in his evidence that
           those who visited his shop were from the Northern Alliance  but,
           asked how he knew, his answer was that "they are all the same  -
           they come and say these people from the government - grow beards
           and say they are Mujahideen..."


           This is plainly an assumption on the appellant's  part,  it  may
           have been correct but in the absence  of  any  evidence  in  the
           background material that there is continued harassment of  Sikhs
           from  the  authorities  I  cannot  find  that  the   appellant's
           assumption is necessarily true.


           The CIPU  report  notes  that  there  are  still  concerns  over
           security in the country, but the situation is volatile  and  the
           crime rate  is  high  -  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of
           particular religious persecution or evidence from the  appellant
           as to who was causing him problems after November 2001, I cannot
           find that it was necessarily the authorities who were  harassing
           him nor that his problems were because of his religious  beliefs
           at all.   The  appellant  has  failed  to  state  properly  what
           happened to him, his only assertion is that his shop was  closed
           and he states  that  he  was  beaten  but  it  is  difficult  to
           ascertain what really occurred, how badly he was beaten, by whom
           and how and thus I cannot conclude that the appellant  has  been
           subjected to any persecution  for  a  Convention  reason.    The
           problems he has had have not, on a lower standard of proof, been
           proven to amount to persecution for a convention reason.


           The same conclusion can be drawn from  the  evidence  about  the
           appellant's brother.   I do accept that the appellant's  brother
           was killed in April 2002 (his evidence, although rather  muddled
           did seem to be a true account).   The appellant  initially  gave
           the impression that his brother's body was dumped at their  home
           but later it became apparent that  it  was  his  sister-in-law's
           home where he was  left,  after  a  short  disappearance.    The
           brother and sister-in-law had lived in Kabul and this  again  is
           where I find that the evidence presented simply does  not  prove
           that the appellant's brother's death was related to his religion
           or that it was necessary [sic] carried out by  the  authorities.
           The appellant's beliefs may be correct but there is evidence  of
           serious criminal offences in Kabul and there is no  evidence  at
           all that there is any sort of systematic persecution, detention,
           abduction or killing of Sikhs in Kabul or elsewhere.   I  cannot
           accept that the appellant's brother's death is any way  evidence
           that the cause of death was religious persecution.


           I find, therefore, that although the appellant  and  his  family
           may have had problems in the past, any problems that  they  have
           suffered  under  the  current   regime   are   not   necessarily
           perpetrated by the regime or its agents not is it related to the
           appellant's religion in any way."


10.    The  second  Adjudicator,  properly  applying   the   principles   of
      Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702,  took  the  first  Adjudicator's
      determination as her starting point and adopted those  findings  which
      we have set out above, holding "that the appellant was not at any risk
      of persecution as a Sikh or otherwise at the  time  of  his  departure
      from Afghanistan".    The second Adjudicator then says that the  issue
      is whether the updated objective evidence shows  a  changed  situation
      for Sikhs to an extent which would  establish  a  risk  of  Article  3
      treatment and expresses her conclusions in this respect as follows:

      "25.  Mr Tattersall [who appeared for the appellant  before  her]  did
           not refer me to any evidence which supported such a claim and  I
           note that the document to which he referred me  as  specifically
           relating to Sikhs, at page 26 of his bundle was dated  prior  to
           the previous appeal hearing and does not, in any  event,  appear
           to represent an independent and objective view of the  situation
           for Sikhs in Afghanistan.    I  also  considered  the  documents
           referred to in the written representations from the  appellant's
           representatives which appear in the respondent's bundle and have
           considered the documents in the appellant's  Court  bundle,  but
           again find no evidence to support the claim that  the  situation
           for Sikhs in Afghanistan is such that to return any  Sikh  there
           will amount to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  nor  that  the
           security situation in Afghanistan is such that to return  anyone
           there would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.  I have considered the
           latest UNCHR report, at page  195  to  197  of  the  appellant's
           bundle, but note that, whilst the UNCHR considers that Sikhs and
           Hindus face discrimination in Afghanistan, their opinion goes no
           further than to say that Sikhs and Hindus are amongst those  who
           may  qualify  for  protection.    Given  the  findings  of   the
           Adjudicator in the previous appeal, that there was  no  evidence
           that the appellant had experienced problems from the authorities
           in Afghanistan as a result of his religion, I do not  find  that
           this document takes the appellant's case any further.

      26.   In the circumstances, given the absence of any evidence  of  the
           change in the situation for Sikhs from that  considered  by  the
           Adjudicator in the appellant's previous appeal, I find no reason
           to depart from the Adjudicator's findings in  her  determination
           of  that  appeal.    I  find,  therefore,  that  there  are   no
           substantial grounds to  believe  that  the  appellant  would  be
           subjected to torture or to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
           punishment pursuant to Article 3 of the ECHR or that  his  human
           rights would be infringed on any other grounds,  either  due  to
           his religion or otherwise, if he were returned to Afghanistan."


The claim of the second Appellant - Mr T

11.   We turn now to the factual basis of claim of the second  appellant  to
      whom we shall refer as Mr T in this determination.

12.   Mr T, who is also a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  of  Sikh  religion  and
      ethnicity, was born on 13 January 1981 in Jalalabad which is his  home
      area in Afghanistan.   He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  1  March
      2002 and applied for asylum on arrival.  Following submission  of  the
      statement of evidence and interview, the Secretary  of  State  refused
      his application for the reasons set out in a letter dated 24  November
      2003 and  on  28  November  2003  issued  directions  for  removal  to
      Afghanistan following refusal of leave to enter after refusal  of  his
      asylum application.   He appealed against that decision on both asylum
      and human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 6 May 2004 by  Mr
      P A Grant-Hutchison, an Adjudicator, who dismissed his  appeal   in  a
      determination promulgated on 7 June 2004.

13.   The basis of Mr T's  claim  was  summarised  at  paragraph  7  of  the
      reasons for refusal letter in the following terms:

           ".... You claim that since  you  were  a  child  you  have  been
           harassed by Muslims  in  your  area  on  account  of  your  Sikh
           religion.   You claim that the Mujahideen made problems for your
           family and then when the Taliban took power  things  got  worse.
           You claim that the Taliban began making problems for you.    You
           claim that the Taliban took your brother and tortured him for  2
           days.    You claim that the Taliban used to  assault  you  on  a
           regular basis.   You claim that every time you went outside they
           would hit you with rifle butts.   You  claim  that  the  Taliban
           would come to your home and drag you from the house and beat you
           stating that it was a Muslim country  and  non-Muslims  are  not
           allowed to live.    You claim your home was  bombed  during  the
           Taliban rule, however you do not  know  who  dropped  the  bomb.
           You claim that you have problems with your neighbours who  would
           mistreat you because of your religion.   You claim that you were
           seen as  non-Muslims  in  your  area.     You  claim  that  your
           neighbour's young son was taken  by  the  Taliban  to  make  him
           convert to Islam.  You claim that because of this and to protect
           you and your faith,  your  father  arranged  for  you  to  leave
           Afghanistan.   You  fear  you  will  continue  to  receive  this
           discrimination on account of your religion if you return."

14.   The Secretary of State challenged those claims, at least in  part,  on
      the basis (paragraph 11) that the account given of constant harassment
      by  the  Taliban  was  not  consistent  nor  credible   according   to
      information on Afghanistan gathered from a variety of sources, some of
      which were quoted in that paragraph, as demonstrating that the Taliban
      did not target or mistreat the Hindu or Sikh  community,  but  it  was
      accepted that the bombing referred to might have taken place in a time
      of fighting although it was an isolated event which had not led to the
      claimant leaving Afghanistan.  Beyond  this  the  Secretary  of  State
      relied on the change in the situation since the fall of  the  Taliban.
      Whilst accepting that there had been difficulties in  the  enforcement
      of law and order  outside  Kabul,  the  letter  points  out  that  the
      claimant would be returned there where there was no reason to think he
      would not be safe.

15.   The Adjudicator does not make  any  clear  findings  of  fact.    Such
      findings  as  there  are  are  contained  in  paragraph  12   of   his
      determination in the following terms:

           "The appellant's oral account was contradictory in that he  said
           that he feared for his life and yet every day for a considerable
           number of years the appellant's father and brother would go  out
           to work in their two shops.   The appellant  also  attended  the
           Gurdwara (the temple) regularly.   The most  likely  explanation
           is that although the appellant and his family  were  undoubtedly
           discriminated  against  while  in  Afghanistan,  in  reality  he
           suffered  no  more  than  low  level  bullying  which   although
           unpleasant did not amount to persecution."


16.   The Adjudicator made no finding as to whether or not Mr T might be  at
      risk in his home area of Jalalabad on  return  but  at  paragraph  13,
      after reference to the UNHCR opinion that Sikhs and Hindus  are  among
      those who may qualify for protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention,
      says this:

           "I accept the  importance  of  such  guidance  although  in  the
           present circumstances of this case, I see no  compelling  reason
           as to why a young fit single man such  as  the  appellant  would
           have to return to his home area of Jalalabad rather than  Kabul.
             It is not unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to  stay  in  Kabul.
           Accordingly the question is whether or not he has a well-founded
           fear of persecution if he returns to Kabul.  There is  certainly
           some small  risk  to  the  appellant's  human  rights  (see  the
           appellant's bundle at page 40) and there is little on offer  for
           minority groups in Afghanistan (see the  appellant's  bundle  at
           page 30  and  page  57  in  the  CIPU  report  paragraph  6.88).
           However, the mere fact that returning minority  groups  such  as
           Hindus feel that they can  raise  proceedings  in  the  District
           Shura for the return of their land indicates how far things have
           improved (see CIPU 6.89).   The CIPU report at 6.84 states  that
           the EU's special representative and UNCHR, Kabul told  a  Danish
           Fact-Finding Mission to Afghanistan in September 2002 that  they
           believed the situation for non-Muslim groups such as Hindus  and
           Sikhs was generally good.   Paragraph 6.90 shows that  religious
           freedom has improved although  there  remain  concerns  for  the
           future (paragraphs 6.91 and 6.92).  Although  the  situation  is
           not a  happy  one,  it  appears  that  it  does  not  amount  to
           persecution."

      The challenges raised in the grounds  of  appeal  are  in  summary  as
      follows: (a) that the Adjudicator had failed to make clear findings of
      fact although apparently accepting the general factual credibility  of
      the claimant at paragraph  12  of  his  determination;  (b)  that  the
      Adjudicator had  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the  background
      evidence as to the situation in his home area of Jalalabad but, had he
      done so, must have concluded the Appellant was at  risk  in  his  home
      area as an ethnic Sikh; (c) that on a proper reading of the  objective
      evidence internal relocation was not open to the claimant.  Leave  was
      granted on statutory review by  Owen  J  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the Adjudicator had erred in his general approach to the
      risks faced by Sikhs in Afghanistan.


The claim of the third Appellant - Mr S

17.   We turn now to consider the factual basis of the appeal of  the  third
      appellant to whom we shall refer in this determination as Mr  S.    He
      was born in Kabul on 6 December 1955.  He is a citizen of  Afghanistan
      of Indian ethnicity and a Hindu  by  religion.    He  claims  to  have
      arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 10 February  2003  with
      his wife and three minor children  who  are  his  dependants  in  this
      appeal.    He was, at all events, here on that date  because  he  then
      claimed asylum.   After considering a Statement of Evidence  Form  and
      conducting  an  interview,  the  Secretary  of   State   refused   his
      application for the reasons set out in a letter  dated  19  May  2003.
      On 5 June 2003 the  Secretary  of  State  issued  directions  for  his
      removal to Afghanistan as an illegal  entrant  after  refusal  of  his
      asylum application.    He  appealed  against  that  decision  on  both
      asylum and human rights  grounds  and  his  appeal  was  heard  on  10
      November 2003 by an  Adjudicator,  Mrs  C  M  Graham.    She  says  at
      paragraph 34 of the determination that she accepts  the  core  of  the
      appellant's account as credible and she sets out that core account  at
      some length at paragraphs  11  to  17  of  her  determination  in  the
      following terms:

           "11.  The appellant is a practising Hindu  and  claims  to  have
                 been persecuted in Afghanistan  because  of  his  religion.
                 The appellant said  that  during  his  education  he  faced
                 harassment from Muslim students causing him to leave school
                 at an early age and continue  religious  studies  at  home.
                 The appellant said that he  was  unable  to  attend  higher
                 education because he was a Hindu and there were no jobs for
                 him at the end of his education.  The appellant joined  his
                 father who was a herbal medicine  doctor.    The  appellant
                 joined the [A] Pharmacy, which his father owns.


            12.  In 1991 the appellant bought a shop from an  Uzbek  person
                 who had left the country.    The appellant  said  that  his
                 brother began  running  a  business  from  the  shop  as  a
                 wholesaler.   The appellant bought a pharmacy in  1993  and
                 ran his business from there called the [K]  Pharmacy.   The
                 appellant said that the Mujahideen used  to  take  medicine
                 from the pharmacy and cash by force.   The  appellant  said
                 that he would regularly dress as a Muslim and wear  a  Kula
                 and shawl to protect himself from the  Muslim  authorities.
                 At the beginning of 1994 the appellant was on his way  home
                 from Jalalabad where he had been purchasing stock  when  he
                 was stopped by a group of Mujahideen.   The  appellant  had
                 forgotten to cover his hand, which had an Om sign (denoting
                 the Hindu religion).  The Mujahideen became angry that  the
                 appellant was dressed as a Muslim and beat him severely and
                 took him to the mountains where he was detained for fifteen
                 days.  The appellant  was released when his father  paid  a
                 large sum of money to the group.


           13.   The appellant said that under  the  Taliban  most  of  the
                 temples  were  closed  down  except  for  one,  which   the
                 appellant attended in secret.  The appellant said that as a
                 non-Muslim he had to display  a  yellow  flag  outside  his
                 house and wear a different type of  clothing  in  order  to
                 signify a different religion.  The appellant said that  the
                 Taliban were harassing the  appellant  and  his  family  to
                 convert to Islam or leave the country.  The appellant  said
                 that his father did not  want  to  leave  the  country  and
                 because he was an elderly person the appellant did not want
                 to leave his father alone in  Afghanistan.   The  appellant
                 said that the Taliban visited his house on  many  occasions
                 and destroyed their religious books and statues.


           14.   Following the defeat of the Taliban the Northern  Alliance
                 took control of Afghanistan.  In October 2002 whilst at his
                 shop  a  group  of  Northern  Alliance  men  came  to   the
                 Appellant's shop with the Uzbek man from whom the appellant
                 had purchased the shop.  The appellant was  told  that  the
                 shop belonged to the Uzbek man and that he was to hand over
                 possession of the shop to him.  The appellant was told that
                 the Uzbek man called Afzal was in possession  of  an  order
                 from the Court stating that the appellant should leave  the
                 property within  the  next  fifteen  days.   The  appellant
                 appealed to the Court and produced the legal  documentation
                 showing his ownership  of  the  shop  to  the  Judge.   The
                 appellant said that the possession order in favour of Afzal
                 was cancelled as a result.


           15.   A few days later the same men returned to the  appellant's
                 house armed with guns and demanded that the appellant  hand
                 over the  Court  Order.   The  appellant  refused  and  was
                 threatened.  The appellant returned to  Court  to  complain
                 but the Judge  that  he  saw  refused  to  help  him.   The
                 appellant says that he knows this  was  because  Afzal  had
                 contacts with Rashid  Dostrum,  a  powerful  warlord.   The
                 appellant says that the Judge told him informally  that  if
                 he converted to Islam then he would be able to help him.


           16.   Two days later, men came  to  the  appellant's  house  and
                 killed  the  appellant's  brother  Sanjay.   Following  the
                 appellant's  brother's   funeral   men   arrived   at   the
                 appellant's  house.   The  appellant's  sister-in-law   was
                 present and began to scream at the men that they had killed
                 her husband.  The armed men forcibly took the sister-in-law
                 with them and began shooting at the rest of the family.   A
                 few days later the appellant found the body of his  sister-
                 in-law outside his house.


           17.   The appellant and his family left Afghanistan in  November
                 2002 travelling from Kabul to Jalalabad  by  bus  and  then
                 crossed into Pakistan by bus.  The  appellant  remained  in
                 Pakistan for seventy days and then  left  the  country  via
                 Karachi airport with  the  assistance  of  an  agent.   The
                 appellant travelled to a number of unknown countries before
                 being placed in the rear of a lorry  and  arriving  in  the
                 United Kingdom on 10 February 2003."

18.   Subsequently in the determination in recording the evidence  given  at
      the hearing, the  Adjudicator  notes  that  the  appellant  stated  in
      evidence that when he left Kabul there were not more than 100  to  200
      families of Hindus there, probably a maximum of 1,500 Hindus  compared
      with 50,000 to 60,000 during the communist regime.    He  agreed  that
      he did not personally know Dostrum and had never  been  threatened  by
      him but said that Afzal had contacts with him  and  this  was  why  he
      could  not  obtain  a  fair  Court  hearing.    Paragraph  27  of  the
      determination records the evidence given in cross  examination  as  to
      the incident when his brother  was  killed  very  shortly  before  the
      departure of the claimant and his family, as follows:

           "The appellant said that when his brother was killed he  was  at
           his shop with his mother and  father,  two  brothers  and  their
           families.   The appellant agreed that his brother was  the  only
           person to be shot and killed and that the men did not  take  the
           papers concerning the shop on that occasion but returned  a  few
           days later.    The appellant said that his  brother  was  killed
           because of a number of factors including the dispute  concerning
           the ownership of the shop and also because of his religion.   It
           was put to the appellant that if the source of the dispute  were
           religion then the men would have killed  other  members  of  the
           family.  The appellant said that he had already lost  his  shop,
           his brother and sister-in-law and that if  he  had  remained  in
           Afghanistan then they would have taken  one  of  his  daughters.
           The appellant said that the precise cause of his sister-in-law's
           death was not known, there were no signs of torture  or  bullets
           and the family assumed that she had been strangled  by  her  own
           shawl.   The  appellant  said  it  was  possible  that  she  had
           committed suicide."


19.   He claimed he would be at risk of further persecution  in  Afghanistan
      even though the former owner of the  shop  had  now  taken  possession
      because they are influential people who were his enemies.

20.   As we have already noted, the Adjudicator states at  paragraph  34  of
      her determination that she accepts the core of the appellant's account
      as credible.  She expresses the view that his difficulties  under  the
      Northern Alliance relate to a property dispute  pure  and  simple  and
      have no religious element.

21.   Dealing with the question of whether he  can  seek  redress  from  the
      Courts,  the  Adjudicator  says  this   at   paragraph   38   of   her
      determination:

           "The appellant says that he cannot seek redress from the  Courts
           however, the first Judge rescinded the possession order obtained
           by Afzal and accepted the appellant's legal right to  ownership.
            The second occasion the appellant went to  Court,  he  went  to
           complain about threats  received  by  Afzal  and  was  therefore
           seeking a different remedy from the Court, it may  be  that  the
           Judge was unable to assist him  on  this  occasion  because  the
           matter had become a criminal matter.    In these  circumstances,
           it may be that he should have first  complained  to  the  police
           authorities and the incident could have been fully investigated.
             I do not accept that the appellant  has  been  denied  a  fair
           hearing in Court and do not accept that the second Judge refused
           to assist the appellant because of his religion."


22.   The Adjudicator gives no reason whatsoever for the  rejection  of  two
      elements in an account which she found generally credible  as  appears
      in the last sentence in paragraph 38.   Nor does there appear to  have
      been any consideration of the reality of the provision  of  protection
      by the authorities to people in the appellant's position in  what  she
      says earlier in that paragraph. The grounds of appeal may  be  briefly
      summarised as follows: (a) that the  Adjudicator  failed  to  consider
      that under Article 3 no Refugee  Convention  reason  arises;  (b)  the
      Adjudicator failed properly to consider the objective evidence  as  to
      the failures in the justice system in Kabul, coupled with  the  degree
      of societal discrimination against ethnic minorities.

The Situation of Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan

23.   It was the principal submission of both Miss Jones and Mr Saleem  that
      Sikhs and Hindus formed a persecuted minority in  Afghanistan  because
      the level of discrimination against them is such as to engage both the
      Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the European Convention.  On  this
      argument, it would be a breach of the United  Kingdom's  international
      obligations to seek to return any Sikh or Hindu to Afghanistan.

24.   For the Secretary of State, Mr McGirr did not dispute that  Sikhs  and
      Hindus as a class are the subject of discrimination in Afghanistan, as
      is  amply  demonstrated  by  the  international  background   evidence
      including that summarised in the current  CIPU  report  before  us  of
      October 2004.   It was his case, however, that the UNHCR guidance  was
      correct and that whilst members of these  communities  fell  into  the
      category of those who might be in need  of  international  protection,
      whether such surrogate protection was in fact required  depended  upon
      the individual circumstances of each claimant  and  not  simply  their
      membership of a potentially disadvantaged class.

25.   We have already noted that the  position  of  Afghanistani  Sikhs  has
      been the subject of consideration by  the  Tribunal  in  three  recent
      cases of which two, namely IB and TK and KK were reported decisions of
      the Tribunal.  In both those decisions the Tribunal accepted  that  RS
      should be treated as a reliable witness of fact  in  relation  to  the
      situation of Sikhs in Kabul.  Although KK  made  it  clear  that  this
      conclusion was reached absent any other evidence to the  contrary,  it
      was part of Miss Jones' submissions to us that it should  not  now  be
      open to the Secretary of State to go behind those decisions  and  that
      the general reliability of RS should be taken to have been established
      by them.

26.   That is, in  our  judgement,  an  unsustainable  proposition.   First,
      neither of those decisions was issued  for  the  purposes  of  country
      guidance generally and so can lay no claim to the special cachet to be
      afforded to country guidance decisions of the Tribunal.   Secondly, it
      ignores the clear  restrictions  on  the  scope  of  country  guidance
      decisions of the Tribunal set out by the Court of Appeal in SK v  SSHD
      [2003] EWCA Civ 841 which underlines that findings of fact in relation
      to a country situation must necessarily be related to  the  particular
      date at which they are made and be  dependent  on  the  scope  of  the
      evidence which was before the Tribunal in question.   In  the  present
      appeals, the Secretary of State sought to challenge the credibility of
      RS as we shall set out below by way of later evidence and  that  is  a
      course properly open to him.  The purpose of country guidance cases is
      to avoid the necessity for fresh decisions on  the  same  material  in
      situations of common application in a particular country.    They  are
      not binding on Adjudicators but it will be an  error  of  law  for  an
      Adjudicator to depart from country guidance  issued  by  the  Tribunal
      unless he can show proper reasons for so doing on an evidential  basis
      in the specific appeal  being  considered,  either  because  of  later
      evidence or because he has before him relevant evidence which was  not
      drawn to the attention of the Tribunal at the  time  they  gave  their
      country guidance.

27.   In IB and TK the Tribunal noted that the evidence before  it  from  RS
      (the statement of 3 December  2003)  was  not  inconsistent  with  the
      general  tenor  of  the  international  reports,  to  which   detailed
      reference was also made, but that it served to flesh out that  general
      evidence as regards the position of the Sikh community in Afghanistan.

28.   The determination in IB and TK was promulgated on 20  May  2004  where
      the  background  evidence  (summarised  at   paragraph   15   of   the
      determination) was considered at length at paragraphs 20 to 40 of that
      determination and, subject as modified below, we  adopt  the  analysis
      and reasoning in relation  to  that  background  evidence  upon  which
      reliance has also been placed in the current appeals.

29.   In that case the Secretary of State had conceded  that  IB,  who  like
      the first and second appellants before us came from Jalalabad,  had  a
      well-founded fear of persecution in his home area so that  his  appeal
      turned on whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him  to  relocate
      to Kabul with his young family.

30.   The Tribunal's general conclusions as to the  situation  of  the  Sikh
      community at that date were set out in paragraphs  38  to  40  of  the
      determination as follows:

           "38.  Before we can consider the situation of each appellant, it
                 is  appropriate  to  give  our  views  in  respect  of  the
                 situation of the Sikh community in  Afghanistan  generally.
                 The evidence  which  we  have  considered  above  certainly
                 points to a situation of  general  societal  discrimination
                 and of interference with economic and educational rights in
                 respect of  which  the  state  does  not  appear  to  offer
                 adequate  protection  or  provision.     Because   of   the
                 concession made by the respondent in the case of B,  we  do
                 not have to consider the evidence other than in relation to
                 Kabul but there is no reason to believe from  the  evidence
                 that the situation of Sikhs elsewhere  in  Afghanistan,  in
                 the limited areas in which they reside, is any better  than
                 in Kabul.   It may be worse.   In Kabul,  SIAF  might  have
                 the ability to provide a sufficiency of protection as  KFOR
                 does in Kosovo but it will not intervene unless asked to do
                 so by the interim administration and there  is  nothing  we
                 can find in the evidence before us to demonstrate that  the
                 administration does make such requests in relation  to  the
                 protection of members the Sikh  community.    Indeed,  such
                 evidence as we have been referred to would seem  to  be  to
                 the  contrary.    Nonetheless,  we  accept  that  the  mere
                 presence of SIAF is likely to have a practical  restraining
                 effect on  overt  public  excess.    Considering  the  high
                 threshold to be reached before the Conventions are engaged,
                 it does not seem to us that these matters, however hard and
                 difficult it might make the lives of  the  Sikh  community,
                 will be sufficient to say that there is a general  risk  of
                 persecution or breach of Article 3 rights simply  by  being
                 an Afghan Sikh.  To that extent, we agree with Miss  Jones'
                 submission that it is the individual circumstances of  each
                 appellant which require consideration and  that,  as  UNCHR
                 accepts, it is not the case that Sikhs as such are entitled
                 to recognition as refugees but  rather  that  they  form  a
                 class of whom individual members may, on the basis of their
                 particular situation, properly  qualify  for  international
                 protection.


           39.   To that extent, the material before us does supersede that
                 before the Tribunal in  Gulati  [[2002]  UKIAT  02130]  and
                 suggests that K (Afghanistan) [2003] UKIAT 00057  also  may
                 be unsafe in so far as it considers on the  evidence  there
                 reviewed that there is a sufficiency of protection in Kabul
                 for those whose previous history points to past persecution
                 or  adverse  interest  by  members  or  factions   of   the
                 Mujahideen, who retain a position of  influence  in  Kabul.
                 They may now have directly conflicting interests with those
                 of returnees seeking to recover their property.    Evidence
                 of  a  past  personal  animus  against  a  specific  asylum
                 applicant would also be of potential relevance.


           40.   We do  not  suggest  that  this  picture  of  the  current
                 situation means  there  is  a  real  possibility  of  or  a
                 reasonable likelihood of persecution in Kabul for all Sikhs
                 but it is part of the background picture to be  taken  into
                 account in considering the position of those to be returned
                 to Kabul."


31.   The next Tribunal decision relating to Sikhs in Afghanistan  was  that
      in KK promulgated on 16 September 2004.   The evidence there  differed
      from that before the earlier Tribunal in that there was an  additional
      statement of 13 June 2004  by  RS  -  it  is  not  clear  whether  his
      statement of 23 April 2004 was also before the Tribunal - in which  he
      set out details of eight specific cases of violence to Sikh  or  Hindu
      Afghans in Kabul which had taken place within the six weeks  prior  to
      that statement, and in which it was accepted  that  he  was  reporting
      first hand accounts from the victims.   The effect of the evidence was
      summarised at paragraph 19 of the Tribunal's determination as follows:

           "Each of these cases involves casual street violence  by  Muslim
           Afghans on a Sikh or Hindu.   In each case, except for E,  there
           is some indication in the conduct of the  aggressors  that  they
           have either selected their victim on that  basis,  or  that  the
           victim's traditional dress (wearing a Turban in the  case  of  a
           man, or not wearing a veil in the case of a  woman)  has  formed
           the basis for some  particular  humiliation.    Mr  Sheikh  [the
           Presenting Officer] suggested that they amounted to no more than
           discrimination: we do not agree.   While only D,  a  Hindu,  was
           knocked out, and  none  of  the  victims  suffered  any  serious
           physical injury, these  were  very  nasty  incidents  of  street
           hooliganism with a religious or racial pretext, which would have
           been regarded as a grave concern if they had  happened  in  this
           country".

      RS went on to say that the families of the victims were frightened  to
      report what had happened to the  authorities  because  they  had  lost
      trust and confidence in the new administration and because the  police
      force consisted of former members of the Mujahideen.

32.   The Tribunal in KK concluded:

           "34.  However, Mr RS's evidence, which for present  purposes  we
                 have decided we ought to accept as passing the  Karanakaran
                 threshold, does appear  to  show  three  things.     First,
                 there is a reasonable likelihood  of  at  least  moderately
                 serious violence against  Sikhs  because  they  are  Sikhs;
                 second, that is encouraged, and not guarded against by  the
                 perpetrators' perception of the  authorities'  attitude  to
                 it; third, there is nothing to show any specific commitment
                 by  either  the  international  forces,   or   the   Afghan
                 authorities, to the protections of minorities generally, or
                 the Sikhs in particular.   In our view those add  up  to  a
                 real risk of persecution at the  present  time:    that  is
                 certainly not to say that all Sikhs are  being  persecuted;
                 but, on the evidence available to us (which was not in  its
                 present form before the Tribunal in IB 150),  any  of  them
                 who are identifiable as such run a real risk of it.

           36.   Until Mr RS's evidence has been authoritatively  confirmed
                 or disproved from some official source, it would  be  wrong
                 to give our decision (which, so far as it differs from that
                 in IB 150, relies on it entirely) the status of a  "country
                 guidance" case; but we do have to do the best we  can  with
                 the individual case before us, and, for the reasons we have
                 given at paragraph 34, we do think there was a real risk of
                 Convention persecution or ill-treatment in this case,  even
                 on the minimal findings of fact made by the Adjudicator  in
                 the appellant's favour".

33.   When the first and second appeals first came before us for hearing  in
      January, the Presenting  Officer  produced  a  report  by  a  Mr  Neil
      Roberts, dated 13 December 2004, of his meeting with RS on 1  November
      2004.  This, on the face of it, suggested that what had been  said  in
      the two statements  of  RS  was  untrue.    Leave  was  given  to  the
      respondent to adduce the report in evidence conditionally upon  filing
      and serving a transcript of the interview referred to in the  note  or
      any contemporaneous notes made by Mr Roberts and  the  respondent  was
      also directed to disclose for what purposes that report  was  written,
      who  requested  it  and  when  such  requests  had  been  made.    The
      appellants were given leave to file and serve any further evidence  on
      which they sought to rely and, as a result, on behalf of  Mr  S  there
      has now been filed a comprehensive statement by RS  dated  9  February
      2005 at the end of which it is made clear it  has  been  "settled"  by
      Counsel and translated  to  RS  by  a  member  of  staff   of  Mr  S's
      solicitors. This effectively incorporates and supersedes  his  earlier
      statements save that it is silent on population numbers,  as  well  as
      explaining the nature of the interview on which Mr Roberts' report was
      based.  On behalf of the other appellants, their solicitors have  also
      procured RS's further statement  of  25  February  2005.  Finally,  in
      response to those directions, the respondent filed Mr Roberts comments
      dated 1 February 2005 on his report of his meeting with RS.

34.   It is convenient to deal first with the  two  reports  of  Mr  Roberts
      filed on behalf of the respondent. His original report of 13  December
      2004 recorded that he conducted an interview with RS on 28 October  at
      the British Embassy having introduced himself as an  Embassy  official
      and a member of the Home Office.   There was no interpreter as he says
      that RS spoke English well.  He refers to his being the author of  the
      statement of 14 June 2004  to  which  we  have  already  referred.  He
      records RS as saying that whereas the Sikh  and  Hindu  population  in
      1992 "totalled 2% of the population (about 30,000)" it  had  decreased
      by 2004 to "only 1200  families  and  about  6,500  Sikhs  and  Hindus
      remaining". He then records RS as saying that cremation is allowed and
      practised and that RS showed him a letter  from  the  Mayor  of  Kabul
      authorising Hindus and  Sikhs  to  continue  to  cremate  their  dead;
      further there was no bar to attending the temple in order  to  worship
      and he is recorded as saying that twice a day up to 1,200  Hindus  and
      Sikhs gathered at his Gurdwara to practise their religion.  Mr Roberts
      noted he was unable to attend RS's Gurdwara as invited  because  of  a
      major security alert. He did complain that many Hindus and  Sikhs  had
      had property wrongly taken from them by the Mujahideen  but  that  the
      majority had documentary evidence of land ownership and  could  pursue
      their claims in Court.  RS said property theft affected all religions.
      As to education, he said the Afghan government had recently founded  a
      Hindu/Sikh school with four teachers.   He  said  that  RS  sends  his
      children to the Amani High School which is considered by  most  to  be
      the best school in Kabul and RS stated  there  were  no  problems  for
      Hindu or Sikh school children in  receiving  an  education  comparable
      with other Afghans.  On the subject of elections,  no  Sikh  or  Hindu
      encountered any problems in registering or voting in the  Presidential
      election. RS had been a member of the Loya Jirga  until  recently  and
      intended to  stand  again  at  the  next  election.  He  welcomed  the
      electoral success of President Karzai. He also recorded RS  as  saying
      that until recently there were difficulties in relation to  crime  and
      security in the area of Kabul where most Hindus  and  Sikhs  live  but
      that "most of the problems related to general criminality and were not
      targeted at any religion or  ethnic  minority".    Since  the  present
      Minister for Defence had moved into the area security had improved  by
      reason of extra security and road blocks and RS is recorded as  saying
      there were now hardly any crimes in this  region  of  Kabul  and  that
      Hindus and Sikhs were able to move and travel freely.  He was  further
      recorded as saying than any type of criminal  act  against  Hindus  or
      Sikhs tends to go unreported to the police  as  there  was  a  natural
      mistrust of any Afghan in authority but he accepted that such  reports
      should be made and said he intended  to  advise  his  congregation  to
      begin a process  of  reporting  any  wrongdoing.     Mr  Roberts  then
      concludes as follows:

           "From my conversation with [RS], I am unable to find evidence of
           discrimination by the state or other parties in Kabul.    [RS]'s
           report was written nearly 5 months ago, and  security  seems  to
           have improved in the area where the majority of Hindus and Sikhs
           live.  However, throughout the length of  our  conversation,  he
           did  not  make  any  comments  that  suggested  that  there  was
           discrimination even at the time of his written  statement.    In
           the  areas  of  crime,  education,   political   representation,
           religious freedom and property rights, [RS]  stated  that  there
           was  no  discrimination  of  Hindus  or  Sikhs  based  on  their
           religious or ethnic background."


35.   As we have said we were concerned as to the way in which  this  report
      had been prepared and gave directions for there to be further  details
      filed and served.   Our concerns arose on two bases: first, that if Mr
      Roberts' report were accurate, it would appear that RS was now  saying
      that what he had previously said  in  the  documents  which  had  been
      produced to the Tribunal was not true; secondly, the claims that there
      was no discrimination whatsoever against Sikhs or Hindus on the  basis
      of their religion or ethnicity clearly flew in the face of the current
      CIPU report as well as various international reports  including  those
      derived from UNCHR.

  36. In his subsequent comment on his report  dated  1  February  2005,  Mr
      Roberts says that he would now amend  the  conclusion  which  we  have
      quoted above by excluding the first sentence saying that he was unable
      to find evidence of discrimination by the state or  other  parties  in
      Kabul, accepting that this statement is open to misinterpretation  and
      is not supported by the report "as brief as it is" and that,  were  he
      given the opportunity to do so,  he  would  not  make  that  statement
      again.    He  states  that  although  he  had  been  asked  to  gather
      information


            "that would provide a more recent, disclosable report than [that
           of RS of 14 June 2004] which  indicated  either  that  effective
           protection would be available to the Sikh community in Kabul, or
           that RS's report was accurate"


       his interview, which he estimates lasted about 30 minutes, was of  an
      informal nature in which he took occasional notes which he  says  were
      not comprehensive and that he used those  notes  as  a  basis  of  the
      report which he wrote, having taken the  headings  of  the  issues  he
      raised from those matters set out in the 14 June report.   He did  not
      send a copy of the draft report to RS and did not ask him  to  confirm
      that the report which he had prepared was  an  accurate  portrayal  of
      RS's views.

37.   In his two  statements  made  in  February  2005,  RS  refers  to  his
      interview with Mr Roberts. The latest statement says in  this  respect
      simply that he has read the report of 13 December 2004 and "I  do  not
      confirm it is my whole statement". In  his  statement  of  9  February
      2005, he deals with it in more detail. He says   his  recollection  is
      that the interview lasted for about 15 minutes and he regarded  it  as
      an informal interview as Mr Roberts and his  assistant  did  not  take
      notes of his replies to their questions, nor was  the  interview  tape
      recorded.  His recollection was that he was asked about four questions
      at interview and he did not have the benefit of  an  interpreter.   He
      says that he was asked about the problems that Sikhs and  Hindus  were
      facing in  Kabul  and  produced  correspondence  with  the  office  of
      President Karzai relating to the problems they were experiencing about
      cremation.   He says he was asked  whether  Sikh  and  Hindu  children
      could go to public school in Kabul and replied that they could  do  so
      but that no further questions were asked about  that  issue.    Beyond
      that RS does not deal with what took place at this interview.

38.   It was Miss Jones' submission that  little  or  no  weight  should  be
      placed upon Mr Roberts' report  in  evaluating  the  evidence  of  RS.
      Having regard to the clearly informal  and  curtailed  nature  of  the
      interview, we find it difficult to regard it as an exercise which  was
      seriously intended to seek to establish the true position of Sikhs and
      Hindus in Kabul and Afghanistan  generally.     Our  concern  in  this
      respect is enhanced by the fact that Mr Roberts  now  clearly  accepts
      that insofar as his initial report states that there is no evidence of
      discrimination against Sikhs or Hindus in  Afghanistan  it  cannot  be
      regarded as accurate.   The Tribunal had made clear that  it  regarded
      RS's earlier statements as evidence properly to be taken into  account
      of the situation of Sikhs in Kabul and,  indeed,  in  IB  and  TK  the
      general background evidence other than that of RS was explored at some
      length so that the basis of the Tribunal's concerns  would  have  been
      very apparent to any one  who  had  taken  the  trouble  to  read  its
      determinations which, presumably, gave rise to the interview which did
      take place in late October. Nevertheless, whilst we  do  not  consider
      that Mr Roberts' conclusions, whatever they may be  having  regard  to
      his second report,  are  to  be  accorded  any  particular  evidential
      weight, it would be wrong to discount the record of the  interview  in
      our consideration of the reliability of RS as a witness. His  February
      statements make it clear that he does not challenge the accuracy of Mr
      Roberts' record of what he said at the interview  but  simply  asserts
      that because of its nature it provides only a partial instead  of  the
      full picture.  Whilst that may be  so,  it  remains  relevant  to  our
      evaluation of his evidence  that:   (a)  at  his  Gurdwara  some  1200
      worshippers were able to assemble for a particular ceremony in October
      2004; we note that he  appears  to  be  mistaken  as  to  Mr  Roberts'
      attendance pursuant to the invitation  he  had  issued  but  place  no
      weight on this because it  may  well  have  been  a  not  unreasonable
      assumption based on an earlier accepted invitation to  so  crowded  an
      event; (b) that there was ongoing dialogue with the Mayor of Kabul  on
      a formal basis about the problems of cremation; (c) that  he  accepted
      the court mechanisms for  settling  land  disputes  existed  and  that
      property theft was a generalised problem not  confined  to  Sikhs  and
      Hindus; (d) he  had  been  able  to  secure  satisfactory  educational
      facilities for his son and that there was no legal restriction on Sikh
      and Hindu children attending state schools; (e)  that  the  government
      had founded a school for Sikhs and Hindus (presumably in Kabul because
      all his evidence is directed to the situation there); (f)  that  Sikhs
      and Hindus had not been impeded  in  exercising  their  constitutional
      voting rights; (g) that most security  problems  were  the  result  of
      general criminality not targeted at any particular group or sector  of
      society; and (h) that the security situation in his own part of  Kabul
      had substantially improved since the Defence Minister had moved there.
      It is also relevant to our evaluation of his reliability that none  of
      this information was contained in any of  the  three  statements  that
      preceded the interview although RS does seek to deal with  certain  of
      the issues in his expanded statements made in February 2005.

  39. In both  IB and TK and KK the Tribunal was mindful of the need to bear
      in mind that RS could not be regarded as an impartial witness.  Indeed
      he expressly made clear that he was seeking  to  speak  for  the  Sikh
      minority of which he was a  member.  What  we  have  recorded  in  the
      preceding paragraph serves to underline the need to ensure  that  what
      he says is not to be regarded as partial, in both senses of that word,
      and requires careful weighing against the general background evidence.
      A further limitation on the scope of his evidence is that it  relates,
      as he makes clear, only to the situation in  Kabul  of  which  he  can
      claim first hand knowledge. The most he can say (and such a  reference
      appears only in his latest statement)  as  to  the  situation  outside
      Kabul is that "there are often reports  of  shootings  and  deaths  in
      Afghanistan, and for [sic] Sikhs and Hindus in  particular".  No  such
      reports are  before  us.  We  note,  however,  that  in  none  of  his
      statements does he claim that any Sikh or Hindu in Kabul has been shot
      or killed and the only examples of ill-treatment given, as opposed  to
      generalised claims, are those set out in the statement of 14 June 2004
      to which we will refer later. Finally, there are some concerns  as  to
      his consistency which is, perhaps, most noticeable in the way in which
      he approaches the numbers of Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan. Although
      it is clear from the country reports that there  is  no  agreement  on
      this issue, one would expect one witness to be consistent in  his  own
      approach. Surprisingly, RS is not.  In the first  statement  (December
      2003) he says the number  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in  Afghanistan  has
      decreased to around 300 families in Kabul; in the April 2004 statement
      he says that in 1992 there were over 30,000 Sikhs in  Kabul  but  that
      there are now only about 3000 Sikhs in the whole  of  Afghanistan;  by
      June 2004 "there are no more than 1500 families" who  "are  living  in
      the temples and we cannot afford to maintain these  people";  although
      there is no reference to population numbers in the  fourth  statement,
      by the time of the  last  statement  (25  February  2005)  "there  are
      approximately  1200  Sikh  and  Hindu  families  and  about  6,500  in
      Afghanistan as a whole". It is right to add that in June  2002  UNOCHA
      (the  United  Nations  Office  for  Co-ordination  of  Human  Affairs)
      estimated there were 1000 Sikhs in Afghanistan of whom about half were
      in Jalalabad but in July 2003 UNHCR said there were  about  3500  Sikh
      and Hindu families mainly in  Kabul,  Ghazni,  Kandahar,  Helmand  and
      Nangahar Provinces.

40.   In his latest statement RS treats Sikhs and Hindus in  Afghanistan  as
      falling to be treated similarly.  He has made  clear  from  his  first
      statement that he regards  himself  as  speaking  on  behalf  of  both
      communities to whom he says he reports the  results  of  his  dialogue
      with the Government. Mr McGirr said that he did not  seek  to  suggest
      that there was any difference in the treatment  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus
      there and, indeed, that  approach  is  borne  out  by  the  background
      evidence  which  generally  treats  both  communities   together   and
      identifies them in one report  as  having  "united  in  adversity"  in
      contrast to the situation which exists in India  where  they  must  be
      regarded as separate religious communities.    According  to  RS,  the
      degree of that unity in adversity extends  to  their  using  the  same
      places of worship now and there is general  background  evidence  that
      the number of Sikh Temples in Afghanistan has been drastically reduced
      by the general damage which occurred  to  the  infrastructure  between
      1992 and 2002. RS says  that  there  is  effectively  only  one  fully
      functioning Gurdwara in Kabul  out  of  the  former  eight  there  but
      another is partly functional whilst the remainder require  rebuilding.
      It is one of his complaints that neither  national  nor  international
      funding has yet been provided for this purpose. There is  no  specific
      evidence as to the situation outside Kabul.

41.   The matters which RS identifies as adversely affecting  the  Sikh  and
      Hindu communities  relate  to  freedom  to  practice  their  religion,
      educational facilities, economic prospects, and lack of sufficiency of
      protection from the state both in relation to property claims  and  to
      the personal safety of individual  members  of  the  population.    We
      propose to deal briefly with each of these heads.

42.   The primary difficulty in  relation  to  religious  observance,  apart
      from the reduction in the number of available Gurdwaras  noted  above,
      is stated to be  in  relation  to  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  practice  of
      cremation of the dead.  This was not a matter raised by RS in  any  of
      his first three statements but appears  to  have  developed  from  the
      issue raised at his interview with Mr Roberts. He makes clear that  it
      has been the subject of correspondence with  President  Karzai  which,
      indeed, he produced to Mr Roberts.  He says  in  his  statement  of  3
      February 2005 that the official  position  is  that  Sikhs  should  be
      allowed to carry out  funeral  rights  according  to  their  religious
      custom,  which  would,  of  course,  be   in   accordance   with   the
      constitutional provisions as to freedom of religion and its  exercise.
      But, RS then says that the reality is that no such facility  has  been
      provided by the Government.   He explains that they can no longer  use
      the original Crematoria in Qalacha area District  8  of  Kabul  (which
      belong to the Sikh and  Hindu  communities  and  have  been  used  for
      decades) because they are now surrounded by houses  owned  by  Muslims
      constructed in the area since  the  1992  Mujahideen  government.  The
      greater number of  Muslims  returning  from  abroad  as  refugees  has
      overcrowded the area and the local Muslim community  will  not  permit
      the use of the Crematoria - cremation,  is,  of  course,  contrary  to
      Muslim religious  practice  which  requires  a  burial  of  the  dead.
      Accordingly, in recent years his community had, with  the  consent  of
      the Priest and Trustees, cremated their dead within  the  compound  of
      the Kart-e-Parwan Gurdwara but the local Muslims who now  live  around
      this Gurdwara have also raised  objections  and  have  prevented  such
      cremations being carried out.   Both these matters  have  been  raised
      with President Karzai's office without any provision of an alternative
      site to date. His last statement, however, makes it clear  that  there
      is recognition of the problems with the local  population  because  he
      says that security guards attend  now  at  cremations  and  cites  one
      specific instance in January 2005 when members  of  the  local  Muslim
      community sought to prevent a cremation taking place in the authorised
      ground and those present retreated to the Gurdwara  for  safety.    If
      this is so, it follows that either the cremation was intended to be at
      the traditional crematoria (where he complains  of  difficulties  with
      the local population) or that another site outside  the  Kart-e-Parwan
      Gurdwara exists. In either  case,  it  suggests  that  the  government
      assistance extends to sites other than the Gurdwara in addition to the
       provision of security to guard  against  the  difficulties  with  the
      local Muslims to which RS refers.

43.   As to attendance at his Gurdwara, in his June  statement  he  referred
      to the remaining population being no more than 1500 families "who were
      living in the temples". It is, however, clear from  what  is  said  in
      other statements by RS that a substantial number of the Sikhs in Kabul
      have their own properties still. That clearly applies to  RS  and,  as
      appears below, he also  refers  to  at  least  30  families  who  have
      returned as having  been  able  to  regain  possession  of  their  own
      properties there. At highest what he is saying on an analysis  of  all
      his statements is that those without their own homes  were  living  in
      the Gurdwaras as they had nowhere else to go. Apart, however, from the
      reference in the June statement which clearly cannot be taken as being
      accurate in relation to the whole of  the  remaining  Sikh  and  Hindu
      populations even in Kabul, the references in other statements make  it
      clear that an unquantified number of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  continue  to
      reside in their own homes. RS says that the numbers taking shelter  in
      the Gurdwaras make it difficult for Sikhs  or  Hindus  to  attend  the
      Temple  to  worship  twice  a  day  as  required  by  their  religion.
      Nevertheless, he confirms that it was correct, as Mr Roberts reported,
      that on the day Mr Roberts was invited to  visit  it  was  a  specific
      religious festival  and  some  1,200  members  of  the  community  had
      attended the celebration held within the compound of the Gurdwara.  He
      says, however, that this is not the norm and that only about 100 or so
      people attend daily.    Others  were  willing  to  take  the  risk  of
      attending morning prayers at 6.00 am when most  in  Kabul  were  still
      asleep. Given the ability to host so large a gathering for a  specific
      ceremony, it seems to us that this part of his complaint comes down to
      the fact, as he claims, that  the  presence  of  families  within  the
      Gurdwara can be disruptive of religious observances there.

44.   In his latest statement he says that his Gurdwara had been  bombed  by
      the Muslims although the date of the incident is  not  specified.   He
      says he complained to the police who recorded the complaint but failed
      to investigate it although there  were  many  Sikhs  and  Hindus  then
      living there as  noted  above.    No  effective  protection  had  been
      provided by the police.

45.   In his statement of 9 February RS says that at one time - the date  is
      not specified and there is no earlier reference to such an incident  -
      the local Muslims  and  their  children  were  regularly  stoning  the
      Gurdwara situated in the Shore Bazaar and his complaint to the  police
      produced no assistance.     A group of Sikh elders then went to  visit
      the Muslim elders in the  local  Mosques  who  called  the  youngsters
      before them in the presence of the Sikh delegation and told them  that
      they must not stone the Gurdwara.   RS says  that  they  have  stopped
      stoning the Gurdwara but now stone Sikhs and Hindus and their families
      who enter and leave that Gurdwara.  He does not complain  that  anyone
      has been hurt by such actions.  He says he lodged  a  complaint  about
      this behaviour at the local police station but it was simply noted and
      no further action was taken.

46.   As to the question of school facilities, he repeats that  the  reality
      is that only some 10 boys in his community go to school (aged about  9
      to 10 years) and none of  the  girls  do  so.    There  are  some  180
      children of school age of whom 40%  are  girls.    He  says  that  the
      reality is that adults from his community are fearful in  the  streets
      of Kabul as to their personal safety and that for this reason  parents
      are not willing to take the risk of sending their  children  to  local
      schools for fear of their personal safety from abuse and abduction  by
      the  overwhelming  Muslim  local  community.   This  stems  from   the
      perception of the Sikhs and Hindus that the police  will  not  provide
      them with any assistance in the difficulties which he says  they  face
      in the streets from local Muslims who regard them as  "Kawfirs"  (non-
      believers).  As we have already noted, RS's own son goes to one of the
      best schools in Kabul  and  in  his  latest  statement  he  says  that
      although there is a school in Bagh-e-Bala district for Sikh and  Hindu
      children it is not currently functioning because there are no teachers
      or materials available. He says the school was built 25  to  30  years
      ago but the local community  has  been  unable  to  restart  education
      there. Given that such teachers would  be  from  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
      communities, we are bound to say that this strikes us as  odd.  It  is
      also at variance with a BBC World News report of 30 October 2002 in Mr
      S's bundle where, reporting from Kabul, their correspondent says  that
      whilst Hindu and Sikh children were  free  to  attend  ordinary  state
      schools, their parents did not send them because the  Muslim  children
      abused and discriminated against them on the street and in  school  so
      that presently Hindu and Sikh children  were  being  educated  at  the
      temples and places of worship. In the same bundle  is  a  report  from
      Religioscope, an organisation unknown to us,  of 28 January 2003 which
      reprints a report of a few days earlier from the Institute for War and
      Peace Reporting. This cites difficulties with education  and  contains
      the following passages:

           "Our children can't study in ordinary schools because the Muslim
           children tease them for their hair and  bracelets",  said  Avtar
           Singh, head of the only Hindu school In Kabul and leader of  the
           community in the capital, whose remarks refer equally to  Sikhs.
           "So our children can only study  in our  temple,  where  we  can
           teach only four subjects - Maths, English, our own language  and
           religion. We have run a school in a temple in the west of  Kabul
           for the past 35 years. Before  the  wars,  5,000  students  were
           studying there and others  studies  in  ordinary  establishments
           alongside Muslims." ...


           Asked why they did not  take  their  case  to  the  ministry  of
           education, Otar Singh said, "We want our children to study  with
           Muslims in ordinary schools, with the help of the ministry.  But
           at present we can't because, firstly, our  children  don't  even
           know their own language, so how can they learn  Dari  (Persian).
           Secondly, other children will know that they are different, from
           their hair, bracelets and names, and will tease them." ...
           In Ghazi Ayob Lycee, in the west of Kabul, 13  year  old  Manish
           Kumar, a lone Hindu in a Muslim school, said he had  experienced
           no problems and got on well with his class-mates. ...


           The principal of Ghazi Ayub School,  Sadat,  told  IWPR,  "Hindu
           boys and girls won't face any problems  if  they  want  to  come
           here. Before the wars, half of our  students  were  Hindus,  and
           they all got on well together. We have told Manish Kumar that if
           he has any problems he should come straight to us."


           Deputy Education Minister Zabihullah  Esmati said,  "Hindus  are
           Afghans, and they have a right  to  go  to  school  with  Muslim
           children. The doors of every school are  open  to  everyone.  If
           anyone teases or bullies them they can complain  to  the  school
           principal. And failing that, they can come  and  tell  us  their
           problems."


47.   As to economic prospects, it is  clear  from  the  general  background
      evidence that although the Sikhs and Hindus were  formerly  active  in
      commerce, their position was largely eroded during the period  of  the
      Taliban and has never recovered from  this.    Those  general  reports
      indicate that they have been subject to extortion on the part  of  the
      Mujahideen and RS says that this continues although to a lesser extent
      because of the depressed financial circumstances of those remaining in
      Kabul.  In his statement of 9 February he says that Government work is
      not available to them save in one case of  which  he  is  aware  which
      involves an engineer with 25 years specialist experience who does work
      for the government. Nevertheless, a little later in the same statement
      when commenting upon the lack of national and  international  support,
      he says that Sikhs are forced to  survive  in  Kabul  'by  undertaking
      business  activity'  and  that  others  survive   through   charitable
      donations from relatives abroad. He complains that women  cannot  find
      any jobs to sustain themselves and because of the fear of violence  on
      the streets they do not go out of doors, leaving the  men  to  perform
      any normal outside activities such as shopping.   We observe, however,
      that  according  to  the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  of  July  2003
      discriminatory treatment of women in Afghanistan is  a  general  issue
      related to gender rather than ethnicity and the matters raised  by  RS
      appear equally applicable to the  majority  of  women  in  Afghanistan
      according to that report.

48.   So far as the provision of a sufficiency of protection  is  concerned,
      it is his claim that this fails both on a personal safety and property
      rights protection basis.

49.   In the June 2004 statement considered in KK he had  given  8  specific
      examples of violence which  had  been  suffered  within  the  6  weeks
      preceding the preparation of that report.   It is appropriate to  give
      brief  details  because  of  the   considerable   diversity   of   the
      circumstances of each case.   RS anonymises them by alphabetic  letter
      and we adopt the same approach.   A was a 15 year  old  going  to  the
      shop when stopped by four men who told  him  to  say  "Allah-ah-Akbar"
      meaning Allah is great.  When he refused they beat him up, pulled  out
      his hair bun and urinated on it.   B was a priest who, when challenged
      by three men as to where he was  going,  said  he  was  attending  the
      Temple.   He was told it would be destroyed and a Mosque built in  its
      place and when he said that was not possible he was assaulted and  his
      turban removed and thrown on the street.   C was a 43  year  old  lady
      walking with her young son who was told to cover her head and when she
      tried to do so she was hit with a baton and her head was cut open.   D
      was a Hindu and  identifiable as such.   He was singled out by  a  man
      for  no  apparent  reason  and  severely  beaten  so  that  he  became
      unconscious until rescued by a passing Sikh who took him to  hospital.
        E was a 22 year old cosmetic seller in the Shore Bazaar  Market  who
      tried to recover his goods from a customer who  had  refused  to  pay.
      He sought the assistance of two men patrolling the  streets  but  they
      refused to help him and beat him with the butts of their guns so  that
      he could hardly walk.  F, a female Sikh, was sitting on  a  bench  not
      far from the Temple when three men made sexual  advances  to  her  and
      told her that they would convert her to Islam if  she  rejected  them.
      They also said this would send the message to other Sikh women of  the
      treatment they could expect but before anything further took  place  a
      group of Sikhs going to the temple interrupted the men.  G was a  Sikh
      in his early 30s going to the cinema when five men tried to  take  his
      turban because they said they wanted to play Buskashi with  it.   When
      he tried to prevent them doing so he was hit and kicked repeatedly  in
      the head and back so that he had to  go  to  hospital  for  treatment.
      Whilst H  was cycling to the market three men said that  they  had  to
      search him.   He did not refuse but when they  found  nothing  on  him
      they took his turban off and urinated on it.

50.   In his latest statement, RS says that complaints were lodged with  the
      police in the cases of C and G but they simply took a report and filed
      it without taking any further action.   In the other cases the victims
      were unwilling to make any report for fear  of  further  difficulties.
      He refers also to a recent incident on 5 October 2004 when  two  Hindu
      girls went missing in Kandahar and says they were forced to convert to
      Islam and marry two young Muslims.  Two days after their  abduction  a
      procession on  the  street  by  the  local  Muslims  celebrated  their
      conversion but the authorities have failed to take any action.

51.   The other area of complaint  of  lack  of  sufficiency  of  protection
      relates to the seizure of properties by the Mujahideen which  he  says
      was not raised at all with him by Mr Roberts, any more than the issues
      of employment and the ability of Sikh and Hindu Afghans to survive  on
      their own in Kabul.  He says that he is aware of some 60  to  70  Sikh
      and Hindu families who have returned from abroad of whom some 30  have
      succeeded in regaining their houses by payment of bribes to  officials
      and their Muslim occupants.     Nevertheless,  he  says  there  remain
      great difficulties in the  recovery  of  property  and  he  cites  one
      specific example of  a  Mujahideen  Commander,  Amen  Ula  Guzar,  who
      occupies a house in the Sikh area of Kabul belonging to AS, a deceased
      Sikh.   Guzar refuses to hand over the property to the family  because
      he says the owner is now dead.   Monies have been paid to officials on
      several occasions for their assistance to get the commander out but to
      no avail.  He says he will not leave  until  he  is  paid  for  having
      occupied the house since 1996 and looking after  and  maintaining  it.
      He is not prepared to pay any rent for his use of the house.    He  is
      in a powerful  position  in  government  and  the  authorities  cannot
      assist.  We note at this point, however, that the  CIPU  Report  makes
      specific reference to land disputes and  the  situation  of  Sikh  and
      Hindu returnees at paragraph 6.90 as follows:

            "In a report on land issues published in September  2003,  UNHCR
           noted that there were some complicated cases regarding the  land
           of members of ethnic and religious minorities who  had  returned
           to Afghanistan. They had been forced  to  sell  their  lands  or
           property during the Mujahideen or Taliban regimes and now wished
           to recover them. The report noted "Their  only  legal  claim  is
           that they had been coerced to sell their land at the time, which
           would be difficult to prove. For example, members of  the  Hindu
           minority group in the provincial capital of Helmand,  Lashkargha
           claim that they were forced to sell  their  shops  in  the  main
           Lashkharga  bazaar  to  Mujahideen  commanders  prior  to  their
           expulsion from the area. These groups are  currently  trying  to
           recover their property,  although  most  of  them  do  not  hold
           documents evidencing their  title.  Their  cases  are  currently
           pending with both the District Shura and the district [sic]."

      It will immediately be apparent from this passage that  the  following
      points  emerge:  (a)  that  some  members  of  ethnic  and   religious
      communities are returning; (b) that they include those who may  expect
      difficulty in regaining their former homes; (c) that they are prepared
      to take legal action to do so in  the  Afghan  courts;  (d)  that  the
      identified triable issue  may  be  a  sophisticated  one  relating  to
      concepts of  coercion  and  the  setting  aside  of  apparently  valid
      transactions. In the one  specific  example  given  by  RS,  there  is
      similarly the legal issue of right  to  inherit  which  would  require
      evidential proof so that it is  perhaps  hardly  surprising  that  the
      person in possession will not simply concede the  claim  made  by  the
      family, quite apart from the fact that he appears to be raising issues
      as to  entitlement  to  compensation  for  repairs  and  improvements.
      Significantly, the occupier does not appear to say he will  not  leave
      but is imposing conditions on his doing so.

52.   Finally, he says that he is aware of forced returns  of  failed  Hindu
      and Sikh asylum seekers from abroad.  He  is  aware  of  eight  single
      males having arrived at different times all of whom came initially  to
      Hezkuvrawa but as to whose present whereabouts he has  no  information
      as they are no longer there.   There was also one Sikh family deported
      from  the  Netherlands  whom  he  saw  for  15  days  until  they  too
      disappeared.   What has happened to  these  returnees  is  simply  not
      known to RS and whatever he says in that respect is mere  speculation.
      He does not say from what part of Afghanistan they originate  but  can
      say  no  more  than  that  they  are  no  longer  in   the   temporary
      accommodation they obtained on their return.

53.   Before we consider the individual circumstances of each appellant,  we
      must deal with the primary submission on behalf of all the  appellants
      that simply by reason of their Sikh or Hindu ethnicity there is a real
      risk to them on return to Afghanistan  either  of  persecution  for  a
      Refugee Convention reason or of breach of their protected human rights
      under Article 3 of the European Convention.   So far  as  the  Refugee
      Convention is concerned, it is not necessary that  any  such  risk  be
      solely by reason of ethnicity or religious opinion - it  will  suffice
      if a Convention reason forms a real part of the reason why  there  may
      be a real risk of persecution.

54.   Before we consider the position of Sikhs and Hindus  specifically,  it
      seems to us that it is appropriate to look at the general situation in
      Afghanistan as shown by the country evidence.

55.    The  effectiveness  of  the  judiciary  and  the  legal   system   in
      Afghanistan is considered in the October 2004 CIPU Country  Report  at
      paragraph 5.46 onwards.  That paragraph notes that the Europa Regional
      Surveys of the World for South Asia 2004 recorded that "after 23 years
      of civil war, which ended in December 2001  with  the  defeat  of  the
      Taliban, there no  longer  existed  a  functioning  national  judicial
      system."  That broad view is reinforced in the  subsequent  paragraphs
      of the report.   At paragraph 5.48, it is noted  that  UNCHR  said  in
      July 2003 that:

           "The  country's  legal  institutions  suffered  from   lack   of
           resources while the record of  laws  and  regulations  has  been
           destroyed and much has disappeared during the years of conflict,
           leaving  practitioners  unclear  as  to  the  substance  of  the
           country's law.   Although court systems exist from district  and
           national  levels,  the  influence  of  commanders  and  powerful
           figures often renders it impossible for fair and just  decisions
           to be reached over land disputes".

      But, the Constitution adopted  in  January  2004  confirmed  that  the
      judicial branch was an independent organ of state, providing  also  at
      Article 3 that no law could be 'contrary to the beliefs and provisions
      of the sacred law of Islam'. By 19 March 2004 the UN Secretary-General
      was able to report to the Security Council:


           "There have been several achievements in justice sector  reform.
           The decree of the reformed code of criminal procedure was issued
           in mid-February [2004], providing a versatile system under which
           jurisdiction can be shifted to provincial courts  from  district
           courts where necessary. This should enable the gradual  transfer
           of criminal cases to the formal justice  system,  though  it  is
           conditional   upon   an   effectively   functioning   provincial
           infrastructure  and  the  rehabilitation  of  district   courts.
           Construction of provincial courts is under way in nine capitals,
           while the prioritisation of district courts will  be  determined
           by the Provincial Stabilization Strategy. On 21 February  [2004]
           a two  week  training-of-trainers  seminar  was  initiated  with
           senior  judicial  and  law  enforcement  personnel  on  the  new
           criminal procedure code.  In  addition,  450  judges  are  being
           trained by the International Development  Law  Organization,  an
           inter-governmental organization that promotes the  rule  of  law
           and good governance."


56.    Paragraph  5.64  notes  that  a  Danish   Fact-Finding   Mission   in
      March/April 2004 reported that "almost all sources  consulted  by  the
      delegation were of the opinion that no rule  of  law  existed  in  any
      place in Afghanistan not even in Kabul.   UNCHR found that there is no
      rule of law in any part of Afghanistan, but local mechanisms  for  the
      solving of conflicts exists.   People with influential  relatives  are
      likely to find their way out of a conflict."

57.   Paragraph 5.65 records that the same Danish Mission reported:

           "UNAMA was  of  the  opinion  that  institutions,  which  should
           protect people against assault are not powerful enough to do  so
           if the perpetrators are warlords or powerful  persons  from  the
           government or  the  police  force.     UNAMA  had  knowledge  of
           citizens who have out standings (sic) with powerful  individuals
           and therefore were not safe in Kabul, and have had to  flee  the
           country.    There are cases where parents and  siblings  to  the
           persecutors have been involved  too.  ...  the  Italian  Embassy
           explained that there are major geographical differences  in  the
           ability of the legal system to provide rule of law and  justice.
             The system is not satisfactory anywhere  in  the  country  and
           even in Kabul, which is regarded as the best  functioning  area,
           considerable improvements  are  necessary.   Everywhere  in  the
           country Judges are subject to interference in  their  work.   No
           Judge is free to make a  ruling  solely  according  to  his  own
           judgement.  This  lack  of  independence  also  applies  to  the
           police.     The  source  pointed  out  that  the  legal   system
           including  the  police  and  other  administrative  offices  are
           influenced by the general security situation in the country."

58.   The position is equally unsatisfactory in  relation  to  legal  rights
      and is of application generally as recorded at paragraph 5.68  onwards
      in the CIPU report.    The Danish Fact-Finding Mission has again  been
      quoted extensively and paragraphs 5.74 and 5.75 of the CIPU report are
      relevant in this context:

            5.74 According to the Danish Fact-Finding Report,

           "The lawyers Union of Afghanistan stated that the  Court  system
           is almost in a state of chaos.   When meeting in  Court,  it  is
           possible to be confronted on the first day with a Judge who  has
           trained only in religious law.  On the next day it  might  be  a
           Judge who has a law  degree  but  uses  Sharia  law  to  protect
           himself against criticism.  As a consequence, women continue  to
           be imprisoned for infidelity.  The source expected that in  time
           the law reforms will have an impact that will change the present
           situation.   The  source  explained  that   corruption   is   so
           widespread that access to legal institutions and to rule of  law
           do not exist.  Only a few percent of the cases come out  with  a
           just or correct ruling.  Anybody can start a legal case, but  it
           is the most powerful or influential person who will come out  as
           the winner of the case."


           5.75  UNCHR informed the Danish Fact-Finding Mission that


           "The state cannot offer any protection for  individuals  against
           persecution and violation.  As an Afghan, you have to go to your
           network  to  find  protection.   In  spite  of  the  efforts  to
           establish a legal system with a functioning police  and  courts,
           warlords continue to rule.   This  also  applies  for  conflicts
           concerning land."  According to UNAMA, "Court sentences are  not
           enforced if the local warlord does not agree  with  the  ruling.
           It was pointed out by the UNAMA that judges are  intimidated  in
           several districts.  In many areas, judges and prosecutors are in
           need of protection."

59.   A little later at paragraph 5.78, CIPU refers  to  the  Freedom  House
      Afghanistan Country Report 2004 as saying:

           "As  law-enforcement  and  judicial  institutions  function   at
           varying levels in different parts of the country, procedures for
           taking people into custody and bringing them to justice  do  not
           follow an established code and often rely on the whims of  local
           officials.  Authorities subject Afghans to arbitrary arrest  and
           detention, often with the aim of extracting bribes  in  exchange
           for a prisoner's release...  According  to  Article  28  of  the
           criminal procedure code of 1965, which remains in force,  police
           can detain suspects without charge for up to 24 hours during the
           course of an investigation, which can be extended for  up  to  a
           week if the police  apply  to  the  attorney  general's  office.
           However,  in  many  police  detention  centres,   suspects   are
           routinely held for weeks or months on end.   This  is  in  large
           part due to the lack of a functioning judicial system,  as  well
           as inadequate  police  infrastructure  in  terms  of  personnel,
           transport equipment, and holding facilities, especially  in  the
           remoter provinces".


60.   On the subject of internal  security  (CIPU  paragraph  5.82  onwards)
      paragraph 5.85 notes the July 2003 UNCHR position paper as saying:

           "The absence of systematic or multi-lateral decommissioning  and
           disarmament, the lack of law enforcement, coupled with  the  war
           economy,  have  given  rise   to   banditry   and   criminality.
           Insecurity is high on several roads, including on  some  of  the
           main road links.    Road travel has  become  more  dangerous  in
           certain areas, with money  being  demanded  by  bandits  and  by
           individual commanders through the establishment  of  checkpoints
           or ambushes."


      At paragraph 5.88, attention is drawn to the report to the UN Security
      Council of 23 July 2003 where the Secretary General  stated  that  the
      overall security situation  throughout  Afghanistan  remained  fragile
      and, in many areas, exhibited signs of deterioration.   He referred to
      localised tensions between rival factions in the north having taken  a
      dramatic turn for the worse and makes specific  reference  to  General
      Dostrum as one of the warlords concerned.    As  to  the  position  in
      Kabul, the UNCHR stated  in  July  2003  that  although  the  security
      situation there was better than elsewhere because of the  presence  of
      ISAF, "certain persons could  still  be  targeted  in  Kabul,  if  the
      persecutors intend to target them".


61.   Paragraph 5.128 of CIPU records:

      In May 2004 the European Council on Refugees and Exiles advised that:

           "In Kabul, the security and human rights situation has been,  to
           a  limited  degree,  alleviated   by   the   presence   of   the
           International  Security  Assistance  Force  (ISAF)  and  by  the
           significant international presence in  the  capital.    However,
           the Afghan government continues to lack effective  control  over
           Kabul, and efforts to create a  new  national  army  and  police
           force and to reform the judicial system throughout  the  country
           remain at an embryonic stage.   It is clear  from  human  rights
           and other reports that the militia, which carry out the  primary
           policing function  in  the  capital,  offer  the  population  no
           protection from human rights abuses.  Beyond Kabul, the  absence
           of an effective system of law and order means that  the  various
           power holders can act within impunity.   The population at large
           is thus subject to the arbitrary use of power and the government
           is not in a position to accord protection from  abuses  of  such
           power.    Allegations  continue  that  communities   are   often
           deprived of their basic rights and are victims of serious  human
           rights abuses, sometimes by the police themselves."


62.   Dealing specifically with the police, (CIPU paragraph  5.183  onwards)
      the first paragraph quotes from a  report  issued  in  March  2003  by
      Amnesty International to the effect that  much  of  the  police  force
      consists of former Mujahideen with extensive military but little or no
      professional police training or experience, and  that  the  Mujahideen
      are  accustomed  to  acting   with   impunity.     Whilst   there   is
      international  response  of  training  and  the  trained  police  have
      contributed to stability, public confidence and maintenance of law and
      order, the UN Secretary General noted in December 2003 that it was  at
      an early stage of the process and that the number  of  trained  police
      remained too low and ill equipped to provide the full  support  needed
      by the central government.   According  to  paragraph  5.196,  the  UN
      Secretary General was noted as reporting on 12 August 2004 that:

           "The need  for  Afghanistan  to  have  a  trained  and  properly
           equipped national police force is acute,  both  for,  long  term
           estate building and in particular in the context of the upcoming
           elections.   The existing  force  suffers  from  a  shortage  of
           trained policemen and equipment and  weak  command  and  control
           structures. Efforts to  train   a  national  police  force  have
           intensified through the operation  of   five  regional  training
           centres  nationwide.  These  are  in  addition  to  the  German-
           supported Police  Academy  and  the  United  States-led  Central
           Training Centre, both in Kabul. To date some 19,500 police  have
           received training ... Of those trained, some 4000 have  received
           at least one year's training at the Police Academy.  The  target
           strength of the force provides for a  core  of  47.500  national
           police, 12,500 border police and  2,500  highway  police  to  be
           reached by the end of 2005. "

      We note that this progress has been achieved from  a  base  where,  as
      Amnesty International reported  in  March  2003,  there  had  been  no
      civilian police force in Afghanistan throughout the last 23  years  of
      armed conflict.

63.   In the light of this general evidence as to the country situation,  it
      is hardly surprising that in the general section  dealing  with  human
      rights issues, paragraph 6.5 of CIPU notes that police in  Afghanistan
      were  committing  human  rights  violations   according   to   Amnesty
      International in a March 2003 report, which also talked  of  many  men
      and  children  alleging  ill-treatment  and  torture  by  the  police,
      predominantly during  interrogation,  reflecting  the  lack  of  basic
      investigative skills and resources available to police and  a  general
      tolerance of violence in society.   The general section of CIPU  cites
      similar concerns on  the  part  of  Human  Rights  Watch  (reports  of
      November 2002 and July 2003) and the USSD Report of 2003 which, whilst
      noting  some  improvement  in  respect  for  human  rights   in   2003
      acknowledges that many serious  problems  remain,  especially  outside
      Kabul.

  64. It seems to us clear from this  general  evidence  that  in  a  tribal
      society local family, tribal, cultural and religious networks play  an
      important part in the means by which ordinary  citizens  achieve  some
      form of security in their lives. Whilst there  is  a  common  criminal
      code and a court system  to enforce it, it is  also  clear  that  both
      systems are in their early days of functioning and that  they  may  be
      ineffective to afford protection against  someone  in  a  position  of
      power in the community. Whilst there have been clear advances  in  the
      provision of policing, the country  has  been  without  a  functioning
      police force prior to the fall of the Taliban for very many  years  so
      that the institution and its ethos is having  to  be  built  from  the
      beginning. Whilst the general evidence points to  a  rapid  deployment
      and expansion of the police force, it is clearly still  in  its  early
      stages and there remain general problems of criminal  law  enforcement
      within the new system. In parallel with the new criminal legal system,
      there is also a functioning civil system although it  is  considerably
      handicapped by lack of resources and the effects of having fallen into
      decay over the preceding period of general unrest within the  country.
      These are, however, general problems, affecting Afghan  society  as  a
      whole and the issue which we must consider is  whether  there  is  any
      evidence that the state  discriminates  against  its  Sikh  and  Hindu
      minorities.


  65. The tenor of RS's evidence is that the state does not offer  practical
      assistance  such  as  the  provision  of  crematoria,  the  funds  for
      rebuilding the Gurdwaras and  the  provision  of  work  and  education
      although he accepts that these communities are free to practice  their
      religions under the Constitution and there is clear evidence that they
      do so in practice. It is equally clear that there is no discrimination
      in law in respect of education and that Sikh and Hindu  children  have
      the right to education in state schools like any other Afghan citizen.
      Clearly some do take advantage of  their  right  to  state  education.
      Moreover, there is no government objection to the existence of schools
      specifically for the minority Sikh and Hindu communities. RS makes  it
      clear that many children in those communities do not attend the  state
      schools for fear that they will suffer at the hands of  Muslim  fellow
      pupils  but  that  is  a  matter  of  societal   rather   than   state
      discrimination and no examples of such discrimination are given by him
      in this respect. Indeed the only clear evidence on this point from the
      Institute for War and Peace Reporting to which we have referred  above
      and, significantly, puts the issue in far less extreme terms than does
      RS. It is to the effect that although there may be such a fear on  the
      part of the community (and we note it is expressed in terms of teasing
      rather than physical danger at a number of points in that report),  it
      is not necessarily the predominant factor  and  in  the  case  of  one
      secondary school in Kabul at  least   does  not  in  fact  exist.  His
      complaint as to lack of provision of  work  opportunities  within  the
      State even taken at its highest does not in our  view  amount  to  any
      evidence of state discrimination in this respect. There is no evidence
      as to what employment opportunities exist in the public sector or that
      access to them  is  determined  on  a  discriminatory  basis.  Such  a
      complaint must equally be tempered by the reference which he makes  to
      Sikhs engaging in  business  activity  and  the  access  to  financial
      support within their own community both  in  Afghanistan  and  abroad.
      Taking into account that from a refugee law perspective these  are  in
      Professor Hathaway's classification (see  Chapter  4  of  The  Law  of
      Refugee Status) mainly complaints about  third  level  rights  -  e.g.
      work, education and medical care - and that there  is  no  sustainable
      evidence of any discrimination on the part of the State but rather the
      contrary - we do not consider that such matters either individually or
      cumulatively demonstrate any conduct on the part of the State which is
      either persecutory or in breach of Article 3 rights. Even taking  RS's
      evidence at its highest there is no evidence  of  persecution  on  the
      part of the State or its emanations. Having carefully reviewed all the
      evidence before us, the broad submission contended for   can  succeed,
      if at all, only on the basis of the behaviour of non-state actors.


  66. In this respect, it seems to us that the claims  are  twofold:  first,
      that the level of societal discrimination against Sikhs and Hindus  by
      the local Muslim population is such  that  all  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
      Afghanistan are  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
      treatment;   secondly,  that  the  power  of  individual  warlords  or
      persons of similar local authority is such as to pose a  similar  risk
      to these minority  communities.  The  second  proposition  is  clearly
      unsustainable. It depends  upon  experiences  which  are  specific  to
      individual members of the communities and as such must be assessed  on
      a case by case basis. There is no evidence of generalised  persecution
      on their part against the minority  communities  as  such.  The  first
      proposition is one which really derives  from  the  specific  examples
      given by RS in the June  2004  statement.  But,  the  appellants  face
      considerable obstacles to demonstrating such a generalised  risk  from
      the Muslim population. The claims of generalised  attack  are  limited
      even on RS's evidence. There is the one incident  of  the  bomb  being
      thrown into the Gurdwara but it is not suggested that anyone  actually
      suffered injury on that occasion and it is clearly an isolated event -
      it is likely to be a reference to the incident in October  2003  which
      resulted in an open letter from Human Rights Watch to President Karzai
      noted at CIPU paragraph 6.91.  There is the complaint of one  incident
      at an intended cremation ceremony where the mourners  were  confronted
      by a Muslim mob but, again, this is an isolated event, the  state  was
      providing security guards, it is not claimed that anyone was  actually
      injured and the mourners were able to retreat to their Gurdwara  where
      they were safe. Beyond generalised claims by RS - and as we have  made
      clear there are reasons to approach his evidence with some  caution  -
      there are only the eight specific examples in the June 2004 statement.
      The descriptions of  the  incidents  make  it  clear  that  they  were
      opportunistic in nature and suffered at the hands of  a  very  limited
      number of assailants. No later such incidents have been cited but when
      he met with Mr Roberts he told him that security in the area in  which
      most Sikhs live in Kabul had improved and that the principal risk  was
      from general criminality, which  would  clearly  apply  to  the  whole
      population. There is nothing to suggest that any  of  those  assaulted
      were  able  to  identify  their  assailants  and  in  the  absence  of
      identification it is notorious that there  is  little  more  that  the
      police can do. Whilst we note RS's assertion  that  no  action  beyond
      recording the incident has taken place,  such  complaints  are  by  no
      means limited to Afghanistan but are frequently a common perception of
      the victims of opportunistic street crime. The  lack  of  progress  in
      individual cases may  equally  be  the  result  of  the  lack  of  any
      evidence. Given the structural  difficulties  faced  by  the  emerging
      police force in Afghanistan, which must place practical limitations on
      their ability to follow up complaints of this nature,  we  are  by  no
      means satisfied, even to the lower standard of proof, that the lack of
      positive results can be ascribed to unwillingness or even indifference
      on the part of the police to deal with  such  complaints  although  we
      understand this may be the perception of the victims. We note also the
      accepted increase in security in Kabul referred to above,  however  it
      may have come about. Moreover, it is important to consider  these  few
      cases in relation to the position of the Sikh and Hindu populations as
      a whole. The evidence as  to  the  numbers  of  those  populations  is
      contradictory. We do not place any reliance on what RS  says  in  this
      respect. He has, as noted above, put forward  substantially  differing
      estimates. Given their ability to obtain  information  on  the  ground
      from a variety of sources, we consider that the UNHCR estimate is  the
      most reliable which is before us. In July 2003  they  estimated  there
      were some 3500 Sikh and Hindu families in Afghanistan  (see  paragraph
      39 above). Assuming, perhaps conservatively, an  average  of  5  to  6
      persons per family,  this  would  suggest  that  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
      communities are in total in the region of 20,000  persons  of  whom  a
      substantial proportion  are  in  Kabul.  Against  those  numbers,  the
      specific cases cited do not support a risk  of  persecution  which  is
      general to the entire community but rather  point  to  the  conclusion
      that they were simply victims of random and opportunistic attacks. For
      these reasons, having more fully explored the background evidence,  we
      differ from the conclusions of the Tribunal in KK insofar as they  may
      have found a general risk to Sikhs identifiable as such in  Kabul.  We
      reaffirm the conclusions expressed in IB and TK that Sikhs and  Hindus
      are not as such at general risk of persecution or treatment in  breach
      of Article 3 rights in  Kabul.  We  are  further  satisfied,  for  the
      reasons  which  we  have  given,  that  this  applies   generally   in
      Afghanistan. We note that there  are  significant  sections  of  these
      communities in other cities and there is no evidence that  in  general
      terms their position differs from that of  the  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
      Kabul. There are no reports that any  have  been  killed  or  tortured
      because of their  religion  or  ethnicity  and  the  one  incident  in
      Kandahar referred to by RS is isolated. There is in  our  judgment  no
      evidential basis for considering that such communities  are  generally
      at risk.

   67.      We have taken into account in the weight to be given to what  he
      says that RS has been able to travel to and from India  apparently  at
      will: in particular, that he makes clear in  his  statements  made  in
      India in February 2005 that he is on  holiday  there  and  intends  to
      return to Afghanistan. Such  a  willingness  to  return  adds  to  our
      caution in regarding  him  as  wholly  reliable  in  relation  to  the
      severity of the level of discrimination  and  random  physical  danger
      which he claims to exist. We have also taken into account  that  there
      is clear evidence that there are Afghan  and  Sikh  families  who  are
      returning to Afghanistan, albeit not in great numbers, but that factor
      also is nevertheless significant in  any  evaluation  of  claims  that
      these communities are generically at risk. The  information  given  by
      RS to Mr Roberts  which  was  not  apparent  from  any  of  his  three
      preceding reports has also been taken into account by us. It  confirms
      the Tribunal's earlier concerns that his evidence, as  being  directly
      in support of the Sikh and Hindu asylum claimants' causes,  needed  to
      be approached with some caution. We are satisfied that the information
      given to Mr Roberts does suggest that we must regard his  evidence  as
      generally seeking to put the case of discrimination against Sikhs  and
      Hindus at its highest and, specifically, failing to give due weight to
      the clear  evidence  of  improvement  as  the  Afghanistan  Government
      establishes itself in the wake of a long period of  civic  unrest.  We
      are satisfied that there is no question of state persecution and  that
      some steps are being actively taken to deal  with  societal  non-state
      actor discrimination on the part of members of the Muslim  population.
      The provision of  security  guards  at  cremations  is  of  particular
      significance in this respect in our view. As was said in  IB  and  TK,
      there is no reason to doubt that life for  members  of  the  Sikh  and
      Hindu communities in  Afghanistan  may  be  difficult  and  frequently
      unpleasant but, looking at all the evidence in the round,  the  levels
      of discrimination which these communities suffer are not  such  as  to
      give rise to a general need for protection. As the UNHCR advises, each
      case must be approached with care on its own merits, bearing  in  mind
      that  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  minorities  are   subject   to   societal
      discrimination.

68.   We turn now to consider the  appeals  of  the  individual  appellants,
      dealing first in each case with whether  there  has  been  a  material
      error of law on the part of the Adjudicator and, if so, the effect  of
      our general findings in reach case.

Findings in Relation to Mr L

69.   In the case of Mr L he appeals on human rights grounds only and  those
      grounds have in the submissions to  us  been  confined  to  Article  3
      issues.  He and his family  had  an  accepted  history  of  past  ill-
      treatment on the part initially of the Mujahideen, then  the  Taliban,
      and subsequently the Northern Alliance after the fall of the  Taliban.
       The first Adjudicator found that the  appellant's  brother  had  been
      detained and killed by Northern Alliance forces with  his  nephew  who
      had disappeared at the same time.   It also  appears  that  the  first
      Adjudicator accepted that it was not  until  after  the  fall  of  the
      Taliban that the appellant had been punished for failing to close  his
      shop during Muslim prayers.  The first Adjudicator concluded, however,
      that it was not necessarily the authorities who had carried out  these
      actions, and she dismissed his asylum appeal on the basis that he  did
      not show he was then at a current risk of persecution  for  a  Refugee
      Convention reason. We note that Mr L came from Jalalabad but that  the
      most serious problems affecting his family took place in Kabul.  There
      was no appeal  against  that  decision  and  the  second  Adjudicator,
      correctly applying the ratio in Devaseelan, regarded herself as  bound
      by the findings of the  first  Adjudicator  and  confined  herself  to
      consideration of whether there had been any change in the situation in
      Afghanistan in the intervening period which would affect the  position
      of the Appellant as someone who on his personal history had been found
      to have no well founded fear of  persecution.  On  the  basis  of  the
      evidence before her, it seems to us that it was clearly  open  to  the
      second Adjudicator to conclude that removal would not be in breach  of
      the Appellant's protected Article 3 rights. Our own conclusion on  the
      objective evidence simply reinforces this. The Appellant has failed to
      show that there was any material error of  law  on  the  part  of  the
      second Adjudicator and cannot therefore succeed before us. His  appeal
      is accordingly dismissed.

The Appeal of Mr T

70.   Like Mr L, Mr T is from Jalalabad and  has  no  past  connection  with
      Kabul.   He left Afghanistan prior to the fall of  the  Taliban.   The
      Adjudicator's determination which was promulgated on 31 May  2004  and
      in respect of which the CIPU report for April 2004 was produced to the
      Adjudicator,  is  unsatisfactory  insofar  as  there  are  no  factual
      findings on his account as to the position of  the  appellant  in  his
      home area.  That is a fundamental error of law  on  the  part  of  the
      Adjudicator  because proper findings in  relation  to  the  individual
      situation of a claimant are essential in considering  whether  he  can
      bring himself within the ambit of the two Conventions. It is an  error
      which cannot be  corrected  by  us  and  we  agree  with  Mr  McGirr's
      submission that absent satisfactory findings of fact the evidence will
      have to be heard afresh. It cannot be said that his case  is  hopeless
      if he is credible in his claims.  This appeal is  accordingly  allowed
      to the extent that it is remitted for hearing  before  an  Adjudicator
      other than Mr P A Grant-Hutchison.

The Appeal of Mr S

71.   The determination in  the  appeal  of  Mr  S  was  promulgated  on  11
      December 2003 when, again, the bulk of the country evidence  to  which
      we have referred would have been available to the Adjudicator  in  the
      then current CIPU report.  The Adjudicator  accepted  the  appellant's
      core account although for reasons which are wholly  unexplained  later
      rejects two minor elements in that account, namely that the  appellant
      had been denied a fair hearing in Court  and  that  the  second  Judge
      refused to assist the appellant because of his religion.    Given  the
      fact  that  the  Adjudicator  found  the  appellant  otherwise  wholly
      credible and that the rejection of those two points  is,  as  we  say,
      wholly unreasoned and accompanied in paragraph 38 of her determination
      by matters of pure speculation, it seems to us that the  rejection  of
      those two points is unsustainable on the face of the evidence.  In any
      event, such rejection in relation to the issue of a fair hearing (and,
      presumably, by this there is to be included the enforceability of  the
      Court's judgment), is wholly contrary to  the  general  tenor  of  the
      background evidence which is that those with power are able  to  treat
      Court decisions with impunity in any event if they do not  like  them.



72.   We are concerned also with the Adjudicator's finding that there is  no
      religious element in the dispute but that it  is  a  property  dispute
      pure and simple.   Mr S's earlier account of his treatment in 1994  by
      the Mujahideen is quite clearly on  the  basis  of  his  religion  and
      ethnicity but, in relation to the later property dispute on the  facts
      accepted by the Adjudicator an Uzbek man  was  unlawfully  seeking  to
      recover possession of property which he had voluntarily  sold  to  the
      appellant. The Adjudicator does not appear to have considered  whether
      the appellant would have been treated in the way in which she  accepts
      he was treated had it not been for his Hindu ethnicity. Those  actions
      seem clearly to have been carried out on  a  basis  of  impunity  from
      State interference or redress.   The extreme nature of the dispute  is
      highlighted by the fact that in  the  course  of  it  the  appellant's
      brother was, in the presence of the family, killed  in  a  generalised
      attack on the family  arising  out  of  the  claim  to  repossess  the
      property.

73.   In this appeal also the vast majority of the  background  evidence  to
      which we have referred would have been available  to  the  Adjudicator
      but does not appear to have been the subject of consideration  by  her
      in any meaningful  way.    She  has  not  asked  herself  whether  the
      authorities could provide protection to the  appellant  against  those
      who had already murdered a member of  his  family  out  of  a  dispute
      directly involving the appellant.   Nor does it seem to  us  that  she
      has properly considered  the  issue  of  any  reason  for  persecution
      because she has confined herself to saying  whether  it  would  be  by
      reason of his religion.  Afghan Hindus are distinguishable on  grounds
      both of their ethnicity and religion and there was evidence before her
      that they were a disadvantaged class. To that extent it  seems  to  us
      that the Adjudicator has asked herself the wrong question and that  is
      a material error of law which vitiates her findings.

74.   There is no evidence before us as to whether,  ignoring  his  specific
      history as found by the Adjudicator, he and his  dependants  would  be
      able to resume life in Kabul where he was born, established  his  home
      and his business interests prior to his flight from  the  country.  We
      know that his father, at least, of his  extended  family  remained  in
      Kabul when he left. He is not, as we have found on the evidence before
      us, entitled to succeed simply on the basis of his membership  of  the
      class of Afghan Hindus, although that is  a factor to  be  taken  into
      account in evaluating his situation. As to his personal history, it is
      accepted that he has powerful enemies amongst the Mujahideen who  were
      prepared to attack his  family  indiscriminately  because  of  a  land
      dispute in which he was a principal  party.  In  the  course  of  such
      attacks his brother  was  murdered  and  his  sister-in-law  abducted,
      subsequently  dying  in  unexplained  circumstances.   These   events,
      coupled with a real risk  that  he  may  be  unable  to  access  state
      protection, were the catalyst which led him to flee  with  his  family
      and to seek refuge abroad. There is objective evidence  that  in  such
      circumstances the State may be unable  to  provide  a  sufficiency  of
      protection as we have set out a  paragraphs 55  to  62  above.   Given
      that personal history, and taking  due  account  of  the  exacerbating
      factor of membership of the Hindu minority,  we  are  satisfied  that,
      notwithstanding that he would otherwise have an  established  base  in
      Kabul to which he could return, there is  a  real  risk  that  if  now
      returned to Afghanistan he would face both persecution  by  reason  of
      his Hindu ethnicity and religion,  at  least  in  part  sufficient  to
      engage the Convention, and that he would also be at real risk that his
      protected human rights under Article  3  of  the  European  Convention
      would be breached.

75.   We accordingly allow the appeal of Mr  S  on  both  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.


Summary of findings

76.      On the basis of the findings of fact made and reasons  set  out  at
      paragraphs 71 to 74 above, and on the basis of our evaluation  of  the
      source materials identified in Appendix B to this  determination,  the
      Tribunal finds that Afghan Sikhs and Hindus are not at risk of  either
      persecution for a Refugee Convention reason or of  treatment  contrary
      to their protected human  rights  under  Article  3  of  the  European
      Convention simply  by  reason  of  being  members  of  those  minority
      communities anywhere in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, the UNHCR  guidance
      that  these  minority  communities  are  the   subject   of   societal
      discrimination must be given due weight in assessing the  position  of
      individual claimants on a case by case basis.

77.   This determination gives the current country guidance of the  Tribunal
      on the issue of the situation of Afghan  Sikh  and  Hindu  asylum  and
      human rights claimants. Gulati [2002] UKIAT  02130  and  [2003]  UKIAT
      00057 K (Afghanistan)and KK (Evidence -Late Filing  -  Proper  Notice)
      Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT 00258 are superseded and should no longer  be
      cited on this issue. Save to the extent that the  review  of  evidence
      contained in the reported case of IB and TK (Sikhs - Risk on return  -
      objective evidence) Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT 00150  is  relied  on  in
      this determination, the conclusions in that case as to the position of
      Sikhs and Hindus originating from outside Kabul (which depended wholly
      on a concession by the Respondent which  has  not  been  made  in  the
      present appeals) are also superseded.

78.     Applying those findings to the current Appellants, the appeal of  Mr
      L is dismissed, the appeal of Mr T is allowed to the  extent  that  is
      remitted for hearing afresh before an Adjudicator other than  Mr  P  A
      Grant-Hutchison, and the appeal of Mr S is allowed for the reasons set
      out  at paragraphs 69 to 75 of this determination.




                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
                                 Appendix A

List of background materials placed before the Tribunal

CIPU Country Report for Afghanistan of October 2004
USSD Report on Afghanistan for 2003 published in February 2004
UN General Assembly Security Council Report of 12 August 2003
European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE) Report of April 2003
Human Rights Watch Report of July 2003, Vol 15 No. 5(c) pp  70-88  -  denial
      of basic freedoms to women and girls
Human Rights Watch Essential Background Overview of human rights  issues  in
      Afghanistan of 31 December 2003
Human Rights Watch report of January 2004 - Losing the peace in Afghanistan
Amnesty International press releases of 28 April 2003  (Forced  Return)  and
      23 June 2003 (Afghanistan still not safe enough)
 Religioscope Report of 28 January 2003 -  Afghanistan:  Hindus  still  face
      prejudice
Statements of RS dated 3 December 2003, 23  April  2004,  14  June  2004,  9
      February 2005 and 25 February 2005
Statements of Mr Roberts dated 13 December 2004 and 1 February 2005




