


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


      GM (Senior members of the Democratic Party and their families at risk)
                                               Azerbaijan [2005] UKAIT 00147

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Kings Court, North Shields
On 19 October 2005
                                                   Determination Promulgated

                                                           20th October 2005

                                   Before:

                 Mr Andrew Jordan, Senior Immigration Judge
                      Mr L.D. Sacks, Immigration Judge

Between:
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:           Mr G. Denholm, counsel (FRU - Holborn)
For the Respondent:          Mr B. Craven, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Senior members of the Azerbaijan Democratic Party  have  been  arrested  and
imprisoned  in  a  effort  to  stifle  opposition  to  the   government   in
circumstances that amount to persecutory  treatment.   There  is  background
evidence that family members of such persons are also at risk.

  1. The appellant it is a citizen of Azerbaijan who was born  on  24  July
     1982.  He is 23 years old.  He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  1
     February 2004 and claimed asylum the following day.  The Secretary  of
     State made a decision on 23 March 2004 to refuse his asylum claim  and
     a second decision on the same day refusing to vary his leave to remain
     in the United Kingdom.  The immigration decision gave rise to a  right
     of appeal under section 82 (1) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002 which the appellant duly exercised on 13 April 2004.
  2.  At  the  hearing  before  the  Immigration  Judge,  Mrs  N.  Bircher,
     promulgated on 8 July 2004, the Judge allowed the appeal on asylum  as
     well as human rights grounds.  The Secretary  of  State  appealed  the
     Judge's decision on the  basis  of  a  procedural  irregularity.   The
     Tribunal (Miss K. Eshun, Senior Immigration Judge) directed  that  the
     appeal should be reconsidered by a panel.  Her reasons  for  doing  so
     were as follows:
           "There  was  a  procedural  impropriety  on  the  part  of   the
           Immigration Judge.  The respondent made an application to tender
           documentary evidence in relation to the appellant's  application
           for a visa.  According to the grounds of appeal the  information
           was in the form of a letter and a copy of the  appellant's  visa
           interview  from  the  British  Embassy  in   Baku,   Azerbaijan.
           According to paragraph 9 of the  determination  the  Immigration
           Judge refused the  application  because  the  HOPO  was  not  in
           receipt of the  document  and  it  was  unclear  when  it  would
           actually arrive if  at  all  that  day.   When  the  documentary
           evidence arrived later that morning, according to  the  grounds,
           the application  to  submit  the  documents  was  renewed.   The
           Immigration Judge declined the application; it would appear  for
           the reason as before.
           Whilst we accept that the Immigration Judge had good  reason  to
           refuse the initial application, we find that she  did  not  give
           any good  reason  for  refusing  the  application  when  it  was
           renewed.   Maintaining  the  decision  seemingly  for  the  same
           reason, when the HOPO had the document was an error of law.   We
           also find that as the appellant had denied in  cross-examination
           that he had applied for his own visa and had  not  attended  the
           British Embassy on any occasion, the additional information  may
           have made a  material  difference  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
           assessment of the credibility of the appellant."
  3.  When the matter came before us, the material  issues  raised  in  the
     appeal did not involve the appellant's credibility.  It is clear  that
     the Secretary of State was concerned that the  Immigration  Judge  had
     not permitted the Presenting Officer to raise issues centred upon  the
     fact  that  the  appellant  had  visited  the  Embassy  and  had  been
     interviewed.  In the course of the interview, he had stated that there
     were no problems to stop him returning.  In addition, in order to gain
     access to the Embassy, the appellant had  been  required  to  pass  in
     front of a number of Azerbaijani  policemen.   More  important  still,
     when asked about the visit to the Embassy, the appellant had denied it
     taking place.  We now know that there was more than one such visit.
  4. Notwithstanding issues relating to the appellant's own conduct, it  is
     common ground that the appellant's family are leading members  of  the
     Azerbaijan Democratic Party.  Information extracted from news  reports
     establishes that Sardar Jalaloglu Mammadov, secretary-general  of  the
     Azerbaijan Democratic Party was one  of  seven  men  sentenced  on  22
     October 2004 in the Court of  Grave  Crimes  in  Baku  on  charges  of
     organising or participating in mass disturbances  which  followed  the
     violence that erupted  during  protests  following  the  October  2003
     presidential  elections.   Independent  observers   found   that   the
     government's election victory was a result of elections that had  been
     fraudulently conducted.  There was substantial and compelling evidence
     that Sardar's conviction  was  a  means  of  suppressing  dissent  and
     designed to prevent the activities of the Democratic Party.  Sardar is
     the appellant's uncle.  His son,  Jalal,  has  been  recognised  as  a
     refugee in the United Kingdom.  The basis of the  grant  of  leave  to
     remain was his relationship with Sardar.
  5. Gurban Jalaloglu Mammadov is the brother of Sardar and the appellant's
     father.  It is accepted that he was arrested and  detained  for  five-
     years as a result of his  political  activities  with  the  Azerbaijan
     Democratic Party, although he was released in February 2003.  He  was,
     however, re-arrested in October 2005.  Once again,  this  evidence  is
     uncontroversial.  It appears, for example,  in  a  Radio  Free  Europe
     bulletin for 17 October 2005.
  6. The activities of the Azerbaijan Democratic  Party  has  come  to  the
     attention of the international press in recent days with the  decision
     of its chairman, Rasul Quliyev, to return to Baku from  his  exile  in
     the United States.  He left London on a chartered flight on 17 October
     2005 amidst  some  publicity.  The  news  report  indicated  that  the
     Azerbaijani  police  had  blocked  the  main  road  to   Baku's   main
     international airport in anticipation of  Mr  Quliyev's  return.   The
     Interior Minister warned journalists and diplomats to stay  away  from
     the airport.  The arrest of the appellant's  father  appears  to  have
     been related to the ADP chairman's  return.   We  understand  from  Mr
     Denholm, who appeared on behalf of the appellant, that  Rasul  Quliyev
     was refused clearance at the airport and was diverted to Ukraine where
     he was arrested and held in custody.  It  appears  that  there  is  an
     arrest warrant issued by  the  Azerbaijan  government  that  is  being
     considered by the Ukrainian government.  There is  little  doubt  that
     these manoeuvres are politically orchestrated in an  effort  to  still
     opposition.
  7. We are satisfied that the background material establishes that  senior
     members of the Democratic Party are at risk of arrest  and  detention.
     The background material establishes that those held in  detention  are
     at risk of ill-treatment.
  8. There was before the Immigration Judge material from the Human  Rights
     Watch Report that the  Azerbaijani  police  use  violence  to  extract
     confessions  and  pressurised  detainees  to  sign  false   statements
     denouncing  opposition  leaders.   That  same  report  indicated  that
     members of opposition parties and their families were more  likely  to
     experience  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention  than  other   citizens.
     Accordingly, the  Immigration  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was
     himself at risk as a result of he is family connections.  That finding
     is consistent with the grant of leave to remain in favour of  Sardar's
     son, Jalal.
  9. Jalal was recognised as a refugee in the wake of  a  determination  of
     his appeal promulgated in May 2004.  The Adjudicator,  Mr  Michael  D.
     Oakley, recorded  in  paragraph  31  of  his  determination  that  the
     Secretary of State accepted in the refusal letter  relating  to  Jalal
     that members of opposition parties and their families are more  likely
     to experience arbitrary arrest and detention than other citizens.   He
     had before him evidence  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  clearly
     accepted that situation in practical terms by granting refugee  status
     to a number of Jalal's extended family.  He concluded that  there  was
     every likelihood, notwithstanding the fact that the appellant may  not
     have suffered treatment that would amount to persecution whilst he was
     in his country, that he would do so if he were to  be  returned.   The
     Secretary of State did not appeal that determination.   The  situation
     in Azerbaijan since then has, if anything, deteriorated as far as  the
     Democratic Party is concerned.
 10. At the commencement of the hearing,  both  parties  sought  additional
     time in  which  to  take  instructions.   At  the  conclusion  of  his
     consideration of the papers, Mr Craven, who appeared on behalf of  the
     Secretary of State, no longer sought to pursue the reconsideration  of
     this appeal.  By so stating, he accepted that  the  appeal  should  be
     allowed.

DECISION

        1) The Adjudicator made a material error of law.
        2) The following decision is accordingly substituted:
           a. the appeal is allowed on asylum grounds;
           b. the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
