
                                    [pic]

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)

R (on the application of Waseem & Others) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (long residence policy - interpretation) [2021] UKUT 00146 (IAC)

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR
                                                  and via Skype for Business

                                                               3rd June 2021
                                   Before:

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of

                              (1) ANSAR WASEEM
                    (2) GAYANI ARACHCHIGE (AND ONE OTHER)
                                                                  Applicants
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

       Mr Z Jafferji and Mr A Rehman, instructed by Lawise Solicitors,
                           for the first applicant
        Ms S Naik QC and Ms Ella Gunn, instructed by Jein Solicitors,
                          for the second applicant

    Mr R Harland (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the
                                 respondent

              Hearing dates: 12th February and 30th March 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                               J U D G M E N T
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

The various versions of the Secretary of State's long residence policy  from
2000 to 2017, as properly interpreted, are consistent with  the  distinction
between  'open-ended'  and  'book-ended'  overstayers,   as   described   in
paragraph [9] of the Court of Appeal's  decision  of  Hoque  &  Ors  v  SSHD
[2020] EWCA Civ 1357; [2021] Imm AR 188.  This interpretation is  consistent
with a rationality review and is capable of resulting in  a  'fair  balance'
between competing interests.


A.   Introduction

 1. We conducted the hearings from open court at  Field  House,  while  the
    parties' representatives attended via Skype for  Business.   The  Skype
    link was also open to members of the public to  access.   We  monitored
    the quality of the communications between the parties  and  us  and  we
    were satisfied overall  that  the  parties  were  able  to  participate
    effectively in the hearing.

 2. The applicants' applications  raised  common  issues  relating  to  the
    respondent's application of her long residence policy; her exercise  of
    discretion for those applying for indefinite  leave  to  remain,  where
    they do not meet the long residence  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules; the issue of proportionality, in the context of article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human  Rights  ('ECHR');  and  the  respondent's
    consideration of the applicants' further submissions as  fresh  claims,
    for the purposes of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. As a consequence of the respondent's refusal to treat  the  applicants'
    further submissions as fresh claims, no statutory right of appeal arose
    and the challenges to the respondent's  decisions  came  before  us  as
    applications for judicial review.  At  the  core  of  the  respondent's
    decisions was the common circumstance  that  the  applicants  were  all
    'open-ended' overstayers, as described by the Court of  Appeal  in  the
    case of Hoque & Ors v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1357; [2021] Imm AR 188 (see
    [9]).

 4. The applicants accept that their  ILR  applications  fell  for  refusal
    under the Immigration Rules, as now understood as a  result  of  Hoque,
    but they contend that the respondent impermissibly failed to apply  her
    own, wider policy in relation to long residence, which would  otherwise
    result in them being granted some form of leave and so becoming  'book-
    ended' overstayers; failed to consider  her  residual  discretion;  and
    failed adequately to carry out a proportionality assessment for article
    8 ECHR purposes.  All parties accepted that it was for this Tribunal to
    determine the meaning of the respondent's long residence policy.

 5. A synopsis of each of the applicants' circumstances is set out below.

B.   The applicants

JR/3246/2019

 6. AW is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5th May 1979.  He arrived in the UK
    lawfully with permission to enter as a student on 19th April 2009, with
    leave to remain until 30th July 2012.  Prior to expiry of  that  leave,
    he made an in-time application on 27th January 2012 for leave to remain
    as a tier 1 post-study migrant and was granted further  leave  on  10th
    May 2012 until 12th May 2014.  On that date, he submitted a further in-
    time application, for further leave to remain as a tier 1  entrepreneur
    and his leave was granted until 24th June 2017.  That was the last date
    on which he had leave, other than as extended  by  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 (which broadly speaking  extends  the  leave  last
    granted until a decision is taken on the appeal for further  leave;  or
    until any appeal rights have been exhausted).

 7. On 22nd June 2017, AW applied for ILR on the basis of  long  residence,
    (10 years' continuous lawful residence), despite having been in the  UK
    for a little over  eight  years  only.   The  respondent  refused  this
    application on 25th November 2017 and AW appealed that decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.   AW  did  not  attend  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing and the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  AW's  appeal  on  30th
    August  2018.   AW  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal.
    Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 2nd November  2018
    and by this Tribunal on 31st January 2019, when his appeal rights  were
    exhausted.

 8. On 4th February 2019 (so within 14 days  of  his  appeal  rights  being
    exhausted, on which AW places significance), AW applied again  for  ILR
    on the basis of long residence.  The crux of AW's case is that he  says
    that by 21st March 2019, taking into account the ability  to  apply  28
    days before a required residence period is met, he had lived in the  UK
    for ten years, and the respondent only reached her decision after  that
    date on 20th  April  2019.   The  respondent  characterises  10  years'
    residence in the UK as a "place marker", without legal significance, as
    AW had been an overstayer,  without  any  existing  leave,  since  31st
    January 2019, and so a longer period of residence would be required for
    some form of leave based on long residence, namely 20 years.

 9. The respondent refused to treat AW's application as a  fresh  claim  in
    the   decision   dated   20th   April   2019.    Following   pre-action
    correspondence, AW applied for judicial review on 14th June 2019.

JR/1043/2019

10. GA, the lead applicant in the second  application,  was  born  on  17th
    December 1974.  Her husband, UM, who is dependent on  her  application,
    was born on 17th March 1964.  Both are Sri Lankan nationals and entered
    the UK lawfully, pursuant to GA's student visa, on 20th September 2003.
    They obtained extensions of leave to remain and GA then applied on 29th
    October 2007  for  a  further  extension,  to  undertake  a  PhD.  That
    application was refused.   GA appealed  against  that  refusal  to  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  The AIT dismissed her appeal on  12th
    February 2008 and GA's appeal rights were exhausted on 6th March  2008.
     GA and UM remained in the UK as overstayers.  UM  then  left  on  20th
    April 2008 and GA left on 28th  April  2008.  GA  then  applied  for  a
    further student visa on 29th May 2008, which was granted and valid from
    3rd July 2008.

11. GA re-entered the UK on 6th July 2008 and UM re-entered on 10th  August
    2008.  They have remained in the UK ever since.  GA then  extended  her
    leave to remain as a student, which expired on 30th October  2015,  and
    that was the last time on which GA had leave to remain, other  than  by
    reason of section 3C.  Two days before the expiry of her last period of
    leave, on 28th October 2015, she made an-in time  application  for  ILR
    based on 10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence,  referring  to  her
    residence from 20th September 2003 until 21st September 2013.

12. The respondent refused GA's application on 7th  March  2016.   GA  then
    appealed that decision and her appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 5th April 2017.   She  sought  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision.  The First-tier Tribunal refused permission  on  3rd  January
    2018 and the Upper Tribunal refused permission on 9th  May  2018,  when
    GA's appeal rights were exhausted.

13. Within 14 days of the exhaustion of their appeal rights (on which, like
    AW, GA places importance), on 17th May 2018,  GA  and  UM  applied  for
    further leave to remain based on their  rights  to  respect  for  their
    private life, by reference to article  8.   Before  their  applications
    were decided, they varied their applications, seeking ILR based  on  10
    years' continuous lawful residence, since GA's re-entry to  the  UK  on
    3rd July 2008.  The respondent also regarded this purported anniversary
    as being without legal significance, as GA's and UM's leave  had  ended
    on 9th May 2018, even when extended  by  section  3C.   The  respondent
    refused to treat the applications as fresh claims, in decisions of 13th
    December 2018 and 18th January 2019.

C.   Procedural history, grounds and defence

14. Following pre-action correspondence, GA and  UM  applied  for  judicial
    review on 22nd February 2019.  Permission was refused by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Kebede on the papers in a decision of 20th May 2019.  AW  applied
    for judicial review on 14th June 2019 and permission in respect of  his
    application was refused on the papers by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup on
    18th July 2019.

15. Following further case management directions,  which  are  not  recited
    here, at an oral permission hearing on 12th March 2020, Upper  Tribunal
    Judges Allen and Finch granted permission on the following grounds:

    "1.  Permission is granted in respect of the arguable  failure  by  the
         respondent to consider and  apply  the  relevant  sections  of  her
         policy on long residence to the facts of the case.

    2.   Permission is granted in respect of the arguable  unlawfulness  of
         the paragraph 353 decision.

    3.   Permission is granted in respect of the arguable lawfulness of the
         article 8 evaluation."

16. A ground asserting that the applicants  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules was refused.  Directions were given, on the grant  of
    permission, to serve amended grounds.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Mandalia
    refused permission on 10th June 2020 in respect of  an  application  to
    add a ground to JR/3246/2019. In further  directions  issued  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 15th September 2020,  the  applications  were
    initially stayed pending the Court of Appeal's decision in R  (Arif)  v
    Upper Tribunal C4/2020/0287.  Following these  directions,  AW  and  GA
    served separate amended grounds on 5th November  2020.   Judge  Gleeson
    issued additional directions on 7th January 2021,  delinking  a  third,
    previously linked application of R (Kabir) v SSHD (JR/3972/3019).   The
    stay was later lifted and the remaining two  linked  applications  came
    before us.

AW's amended grounds

17. The amended grounds focussed on the three  permitted  grounds,  with  a
    fourth, new challenge, to which the respondent objected.

18. The first ground was the challenge that the respondent  had  failed  to
    consider and apply her own long residence policy, when  assessing  AW's
    application for ILR, in particular,  the  continuous  lawful  residence
    requirement.  The respondent had erroneously limited her assessment  of
    the application to paragraph 276B  of  the  Rules  and  had  failed  to
    consider, either adequately, or at all,  paragraph  39E;  its  conflict
    with, or different  direction  compared  to  paragraph  276B;  and  the
    respondent's wider policy guidance and greater flexibility  in  respect
    of overstaying and long residence which made allowance for  periods  of
    overstaying, if applications were made within specified  short  'grace'
    periods.  Developing that ground further, the long residence  rule  had
    always contained a strict requirement of continuous  lawful  residence,
    but after its introduction, there had been a  parallel  long  residence
    concession, allowing the respondent to disregard certain gaps in lawful
    residence.  The long residence concession had been  imported  into  the
    Rules in 2003 in order to allow for a right of appeal.

19. While the respondent's earlier policy guidance contained  only  limited
    discretion to grant  applications  where  there  were  gaps  in  lawful
    residence, the scope of the discretion grew over time. By  April  2009,
    there was already some limited discretion,  usually  for  single  short
    gaps of lawful residence of not  more  than  10  calendar  days.   This
    reflected the purpose of the long residence concession,  which  was  to
    recognise where someone had shown the 'necessary commitment to ensuring
    they have maintained lawful leave throughout their time in the UK'.

20. There was a difference between  the  respondent's  overall  immigration
    policy on overstaying; her specific policy guidance; and the  specific,
    more limited provisions of the Rules.

21. In respect of the respondent's asserted failure to comply with her  own
    policy guidance, AW relied  upon  the  applicable  version  15.0.   The
    grounds set out where the policy allowed the respondent to grant  leave
    where applicants did not satisfy the strict requirements of  continuous
    lawful residence, including granting those with temporary admission; in
    relation to  early  applications;  the  ability  to  go  beyond  'grace
    periods' provided in the Rules; and  in  particular,  the  respondent's
    discretion to depart from the  requirement  of  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence where a statutory appeal  was  ultimately  successful.
    In contrast, in refusing  AW's  application,  the  respondent  did  not
    exercise any discretion at all and  merely  referred  to  the  lack  of
    continuous lawful residence.

22. Passing over the second ground for a moment, in relation to  the  third
    ground, the respondent had failed  to  consider  the  quality  of  AW's
    private life established in the UK for the purposes of article 8.   The
    respondent should have recognised that the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B were far narrower, and could not encompass, an  article  8  claim.
    AW raised a human rights claim in his ILR application. The fact that he
    could not satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Rules  for  ILR  was  not
    determinative of  his  article  8  claim.   Instead,  in  the  impugned
    decision, in a section dealing with the consideration  of  'exceptional
    circumstances', the respondent had referred to the fact  that  even  if
    his removal from the UK would not be a breach of his ECHR  rights,  she
    had gone on to consider exceptional circumstances.   By  jumping  to  a
    consideration of exceptional circumstances, the respondent  had  failed
    to consider that there might be a breach of AW's article 8 rights.

23. The respondent should not have relied  merely  upon  narrow  applicable
    provisions in the Rules as fully reflecting her own  wider  immigration
    policy, which in turn had an impact upon  the  weight  which  could  be
    attached to the maintenance of effective  immigration  control  in  the
    article 8 proportionality assessment.  There was no rational reason why
    a person who  had  overstayed  within  the  time  limits  specified  in
    paragraph 39E of the Rules should be treated  less  favourably  than  a
    person resident in the UK on temporary admission.

24. AW further argued (although the respondent characterised this as a  new
    ground, and we agree that it  is)  that  the  respondent's  policy,  in
    focussing on paragraph 276B, lacked "accessibility and  foreseeability"
    when read in the context of the respondent's wider immigration  policy,
    as reflected in paragraph 39E.  There was an ambiguity in  the  claimed
    purpose of the eligibility provisions of  the  Rules.   They  had  been
    described as seriously problematic and ambiguous.  Moreover, the policy
    was clearly more generous than the Immigration Rules, however they were
    interpreted.  The rule of law required that the scope of any discretion
    be defined with a sufficient degree of specificity to avoid being  used
    arbitrarily.




25. Both of these grounds  fed  into  the  second  ground,  which  was  the
    respondent's error in refusing to treat AW's renewed ILR application as
    having a realistic prospect of success, so as to meet the criteria of a
    fresh claim for the purposes of paragraph 353.

GA's amended grounds

26. GA's amended  grounds  substantially  replicated  AW's  challenges.  GA
    added, in terms of her personal circumstances, that her application  of
    9th June 2018 was not simply a repeat application,  but  related  to  a
    different time period from her earlier application for ILR.  If  weight
    were properly attached to her 10 years' residence (with longer  periods
    of residence prior to that) up to June 2018, the respondent's rationale
    for treating the application as having no realistic prospect of success
    was unsustainable, even if GA did not meet the strict  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B.  Central to the realistic prospect of success  (as  per
    the well-known authority of WM (DRC)  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1495;
    [2007] Imm AR 337) was GA's article 8 claim,  which  was  significantly
    different from the previous application for ILR because  she  had  been
    continuously resident for ten years, which brought her within the scope
    of the respondent's long residence policy.

27. The  respondent  had  failed  to  consider  properly  her  exercise  of
    discretion under section 3 of the 1971 Act. GA had only  overstayed  by
    eight days and had completed nine years and 10 months' lawful residence
    by the date of her application; 10 years and six months'  residence  by
    the date of the impugned decision; and had lived in the UK for 16 years
    in total, with leave for over 14 years, except for  a  period  of  four
    months in 2008.

28. The respondent had instead limited her assessment  to  paragraph  276B,
    not considering paragraph 39E and the wider policy guidance in  respect
    of overstaying.  There was ambiguity in  the  claimed  purpose  of  the
    Rules, as reflected in cases such as Hoque.  Any ambiguity weakened the
    public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls.
    Regardless of any ambiguity in  its  purpose,  the  respondent  clearly
    operated a policy that was more generous than the  Rules  and  she  had
    wide residual discretion, which she ought to have considered, at  least
    in respect of granting limited leave, as opposed to no leave at all.

29. GA repeated AW's criticism that  the  respondent  had  also  failed  to
    consider adequately whether refusal of leave would breach her article 8
    rights. The respondent had instead  relied  upon  GA  not  meeting  the
    requirement of paragraph 276B, without considering her wider policy and
    residual discretion when conducting (as she ought to have conducted)  a
    proper 'balance  sheet'  assessment  of  proportionality.   By  way  of
    example, the respondent's own policy guidance had urged decision-makers
    to consider an applicant's family life in the UK; their  investment  in
    business or property; and their positive contributions to UK society.

Orders sought in the grounds

30. The applicants sought orders quashing the decisions refusing  to  treat
    their applications as fresh claims; declarations that the  respondent's
    long residence policy was insufficiently clear to be applied  lawfully,
    including in a manner consistent with article 8; and  mandatory  orders
    requiring the respondent to reconsider her decisions to refuse to treat
    their applications as fresh claims.

The respondent's amended grounds of defence

31. Following the submission of Acknowledgements of  Service;  the  partial
    grants of permission; and the  orders  for  amended  grounds,  on  18th
    November 2020,  the  respondent  served  amended  detailed  grounds  of
    defence.

32. The respondent first took issue with the new ground, namely  the  'lack
    of accessibility' or 'foreseeability' in relation to  the  respondent's
    long residence policy. It was without permission or merit.

33. The broad thrust  of  the  respondent's  detailed  grounds,  which  are
    lengthy and so we  do  no  more  than  summarise  here,  was  that  the
    applicants' applications for  ILR  had  been  correctly  refused  under
    paragraph 276B and the respondent's policy. The  policy  set  out  some
    situations and exceptions where case workers could exercise  discretion
    beyond the Rules, but the applicants were unable to identify how any of
    those exceptions applied to them.   Their  applications  had  stood  or
    fell to be refused based on their long residence, as the only basis  of
    their further submissions was the weight  they  themselves  applied  to
    long residence.  Given the narrowness of their applications, there  was
    no reason to grant leave, nor any freestanding article 8 claim  of  any
    residual merit.  The decisions  to  refuse  to  treat  the  applicants'
    applications as fresh claims under paragraph 353 were, in that context,
    unarguably lawful.

34. The respondent  noted  that  Judge  Gleeson  had  previously  adjourned
    consideration of these applications so that the parties could await the
    conclusion of the Court of Appeal in Hoque.  In any event, the Court of
    Appeal's decision provided further support to the respondent,  not  the
    applicants.

35. At the previous hearing before Judge Gleeson, there was discussion,  in
    the context of  directions,  about  what  part  of  the  Rules  or  the
    respondent's policy the applicants claimed  to  have  the  benefit  of.
    This had remained unresolved and the applicants had never been able  to
    identify which part of the wider policy they benefitted  from,  because
    again, in reality, they could not.

36. Turning to the applicants' individual chronologies,  they  had  applied
    for ILR on the basis of lawful long residence and in neither  case  did
    the applicants have the required lawful long residence at the  time  of
    their applications.  AW was approximately three months short of the  10
    years' continuous  lawful  residence  requirement  when  he  became  an
    overstayer on 31st January 2019.  GA was two  months  short  after  she
    became an overstayer on 9th May 2018.  Whilst the  applicants  asserted
    that their failure to reach the required period  of  continuous  lawful
    residence could be overlooked by virtue of a  discretion  contained  in
    the long residence policy, in fact they were unable to point  to  which
    part of the policy would benefit them.

37. In relation to a challenge under the Rules, permission had been refused
    on this ground and in any event was ruled out because of the  Court  of
    Appeal's  decision  in  Hoque,  which  confirmed  that  paragraph  276B
    permitted  'book-ended'  overstaying,  that  is,   gaps   of   previous
    overstaying between periods of lawful leave, as counting  towards  long
    residence, but not 'open-ended' overstaying  i.e.  current  overstaying
    which has not been closed off by a grant of leave.

38. The respondent pointed out that every visitor met  the  requirement  of
    being in the UK lawfully, but this would not entitle every  visitor  to
    ILR.  Lawful  presence  was  distinct  from  a  requirement  of  lawful
    residence for a specified period, which  if  met,  allowed  someone  to
    'bank' and apply for ILR at some stage in the future, even if they were
    currently unable to do so because of a current lack of lawful presence.
    The applicants fell into the first category. Their applications did not
    fail because they were in the UK unlawfully - they failed because  they
    did not have the required period of continuous lawful residence.

39. In relation to the respondent's policy  guidance,  Lord  Reed  JSC  had
    confirmed at [4] of Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11; [2017]  Imm  AR  764
    that the respondent has a  discretionary  power  under  the  1971  Act.
    However, he also recognised at [7] the increasing emphasis on certainty
    rather than discretion, and predictability rather than flexibility.  It
    was good practice for the respondent to publish its policy and to stick
    to it; unless there were uniformly applied practices,  decisions  could
    be inconsistent and arbitrary. Since the guidance might set out how the
    respondent intended to exercise her residual discretion, it could be  a
    source of policy more generous than the Rules and the respondent  could
    state that she would adopt a more lenient interpretation of  the  Rules
    (see [42] to [43] of Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568; [2014]  Imm
    AR 711).  However, there was no difference between paragraph  276B  and
    the respondent's policy as applied to the applicants, as paragraph 276B
    was understood in Hoque.

40. The appropriate approach was for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  assess  the
    meaning of the policy and to see the extent  to  which  the  applicants
    fell within it, as per [31] of  Mandalia v SSHD [2015] UKSC 59;  [2016]
    Imm AR 180.

41. While the respondent had provided guidance on long  residence  to  case
    workers from time to time, the respondent's discretion was not, as  the
    applicants  contended,  wide  or  so  vague  as  to   risk   irrational
    application.  In fact, the guidance to caseworkers  circumscribed  that
    discretion,  with  specific  exceptions  and  examples.   Historically,
    caseworkers had typically been able to exercise discretion where  there
    were short  gaps  in  lawful  residence,  as  per  the  long  residence
    concession.  The relevant guidance for present purposes  was  the  long
    residence guidance, version 15.0, published on 3rd  April  2017,  which
    dealt with 'breaks' in lawful residence and 'gaps'.  The  guidance  was
    clear, in using  such  terminology,  that  such  'gaps'  related  short
    periods of overstaying between periods of grants of leave.  None of the
    applicants had subsequent grants  of  leave  and  instead  were  simply
    people who had not accumulated 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence.
    The applicants were attempting  to  conflate  their  circumstances,  by
    comparing themselves with those who had met the residence  requirement,
    but were currently overstayers  when  they  applied  for  ILR,  and  so
    satisfied paragraph  276B(i)(a),  but  contravened  paragraph  276B(v),
    which the guidance dealt with.

42. The applicants' attempts to conflate their circumstances with those who
    benefitted from exceptions  within  the  policy  were  not  limited  to
    paragraph 39E. They also sought to compare themselves to those who were
    within 28 days of completing the required qualifying period at the time
    of  their  application,  namely  those  benefitting  from   the   early
    application  exception.  None  of  the  applicants  fell  within   that
    exception, as none had  made  their  applications  within  28  days  of
    completing the lawful residence requirement.

43. AW also sought to compare himself with those on temporary admission, as
    it then existed.  The respondent was entitled  to  distinguish  between
    overstayers and those on temporary admission, but in  any  event,  they
    were not treated differently.  A person with temporary admission  still
    needed to meet the long residence requirement.   While periods spent in
    the UK with temporary admission could  potentially  count,  they  could
    only do so where there was a later grant of 'book-ended' leave on other
    grounds.  If there were no such later grant, a  person  with  temporary
    admission would still fail because  of  a  lack  of  qualifying  lawful
    residence.

44. Finally, the applicants tried to compare themselves with those who  had
    spent time outside the  UK,  but  where  that  absence  did  not  break
    continuous residence, provided that they had leave on exiting  and  re-
    entering the UK and the gap was for a limited period. Once again,  none
    of the applicants fell into this category (GA had  been  an  overstayer
    when she left the UK in 2008 and had not applied  for  entry  clearance
    within 28 days of the expiry of her leave).

45.  The  obvious  rationale  underlying  the  policy   guidance   was   to
    differentiate between 'open-ended' and 'book-ended' overstayers.   Were
    time spent in the UK pursuant to repeatedly unfounded applications,  so
    long as each new application came 'hot on the heels' of the refusal  of
    its  predecessor,  to  count  towards  10  years'   continuous   lawful
    residence, it would inevitably lead to abuses, as  recognised  by  both
    Underhill and Dingemans LJJ at paragraphs [50] and [104] of Hoque.  The
    applicants' reliance on different circumstances where  exceptions  were
    made  did  not  assist  them,  as  those   exceptions   reflected   the
    circumscribed nature of the discretion.  The Court of Appeal  in  Hoque
    observed  their  construction  of  paragraph  276B  accorded  with  the
    respondent's guidance and practice (see  paragraphs  [38]  and  [104]),
    namely the same distinction was made in the policy, as  in  the  Rules,
    between 'book-ended' and 'open-ended' overstayers.

46. In summary, the applicants' first ground of challenge was  answered  by
    the absence of any sections of  the  respondent's  policy  or  guidance
    which allowed case workers a discretion to grant leave on the facts  of
    the applicants' cases.  None had  set  out  with  any  specificity  the
    section of the policy guidance that applied to them.

47. AW had applied on the basis of long residence, rather than outside  the
    Rules.  He did not purport to be  making  an  early  application.   The
    application was made prior to 28 days before attaining 10 years' lawful
    residence and in that respect, the policy mandated refusal.

48. GA had applied on 17th May 2018 for limited further  leave  to  remain,
    which she subsequently varied, but she had never  explained  how,  even
    with the benefit of the early application exception, section  3C  leave
    extended  from  17th   May  2018  to  9th  June   2018   (the   10-year
    anniversary), after her appeal rights had been exhausted.

49. Their applications failed under the policy for the same reasons as they
    failed under the Rules, namely they were 'open-ended'  overstayers  who
    did not meet the 10 year period of continuous lawful residence.

50. Dealing with the second and  third  grounds  together  (article  8  and
    paragraph 353), the weakness of the article 8 claims reflected the fact
    that none of the applicants claimed to meet the Rules either in respect
    of Appendix FM for family life,  or  paragraph  276ADE  in  respect  of
    private life.  The applicants appeared to be pursuing 'near miss'  long
    residence claims.  While there might be some weight attached to a 'near
    miss' in relation to the Rules, it depended on the  rule  in  question.
    The long residence provisions  were  not  coterminous  with  article  8
    rights.  The fact that an applicant only nearly  missed  the  '10-year'
    rule did not mean that their application would or should succeed  under
    article 8.  This was true of Mr Hoque and Mr Kabir in the  Hoque  case.
    Mr Mubarak fell only two months short and his claim was still bound  to
    fail (paragraphs [140] to [141]).

51. In the applicants' cases, none had established family life in  the  UK;
    the existence of each in the  UK  was  precarious;  and  a  substantial
    period of their presence was only with section 3C leave.  None  pointed
    to the particular development of private life which  would  make  their
    cases  exceptional.  All  had  had  appeals  rejected   by   First-tier
    Tribunals: AW, on 16th August 2018; GA,  on  31st  March  2017.   Their
    renewed applications were made only a brief period of time  afterwards.
    The  only  'new'  matter  was  a  place  marker,  which  had  no  legal
    significance, of 10 years' presence in the UK.  Each application was no
    different to the previous claim which had recently been rejected by the
    First-tier Tribunal, and the further application was similarly bound to
    fail on an article 8 analysis and  so  had  no  realistic  prospect  of
    success.

52.  In  respect  of  any  argument  about  lack   of   accessibility   and
    foreseeability, first, no permission had been given  for  this  ground.
    Second, the premise that the policy was unclear, as it applied  to  the
    applicants, was incorrect.   The  policy  was  very  clear.   That  was
    supported by the Court's decision in Hoque that  its  understanding  of
    the Rules was consistent with the application  of  the  policy.   There
    was, in the Court's view, no ambiguity when it came to overstayers like
    the applicants (see paragraph [43] of Hoque).  'Book-ended' overstayers
    could  succeed  under  both  the  Rules  and  the  policy,  while   the
    applicants, as 'open-ended' overstayers, failed under both.

53. Third, the applicants could not point to any ambiguity  in  the  policy
    that assisted them and instead  complained  that  they  ought  to  come
    within exceptions,  because  their  circumstances  were  of  comparable
    merit. The applicants' circumstances were not comparable, because  they
    were all currently overstayers, with no reason to remain in the UK.

54. Even if the premise were correct that the policy was not  clear,  there
    was no evidence that the  policy  could  not  be  lawfully  applied  in
    respect of article 8 or that  the  decisions  were  otherwise  unlawful
    because they  were  not  'foreseeable'  or  'accessible'.   The  policy
    covered applications for ILR only and had to be read holistically  with
    other paragraphs of the  Rules  and  the  respondent's  policies.   The
    respondent did not suggest that  her  residual  discretion  was  unduly
    fettered by the terms of the Rules or policies and the  applicants  had
    not begun to show  that  the  policy,  as  applied,  was  incapable  of
    protecting their human rights.   By  analogy  to  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision of R (Bibi) v SSHD [2015] UKSC  68;  [2016]  Imm  AR  270,  in
    relation to whether a rule was unlawful, the applicants had  not  shown
    (nor could they show) that the  policy  could  not  be  operated  in  a
    proportionate way or a way that was so inherently unjustified in all or
    nearly all cases.  Whilst there remained a residual discretion  outside
    the policy, as confirmed in the case of R  (Ahmed)  v  SSHD  (paragraph
    276B - ten years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 00010 (IAC), the  extent
    of the residual discretion should not  be  overstated  nor  should  the
    respondent be criticised for not expressly having regard to  it.   None
    of the applicants had raised any reference to  residual  discretion  in
    their applications, nor did they make a specific  application  on  that
    basis.  In reality, there was nothing exceptional  about  their  cases,
    which placed sole reliance on the place marker of 10 years'  residence,
    but not continuous lawful residence.

D.   The hearing before us

The applications to adduce new evidence

55. On 11th February 2021, the day before the first day of the hearing, the
    applicants applied for permission to rely upon additional evidence. The
    additional evidence comprised witness  statements  of  five  solicitors
    representing third parties; emails between the AW's solicitors and  the
    Government Legal Department from 1st to 11th February 2021, in which it
    was said that the applicants had sought further  information  from  the
    respondent about decisions in relation to third party applicants; and a
    redacted decision of the respondent in a third party case.  The gist of
    the evidence was that in at least a number of cases identified  by  the
    applicants (around 20), 'open-ended' overstayers had been granted leave
    to remain and  this  supported  the  applicants'  construction  of  the
    policy.  It was  not  argued  that  an  unpublished  policy  was  being
    applied.

56. In justifying the lateness of the application, Mr Jafferji pointed  out
    that  Judge  Gleeson  had  given  no  specific  direction  as  to   any
    application for additional evidence (so no deadline  had  been  broken)
    and  the  evidence  had  been  collated   only   very   recently   with
    correspondence  between  the  Government  Legal  Department   and   the
    applicants beginning on 1st February 2021.  It was only around the  end
    of January 2021 that  the  applicants'  solicitors  had  become  aware,
    through networks of third party solicitors, about some decisions having
    been granted in favour of 'open-ended' overstayers.  As a  consequence,
    the applicants had sought further information from the respondent.   In
    response, the respondent had provided no witness statement and the  GLD
    had stated on 4th February 2021 that it had no knowledge of  any  other
    practice  to  grant  ILR  to  'open-ended'  overstayers,  and  if   the
    applicants had evidence, they should provide it.   The  applicants  had
    then begun  a  difficult  process  of  obtaining  evidence  from  third
    parties, a number of whom were nervous because of fear that  any  grant
    of leave would  be  retracted.   There  had  been  no  breach  of  case
    management directions. There was a good reason for late disclosure. The
    respondent had been invited to give evidence and was under  a  duty  of
    candour.  Therefore the evidence should be admitted as it supported the
    applicants' construction of  the  guidance  and  was  relevant  to  its
    exercise of discretion  that  there  was  no  consistent  policy  being
    applied, and instead evidence of a dysfunctional policy,  as  supported
    by the view of Dingemans LJ at [105] of Hoque.

57. In response, Mr Harland raised four points: first, the lateness of  the
    application; second, how this fitted in with the grant of permission in
    terms of the case; third, the prejudice to the respondent; and  fourth,
    the impact on proceedings.

58. First, the application was manifestly late.  Judge Gleeson had directed
    on 15th September 2020 that a consolidated bundle be  filed  not  later
    than 21 days before the hearing and no further  documents  or  evidence
    would be accepted thereafter without the leave of the  Upper  Tribunal.
    This was a long running judicial  review  application  with  re-amended
    grounds and two skeleton arguments.   It  was  common  sense  that  the
    application was made late (only  the  day  before  the  hearing).   The
    reasons given for the lateness of the application  were  unsustainable.
    Whilst the applicants had claimed only to have  just  become  aware  of
    other cases, there was no detail about what  enquiries  had  been  made
    before, or what earlier steps had been taken, in a timely fashion.  Was
    it really the applicants' case that  the  possibility  of  inconsistent
    decisions had only just occurred to them?

59. Second, the disclosure did not appear to be relevant to  the  permitted
    grounds.  Ground (1) was an arguable  failure  to  consider  and  apply
    relevant sections of the respondent's policy.  There was no  permission
    granted to argue that the policy had been applied inconsistently.  That
    would have required a further amendment to the grounds.

60. Third, in terms of prejudice, on the one hand, the evidence may in fact
    be of very little import.  Various solicitors had expressed  experience
    of grants to  'open-ended'  overstayers,  but  without  detail  of  the
    underlying decision.  Taken even at its highest, the evidence  referred
    to around 20 grants having been made  to  'open-ended'  overstayers  or
    there being decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  favour  of  such
    applicants.  There was no evidence that these were more  than  isolated
    cases. It was not appropriate for us to take  into  account  unreported
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal.  There might be some case workers
    who applied the policy incorrectly, or not at all, but it was for  this
    Tribunal to understand and determine the meaning  of  the  respondent's
    policy.

61. On the other hand, the prejudice to the respondent was that  there  was
    no opportunity to review the relevant circumstances of the cases; cross-
    examine the representatives who provided these statements; or point out
    where the analysis was wrong.  It was impossible for the respondent  to
    put together a response  in  relation  to  those  statements.   On  the
    applicants' question in correspondence of February 2021,  of  how  many
    grants of leave had been given to 'open-ended' overstayers,  there  was
    no way of addressing that except by going through each and every  file,
    which would be an enormous exercise in a tiny timeframe.

62. Fourth, it could not be right to adjourn  the  hearing  of  this  long-
    running application again.

63. In response, for the applicants, Ms Naik QC added that there was a duty
    of candour and the respondent was obliged to show the full picture.  It
    could perhaps be dealt with by way of submissions  after  the  hearing,
    but Mr Harland was without instructions on such next steps.

64. We concluded that it was appropriate to admit the new evidence, but its
    relevance should be limited to the interpretation of the  policy,  i.e.
    the first ground that was permitted to proceed.  Our decision to  admit
    new evidence was a finely balanced one.  We regarded the application as
    late and without satisfactory explanation of the timeliness of  earlier
    enquiries.  On the other hand, we accepted  that  such  evidence  could
    potentially be relevant to the pleaded first ground, but the  prejudice
    to the respondent was mitigated by admitting it only  by  reference  to
    that permitted ground (as to which the applicants  made  no  objection)
    and by allowing the parties do deal with the evidence by way of written
    submissions.

65. Having agreed to admit the evidence, Mr Harland indicated that  he  was
    content to proceed without an adjournment, but said that there may need
    to be an application for permission to respond  with  the  respondent's
    own statement on the narrow issue to which the new evidence related and
    the specific, third-party decision relied on.

66. As  it  happened,  the  hearing  then  went  part-heard  (it  was  only
    originally listed for a day), with the adjourned hearing  relisted  for
    30th March 2021.

67. The respondent herself made a late application on 29th March  2021,  to
    adduce her own witness statement, as to which there was no objection by
    the applicants.  The  witness  statement  was  of  a  Senior  Executive
    Officer of the respondent, Richard Holmes,  with  supporting  exhibits.
    We also admitted  that  evidence,  which  we  have  considered  in  our
    discussion below.   Mr Holmes did not attend the Tribunal to give  oral
    evidence.

The applicants' combined written submissions

68. We considered the applicants' combined written submissions  dated  28th
    January 2021.  While we do no more than summarise the  submissions,  we
    have considered them in full.

69. The applicants acknowledged the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  Hoque,
    which confirmed that 'open-ended' overstayers could not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276B,  but  the  Court  had  not  considered  in  detail  the
    respondent's  policy  guidance.   That  policy  was  central   to   the
    applicants' claims, so no real, or very  limited  assistance  could  be
    derived from the Court of Appeal's decision.  In any event,  the  Court
    of Appeal's decision was a split judgment and the Court  was  unanimous
    in its criticism of the respondent's own understanding of the Rules and
    immigration policy.

70. In those circumstances,  the  policy  needed  to  be  read  with  great
    circumspection, particularly in the  absence  of  a  witness  statement
    adduced by the respondent setting out the policy  background  or  other
    considerations in applying the policy.   Adverse  inferences  could  be
    drawn from the absence of such a witness statement (see  the  authority
    of R (Das) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 45, at [80]).

71. The relevance of Hoque was also limited, as Underhill LJ had  expressly
    stated at paragraph [3], that the article 8 issues  were  case-specific
    and did not themselves raise any issue of principle.

72. In relation to the  first  ground,  namely  the  respondent's  arguable
    failure to consider and apply the relevant sections of  her  policy  on
    long residence to the facts of the case, the Rules had to be considered
    as a coherent scheme, rather than in isolation and the context  of  the
    introduction of paragraph 39E on 3rd November 2016, as explained in the
    explanatory memorandum to the Statement of Changes in  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 667), at [7.49], was for "reasons  of  fairness".   Where  an
    individual  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  the  discrete   scenarios
    provided for in paragraph 39E, they would  not  be  seen  as  being  in
    breach of immigration control.  A period of overstaying  was  one  that
    could be disregarded or overlooked.

73. The background  to  paragraph  276B  was  the  earlier  long  residence
    concession, based on the European Convention  on  Establishment,  which
    itself was based on the ECHR.  While therefore ultimately arising  from
    the ECHR, the focus of the concession  and  later  the  Rule,  was  the
    length of lawful residence, with no other factors such as  the  quality
    of residence and the extent of private and family life  established  in
    the UK being relevant.   While arising out of the  ECHR,  applying  the
    long residence rule was a very different matter to considering  article
    8.

74. While there were apparently strict requirements in the  long  residence
    rule prior to changes brought into effect on 1st October 2012 requiring
    continuous lawful residence, which would mean that even if  there  were
    one day of overstaying due to ill-health or  other  matters  beyond  an
    individual's control, their application for  long  residence  would  be
    unsuccessful, increasing  discretion  was  introduced  over  time.  For
    example, limited discretion was  introduced  in  April  2009,  allowing
    single short gaps to be  disregarded.   The  respondent's  guidance  in
    version 15.0 (2017) was now much broader, going  beyond  paragraph  39E
    and its predecessor provision, to include  many  examples,  which  were
    just that - examples, which did not define the scope of the policy  but
    merely illustrated its application.  They included  examples  of  early
    applications and those with temporary admission.  The policy  reflected
    what was stated in the long residence concession - the  recognition  of
    an applicant having "shown the necessary commitment  to  ensuring  that
    they have maintained lawful leave throughout their  time  in  the  UK."
    There was a significant  difference  between  the  overall  immigration
    policy on overstaying, as reflected  at  paragraph  39E;  the  specific
    policy with regard to long residence; and the  specific  provisions  of
    the Rules.

75. Neither GA's nor AW's applications were appropriately  considered.  The
    respondent had not  considered  the  exercise  of  discretion  at  all.
    Instead, the respondent relied on the circular reasoning that as GA and
    AW had not satisfied paragraph 276B, an exercise of discretion was  not
    appropriate.

76. Proportionality was said to be relevant to the first and second grounds
    of the permission application.  In relation to the first  ground,  when
    applying her policy, the respondent ought to have recognised that after
    a certain period of continuous lawful residence, people should  not  be
    required to leave the UK.  This was a  broader  policy  discretion,  in
    addition to the human rights framework of article  8.   The  degree  of
    weight given to the assessment of a primary decision-maker depended  on
    the context, (see [69] of Bank Mellat v Her Majesty's  Treasury  [2014]
    AC 700), but we should go beyond  a  'range  of  reasonable  responses'
    review, to consider the aim of the respondent's policy and whether  the
    refusal of leave was disproportionate, striking a 'fair balance' as per
    [74] of Bank Mellat.  The respondent had failed to apply  her  mind  to
    the proportionality of refusing leave in the broader policy  discretion
    sense, for example in failing to distinguish the applicants  as  lawful
    migrants to the UK who properly made in-time, paid  applications,  with
    periods of  lawful  leave,  from  others  such  as  those  involved  in
    deception.

77. The applicants accepted that it was open to the respondent to  apply  a
    longer 20 year rule under paragraph 276ADE where an applicant  did  not
    meet the requirement of paragraph 276B, but this could not absolve  the
    respondent of her responsibility to consider properly where  applicants
    were lawfully present and had made proper  applications  for  leave  to
    remain and would not  have  breached  the  Rules  save  for  where  the
    respondent herself would otherwise disregard such  breaches.   Adopting
    the 'fair  balance'  review  enjoined  in  Bank  Mallet,  there  was  a
    difference between whether a particular objective  was,  in  principle,
    sufficiently important to  justify  limiting  a  particular  right  and
    whether in fact it constituted a  fair  balance.   The  respondent  had
    failed to consider the fair balance.

78. The respondent's application of her policy  could  also  be  considered
    through  the  framework  of  a  'rationality  review',  described  most
    recently in R (Pantellerisco) v SSWP [2020] EWHC 1944 (Admin), at  [47]
    to  [50],  which  encompassed  an   assessment   of   the   comparative
    disadvantages of the  various  options  open  to  the  respondent,  the
    reasons  for  the  course  taken  and  whether  that  course  struck  a
    'reasonable balance'.  The question here was  whether,  notwithstanding
    the applicants not meeting the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B,  the
    applicants ought to have had discretion exercised in their favour.

79. In relation to the second ground,  the  applications  had  also  raised
    human rights claims under article 8.  The respondent's consideration of
    the applications outside the Rules had failed to  apply  the  requisite
    structured approach to article 8 mandated by the Court  of  Appeal  and
    endorsed by the Supreme Court in R (Aguilar Quila) v SSHD (AIRE  Centre
    intervening) [2012] 1 AC 621; [2012] Imm AR 135 and Bank Mellat.  There
    was no assessment of the strength of the public interest, and where the
    fair balance of competing interests  lay.  The  assessment  of  a  fair
    balance required  consideration  of  the  respondent's  long  residence
    policy, which was not considered or applied at all, and the applicants'
    adherence to the  respondent's  wider  immigration  policy  during  the
    course of their stay in the  UK,  namely  their  attempts  to  maintain
    lawful status.

80. The respondent had not given consideration to the weight to be attached
    to the policy. Instead, she had erred in relying narrowly on  paragraph
    276B, where this pulled in a different direction from paragraph 39E and
    there was a wider policy still, beyond the Rules.  If the applicants in
    fact met the respondent's wider policy, as  correctly  understood,  the
    respondent would not be able to point to the importance of  maintaining
    effective immigration controls as a factor weighing in  favour  of  the
    respondent (see the recent Upper Tribunal decision of OA (Human Rights)
    v SSHD [2019] UKUT 65 (IAC); [2019] Imm AR 647).

The applicants' oral submissions

Ms Naik QC, on behalf of GA

81. By way of introduction, this Tribunal should look at  the  respondent's
    application of her policy and her exercise of discretion in  a  broader
    way than a First-tier Tribunal could, because the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was limited to consideration of article 8 in a  statutory  appeal.   Ms
    Naik QC emphasised the residual discretion under section 3 of the  1971
    Act, in the context of GA's specific circumstances,  namely  the  brief
    period of overstaying and the completion of nine years and  10  months'
    lawful residence and the completion of over 10 years' residence by  the
    date of  the  impugned  decision.   The  respondent  had  impermissibly
    limited her assessment to paragraph 276B  and  had  had  no  regard  to
    paragraph 39E and the respondent's wider policy. Hoque did  not  assist
    as it did not examine the  application  of  the  respondent's  residual
    discretion.  There needed to be a structured approach to that,  as  per
    Bank Mellat.  For the purposes of article 8, the  respondent  ought  to
    have considered the quality of GA's private  and  family  life  in  the
    context of the respondent's policy,  as  correctly  understood,  and  a
    'fair balance' test should be applied.

82. Dealing with the  lack  of  foreseeability  or  accessibility,  it  was
    difficult for GA to know how she would be treated and  how  she  should
    manage her affairs, when the respondent herself did not know  what  her
    policy was, or the purpose behind it, and had changed her mind the  day
    before the hearing in Hoque.  It was not sufficient for the  respondent
    to adopt the rationale for the Rules as understood in Hoque.  We needed
    to consider what the purpose of the policy was.  No evidence  had  been
    put by the respondent  as  to  her  intended  purpose.   Moreover,  the
    dichotomy in Hoque between 'open-ended' and  'book-ended'  overstayers,
    with the former being cast as unmeritorious  because  of  the  risk  of
    spurious repeat  applications,  ignored  the  applicants'  attempts  to
    comply with the Rules and make timeous, paid applications.

83. It was also clear that the respondent's policy was more  generous  than
    the Rules and so it needed to  have  specificity,  to  avoid  arbitrary
    decisions.  Instead, the respondent's  policy  demonstrated  ambiguity.
    The policy  was  insufficiently  precise  to  be  able  to  be  applied
    compatibly with article 8.

84. The answer to the respondent's challenge that the  applicants  had  not
    identified a particular part of  the  respondent's  policy  which  they
    could benefit from was that there was express flexibility  in  how  the
    criteria in paragraph 276 applied, as confirmed by  McCombe  LJ,  which
    allowed for discretion to be extended to 'open-ended' overstayers.

85. The purpose of the long residence rule and earlier concession was  like
    no other.  It allowed somebody the right to  apply  for  settlement  if
    they complied with the law based on the ties that had been built up and
    was an indicator of how article 8 obligations should  lie.   From  July
    2012, the 14-year rule had been removed and instead there had been  the
    introduction under paragraph 276ADE of  the  20  year  route,  but  the
    applicants were not arguing a 'near-miss' case.  The respondent claimed
    that in the absence of 10 years' continuous lawful residence, 20 years'
    residence was needed, but the purpose of the rule which informed the 10
    year requirement also informed the 'fair balance' for  a  wider  policy
    review and an article 8 assessment, beyond  paragraph  276B.    In  the
    context of that 'fair balance', it was hard to see why  the  applicants
    should not benefit from the exercise of  discretion,  when  those  with
    temporary admission could; and where the applicants could  be  forgiven
    for misunderstanding the Rules and had not been able  to  manage  their
    affairs appropriately.  To the extent that the respondent relied on the
    public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls,
    the applicants  had  attempted  to  comply  with  the  law,  with  paid
    applications.

86. Ms Naik QC referred to the purpose set out in the policy  guidance  and
    passages of it, which were  consistent  with  the  flexibility  of  the
    respondent's policy.  The long residence  guidance,  version  15.0,  at
    page [730] of the Core Bundle ('CB') stated:

         "The rules on long residence recognise the ties a person  may  form
         with the UK over a lengthy period of residence here."

87. The section "Extension  requirements"  (page  [732]  CB)  included  the
    following:

         "Applicants in the UK with temporary admission

         If an applicant  with  temporary  admission  meets  all  the  other
         requirements of rule 276B, discretion can be  exercised  by  Border
         Force to grant them 6 months code 1 outside the Immigration  Rules,
         so they can make an application in the UK."

88. The section included a  passage  about  the  grant  of  limited  leave,
    stating that long residence applicants could be granted limited  leave,
    including where any overstaying was disregarded pursuant  to  paragraph
    39E.  Whilst Ms Naik QC acknowledged that in the same  section  at  the
    bottom of page [732] CB, the guidance  required  case  workers  not  to
    grant an applicant an extension of  leave  in  order  to  complete  the
    qualifying period of 10 years, the fact that  limited  leave  could  be
    granted demonstrated the flexibility within the policy.

89. Ms Naik QC turned  next  to  the  section  on  'Requirements  for  long
    residence' at page [734] CB, which  repeated  the  exception  permitted
    under paragraph 39E for overstayers.  At page [735] CB, the 'Definition
    of continuous lawful residence' section included:

         "temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Immigration  Act
         where leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted".

90. Such periods of temporary admission could last for years and yet  those
    benefitting from this exception could still be eligible for ILR. If the
    respondent's contention for  the  interpretation  of  her  policy  were
    correct, she would have to explain why it was rational  to  distinguish
    between those with temporary admission and the applicants.

91. Next, at page [736] CB, the guidance contained a section on 'Breaks  in
    continuous residence'.  This permitted short gaps in  lawful  residence
    and there was a further passage dealing with where discretion could  be
    exercised.

92. The guidance then contained worked examples  of  breaks  in  continuous
    residence.  'Example 4' on page [743] CB, which had  been  referred  to
    expressly by McCombe LJ at  paragraph  [92]  of  Hoque,  described  the
    circumstance of an applicant's leave having expired on 10th  July  2012
    but they only left the UK on 1st August 2012, after the expiry of their
    leave.  They had then submitted an application for entry  clearance  on
    5th August 2012 and when returning to the  UK  on  27th  October,  they
    submitted a long residence application.  In answer to the  question  of
    whether the application should be granted, the answer was  "yes".   The
    answer continued:

         "Grant  the  application  as  the  rules  allow  for   periods   of
         overstaying of 28 days or  less  and  the  period  ends  before  24
         November 2016.  This  applicant  submitted  their  application  for
         entry clearance less than 28 days after original grant of leave had
         expired and returned to the UK within 6 months of last leaving."

93. The fact that there were four examples given illustrated the extent  of
    the exercise of discretion.  In GA's case, she was an overstayer  prior
    to 24th November 2016 and therefore fell directly within this  example.



94. Even for applications after 24th November 2016, at page 745  [CB],  the
    guidance required case workers to consider paragraph 39E.  'Example  1'
    on the same page, which indicated that there  was  a  break  in  lawful
    residence  where  an  in-country   overstayer   made   an   out-of-time
    application before 24th November 2016, was capable of applying to 'book-
    ended' as well as 'open-ended' overstayers.

95. At page [763] CB, the guidance set out circumstances where an extension
    of stay in the UK could be granted, by reference  to  paragraph  276A2.
    They included those who had applied for long residence but were  unable
    to meet the requirement of paragraphs 276B(iii) and/or (iv).   The  use
    of the word 'includes' in the guidance  recognised  that  an  exemption
    could be granted under other provisions.  The same  section  also  made
    clear that if an applicant had less than 20 years' residence in the UK,
    a decision-maker must grant an extension  on  the  same  conditions  to
    which an applicant was subject on their previous grant of  leave,  even
    where an applicant would not qualify for further leave in that category
    if they were to apply separately.   This  reflected  the  proportionate
    restrictions on grants of limited leave to remain, such as no  recourse
    to public funds, which showed the mechanisms by which discretion  could
    be exercised.

96. The applicants could not be blamed  for  not  setting  out  a  specific
    exception in the guidance into which  they  fell,  as  the  policy  was
    complex and there were so many reasons why exemptions could be  granted
    and limited leave could also be granted.  The overstayer  exception  in
    paragraph 39E was of wide application, applying to the following  (non-
    exhaustive list) of paragraphs of the Rules: 128A; 134; 135; 142;  158,
    159G; 176 and 192.  Simply referring to paragraph  276B  was  therefore
    not an answer.  If the respondent had  exercised  her  discretion,  the
    applicants  would  have  become  'book-ended'  overstayers  and   their
    applications would then have succeeded.

97. Turning next to the authority of Hoque, the  Court  had  construed  the
    Rules purposively (see [49]) and had said that it was not  unreasonable
    to  treat  'open-ended'  overstayers  differently   from   'book-ended'
    overstayers.  However, the Court was considering and applying the Rules
    only and had not heard argument about the guidance and the width of the
    respondent's discretion.  The Court had limited its review of article 8
    issues at [53] and [54], to the principles set out in sections 117A and
    117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the
    (accepted) lack of a 'near miss' principle.

98. The applicants' challenge was to whether the respondent had  adequately
    considered  her  discretion,  in  the  context  of  paragraph  353.   A
    'rationality review' was necessary, as per the approach endorsed in the
    cases of R (Lord Carlisle) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 60 and Pham v SSHD [2015]
    UKSC 19; [2015] Imm AR 950.  The applicants' cases  were  more  complex
    than narrow private life claims, with no other distinguishing features,
    such as in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58; [2019] Imm AR 452.

99. The Court in Hoque had criticised the drafting of the  Rules  (at  [59]
    and [103]) and all three LJJs had taken different views  in  dismissing
    the applicants' appeals in that case. GA and  AW  had  done  everything
    they could, by making paid applications in good time, and that was  how
    they squared the circle of meeting the policy purpose, on a rationality
    review, even  if  they  did  not  meet  the  Rules.   The  respondent's
    discretion would otherwise be meaningless.   The  policy  could  reward
    those who made meritorious applications, by complying with making  paid
    applications, even if the Rules were more limited.

100. McCombe LJ's dissenting judgment had referred at [75] to the lack of  a
    distinction between current and previous overstaying  when  changes  to
    the Rules were introduced in 2012.  He then  analysed  further  changes
    and concluded, at [87], that the policy of objective overstaying was as
    follows:

         "In my view, all these  provisions  are  designed  to  ensure  that
         applications for new leave to remain,  made  on  expiry  of  a  old
         period of leave, should be made promptly and within the  period  of
         grace provided for in paragraph 39E."

101. McCombe LJ also observed at [91] that no counsel had  taken  the  Court
    to the detail of the guidance issued to case workers and they  had  not
    focussed on this in their arguments on the construction of  the  Rules.
    While he agreed with the other two LJJs on the  article  8  assessment,
    the applicants in Hoque had not pursued appeals on the same basis as GA
    and AW, namely on the basis of  the  flexibility  of  the  respondent's
    policy; and the lack of proportionality in, and a fair  balance  struck
    by, the impugned decisions.

102. No one  had  argued  in  Hoque  that  the  respondent's  policy  lacked
    foreseeability or accessibility, so as  to  enable  the  applicants  to
    arrange their affairs properly.  Had GA  known  what  the  respondent's
    position now was, she could have left the UK; applied to re-enter in  a
    different capacity; and  then  become  a  'book-ended'  overstayer  and
    obtained ILR.

103. Returning next to the need for a 'fair  balance'  review,  Ms  Naik  QC
    referred to the four-stage test in [74] of Bank Mellat:

         "(1)     Whether the  objective  of  the  measure  is  sufficiently
             important to justify the limitation of a protected right.

         (2)  Whether the measure is rationally connected to the objective.

         (3)  Whether a less intrusive measure could have been used  without
             unacceptably compromising the achievement  of  the  objective,
             and

         (4)  Whether, balancing the severity of the  measure's  effects  on
             the rights of the persons  to  whom  it  applies  against  the
             importance of the objective, to the extent  that  the  measure
             will contribute to its achievement, the former  outweighs  the
             latter."

104. The Supreme Court had endorsed the 'fair balance' test in the  case  of
    R (Aguilar Quila) - see [45]. In differing  circumstances,  the  courts
    had applied that test, for  example  in  the  case  of  R  (Kiarie  and
    Byndloss) v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  42;  [2017]  Imm  AR  1299,  ([48])  and
    Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58.  GA and AW accepted that the respondent
    was entitled to 'draw a line', but the policy needed to be flexible and
    this Tribunal's interpretation of what  her  policy  meant  required  a
    consideration of whether the measure was rationally  connected  to  the
    objective in question.  The objective was  to  reward  those  who  were
    present in the UK lawfully but also required consideration of whether a
    less intrusive measure should  be  used,  and  whether,  balancing  the
    effects on GA and AW against the importance of  the  policy  objective,
    the former outweighed the latter.  GA and AW were not pursuing a  'near
    miss' argument.  Rather, they were arguing that if an individual  were,
    for example, a couple of months short of the required period of  lawful
    residence, the policy required consideration  of  whether,  instead  of
    refusing leave, it was a fair balance to grant  some  form  of  limited
    leave.   It  would  very  much  depend  on  an  applicant's  individual
    circumstances.

105. In relation to consideration of GA's human rights, other parts  of  the
    Rules, for example Paragraph 276A02, referred to  the  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules. In that context, it would  be  perverse  to  require
    someone like GA, who had applied for ILR, to have to also specify  that
    they also wanted consideration of limited leave to remain  outside  the
    Rules.  Following the changes to rights of statutory  appeal  (so  that
    the relevant right to appeal was limited to human rights  grounds),  an
    application for leave to remain both within,  and  outside,  the  Rules
    could be made in one application and the  respondent  was  required  to
    consider all of the relevant  circumstances,  including  an  assumption
    that GA would be removed.

106. Ms Naik QC recognised the discussion by the Supreme Court  in  Patel  &
    Ors v SSHD [2014] AC 651; [2014] Imm AR 456 in terms that there was  no
    'near miss' or 'sliding scale' for an applicant who did  not  meet  the
    Rules; that article 8 was not a 'general dispensing'  power;  and  that
    article 8 considerations needed to be distinguished from  the  exercise
    of discretion outside the Rules, which may be for factors unrelated  to
    article 8 (see [56]). That being said, common values may underlie  some
    Rules which were also at the heart of article 8.   The  Rules  balanced
    lawful long residence with the public interest in  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls.   GA was not asking for the exercise of
    a 'general dispensing power,' but recognition of the fact that she  had
    made every endeavour  to  make  timely,  paid  applications,  when  the
    respondent  considered  whether  to  exercise  her  discretion.    That
    discretion was part of the respondent's policy.

107. Ms Naik QC emphasised the level of scrutiny needed in this  case.   The
    Supreme Court had noted in Pham v SSHD [2015] UKSC 19,  at  [107],  the
    differences between concepts of proportionality at common law  and  for
    the purposes of the ECHR (citing R (Daly v SSHD [2001] 2 AC 552).   The
    former  was   not   limited   to   classic   notions   of   'Wednesbury
    unreasonableness' and the intensity of scrutiny depended on  the  right
    which was at risk of infringement.  In GA's case,  there  should  be  a
    searching review where  fundamental  rights  were  at  stake.   In  the
    context of such a searching review, there was no  suggestion  that  the
    applicants had  been  involved  in  evading  immigration  control.  The
    construction or interpretation of the Rules had been confusing.

108. While risks of abuse of the system had been posed as  a  justification,
    GA had not attempted to abuse the system.   In GA's  application  (page
    [166] CB), her solicitors had emphasised that if  the  respondent  were
    minded to reject the application on the basis of article 8, she  should
    let them know, so they  could  address  any  concerns.   A  'minded  to
    refuse' process was mirrored in the well-known authority of  Balajigari
    v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673; [2019] Imm AR 1152.

109. While Ms Naik QC accepted that the May 2018  application  had  referred
    to GA initially entering the UK in 2008 (page [96]  CB),  the  impugned
    decision in response (page [242] CB), had ignored GA's  earlier  period
    of  lawful  residence  during  and  prior  to  2008.   This   lack   of
    consideration of GA's earlier residence was consistent  with  the  case
    records held in respect of GA (the 'GCID' notes),  at  page  [370]  CB,
    which made no reference to the earlier period of residence.   Moreover,
    the GCID notes at page [370] CB did not suggest any consideration under
    paragraph  353.  In  addition,  they  supported  GA's  case   that   no
    consideration  of  discretion  or  her  article  8  rights   had   been
    considered. The notes record the following question at page [373] CB:

         "Grant LOTR [Leave Outside the Rules?]

         Nothing to be considered."

110. This  was  consistent  with  the  section  of  the  decision,  entitled
    'Consideration of exceptional circumstances' (page [245] CB), which had
    stated:

         "You have claimed that even if your removal from the UK  would  not
         be  a  breach  of  the  Refugee  Convention  or  ECHR,  there   are
         exceptional circumstances for allowing you to  remain  in  the  UK.
         Consideration has therefore been given to  the  following  relevant
         factors."

111. The analysis that  followed  was  outside  any  consideration  of  GA's
    article 8 rights, which were based  not  only  on  the  length  of  her
    residence but its lawful  nature.   In  contrast,  the  'safety  valve'
    envisaged by paragraph 353 was extremely narrow, as  confirmed  by  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of Qongwane & Ors v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    957; [2014] Imm AR 1179.

112. Following the decision in Charles (human rights appeal:  scope)  [2018]
    UKUT 00089 (IAC); [2018] Imm AR  911  this  Tribunal  had  to  consider
    whether  GA's  human  rights  were  engaged   for   the   purposes   of
    proportionality before considering paragraph  353.   Given  its  narrow
    nature, paragraph 353 could not resolve the issue of GA's human  rights
    and a statutory appeal was not open to GA. That was the reason why  the
    applicants were applying for judicial review and there had not  been  a
    failure to exhaust any statutory remedies.

Mr Jafferji, on behalf of AW

113.  Mr Jafferji emphasised that AW had entered the UK  lawfully.   AW  had
    obtained an extension of leave to remain on various bases and then made
    an in-time application, which had referred to him being on the cusp  of
    being in the UK for 10 years.  The application had been refused on 20th
    April 2019 (see page [328] CB) with  a  reference  to  his  application
    being submitted out of time.  In fact, his application was not  out  of
    time  and  at  page  [332]  CB,  the  impugned  decision  omitted   any
    consideration of discretion.  Instead the paragraph stated:

         "In considering your application  it  was  considered  whether  the
         exercise of discretion was appropriate as you could not demonstrate
         10 years continuous lawful residence.  However, it  is  noted  that
         you have resided in the UK for a period of 10 years and  1  day  to
         date of which only 9 years 9 months and 12 days are  considered  to
         be continuous and lawful.....As you fail to  meet  the  fundamental
         requirement of the rules to have established  10  years  continuous
         lawful residence the Secretary of State is not satisfied that yours
         is a case where the exercise of discretion is appropriate."

114. The respondent's reasoning was  circular.   The  respondent  considered
    that as AW did not have  10  years  continuous  lawful  residence,  she
    declined to exercise any discretion.  Had AW had  such  residence,  the
    exercise of discretion would have been unnecessary.

115. Mr Jafferji then referred to the development of the  respondent's  long
    residence concession, a copy of  which  was  at  page  [723]  CB.   The
    background to the concession was the UK's ratification of the  European
    Convention on Establishment,  which  provided  that  nationals  of  any
    contracting party who had been lawfully residing for more than 10 years
    in a territory of another  party  may  only  be  expelled  for  limited
    reasons.

116. The concession document confirmed that the  respondent's  practice  had
    been to extend this provision in three respects: to include all foreign
    nationals; to grant indefinite leave rather than simply to refrain from
    removing such a person; and to allow those who had been here  illegally
    to benefit.  The long residence concession  continued  with  a  section
    entitled 'Considerations' at page [724] CB, which included a  provision
    that those who had 10 years' or more continuous lawful residence or  14
    years' continuous residence of any legality should normally be  granted
    ILR.  There then  followed  sections  with  more  detail,  including  a
    passage dealing with those who had not completed 10  years'  continuous
    lawful  residence,  in  which  case  applications  should  normally  be
    refused, unless there were very strong compelling  circumstances.   The
    strength of ties with the UK; continuing ties with  the  home  country;
    the total length of the continuous period; and  the  proportion  of  it
    which is lawful were the  primary  determining  factors  when  deciding
    whether to grant or withhold a grant of ILR.

117. Thus, there was a consistent theme of considering lawful residence  and
    considering what gaps in that residence should still be  considered  as
    lawful.  The  section  headed  'Lawful  residence'  at  page  [724]  CB
    indicated that certain breaches could still be regarded as lawful, such
    as:  a  short  delay  in  submitting  an  application,   provided   the
    application was subsequently granted; a period between  the  submission
    and determination of an appeal, if it were  successful;  and  where  an
    appeal was unsuccessful but leave was subsequently granted, the  period
    between submitting the appeal and the determination may be  treated  as
    lawful.  Also included was the time taken by the respondent to reach  a
    decision, at a time when there was  no  section  3C  leave  and  so  it
    permitted 'open-ended' overstaying, which was analogous to AW's current
    situation.  AW's application was not novel or an attempt to  abuse  the
    Rules, but reflected the position from the date when the long residence
    concession first came into force.  At the time of the concession, there
    was no temporary admission which would be a route to applying for  ILR.



118. Turning next to the April 2009 'Instructions' on  'Long  Residence'  at
    page [707] CB, paragraph [2.2.7]  considered  early  applications  that
    were made less than 28  days  before  the  10  or  14  year  period  in
    question.  Applications earlier than 28 days should be  refused,  while
    applications within 28 days before the anniversary  might  be  granted.
    Paragraph [2.3.3] (page [708] CB) of the same  Instructions  considered
    breaks in lawful residence and the use of discretion.  This included  a
    statement that where an applicant had a  single  short  gap  in  lawful
    residence through making one single previous application a few days out
    of time, that case workers should use discretion in granting  ILR.   On
    the other hand, it would not usually be appropriate to grant discretion
    where an applicant had more than one gap.  This illustrated the core of
    the  policy,  with  multiple  out-of-time  applications   not   showing
    sufficient commitment to lawful residence.  ILR was  on  the  basis  of
    long residence and that  was  the  title  of  the  concession  and  the
    guidance.  Whilst  the  provision  in  paragraph  276A(b)  referred  to
    'lawful  residence',  that  was  wider  than  residence   without   any
    concession, as it included temporary admission and  time  spent  as  an
    overstayer where it was 'book-ended'.  Trying to put a  finger  on  the
    essential element of the Rules was  not  served  by  focussing  on  the
    lawful element of residence, but on the length  of  residence  and  the
    2009 Instructions had at their core, the purpose of  recognising  those
    who had shown the  necessary  commitment  to  ensuring  that  they  had
    maintained lawful leave throughout their time in the UK.

119. The later guidance of 8th November 2011, at page  [959]  CB,  confirmed
    that when exercising discretion for breaks in lawful  residence,  those
    applying for leave to remain should  make  every  effort  to  obey  the
    Rules.  This was consistent with the guidance in force from 10th  April
    2013, in particular at page [888] CB, which included  similar  guidance
    and also introduced a 28 day concession, which allowed for gaps  of  no
    more than 28 calendar days through making applications out of time, and
    there was no limit on the number of  gaps,  which  represented  a  huge
    expansion of discretion.

120. The respondent had sought to criticise GA  and  AW  because  they  were
    unable to point to a section of the policy guidance  which  they  could
    benefit from.  This was the relevant section  (page  [891]  AB),  which
    confirmed that applicants must not have overstayed  for  more  than  28
    days on the date of the application.  This was not limited to those who
    were  'book-ended'  overstayers  and  there  was  no  reference  to   a
    requirement for 10 years having to  be  built  up  before  their  leave
    expired.   Instead  there  was  simply  a  reference  to  the  28   day
    concession.

121. Mr Jafferji moved on to the guidance in force at the date that  GA  and
    AW made their applications (version 15.0),  at  page  [730],  CB  which
    focussed on the length of residence, rather than a  narrower  focus  of
    lawful residence:

         "The rules on long residence recognise the ties a person  may  form
         with the UK over a lengthy period of residence here."

122. The guidance did not refer to other matters that had been  included  in
    the  original  long  residence  concession,  such  as  the  quality  of
    residence.  It was, however,  generous  in  the  scope  of  discretion,
    illustrated at page [736] CB,  which  related  to  'Events  that  break
    continuous residence' and 'Time spent  outside  the  UK'.   The  policy
    allowed for 18 months outside the UK throughout the  whole  of  the  10
    year period.  To pick 'Example 4' referred to by  McCombe  LJ  at  page
    [743] CB, AW could have left the UK, applied for  entry  clearance  and
    returned within six months with entry clearance and would  satisfy  the
    policy.  On entering for a day, he would have met the  10  year  lawful
    residence requirement.   This  would  have  been  possible  even  as  a
    visitor,  as  the  requirement  for  ILR  required  10  years'   lawful
    residence, not an intention to settle.  Bearing in mind that  this  had
    been open to AW as an option, GA and AW had been hampered in organising
    their affairs advantageously, by  poor  guidance.   The  confusion  was
    illustrated by 'Example 4'.

123. The guidance also contained wide discretion,  at  page  [739]  CB,  for
    early applications and at page [744] CB, for out of time  applications.
    This required decision-makers considering applications made on or after
    24th November 2016 to  consider  exercising  discretion  in  line  with
    paragraph 39E.  There could only be one intent, namely to make good the
    continuous lawful residence requirement.  This could not be relevant to
    paragraph 276B(v) as that paragraph confirms that an applicant must not
    be in breach of the Rules.  There  was  therefore  a  clear  difference
    between a  grant  under  the  Rules  and  an  exercise  of  discretion.
    'Example  1'  (page  [745]  CB),  relating  to  a   pre-November   2016
    application, considered that a person was nevertheless granted leave as
    a student despite making an out of time application.  'Example  3,'  at
    page [743] CB, stated that an applicant  had  a  single  gap  in  their
    lawful residence of 34 days but a decision-maker was nevertheless right
    to use discretion in the case.  That  could  not  be  by  reference  to
    276B(v) but instead was an  exercise  of  discretion  by  reference  to
    paragraph 276B(i)(a), namely  a  requirement  of  10  years  continuous
    lawful residence.

124. If we considered the previous versions of the policy, the  introduction
    of paragraph 39E changed the nature of the  discretion.   Part  of  the
    overstayer concession was now included in the Rules, but even if 'open-
    ended' overstaying was not so included in the Rules, it remained in the
    wider policy. Only if the wider  policy  were  interpreted  to  include
    'open-ended' overstaying was it coherent and rational.

125. Mr Jafferji then returned to the case of Hoque and in  particular,  [3]
    where Underhill LJ had made clear that the article 8 issues  were  case
    specific and did not  in  themselves  raise  any  issue  of  principle.
    Whilst at [50], Underhill LJ had discussed  a  rationale  for  treating
    'open-ended' overstayers differently from 'book-ended' overstayers  and
    the potential for abuse, that was not a reason advanced  by  the  Court
    for its analysis of the Rules and it  was  not  even  advanced  by  the
    respondent. Taking a realistic example,  an  applicant  might  make  an
    application for leave to remain which was refused and his appeal rights
    were exhausted and make a further application  within  14  days,  which
    took time to resolve.  If his situation changed, for  example,  he  got
    married and was granted leave,  his  overstaying  would  become  'book-
    ended,' despite the merits of his original application being unchanged.
     He would still have been an overstayer and  there  was  no  reason  to
    think that in comparison, an 'open-ended' overstayer was attempting  to
    abuse  the  Rules  any  more  than  he  was.   The  fear  of   'repeat'
    applications was not correct, as there was only one chance to  rely  on
    paragraph 39E.

126. The false characterisation of 'open-ended' overstaying as  abusive  and
    'book-ended' as not abusive was further illustrated by the way that the
    'temporary admission' exception worked. In  the  section  on  temporary
    admission at page [746] CB, the example referred to  somebody  who  was
    granted temporary admission  on  31st  January  1995  and  remained  on
    temporary admission until 27th June 2003, namely for eight  years.   If
    the respondent's interpretation of the policy were correct, then whilst
    the whole of the eight year period counted as lawful residence, it  was
    difficult to see how AW's behaviour was more abusive.   Indeed  AW  had
    only been technically overstaying at the very  end  of  his  period  of
    residence.  He had been in the UK lawfully for a far greater period  of
    time, working and contributing to the UK, factors which were  specified
    as being relevant to the  exercise  of  discretion,  in  the  'Personal
    history' section at page [758] CB.

127. The breadth of the discretion was further illustrated  by  the  section
    in the current guidance, 'Time spent in the UK with a right  to  reside
    under EEA Regulations,' at page [750] CB.  While 'lawful residence', as
    defined, did not extend to a right of residence under EU law, there was
    a discretion to treat it as such, beyond the Rules.

128. In relation to the assessment of AW's article 8 rights, the  respondent
    had made no assessment at all and for that reason alone,  the  impugned
    decision  should  be  quashed.   Instead,  the  respondent  had  merely
    referred to  paragraph  353  and  consideration  of  what  were  termed
    'exceptional circumstances', but not an article 8 assessment.  This was
    shown by the wording used in the decision at page [333] CB, which  made
    an assessment 'even if your removal would  not  be  in  breach  of  the
    Refugee Convention or  ECHR.'   Had  there  been  a  proper  article  8
    assessment, first, the  respondent  should  have  considered  paragraph
    276ADE, and then gone on to make a wider article 8 assessment,  as  the
    long residence rule was now solely based on the length and not  quality
    of residence.  For private life, there was no real mechanism equivalent
    to paragraph GEN.3.2.  of  Appendix  FM  for  family  life.   A  proper
    assessment of proportionality, on a 'balance  sheet'  approach,  should
    have considered, on AW's side, the  length  of  lawful  residence;  the
    length of residence overall; the education AW undertook in the UK; AW's
    work history; the lack of absence from the UK in contrast to those  who
    might otherwise leave the UK for up to one and a half  years;  and  the
    fact that AW made an application, as he was permitted to do so  by  the
    Rules.

129. An article 8 assessment might not have resulted in a grant of  ILR  but
    the respondent could at least have considered whether instead AW should
    be required to leave the UK.  In that context, the  question  here  was
    what the public interest was in AW's removal.  He had complied with the
    timeliness of applications and he could have left and returned  to  the
    UK and met the requirements, had the guidance in question been clearer.
     Whilst the applicants may not be able to benefit within the  Rules  as
    'open-ended' overstayers there was no reason why, in a  proportionality
    assessment, 'open-ended' overstayers should be treated differently from
    'book-ended' overstayers.  The apparent explanation given by the  Court
    of Appeal in Hoque was not entirely correct  because  it  misunderstood
    the quality of residence and suggested one category  of  those  abusing
    the system and another of those who were not, whereas in fact,  as  the
    examples demonstrated, this  was  not  a  fair  distinction.   In  that
    context, the exclusion of 'open-ended' overstayers was unexplained  and
    arbitrary and there is no provision for limited  leave  to  be  granted
    under the policy, except where an applicant could not meet  an  English
    language requirement.

130. The case of EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41; [2008] Imm  AR  713
    was authority for the proposition  that  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control  could  be  reduced  where
    there was delay because of a dysfunctional system.   The  circumstances
    of this case showed a dysfunctional system.  R (Agyarko) v SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 confirmed that where a court was considering the weight  to  be
    given to the public  interest,  it  could  envisage  a  less  stringent
    approach, in certain circumstances,  for  example,  where  people  were
    under a reasonable misapprehension as to interpretation of  the  Rules.
    That was equally applicable in these  cases  where  people  had  placed
    reliance upon Rules that were not properly drafted and  were  prevented
    from ordering their affairs in a way that they could have done.   There
    was clearly also no requirement to show an 'exceptional case' (see  the
    authority of Unuane v  United  Kingdom  (Application  No:  80343/2017);
    [2021] Imm AR 534 and consideration of a proportionality assessment was
    particularly important where, as here, a  policy  pulled  in  different
    directions and was potentially unclear.  Dingemans LJ had  doubted,  in
    Hoque, that proper thought had been given to  the  interaction  of  the
    various provisions and what  weight  should  be  applied  to  competing
    elements of the policy and the Rules.  This had resulted in a  lack  of
    foreseeability and complete confusion about what the  Rules  meant,  as
    exemplified by the respondent's 'volte-face', when she had changed  her
    position on what the Rules had meant a  mere  day  or  two  before  the
    hearing in Hoque.

131.  Turning  to  AW's  witness  evidence,   these   were   statements   of
    practitioners which showed treatment which was consistent with what  AW
    was seeking.  There was one case where an  'open-ended'  applicant  had
    been granted leave outright and a  second  had  had  their  application
    refused,  but  won  on  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and   in
    circumstances where there was no challenge to  those  decisions.    The
    witness statement adduced by the respondent, from Richard  Holmes,  did
    not discuss the policy guidance and was limited to a discussion that Mr
    Holmes had had  with  a  single  colleague.   Nothing  in  the  witness
    statement  suggested  that  either  of  them  had  expertise   in   the
    formulation of  the  long  residence  policy  or  the  policy  guidance
    document.  Of note, nowhere  in  the  witness  statement  could  it  be
    discerned why the decision-makers in  the  examples  given  by  AW  had
    interpreted the policy in the way that they did, despite the fact  that
    one decision-maker could be identified by name.  There was  no  attempt
    to address or investigate any wider  pattern  of  decision-making.   Mr
    Holmes had even misunderstood the policy himself, when at  [8]  of  his
    statement he had referred to 'book-ended' overstayers benefitting  from
    the exercise of discretion, when in fact on the  respondent's  case  in
    Hoque,  such  applicants  had  the  required  long  residence  and   no
    discretion was needed.

The respondent's submissions

Written submissions

132. In written submissions  dated  4th  February  2021,  Mr  Harland  first
    summarised the respondent's case; dealt with applications for ILR under
    the Rules and the respondent's policy, together with  a  discussion  of
    the distinction between 'book-  ended'  and  'open-ended'  overstayers;
    then  focused  on  the  applicants'  cases  under  article  8  and  the
    respondent's  impugned  decisions;  and  finally  the  extent  of   the
    respondent's residual discretion to grant ILR under the 1971 Act.

133. In summary, the applicant's ILR applications  were  based  on  a  false
    premise, namely because they had made further  applications  for  leave
    within 28 days after their section 3C leave had come to  an  end,  they
    were continuing to accrue  continuous  lawful  residence  whilst  those
    applications were outstanding. That was a basic misunderstanding of the
    Rules and the respondent's policy. They failed both  within  the  Rules
    and the wider policy and there  was  nothing  which  could  potentially
    engage any residual discretion.

134. The applicants, like  the  appellants  in  'Hoque',  were  'open-ended'
    overstayers. The sections of the respondent's guidance referred to gaps
    in lawful residence which had ended before 24th November 2016 or  where
    leave had been  granted  in  accordance  with  paragraph  39E.  Neither
    circumstances applied to GA or AW.  At no point  had  the  respondent's
    policy encompassed 'open-ended' overstayers, and all  of  the  examples
    given in the long residence concession referred to subsequent grants of
    leave.

135.  Underhill  LJ  had,  at  [50]  of  Hoque,  provided  a  rationale  for
    distinguishing between 'open-ended' and 'book-ended'  overstayers.   In
    the former case, the anniversary  was  without  legal  significance  as
    there was no grant of leave on the original application.  It  was  also
    capable of  abuse  as  an  applicant  could  make  a  wholly  unfounded
    application and rely upon time taken to determine it, perhaps prolonged
    by a variation, in order to get the point where  an  application  under
    paragraph 276B could be made.  AW's and GA's anniversaries were no more
    than what Underhill LJ had described as 'place markers'.

136. Mr Harland reiterated AW's and GA's  circumstances  as  supporting  the
    risk of abuse.  Their earlier ILR applications were bound to  fail  and
    their article 8 claims had similarly been rejected.

137. The applicants' reliance upon an explanatory memorandum of  changes  in
    the Rules did  not  assist  them,  as  the  guidance  had  to  be  read
    objectively (see Mandalia v SSHD [2015] UKSC 59).   Reliance  upon  the
    memorandum took statements in it out of context,  as  paragraph  [7.49]
    had referred explicitly to disregarding periods of overstaying  between
    periods of leave, for reasons of fairness. Changes in  the  Rules  were
    only ever intended to assist those  who  had  historically  short  gaps
    between periods of leave, i.e. 'book-ended overstayers'.

138. The interpretation of the Rules and policy  as  contended  for  by  the
    respondent sat comfortably with the overarching immigration system  and
    the section 3C regime under the 1971 Act, which allowed for leave to be
    extended while in-time, valid applications were  outstanding  or  being
    appealed,  but  not  beyond  that.  Any  alleged  inconsistencies  with
    paragraph  39E  were  illusory.  The  person  who  might  benefit  from
    paragraph 39E could be a skilled worker, who possessed the  fundamental
    attributes which would allow them to remain and take up  a  role  which
    might benefit society and who,  for  personal  reasons,  had  made  the
    application late. This was entirely different from  a  person  applying
    for ILR under paragraph 276B who  had  fallen  short  of  the  10  year
    requirement and had failed to fulfil even the most  basic  requirement.
    The respondent would not merely be asked to disregard  overstaying,  as
    per paragraph 39E, but to treat such applicants as  having  fundamental
    attributes that they did not have, akin to  pretending  that  a  Worker
    visa applicant had a certificate of sponsorship when they did not.

139. GA and AW had not forgotten to submit  a  valid  application  in  time,
    rather they were unable to make such applications  and  the  respondent
    was not required to make up missing time. They  did  not  fail  because
    they were overstayers, but because they did not  have  10  years'  long
    residence.

140. The respondent's policy was a constrained, rather than a broad one  and
    none of the examples of  favoured  applicants,  with  whom  GA  and  AW
    compared themselves, had analogous attributes. These included those who
    had accumulated 10 years' long residence, but were  overstayers;  those
    within 28 days of  completing  the  required  qualifying  period,  with
    ongoing leave when the application was being considered; and those with
    certain recognised breaks in their continuous residence, i.e. those who
    had spent time outside the UK. The applicants  were  not  analogous  to
    those benefiting from the concession for periods of time spent  outside
    the UK because they had not overstayed for less than 28 days  prior  to
    24th November 2016, in combination with a  further grant  of  leave  so
    that they had a 'gap' which could then be overlooked.  Those  who  were
    resident in the UK on temporary  admission  or  immigration  bail  only
    benefited from such periods counting as lawful residence  if  leave  to
    enter  or  remain  was  later  granted.  The  'book-ended'/'open-ended'
    dichotomy also applied for those who lodged appeals out  of  time,  but
    their appeals were ultimately successful.

141. In summary, the policy did not assist  the  applicants,  and  for  good
    reason, because of the potential for abuse, and  as  Dingemans  LJ  had
    described it at [103] of Hoque, such an interpretation "defies reason."

142. The criticism that the respondent  had  failed  to  provide  a  witness
    statement to explain the meaning of the policy was not consistent  with
    the view of the Supreme Court in Mandalia,  which  confirmed  that  the
    interpretation of the policy was for this Tribunal. The case of  Das  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 45, where a statement had been provided to explain
    the  length  of  detention  for  an  individual  detainee,  related  to
    individual circumstances and not the interpretation of a policy.  There
    was no evidence of a different or hidden policy.

143. In relation to the article 8 arguments, the test was that  set  out  in
    WM (DRC) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1495, namely whether having  asked  the
    right  question  and  applied  anxious  scrutiny,  the  respondent  was
    entitled to come to  the  conclusion  that  she  did.  The  applicants'
    challenges must boil down to their  proposition  that  despite  failing
    under paragraph 276B,  they  had  realistic  prospects  under  a  wider
    article 8 analysis. The applicants had acknowledged that article 8  was
    not a general dispensing power; nor were they entitled to  a  grant  on
    the basis of a 'near miss.'

144.  The  decisions  in  AW  and  GA,  when  considering   the   particular
    circumstances, did not demonstrate any factor counterbalancing the need
    to comply with the Rules.  AW had no  family  and  had  lived  for  the
    majority of his life in Pakistan, where he grew up, studied and  worked
    until aged nearly 27. The fact that he had spent nine years in  the  UK
    did not lend any real weight to his private life claim, as found by the
    First-tier Tribunal. AW's assertion that he was on track to  obtain  10
    years' qualifying continuous lawful residence was simply wrong, as  his
    leave had ended. The respondent  was  entitled  to  consider  that  his
    submissions were not significantly different to those  put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and dismissed by it some seven and  a  half  months
    earlier.

145. GA's case was also considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  had
    refused  her  article  8  appeal  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no
    circumstances which made refusal of leave unjustifiably harsh. None  of
    her article  8  private  life  submissions  subsequently  made  in  her
    application of 9th June 2018 were significantly  different  from  those
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal in April  2017. She was a 43 year
    old woman who had arrived in the UK originally aged  29,  although  her
    current period of leave began when she was aged 34. She had  no  family
    in the UK, save for her Sri Lankan national husband who would return to
    Sri Lanka with her.

146. In terms of residual discretion, this was not to be seen as  a  way  of
    getting round the Rules or introducing a 'near miss' principle by other
    means. As confirmed by Davis LJ in R (Junied) v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    2293, ([42]), an argument that considerations of  fairness  meant  that
    the residual discretion should be exercised to  waive  compliance  with
    the Rules would drive a 'heavy goods vehicle' through the whole  scheme
    and would run counter to  the  approach  in  the  decided  authorities.
    Whilst it remained true that the respondent retained  a  discretion  to
    grant leave, such a grant would be truly exceptional. If that were  not
    the case, the purpose of the Rules and the published policy, to provide
    certainty to applicants; guidance to caseworkers; and  clarity  to  the
    public,  would  be  wholly  undermined.  The  argument  that   residual
    discretion should be exercised in the absence of any article  8  claims
    of any merit was unsustainable.

Oral submissions on behalf of the respondent

147. The cases were, in fact, far simpler  than  the  applicants  suggested.
    They related to a fundamental attribute needed for ILR under  paragraph
    276B, which none of the applicants had,  namely  10  years'  continuous
    lawful residence.  That attribute was as fundamental a requirement as a
    certificate of sponsorship  for  a  Worker  visa  application.   If  an
    applicant had the required residence, they could then 'bank'  this  and
    apply at a later date, provided they were not in breach of the Rules at
    the time of their application.  That was a requirement of the Rules, as
    in force from July 2012.  The second requirement of not being in breach
    of the Rules  at  the  time  of  the  application  was  an  additional,
    different requirement. Paragraph  39E  provided  an  exception  to  the
    latter, not the former.   It never gave applicants the  core  attribute
    that they had never had.  As with any attribute, there would inevitably
    be bright lines, which do not allow for 'near misses'.  Hoque confirmed
    this.  To get ILR, one could be a 'book-ended,' but not an 'open-ended'
    overstayer, but the key to that distinction was that those in the first
    category, even book-ended, needed to have the core attribute.   AW  and
    GA did not.

148. The respondent was entitled to have  a  policy  guiding  its  decision-
    makers that could be more generous than the Rules.  However, it was for
    the applicants to show which part of the policy that they  fell  within
    and it was not enough for them to point out  that  other  people  could
    come within the policy and that they did not.  They must indicate which
    parts of the policy they fell within and they had not done so.

149. The applicants were then thrown  back  to  article  8,  which  was  not
    coterminous with paragraph 276B.  These applicants did not assert  that
    they succeeded under the Rules. Their cases  were  standalone,  outside
    the Rules.  There was nothing on which to 'bite', in respect  of  their
    article 8 claims.  Their article 8 claims had previously been  rejected
    by First-tier Tribunals shortly before their renewed  applications  and
    the only development by the time of the renewed  applications  was  the
    'place marker' of 10 years' residence, which had no legal significance.
     On a more minor point, it  was  beside  the  point  to  say  that  the
    applicants had done everything they could to try to remain  within  the
    UK lawfully.  If that were enough,  Worker  visa  applicants  could  be
    granted visas even without a certificate of sponsorship.

150. Whilst Mr Jafferji had criticised the consistency  of  the  Rules,  the
    position for 'open-ended' overstayers had always been the same, as  per
    the authority of R (Juned Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] UKUT 10 (IAC).   As  the
    case of Hoque confirmed, 'open-ended' overstayers  were  not  permitted
    within the Rules.  While McCombe LJ had considered, at  [92],  'Example
    4', (page [743]  CB),  his  was  a  dissenting  judgment,  and  he  had
    misunderstood that example, which actually related  to  a  'book-ended'
    overstayer.  Mr Harland urged us to consider instead [11]  to  [22]  of
    Hoque, which set  out  the  relevant  provisions  and  the  applicants'
    circumstances in that case; and at [25], Underhill  LJ  had  noted  the
    case of R (Juned Ahmed), with facts which were materially identical  to
    those in  the  present  applications;  and  he  had  rejected  counter-
    arguments at [48] to [49].  Underhill LJ confirmed that the requirement
    of continuous lawful residence was not qualified by paragraph 39E.   At
    [37], he had referred to paragraph [7.49] of the explanatory memorandum
    for the 2016 changes and the requirement for ILR applicants to have the
    required  period  of  continuous  lawful  residence.   Any  gaps  could
    potentially  be  cured,  provided  there  was  a  subsequent  grant  in
    accordance with paragraph 39E. That assisted 'book-ended'  overstayers,
    but not 'open-ended' overstayers.  These applicants  were  'open-ended'
    overstayers and they could not point to a 'gap', so  that  neither  the
    Rules not the explanatory memorandum assisted them.

151. The Court in Hoque had referred to  the  validity  of  the  distinction
    between 'book-ended'  and  'open-ended'  overstayers.   A  'book-ended'
    overstayer had a valid reason for remaining in the UK and, for example,
    may have missed an application  date  for  one  renewal  but  then  had
    established another valid reason to remain, which  the  respondent  had
    recognised in granting further leave.  In that case,  the  person  with
    the 'gap' had then gone on  to  accrue  long  residence  and  could  be
    treated validly in a different way to an 'open-ended'  overstayer.   An
    'open-ended' overstayer's leave had ended and they  did  not  have  any
    further lawful reason to remain in the UK.  They  had  not  accrued  10
    years' lawful residence and their  further  application  was  merely  a
    'place holder' application with no inherent merit on its own.  They had
    run out of lawful leave and there was nothing to show why paragraph 39E
    should apply.

152. Underhill LJ had correctly noted  the  possibility  for  abuse  if  the
    applicants' contention were permitted.  As in GA's and AW's  cases,  an
    application for leave, however  unfounded,  could  be  pursued;  appeal
    rights be exhausted; and then an applicant could simply make a  further
    application within a short time of the exhaustion of  the  last  appeal
    rights.   An argument similar to the applicants' had been pursued in  R
    (Juned Ahmed) and had been rejected.  Whilst Mr  Jafferji  was  correct
    that a person could not make repeatedly rejected applications, a person
    could apply for ILR based on long residence despite being resident  for
    only 7 years; vary their  application  a  number  of  times  which  the
    respondent then had to consider afresh and then, when finally rejected,
    make a further application within 14 days and start off all over again.



153. AW had arrived in 2009 and applied in 2017  for  ILR,  with  only  just
    over eight years' residence, (i.e. nearly two years' short)  which  was
    the last time when he had anything other than section 3C leave.   There
    was no undue delay in the  refusal  of  his  application  (five  months
    later) and he was then given an in-country right  of  appeal.   GA  had
    returned to the UK on 6th July 2008, with her leave, except as extended
    because of statutory appeals, ending in 2015, so she had  seven  years'
    leave.  Her application was also swiftly rejected but she then appealed
    all the way to the Upper Tribunal and then  made  varied  applications.
    The Court of Appeal's fears were justified in the cases of GA and AW.

154. The applicants may say that this  was  how  section  3C  leave  worked.
    However, the answer was that if the applicants had found  other  lawful
    reasons to remain, they would then be  'book-ended'  overstayers.   The
    system had some degree of flexibility, but the  'bright  line'  lay  in
    having the required period of lawful residence, whether such  residence
    included 'book-ended' gaps or  otherwise.   The  applicants  could  not
    succeed under the Rules or the policy.

155. Looking at what the policy said, first, while the Court  in  Hoque  had
    focussed on the Rules, Underhill LJ had stated at [38] that the  policy
    was consistent with his interpretation of the Rules.

156. Turning next to the history of the guidance and first, the  April  2009
    version, the background section made clear at page [702] CB that  until
    April 2003 there was no provision in the  Rules  for  a  person  to  be
    granted ILR based on the grounds of long residence.  Instead, the  long
    residence concession allowed for a discretionary  grant,  based  on  UK
    residence, the length of which varied depending  on  whether  residence
    was continuously lawful or not (if 'yes', it was 10 years; if 'no,' the
    period was 14 years).

157. The implementation of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    in April 2003 meant that there was no right of appeal  against  refusal
    of  those  seeking  leave  to  enter  or  remain  under   concessionary
    arrangements.  To  provide  a  right  of  appeal,  the  long  residence
    concession was brought within the scope of the  Rules  from  1st  April
    2003.  Page [704] CB of the same 2009 guidance included a flowchart for
    '10 years long residence'.  The first question in  that  flowchart  was
    whether  an  applicant  had  at  least  10  years'  continuous   lawful
    residence.  If the answer was  'no,'  then  the  application  would  be
    refused under paragraph 276D.  This was consistent  with  Mr  Harland's
    characterisation of the requirement being a fundamental attribute.

158. Turning to the section [2.3.3] of the 2009 guidance (page [709]  CB)  -
    'Examples of use of discretion'  in  the  context  of  gaps  in  lawful
    residence, one example given was of an applicant having a single  short
    gap in lawful residence through making one single previous  application
    out of time.  The point was that if it were a 'gap,' it  could  not  be
    'open-ended'.  Whilst Mr Jafferji relied upon the earlier paragraph  on
    that page stating that case workers needed to be satisfied  that  every
    attempt had been made to comply with the Rules, it did not follow  that
    they should succeed because they had made attempts.  They  should  only
    succeed if their application was  in  the  context  of  a  'gap'.   The
    discretion was constrained and not a broad one as contended for by  the
    applicants.

159. Moving to the subsequent version of the guidance of  November  2011  at
    page [959] CB, it too referred  to  discretion  for  breaks  in  lawful
    residence.  A decision-maker had to be satisfied that an applicant  had
    acted lawfully throughout the whole 10 year period and had  made  every
    effort to obey the Rules.  The guidance  continued  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to use discretion for a  single  gap  in  lawful  residence
    through making one previous application out of time.  The emphasis  was
    upon a gap in lawful residence.

160. The next version of the guidance of April 2013 was at  page  [888]  CB.
    Once, again short gaps were allowed, where  applications  were  out  of
    time by no more than 28 days.  The policy was  that  any  gap  must  be
    'book-ended' by a grant of leave.

161. The first time that overstaying was included in  the  guidance  was  in
    the April 2013 guidance at page [891] CB, in the  context  of  'out  of
    time'  applications.   This  distinguished  between  applications  made
    before 9th July 2012 and those made on or after 9th July  2012.   After
    9th July 2012, applicants must not have been in breach  of  the  Rules.
    Whilst  the  applicants  sought  to  argue  that   these   'overstayer'
    exceptions allowed  an  applicant  to  build  up  a  period  of  lawful
    residence, they  did  not  and  could  not.   Instead,  they  protected
    overstayers who had built up 10 years' continuous lawful residence  but
    had made 'out of time' applications, within 28 days of the  last  grant
    of leave and now wished to 'bank' their accrued lawful residence.   The
    provisions could not be read as relating  to  'open-ended'  overstayers
    who  had  not  accrued  the  required  lawful   residence,   as   their
    applications were not 'out of time' -  rather  they  were  without  the
    required lawful residence.

162. The 2017 policy, applicable to the applicants, contained a  section  on
    'breaks in lawful residence,' at page [741] CB and as  before,  allowed
    for short gaps in lawful residence through making previous applications
    out of time by no more than 28 calendar days  where  those  gaps  ended
    before November 2016 (the 'out of  time'  provisions,  as  before),  or
    where leave was granted in accordance with paragraph 39E.  The  further
    section on 'out of time applications' (page [744] CB)  dealt  with  the
    circumstance of those who  had  accrued  10  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence but were overstayers at the time of the application.  It  was
    that guidance that was considered  in  Hoque  and  in  particular,  the
    paragraph dealing with breaks at page [741] CB, where Underhill LJ took
    the policy as support for his interpretation of the  Rules.   This  was
    consistent with 'book-ended'  overstaying  being  allowed,  but  'open-
    ended' overstaying, not allowed.  Whilst Mr Jafferji had  referred  to,
    and relied upon the 2009 guidance, (page [701] CB) as stating that  the
    Rules recognised the ties a person may form in the UK  over  a  lengthy
    period  of  residence,  that  was  not  coterminous  with  article   8.
    Recognition of article 8 flowed from other provisions of the Rules, for
    example paragraph 276ADE, following the abolition of the 14  year  long
    residence route.  The Rules did not recognise that 10 years' continuous
    lawful residence equated to an article 8 family or a private life claim
    and indeed one could have remained for 15 years with no article 8 claim
    to speak of, or instead may have established  such  private  or  family
    life so as to engage article 8 with only a couple of years'  residence.



163. Mr Jafferji had pointed to  a  number  of  parts  of  the  policy  that
    allowed applications for leave to remain on the basis of long residence
    to succeed, even though they were more generous  than  the  Rules.   In
    particular, at page [736] CB, there was  a  reference  to  a  break  in
    continuous residence being permitted where a person  had  been  outside
    the UK for more than six months at any one time.  However, there was no
    mystery as to why the policy allowed this, where paragraphs 276A(a) and
    276A(b) defined lawful residence and allowed for  individuals  who  had
    been absent for less than six months to maintain  continuity,  so  that
    the policy was in fact consistent with the Rules.

164. Mr Jafferji had also raised an issue about  leaving  the  UK  with  one
    grant of leave and returning with a different grant of leave and having
    been without leave outside the UK for some time.  It was asked how that
    was fair that they were treated more favourably.   The answer  to  that
    was  that  the  applicants  had  remained  in  the  UK  unlawfully   as
    overstayers and they had not established that had  they  left  the  UK,
    they would have been granted re-entry.  They had not pursued this route
    and so we could not know what the outcome would  have  been.   In  that
    context, the policy was not arbitrary, but consistent with  the  Rules,
    which respected those who had left and re-entered on valid visas  -  in
    the latter case, if there had been any  overstaying,  this  was  'book-
    ended,' as re-entry had been granted.

165. Next, Mr Harland referred to the section in  the  current  guidance  at
    page [747] CB, dealing with 'Time awaiting a decision on an application
    or appeal'.  That had included a passage at  page  [748]  CB,  where  a
    person's leave to remain had not been extended by virtue of section  3C
    because they had made an application out of time but nevertheless their
    appeal was subsequently admitted  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  and  had
    succeeded.  In  those  circumstances,  discretion  should  normally  be
    exercised to disregard any break in continuous lawful  residence  where
    an appeal was allowed, with a grant outside the Rules.  This once again
    mirrored the 'book-ended' versus 'open-ended' distinction.  If such  an
    applicant  were  an  'open-ended'  overstayer  and  their  appeal   was
    unsuccessful, they would not get a grant of further leave.

166. Mr Harland then referred to the section of the policy on 'Out  of  time
    applications' at page [744] CB and those applications where a period of
    overstaying, depending on when  the  application  was  made,  would  be
    disregarded.  However,  this  section  was  not  relevant  because  the
    applicants had not had their applications  refused  because  they  were
    overstayers, but because they did not have 10 years' continuous  lawful
    residence.  They were two distinct concepts.

167. Turning to the next  section  of  the  2017  policy  on  'Treatment  of
    temporary admission' at page [746] CB, this  confirmed  that  temporary
    admission or release on  immigration  bail  only  qualified  as  lawful
    residence, if leave to enter or leave  to  remain  was  later  granted.
    Once again, this was consistent with  the  'book-ended'  versus  'open-
    ended' overstaying distinction.  On a connected section of the guidance
    at page [732] CB, for applicants in the UK  with  temporary  admission,
    where it provided that an applicant with  temporary  admission  meeting
    all of the other requirements of Rule 276B could have a six-month grant
    of leave outside the Rules, so that  they  could  make  an  application
    within the UK, this was explicable because an ILR application had to be
    made in-country and in  this  case,  all  of  the  other  requirements,
    including the 10 year continuous lawful residence requirement,  had  to
    be met.  This was a discretion to allow  an  applicant  with  temporary
    admission to make their application within the UK.

168. The other cases where Mr  Jafferji  had  referred  to  more  favourable
    treatment of other groups, all  had  rational  explanations  consistent
    with the distinction between 'book-ended' and 'open-ended' overstayers.
      One such example was the discretion  given  to  EEA  nationals,  when
    neither GA nor AW were EEA nationals.  Next, Mr Jafferji  had  referred
    to the 'public interest' considerations at  page  [754]  CB.   However,
    those  factors were relevant where, despite meeting the long  residence
    requirements, it would be against the public interests  to  grant  ILR.
    The factors were relevant to the assessment of  that  public  interest.
    The fact that the applicants' circumstances were said to be  consistent
    with the factors listed, took those  factors  out  of  context  -  they
    applied when considering  whether  to  refuse  leave,  despite  meeting
    residence requirements.  The factors could not be read as being that  a
    person who did not meet the residence requirements  could  succeed,  or
    that 'open-ended' overstayers should succeed.  This  was  a  restricted
    policy in practice, not one applying to 'open-ended' overstayers.

169. Mr Harland dealt with two other examples in the  guidance.   The  first
    was an early application,  dealt  with  at  page  [739]  CB,  where  an
    applicant needed to make a timely application very shortly  (within  28
    days)  before  meeting  the  residence   requirement.   The   exception
    recognised people who would otherwise meet the  residence  requirement,
    but for the need to make an in-time application.   Neither  GA  nor  AW
    were within 28 days of a qualifying period; on the contrary  they  were
    10 years away from being  able  to  establish  such  continuous  lawful
    residence, either  because  of  a  break  in  their  period  of  lawful
    residence, or simply never achieving such a threshold.  In  particular,
    at page [739] CB, the guidance stated, in  the  penultimate  paragraph,
    that if the person made an application more than 28 days prior  to  the
    acquisition of continuous lawful residence of 10 years, then a decision-
    maker must refuse it.

170. Second, in relation to 'Example 4' at page [742] CB and an  observation
    by  McCombe  LJ  that  this  might  be  of  benefit   to   'open-ended'
    overstayers, his observation was  both  obiter  and  misunderstood  the
    example. In 'Example 4', the applicant had left the UK,  albeit  as  an
    overstayer, and  had  then  applied  from  outside  the  UK  for  entry
    clearance,  which  he  was  granted.  He  was  a  classic  'book-ended'
    overstayer, as he had obtained further entry clearance, for reasons not
    specified as relating to long-residence.  In contrast,  the  applicants
    had not, when their appeal rights were finally exhausted, left  the  UK
    and then re-entered with further leave.  AW had last had  leave,  other
    than 'section 3C' leave, in June 2017; whereas GA  had  last  had  such
    leave in 2015.  They did not fall into 'Example 4', nor would any open-
    ended overstayer.  There were no  circumstances  independent  of  their
    applications for ILR such as any family life relied  upon.   While  the
    applicants said it was unfair for others to benefit from provisions  on
    which those others could rely, for  different  reasons,  to  get  entry
    clearance, that reflected the reality of the lack  of  family  life  or
    other circumstances meriting a grant of leave or entry,  to  'book-end'
    any gap in leave.

171. In response to the challenge to the evidence of Richard Holmes  as  not
    addressing the applicants' witness  statements,  Mr  Harland  had  made
    clear at the end of the first day that he was only intending to  adduce
    the evidence of Mr Holmes to respond to the  specific  decision  letter
    which had been adduced.  It was clear from Mr  Holmes'  statement  that
    there was no secret policy of granting leave in cases such as this  and
    if there had been a wrong decision, that was simply a mistake  and  did
    not assist the applicants.

172. In terms of any claim based on article 8, the  impugned  decisions  had
    refused to treat the applicants' further submissions  as  fresh  claims
    for the purposes of paragraph 353.  The article 8 submissions  did  not
    have a  realistic  prospect  of  success.   There  was  no  near  'miss
    principle', and while the extent to  which  they  nearly  achieved  any
    period of lawful residence was not wholly irrelevant, nonetheless,  the
    applications for ILR were not  coterminous  with  article  8.   If  the
    applicants needed to show a realistic prospect of success for  a  claim
    outside the Rules, on the basis of article 8, the starting point was to
    consider this through the lens of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE.
    They got nowhere close in relation to those provisions.  By comparison,
    Mr Mubarak in the case of Hoque was only two months  short  of  the  10
    year  residence  requirement  and  while  their   Lordships   expressed
    sympathy, all found that falling short to that limited extent was of no
    assistance.  Arguably, Mr Mubarak had a stronger claim, as he also  had
    a daughter, but still failed.  The applicants in this case  would  have
    to show that there was  a  realistic  prospect  that  they  would  have
    succeeded under article 8.   In reciting their  immigration  histories,
    the applicants' representatives had not dwelt on the previous  separate
    refusals of human rights appeals by the First-tier  Tribunals,  only  a
    short time before their renewed applications.

173. In relation to AW, Judge Miah had, in a decision  promulgated  on  30th
    August 2018 at page [312] CB, indicated that there was  nothing  before
    her to allow the human rights appeal ([32]).  The appeal in August 2018
    came nowhere close to succeeding.  AW's appeal rights were exhausted on
    30th January 2019 and he then made his ILR application on 4th  February
    2019, which the respondent refused to treat as a fresh  claim  on  20th
    April 2019, so no more than eight months after the First-tier  Tribunal
    had resoundingly refused his article 8 claim.  The  question  therefore
    was what had changed between  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
    August 2018 and his further  application  on  4th  February  2019.  The
    answer was that nothing had changed, other than a  place  marker  which
    had no legal significance.  AW was not within 28 days of  acquiring  10
    years' continuous lawful residence and was in fact 10 years  away.   He
    had not been outside the UK and returned  lawfully.   In  AW's  renewed
    application, there was  nothing  different  from  what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had considered in  the  material  before  it,  other  than  an
    incorrect assertion that AW met the requirement of paragraph 276B.  The
    refusal in that context was entirely unsurprising.  A discretion  could
    not be used to waive a fundamental requirement of 10 years'  continuous
    lawful residence and in the circumstances, the respondent was  entitled
    then to consider whether there was any realistic prospect  of  success.
    The respondent was entitled to consider in her decision, at page  [333]
    CB, that all of the submissions had previously  been  considered  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal, and to reject it as a fresh claim.  Therefore  the
    brevity of the respondent's reasoning had to be seen in the context  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's very recent and resounding article 8  refusal
    and the absence of any new material.

174. GA's application had a similar pattern.  In a decision  promulgated  on
    5th April 2017, Judge Lawrence of the First-tier Tribunal had confirmed
    at  page  [257]  CB,  [13],  that  the  applicants  had  not  met   the
    requirements of paragraph  276A,  in  the  context  of  the  respondent
    considering the  exercise  of  discretion  'pursuant  to  the  relevant
    guidance'.  Judge Lawrence had gone  on  to  consider  Appendix  FM  in
    respect of family life and  also  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    applicants' integration to their country of origin, Sri Lanka, for  the
    purposes of paragraph 276ADE  and  had  similarly  rejected  the  human
    rights appeals at [19].  Having had  their  appeals  dismissed  on  5th
    April 2017, GA sought permission to appeal to this Tribunal, which  was
    refused both by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  subsequently  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanson, in a decision promulgated on 9th May  2018.   He
    had confirmed at that date that there was  nothing  outside  the  Rules
    raised, that required consideration separately pursuant to  article  8,
    and that Judge Lawrence was clearly entitled to find that article 8 was
    not engaged.  Having refused permission on 9th May 2018, the applicants
    then made a further application on 17th May  2018,  varied  to  an  ILR
    application on 9th June 2018, based on 10 years' lawful residence.  The
    application had referred, at page [162] CB, to GA having  at  least  10
    years' continuous lawful residence, which was not correct, and then  at
    page [168] CB, to an application by reference  to  GA's  human  rights.
    However, all of the issues that had been  raised,  namely  adapting  to
    life and integrating in  the  UK;  being  without  a  poor  immigration
    history  or  serious  breach  of  the  Rules;  and  making  a  positive
    contribution  to  the  UK;  were  factors  that  had  previously   been
    considered, a matter of months  earlier,  by  Judge  Lawrence.  In  the
    circumstances,  the  respondent,  in  refusing  to  treat  the  further
    submissions as a fresh claim, noted at page [244] CB, that GA could not
    succeed on the basis of  continuous  lawful  residence  and  there  was
    nothing significantly different from that  which  had  been  considered
    some seven months earlier by the First-tier Tribunal.

175. Whilst Ms Naik QC had suggested that  there  should  be  some  form  of
    'minded to refuse' letter analogous to the case of  Balajigari  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 673, first, that was a new ground and  second,  it  was
    unarguable.  The applicants knew about the requirements under the Rules
    and also knew about the requirement to put  forward  something  outside
    the Rules for the purposes of article 8 and had not done so.  Moreover,
    even if the  respondent  had  done  so,  there  was  nothing  that  the
    applicants had pointed to now or since that  resulted  in  an  arguable
    claim under article 8.  Whilst Ms Naik QC  had  referred  to  the  GCID
    notes recording GA as entering the UK in 2008 whereas she had  in  fact
    entered earlier, albeit with a break, this was reflected  in  GA's  own
    application letter which had referred to her arriving in the UK on  6th
    July 2008.  Even though she had arrived earlier, that did not make  out
    an article 8 claim.  She would need to have been  continuously  present
    for 20 years and arguments around those human rights had not previously
    succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal.

176. The  respondent's  submissions  were  therefore  straightforward.   The
    applicants could not succeed under the Rules, as per Hoque.  They could
    not succeed under the policy as no provisions under the  policy  stated
    that they should succeed.  The applicants had been forced  to  turn  to
    some form of 'near miss' argument for the purpose of  article  8.   For
    the same reasons that Mr Mubarak failed, these applicants  should  also
    fail.  Their claims did no more than assert a period of time  in  which
    they had been in the UK, albeit without  continuous  lawful  residence,
    and their lawful residence had  ended  some  years  previously,  unless
    otherwise as extended by section 3C.

177. On one final point in terms of the extent of residual  discretion,   to
    the extent that there was residual discretion, it was of minimal scope,
    noting the recent authority of  Kalsi  v  SSHD  [2021]  EWCA  Civ  184.
    Nothing in the applicants' circumstances merited the exercise  of  such
    residual discretion.

The applicants' response

GA's response

178. Ms Naik QC said it was not sufficient for  this  Tribunal  to  consider
    only  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decisions   when   considering   the
    applicants' circumstances.  GA had entered the UK lawfully in 2003, and
    maintained her lawful leave until it ended on refusal of an  appeal  by
    the AIT, as it then was, on 6th March 2008.  Whilst  GA  had  no  leave
    when she then left the UK (and had overstayed by some 39 days) she  was
    subsequently granted an entry visa on 3rd July  2008.   Whilst  GA  had
    made an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal which had been rejected,  her
    previous application was not wholly unmeritorious and  indeed  was  far
    from it.  She had a history of  paid  applications,  her  original  ILR
    application being made in 2015, based on a claim of residence from 2003
    to 2015 with a short gap in 2008,  so  that  12  years'  residence  was
    relied upon. Her 2015 application was refused in 2016  because  of  her
    overstaying and period of absence from the UK, which  broke  continuity
    of leave.  Her most recent application was now refused because she  was
    not a 'book-ended' overstayer, when  she  previously  had  been.    The
    primary remedy for GA had been a statutory appeal on article 8  grounds
    and when this failed, her only option was to make further  submissions.
     The only reason GA's application had failed in 2015 was because, as  a
    'book-ended' overstayer then, the gap in lawful residence  exceeded  28
    days.   Moreover, she had only been  60  days  short  of  acquiring  10
    years'  continuous  lawful  residence  when  she   made   her   renewed
    application in 2018.

AW's response

179. The respondent had made much of AW's circumstances not  having  changed
    since the First-tier Tribunal's rejection of his previous appeal  under
    article 8, but what had changed was the weight to be  attached  to  the
    public interest in refusing AW leave to remain, in  the  context  of  a
    'fair balance'.  The respondent said that the  core  attribute  was  10
    years' continuous lawful residence and Mr Harland had drawn the analogy
    to a certificate of sponsorship in the context of Worker  visas.   That
    was not a fair analogy, as without  a  certificate  of  sponsorship,  a
    Worker visa application could not be made and there was no  discretion.
    This was in contrast to the long residence policy, which was  'riddled'
    with discretion to waive particular rules, including a whole section on
    'book-ended' overstayers which was a  departure  from  the  Rules;  EEA
    nationals and temporary admissions; and concessions for late and  early
    applications.  The development of the long residence  policy  over  the
    years had resulted in part of the policy being incorporated within  the
    Rules; and part remaining within the  guidance;  but  the  fundamentals
    remained the same.  The concession, as expanded, had been more generous
    than the Rules and had, as its purpose, a  desire  to  ensure  that  an
    applicant's commitment to trying to comply with  the  Rules  should  be
    recognised.

180. On a separate note, it was dangerous to  treat  individual  conclusions
    in Hoque as somehow setting precedents, when the Court  of  Appeal  had
    made clear that they did not regard the applicants' article 8 rights as
    raising general issues of principle in that case.  The article 8 issues
    in AW's case were different here.  It was also not fair to characterise
    AW's previous applications as being made in bad faith or bound to fail.
     Had they been, the respondent could have certified  the  applications,
    and she had not. The easy way to  resolve  the  problem  of  repeat  or
    abusive applications was either  to  use  certification  or  make  more
    timely decisions.  Moreover, Mr Jafferji emphasised that the  Court  of
    Appeal had not considered how  a  'book-ended'  period  of  overstaying
    could come about.  There could be  an  in-time  application  which  was
    refused, generating a right of appeal and then when appeal rights  were
    exhausted, the applicant  might  make  an  application  that  could  be
    granted for reasons entirely unconnected to the  original  application,
    which meant that the person was now entitled to succeed.

181. Responding to the remainder of Mr Harland's  points,  Mr  Jafferji  re-
    emphasised that there had been a significant change in policy  in  July
    2012, which was reflected in the difference between pre- and  post-July
    2012 applications, where pre-July 2012 applications required 10  years'
    lawful residence, but post-July  2012  applications  included  no  such
    requirement.  There was  a  deliberate  change  in  language.   It  was
    crucial to assess where the 'fair balance' was struck  in  interpreting
    the policy.  The respondent had accepted that the applicants could have
    left and re-applied and a  visit  visa  could  be  obtained,  with  the
    further intention of making an ILR application.

E.   The Law and the Rules

The Immigration Act 1971

182. As recently discussed by the Court of  Appeal  in  the  decision  of  R
    (Kalsi & Ors) v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 184, [35] to [36],  section  1  of
    the 1971 Act provides that while those with the right of abode  in  the
    UK may come and go freely, those without such a right may only  do  so,
    and live and work and settle in the UK, by permission  and  subject  to
    such regulation and control as is imposed by Section 1(4), which:

     "recognises that the Secretary of State may lay down rules 'as to  the
    practice  to  be  followed  in  the  administration  of  this  Act  for
    regulating the entry into and  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom'...."  (R
    (Kalsi), [36])

183. Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act requires the Secretary of State:




     'from time to  time  (and  as  soon  as  may  be)'  [to]  'lay  before
    Parliament statement of the rules or of any changes in the rules,  laid
    down by him as to practice to be followed in the administration of this
    Act...'

184. Section 3(1)(b) also recognises that an individual may be  given  leave
    to enter the UK, or to remain in the UK, either for  a  limited  or  an
    indefinite period.

The Immigration Rules

185. The relevant provisions of the Rules  are  paragraphs  276B;  39E;  and
    353:

    "Requirements for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  ground  of  long
residence in the United Kingdom

    276B.  The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite  leave
    to remain on the ground of long residence in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    that:

         (i)(a)   he has had at least 10 years continuous  lawful  residence
              in the United Kingdom.
         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
              it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite  leave
              to remain on  the  ground  of  long  residence,  taking  into
              account his:
              (a) age; and
              (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
              (c)   personal   history,   including   character,   conduct,
                  associations and employment record; and
              (d   domestic circumstances; and
              (e) compassionate circumstances; and
              (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and
         (iii)    the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
              grounds for refusal.
         (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
              English language and sufficient knowledge About life  in  the
              United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.
         (v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
              laws,  except  that,  where  paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules
              applies,  any  current  period   of   overstaying   will   be
              disregarded.  Any  previous  period  of  overstaying  between
              periods of leave will also be disregarded where -
                (a)    the previous application was made before 24  November
                   2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or
                (b)    the further application  was  made  on  or  after  24
                   November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied."
         "Exceptions for overstayers
         39E. This paragraph applies where:
          (1) the application was made within 14  days  of  the  applicant's
         leave expiring and the Secretary of State considers that there  was
         a good  reason  beyond  the  control  of  the  applicant  or  their
         representative, provided  in  or  with  the  application,  why  the
         application could not be made in-time; or
          (2) the application was made:
              (a) following the refusal of a previous application for leave
              which was made in-time; and
                  (b) within 14 days of:
                        (i) the refusal  of  the  previous  application  for
leave; or
                   (ii) the expiry of any leave extended by  section  3C  of
                  the Immigration Act 1971; or
                  (iii) the expiry of the time-limit for making  an  in-time
                  application for administrative  review  or  appeal  (where
                  applicable); or
                  (iv) any administrative review or appeal being  concluded,
                  withdrawn or abandoned or lapsing......."

186. The effect of paragraph 276B was the issue determined by the  Court  of
    Appeal in Hoque.  That  analysis  was  summarised  succinctly  by  this
    Tribunal most recently in Muneeb Asif (Paragraph  276B  -  disregard  -
    previous overstaying) [2021] UKUT 0096 (IAC), the  relevant  paragraphs
    ([11] to [18]) are set out below:

         "11. In Underhill's LJ judgment, with  whom  Dingemans  LJ  agreed,
         three separate elements were identified in paragraph  276B(v).  The
         first element was the primary requirement that an  "applicant  must
         not be in the UK in breach of the immigration laws". The second and
         third  elements  related  to  circumstances  in  which  periods  of
         overstaying may be "disregarded." The  second  element,  concerning
         the '1st disregard', related to current overstaying by an applicant
         at the time of  their  application  for  ILR.  The  third  element,
         concerning  the  '2nd  disregard',   related   to   "previous   ...
         overstaying between periods of leave." Central  to  Underhill's  LJ
         judgment was the distinction between "open-ended"  overstaying,  in
         which there is a current period of overstaying in  respect  of  the
         ILR application (which concerns  the  1st  disregard),  and  "book-
         ended" overstaying, which involves previous periods of  overstaying
         between periods of leave (concerning the 2nd disregard) [9].

         12.   The  joint  appeals  in  Hoque   all   concerned   open-ended
         overstaying, the appellants contending that  they  benefitted  from
         the 1st disregard relating to 'current overstaying'  and  therefore
         fell to be treated as having been  continuously  lawfully  resident
         for the requisite 10 year period as required by paragraph  276B(i),
         which fell to be read in conjunction with the  whole  of  paragraph
         276B(v) [22].

         13.  Underhill LJ  first  analysed  the  issues  and  the  material
         reasoning in the earlier Upper Tribunal's decision  of  R  (on  the
         application of Ahmed) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         (para 276B - ten years lawful residence) [2019]  UKUT  00010  (IAC)
         ("Juned Ahmed"), which dealt with open-ended overstaying,  and  the
         earlier Court of Appeal permission decision in Masum Ahmed,  R  (on
         the  application  of)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1070;  [2019]  Imm  AR  1316  ("Masum
         Ahmed"), which concerned book-ended overstaying. At [27]  Underhill
         LJ set out the essential reasoning of Floyd LJ and  Haddon-Cave  LJ
         in Masum Ahmed for  rejecting  the  argument  that  paragraph  276B
         operated so as to cure shorts gaps between periods of leave  so  as
         to entitle persons to claim '10 years continuous lawful residence'.
         At [27] Underhill LJ set out paragraph 15(4)  of  the  decision  in
         Masum Ahmed:

             '15(4) The critical point is that the disregarding of  current
             or previous short periods of overstaying for the  purposes  of
             sub-paragraph (v) does not convert such periods  into  periods
             of lawful LTR; still less are such periods to be "disregarded"
             when  it  comes  to  considering  whether  an  applicant   has
             fulfilled the separate requirement of establishing  "10  years
             continuous lawful residence" under sub-paragraph (i)(a).'

         14.  It was clear to Underhill LJ (at [29] and [30]), based on  the
         structure and language of paragraph  276B,  that  the  requirements
         identified at sub-paragraphs (i)-(v)  were  intended  to  be  free-
         standing and self-contained, but he considered that the  effect  of
         sub-paragraph (v) was "seriously problematic".

         15.  At [31] His Lordship noted that sub-paragraph (i), by contrast
         with sub-paragraph (v):

             "...  requires  that  the  applicant  "has  had"  ten   years'
             continuous  lawful  residence.  That  formulation   does   not
             necessarily require that the lawful residence is continuing at
             the date of decision. No doubt typically  that  would  be  the
             case, but it would also  be  satisfied  in  a  case  where  an
             applicant has accrued the relevant period in the past but  has
             become an overstayer since then. In my view the purpose of the
             requirement in sub-paragraph (v) is evidently to  ensure  that
             overstayers are not entitled to  ILR  in  those  circumstances
             (subject to the effect of the disregard).

         16.  Paragraph 276B(v) was concerned with addressing an applicant's
         position at the date of  the  decision  in  respect  of  their  ILR
         application. If an applicant had accumulated  10  years  continuous
         lawful residence but was an overstayer when they applied  for  ILR,
         that overstaying would be disregarded if paragraph 39E applied with
         the result that the requirement in sub-paragraph (v) was treated as
         being satisfied ([32] & [33]).

         17.  Underhill LJ found there was "a frank disconnect" between  the
         2nd disregard in sub-paragraph (v) and the requirement to which  it
         appeared to be applied [34]. On its true construction, Underhill LJ
         found that the 2nd disregard did not belong to 276B(v), but instead
         belonged to 276B(i) ([34] & [35]), a conclusion that was  supported
         by reference to the drafting history ([36] &  [37]).  Applying  the
         interpretative principle established in  Pokhriyal  v  SSHD  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1568; [2014] Imm AR 711 Underhill LJ found further support
         for his  construction  in  the  Home  Office's  Guidance  on  "Long
         Residence", version 15, issued  on  3  April  2017,  which  enabled
         caseworkers to grant  an  ILR  application  in  circumstances  that
         reflected the third element  in  paragraph  276B(v).  His  Lordship
         concluded that Masum Ahmed was consequently wrongly decided [40].

         18.  At  [43]  Underhill  LJ  accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's
         submission that the 2nd disregard  could  not  however  assist  the
         appellants who were open-ended overstayers  as  the  1st  disregard
         only qualified the requirement in sub-paragraph (v)  and  not  sub-
         paragraph (i). He concluded, at [45], that  Juned  Ahmed  had  been
         correctly decided and that, "... on no possible  reading  can  [the
         1st  disregard]  be  construed  as  qualifying  the  definition  of
         continuous lawful residence" (at [49])."

187. In conclusion, for the purposes of the Rules at  least,  the  Court  of
    Appeal had drawn the distinction between 'open-ended'  overstayers  and
    'book-ended' overstayers, with the latter group being entitled to  rely
    upon the 'second disregard' referred to above, (a  previous  period  of
    limited overstaying between periods of leave), whereas the former group
    of 'open-ended' overstayers could not, and they could not rely  on  the
    'first disregard' as qualifying the 10 year continuous lawful residence
    requirement in paragraph 276B(i)(a).

188. Paragraph 353 relates to the respondent's consideration of  whether  to
    treat further submissions as a fresh claim:

        "Fresh claims

        353. When a human rights or protection claim  has  been  refused  or
        withdrawn or treated as withdrawn  under  paragraph  333C  of  these
        Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is  no  longer  pending,
        the decision maker will consider any  further  submissions  and,  if
        rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a fresh  claim.
        The  submissions  will  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  if   they   are
        significantly different from the material that has  previously  been
        considered. The submissions will only be significantly different  if
        the content:

         i) had not already been considered; and




        ii) taken together with the previously considered material, created
            a realistic prospect of success, notwithstanding its rejection.
            This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas."

F.   Discussion and conclusions

Ground (1) - the failure by the respondent to consider and  apply  her  long
residence policy

189. The parties accepted it was for this Tribunal to decide the meaning  of
    the Respondent's policy (as per  Mandalia)   and  that  the  policy  in
    principle could be, and in practice was, broader than the Rules.  Where
    the parties differed was that Mr Harland submitted that the policy  was
    fundamentally consistent with the Rules and  had  always  distinguished
    between 'open-ended' and 'book-ended'  overstayers,  whilst  for  their
    part, Ms Naik QC and Mr Jafferji contended  that  the  meaning  of  the
    policy was to enable a broader assessment of applicants'  applications,
    even in circumstances where  they  were  'open-ended'  overstayers,  to
    recognise those applicants who had attempted to comply with the  Rules.
    Construction of the policy in this way enabled it to be consistent with
    a  "rationality"  or  "fair  balance"  review  and  ensured  that   the
    respondent complied with her obligations to make decisions  which  were
    consistent   with   her   article   8   obligations,   and   were   not
    disproportionate.  We were invited  to  consider  the  meaning  of  the
    policy  from  a  variety  of  different   perspectives:    first,   the
    development of the policy over time; second, the scope  of  the  policy
    and the  extent  to  which,  where  it  encouraged  decision-makers  to
    exercise discretion outside the Rules, the exercise of such  discretion
    was  consistent  with  'open-ended'  overstayers  being   entitled   to
    consideration of discretion; and third, the actions of  the  respondent
    in a third-party decision, which lent credence to the applicants'  case
    on the meaning of the  respondent's  policy,  always  noting  that  the
    meaning of that policy was for us to decide.

190. The alternative formulation  of  the  challenge  was  that  the  policy
    lacked 'accessibility' or 'foreseeability' - in other words, it was  so
    vague as to result in arbitrary decisions, which the  applicants  point
    out have occurred; and has prevented the applicants from ordering their
    affairs in the most advantageous way, for example by leaving the UK and
    then applying for re-entry, to 'book-end' any gap in lawful  residence.
    We accepted Mr Harland's submission that this was an attempt to  add  a
    new, fourth ground, in  respect  which  the  applicants  have  made  no
    previous application for permission. We reminded ourselves of the  need
    for appropriate procedural rigour in  judicial  review  cases  (see:  R
    (Spahiu)  v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  2604;   [2019]   Imm   AR   524).
    Nevertheless, we are  content  to  deal  with  the  issue  because  our
    decision in respect of the first three grounds answers the challenge on
    the fourth ground, for reasons we set out later.

History of the concession and long residence policy

The long residence concession

191. We refer first to the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions  relating
    to the long residence concession (page [723] CB) dated  December  2000.
    This confirmed the following:

         "1.  Introduction

             There is no provision  within  the  Immigration  Rules  for  a
             person to be granted indefinite leave to remain solely on  the
             basis of the length of his or her residence.

             The grant of indefinite to remain  on  the  basis  of  lengthy
             continuous residence is discretionary,  each  case  should  be
             considered on its merits.

         1.1  Background

             On 14 October 1969, the United Kingdom ratified  the  European
             Convention on Establishment, Article 3(3) which provides  that
             nationals of any contracting  party  who  have  been  lawfully
             residing for more than 10 years in the  territory  of  another
             party may only be expelled for reasons of national security or
             for particularly serious reasons  relating  to  public  order,
             public health or morality.  Home Office practice has  been  to
             extend this provision in three respects:

             .    to include all foreign nationals

             .    to grant indefinite leave rather than simply  to  refrain
                  from removing such a person; and

             .    to allow those who have been here illegally to benefit."

192. The concession document went onto distinguish between the situation  of
    a person who had 10 years or more 'continuous lawful residence'  and  a
    person with 14 years' continuous residence  of  'any  legality',  (both
    original emphasis) and specified that ILR should normally be granted in
    the  absence  of  strong  countervailing   factors.    The   concession
    continued:

         "Applications  from  people  who  have  not  completed   10   years
         continuous lawful residence  should  normally  be  refused,  unless
         there are very strong compelling circumstances.   The  strength  of
         ties with the United Kingdom, the  continued  ties  with  the  home
         country,  the  total  length  of  the  continuous  period  and  the
         proportion of it  which  is  lawful  are  the  primary  determining
         factors when deciding whether to grant or withhold indefinite leave
         to remain.

         3.   Lawful residence

             Where a  person  has  completed  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence he should normally be granted  indefinite  leave  to
             remain without enquiry.

             When considering whether a person has remained in  the  United
             Kingdom lawfully  for  10  years  the  following  breaches  of
             conditions  may  for  the  purposes  of  this  concession   be
             considered as lawful:

             .    a short delay in submitted an application,  provided  the
                  application is subsequently granted;

             .        any period between the submission  and  determination
                  of an appeal, if it is successful;

             .     where  an  appeal  is   unsuccessful,   but   leave   is
                  subsequently granted, the period  between  submitting  the
                  appeal and the determination may be treated as lawful  if,
                  for example, the leave was granted on  the  recommendation
                  of the adjudicator, leave was granted  during  the  period
                  before the determination or  where  a  further  successful
                  application was submitted shortly after the determination.



         The time IND take to decide and inform the person of the outcome of
         an in-time application should  be  included  as  continuous  lawful
         residence.

         [Original emphasis]"

193. The concession then went on  to  describe  the  situation  of  unlawful
    residence but where this was for 14 years or more.

194. Three points clearly emerge from that early version of the  concession,
    albeit a policy outside the Rules. The first  is  that  the  respondent
    distinguished, and  placed  particular  emphasis  on,  the  distinction
    between those with 10 years' continuous lawful residence and those with
    a longer period of unlawful continuous residence.  This  reflected  the
    ratification of  the  European  Convention  on  Establishment  and  the
    primacy of the 10 year period of lawful  residence,  while  recognising
    the practice of permitting  regularisation  of  status  to  those  here
    illegally.

195. The  second  point  is  that  the  breaches  in  continuity  of  lawful
    residence which the concession considered as permissible all related to
    where  an  application  was  subsequently  granted  or  an  appeal  was
    subsequently  successful,  i.e.  'book-ended'  overstayers,  which  was
    consistent with a continuing theme throughout the  development  of  the
    policy  of  the  distinction  between  'open-ended'  and   'book-ended'
    overstayers.    This reinforced the main distinction  and  differential
    treatment between those with 10 years' continuous lawful residence, and
    those without it.

196. Third, that distinction did not mean that there were  no  circumstances
    in which the respondent would consider, in the absence of completion of
    10 years' continuous lawful residence, the grant of ILR, but these  had
    to be very strong compelling circumstances, including, as  Mr  Jafferji
    invited us to consider, those relating to the quality of life developed
    in the UK.   The existence of that discretion within  the  policy  does
    not, in our view, render the purpose of  the  concession  unclear;  nor
    detract from the central distinction and differential treatment already
    referred to.  It also follows that the scope  of  that  discretion  was
    necessarily limited, because otherwise the  central  distinction  would
    then become untenable.

Immigration Directorates' Instructions - April 2009

197.  We  turn  next  to  the  2009  Instructions.   The  introduction   and
    background to these Instructions  were  explained  at  paragraph  [1.1]
    (page [702] CB):

         "Introduction

         The rules on long residence recognise the ties a  person  may  form
         with the UK over a lengthy period  of  residence  here.  Paragraphs
         276A-D of HC 395 as amended  by  HC  538  allow  settlement  to  be
         granted after a period of:

            . 10 years continuous lawful residence or

            . 14 years continuous residence of any legality.

         1.1 Background

         Until April 2003 there was no provision in  the  immigration  rules
         for a person to be  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of long residence.  The Long Residence  Concession  allowed
         for a discretionary grant of settlement after 10  years  continuous
         lawful residence or 14 years continuous residence of any  legality,
         provided there were no serious countervailing factors.

         Under the provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         (NIA) 2002, which came into effect in April 2003, there is no right
         of appeal against refusal for  those  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
         remain under concessionary arrangements.  As a consequence the Long
         Residence  Concession  was  brought  within  the   scope   of   the
         immigration rules from 1 April 2003."  [original emphasis]

198. Mr Jafferji placed particular emphasis on the introductory  section  as
    reflecting the purpose of the policy, namely to reflect the ties to the
    UK that a person  may  have  formed.   In  our  view,  this  takes  the
    generality of that statement out of the context of the  sentence  which
    immediately follows, which is  to  tie  the  policy  back  to,  and  be
    consistent with, the Rules; and to  emphasise  (as  underlined  in  the
    original text), the differential treatment between the 10 and  14  year
    routes.  There followed a table of flowcharts, depending  on  which  of
    the two routes a person fell within, followed  by  the  detail  of  the
    guidance.  'Continuous residence' was defined within  section  [2]  and
    the guidance re-emphasised the two different routes (10/14 years).   At
    section [2.2] (page [705]  CB),  the  guidance  referred  to  paragraph
    276A(a) of the Rules,  in  particular,  residence  in  the  UK  for  an
    unbroken period, except where an applicant was absent from the UK for a
    period of six months or  less  at  any  one  time,  provided  they  had
    existing leave to remain on departure and to re-enter on return.

199. Two points emerge from this section. The first is  that  continuity  of
    residence was important both  for  the  10  and  14  year  routes,  and
    permitted specified absences from the UK of multiple periods,  provided
    that the total of multiple absences did not exceed 18 months throughout
    the 10 or 14 year period (section [2.2.3], page [705] CB).   While  the
    acceptance  of  periods  of  absence  from  the  UK,  as  not  breaking
    continuity of residence, was undoubtedly an expansion  of  the  policy,
    there is, in our view, no arbitrariness in the way  that  the  expanded
    policy operated, given that the 'absence from the UK' provisions  could
    apply to both the 10 and 14 year routes.

200. Second, while applying to  both  routes,  the  'absence  from  the  UK'
    provisions   were   consistent   with   the   'book-ended'/'open-ended'
    distinction, as an applicant had  to  have  leave  (in  this  case,  on
    departure and re-entry) to benefit  from  the  extended  policy.    The
    policy recognised that specified periods of absence might not break the
    relevant ties in the UK, but continued to pin the policy  back  to  the
    10/14 year distinction, as underpinned by the need for  a  'book-ended'
    grant of leave.   We accept Mr  Harland's  submission  that  while  the
    policy expanded, it did so within clear limits.

201.  The  Instructions   also   contained   a   section   [2.2.7],   'Early
    applications,' (page [707] CB), which allowed early applications  where
    an applicant had not yet completed the necessary qualifying period  for
    settlement, either for the 10 or 14 year route.    An  application  for
    settlement which was considered by decision-makers more  than  28  days
    before the applicant  had  completed  the  required  qualifying  period
    'should be refused on the  basis  that  they  have  not  completed  the
    required period,' but if an application was considered 28 days or  less
    before the 10/14 years was to be completed, then ILR might be granted.

202. The first point is that as with the section relating to  absences  from
    the UK, the 'Early applications' provision applied to both the  10  and
    14 year routes.  The second point is that the same section  required  a
    decision-maker to consider fully the case and 'cite any  other  reasons
    for refusal in additional to an applicant not having spent enough  time
    in the UK to have completed the qualifying period' (page [707] CB), for
    example,  breaks  in  continuous  residence.    In  other  words,   the
    Instructions operated as a whole and the decision-maker was required to
    consider  not  only  the  timing  of  the  application  but  breaks  in
    continuity.   The third point is  the  Instructions  did  not  seek  to
    penalise an applicant for a premature application, as  they  allowed  a
    further application once  an  applicant  was  within  28  days  of  the
    qualifying period.   They did not go so far as to say additional  leave
    should be granted to permit  such  a  further  application,  but  this,
    together with the limit of 28 days for early applications, was entirely
    explicable, in our view, by the need to prevent the early  applications
    provision from being abused.

203. As with later versions of the guidance, the Instructions then  went  on
    to  provide  practical  examples  of  continuous  residence   and   the
    circumstances in which it might be  broken.   None  of  those  examples
    support GA or AW, in the sense of having circumstances in  common  with
    them. The Instructions then considered, at section [2.3],  (page  [708]
    CB) the sub-category of  continuous  lawful  residence.   As  with  the
    earlier 2000 concession, they referred back to the Rules, in this  case
    paragraph 276A, and defined  lawful  residence  as  including  existing
    leave to enter or remain; and temporary admission within section 11  of
    the 1971 Act, where leave to enter or remain was subsequently  granted.
    There followed  a  section  [2.3.3],  dealing  with  breaks  in  lawful
    residence and the use  of  discretion.   That  included  the  following
    provision, as already referred to by the representatives:

         "Caseworkers should be  satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  acted
         lawfully throughout the entire period and has made very attempt  to
         comply with the immigration rules.

         If an applicant has a single short gap in lawful residence  through
         making one single previous application out of time by  a  few  days
         (not  usually  not  more  than  10  calendar  days  out  of   time)
         caseworkers should use discretion granting  ILR,  so  long  as  the
         application meets all the other requirements.

         It would not usually be appropriate to exercise discretion when  an
         applicant has more than one gap in their lawful  residence  due  to
         submitting more than one of  their  previous  applications  out  of
         time, as they would not have  shown  the  necessary  commitment  to
         ensuring that that they have  maintained  lawful  leave  throughout
         their time in the UK."  [original emphasis]

204. The section also allowed discretion for an out of time  application  of
    more than 10 calendar days in the event of 'extenuating  circumstances'
    such as a postal  strike  or  hospitalisation  (page  [709]  CB).   The
    remainder of the  section  contained  examples  of  discretions,  which
    included applicants having single gaps of seven days,  where  it  would
    normally be appropriate to exercise discretion; and a lengthier gap  of
    24 days because of a documented hospitalisation, where once again,  the
    exercise of discretion would normally be appropriate.  In contrast, the
    example of three gaps, of 12, 4 and 8 days  out  of  time  respectively
    meant that it would not be appropriate to grant discretion.

205. Consistent with the other examples, none of these examples  related  to
    circumstances where an applicant had  a  period  of  10  years'  lawful
    residence, and was an 'open-ended' overstayer. All of these examples at
    page [709] CB must be read as referring to previous gaps in  leave,  in
    the context of lawful residence being defined as having existing  leave
    or temporary admission where leave was subsequently granted (i.e. 'book-
    ended' overstaying).

206. The Instructions contained a section [2.3.4] (page [709] CB),  relating
    to time spent outside the UK, which confirmed  that  continuous  lawful
    residence would not be broken if there was a gap, during  the  entirety
    of which the applicant was outside the UK, and the gap lasted less than
    six months.

207. Section [2.3.5] (page [710] CB) considered  out  of  time  applications
    and confirmed that there was no requirement for applications to be made
    in time under the 10  year  route.   Out  of  time  applications  might
    qualify for a grant of ILR, provided that an applicant  had  previously
    built up an unbroken 10 year period  of  continuous  lawful  residence.
    The point here is that the guidance  distinguished  between  having  10
    years' continuous lawful residence, and an  application  being  out  of
    time. As Mr Harland contends was a  consistent  theme,  they  were  two
    different concepts.  The section cross-referred to an  "Example  4"  at
    page [713] CB, which described a person entering the UK on  31st  March
    1997 and being granted a series of extensions, which  expired  on  31st
    March 2007, so acquiring 10 years' continuous lawful  residence.   They
    could still obtain ILR, provided they met all other criteria,  even  if
    applying out of time, as "they built  up  10  years  continuous  lawful
    residence prior to their leave expiring."

208. Finally, the Instructions also  considered  factors  to  be  considered
    before granting ILR.  They explained that possession  of  the  required
    period of residence did not automatically entitle a person to  a  grant
    of leave, but merely entitled them to be considered for  a  grant.  The
    factors that a decision-maker was to consider included age, strength of
    connections in the UK, and personal history.  At  page  [715]  CB,  the
    instructions went on to confirm:

         "If the  applicant  has  not  completed  the  necessary  period  of
         residence, they will not be able to  satisfy  the  rules  for  long
         residence, regardless of any of the  factors  listed  in  paragraph
         276B(ii)."  [original emphasis]

209. In our view, this undermines Mr Jafferji's submission that  the  policy
    mandated consideration of these factors as positive  factors,  where  a
    person did not have the required period of continuous lawful residence.



210. In summary, we conclude that the 2009 Instructions were  consistent  in
    maintaining  the  distinction  between  continuous  residence  'of  any
    legality' and continuous lawful residence (with  different  periods  of
    residence accordingly), while applying  provisions across  both  routes
    in relation to: early applications; late applications; and  time  spent
    outside the UK.  We do not accept that the purpose of the policy was to
    recognise that those who had developed UK  ties  or  had  attempted  to
    comply with the Rules  were  entitled  to  a  wide-ranging  discretion.
    Instead, the discretion was clearly limited and needed to be, in  order
    to maintain the distinction between the two  routes.  That  distinction
    and the detailed examples, all of which were consistent with the 'open-
    ended/book-ended' distinction in relation to continuity  of  residence,
    were part of a whole.

Long residence guidance version 1.0 - valid from 8th November 2011

211. We next consider the 2011 long residence guidance, which continued,  at
    page [942] CB, to draw the  distinction  between  the  two  alternative
    routes (10/14 years).  As with the  2009  Instructions,  having  either
    period of residence did not entitle someone to ILR, and page  [944]  CB
    had the familiar factors to consider if  a  person  had  the  necessary
    residence, as to why it might still not be in the  public  interest  to
    grant ILR; as opposed to positive factors if the person  did  not  meet
    either of the residence requirements.

212. A further development of the policy in 2011 was in  relation  to  those
    who were present in the UK with temporary admission and wanted to apply
    for ILR.  The section on 'Entry and extension  requirements,'  at  page
    [946] CB, stated:

         "Entry requirements

         There is  no  provision  in  the  long  residence  rules  to  grant
         indefinite leave to enter.  This means that a person  who  has  not
         previously been granted leave to enter the UK, for example, because
         they have been on temporary admission,  cannot  qualify  under  the
         rules.  However, where  such  a  person  meets  all  of  the  other
         requirements of rule 276B, discretion should normally be  exercised
         to grant them six months code 1 outside the  Immigration  Rules  so
         that they can make an application in the UK."

213. As with other expansions in the policy, we regarded this as a  defined,
    incremental  change;  clearly  explained;  not  vague   or   prone   to
    arbitrariness;  and   consistent   with   the   'open-ended/book-ended'
    overstayer distinction - indeed the very purpose of the addition was to
    ensure the maintenance of that distinction.  The fact that such periods
    of temporary admission may have been  for  extended  periods  does  not
    undermine the rationale for the exception, which was to  recognise  the
    absence of a provision in relation to indefinite  leave  to  enter  and
    address that problem in a limited way.

214. The guidance went on to include reference to the extension  of  limited
    leave in the context of paragraphs 276A1 and 276A2 (if an applicant met
    all requirements other than the 'knowledge of language and life in  the
    UK' requirement).  Once again, this change was incremental  and  within
    clear limits, as the section continued (page [946] CB):

         "You must only grant an extension of further leave on the basis  of
         long  residence  if  the  applicant  meets  all  the  criteria  for
         indefinite leave, except for knowledge of life.  You must not grant
         an applicant an extension  in  order  to  complete  the  qualifying
         period of 10 or 14 years for long residence, if they have not spent
         enough time in the UK to be granted  indefinite  leave.   For  more
         information, see related link: Early applications."

215. As  with  the  2009  guidance,  the  2011  guidance  included  separate
    provisions relating to events breaking continuity of  lawful  residence
    and residence 'of any legality' and the distinction between the two was
    clearly maintained.  The 2011 guidance included a  section,  consistent
    with the 2009 guidance, on limits to the number of, and length of  gaps
    in, leave.  Multiple  or  extended  gaps  were  generally  regarded  as
    breaking  continuity  of  lawful  residence.  Single  gaps  of  limited
    duration were permitted, or lengthier gaps due  to  postal  strikes  or
    hospitalisation, as before.

The long residence guidance version 8.0 - valid from 10th April 2013

216. This version of the guidance reflected the change  to  the  Immigration
    Rules, with effect from 9th July 2012, in respect of the withdrawal  of
    the route for obtaining ILR based on long residence 'of  any  legality'
    (the '14 year' route). In that  context,  discussion  and  examples  of
    continuity of residence  'of  any  legality'  were  now  removed.   The
    guidance stated, in the section 'Requirements for long residence' (page
    [880] CB) the following:

         "Requirements for long residence

         The applicant must meet the following requirements  to  be  granted
         indefinite leave:

         .    The applicant must have at least 10 years lawful residence  in
         the UK.

         .    There must be no reason why  granting  leave  is  against  the
         public good.

         .    The applicant must meet the knowledge  of  language  and  life
         requirement.

         .    The applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
         grounds for refusal.

         .    The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
         laws except for any period of overstaying:

                 for 28 days or less, or

                 if the application was submitted before 9th July 2012

         which will be disregarded."

217. The guidance made clear (at page [882] CB) that once an  applicant  had
    built up 10 years' continuous lawful residence, there was no  limit  on
    the length of time afterwards that they could  apply  for  ILR.   "This
    means they could leave the UK, re-enter and apply based on  a  10  year
    period..."   The guidance was  consistent  with  earlier  versions,  as
    requiring the distinct and necessary qualification of 10 years'  lawful
    residence, defined in  the  same  way  as  earlier  versions,  i.e.  an
    applicant needed  existing  leave  to  enter,  temporary  admission  or
    exemption from  immigration  control  (page  [883]  CB).  The  guidance
    contained sections similar to earlier versions on breaks in  continuous
    residence, including time spent outside the UK  (page  [884]  CB);  and
    early applications  (page  [886]  CB).   There  was  one  notable,  but
    discrete and limited  expansion,  in  the  section  'Gap(s)  in  lawful
    residence' which allowed the grant of discretion if an applicant:

        . "has short gaps  in  lawful  residence  through  making  previous
          applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar days, and

        . meets all the other requirements for  lawful  residence."   (page
          [888] CB)

218. The more restrictive  policy  of  permitting  only  a  single  gap  was
    removed, but there remained the usual limit on the duration of the  gap
    and the applicant had to otherwise meet the requirement of the Rules  -
    critically,  there  was  no  statement  that  'open-ended'  overstaying
    suddenly became equivalent to lawful residence, the implication  of  Mr
    Jafferji's submissions when he argued that GA and AW fell  within  this
    exception.   Indeed,  such  equivalence  (and  the  conflation  of  the
    'overstaying'  concession   with   accruing   lawful   residence)   was
    inconsistent, in our view, with a later part of  the  guidance  dealing
    with out of time applications made on or after 9th July 2012,  at  page
    [891] CB:

         "The 28 day period of overstaying is calculated from the latest  of
         the:

         .    end of the last period of leave to enter or remain granted

         .    end of any extension of leave under section 3C or  3D  of  the
             Immigration Act 1971, or

         .    the point that the  migrant  is  deemed  to  have  received  a
             written notice of invalidity, in line with  paragraph  34C  or
             34CA of the Immigration  Rules,  in  relation  to  an  in-time
             application for further leave to remain."

219. The guidance then went on to consider exceptional  circumstances  where
    there was overstaying of more than 28  days,  subject  to  'exceptional
    reasons' (as with the 2009 Instructions and 2011 guidance)  such  as  a
    postal  strike  or  hospitalisation.  However  the  28  day  period  of
    overstaying was specifically calculated from the end or last period  of
    the leave  to  enter  or  remain  being  granted,  so  once  again  was
    consistent with the requirement that an applicant must have  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence 'banked'.  An applicant could  nevertheless
    then make an out of time application, provided he did so within 28 days
    of overstaying.

The respondent's long residence policy  version  15.0  -  published  on  3rd
April 2017

220. While we were provided with versions 13.0 (published on 8th  May  2015)
    and 14.0 (published on 24th November 2016) of the guidance, we were not
    referred to them by the parties and have proceeded on  the  basis  that
    nothing turns on those versions which we have not  already  considered,
    or go on to consider in relation to the 2017  guidance.    Instead,  we
    turn next to the 2017 version of  the  guidance,  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal considered in Hoque, version 15.0. Many of the passages  of  the
    guidance were similar or identical  to  the  earlier  versions  of  the
    guidance.  It included, at page [730] CB, reference  to  the  rules  on
    long residence recognising the ties a person may form with the UK  over
    a lengthy residence, as emphasised by Ms Naik QC, although it  did  not
    include the previous reference  to  the  previous  distinction  between
    10/14 year routes, for the simple reason that the  14  year  route  had
    been abolished.  Sections common to  earlier  versions  included  those
    relating to applicants in the UK with temporary admission  (page  [732]
    CB); and  where  limited  leave  had  been  granted  on  the  basis  of
    paragraphs 276A1 and 276A2  (also  page  [732]  CB).   The  section  on
    'Limited leave' included a recent addition (originally incorporated  in
    version 14.0, some five months' earlier) to paragraph 39E:

         "On 2 April 2017, paragraph 276A1 and paragraph 276A2 were added to
         the Immigration Rules.  This allows long residence applicants to be
         granted limited leave to remain, if:

         .    they have had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in
         the UK

         .    there are no reasons why it would be undesirable for  them  to
             be given leave to remain,  see:  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence

         .    the applicant must not  be  in  breach  of  immigration  laws,
             except

                 for any period of overstaying for 28 days or  less  which
                  will be disregarded where the period of overstaying  ended
                  before 24 November 2016

                 where overstaying on or after 24 November 2016, leave was
                  nevertheless granted in accordance with paragraph  39E  of
                  the Immigration Rules.

         Limited leave to remain is granted under  paragraph  276A2  of  the
         long residence category of the Immigration Rules,  and  not  as  an
         extension of their previous category of limited  leave  to  remain.
         ...

         You must only grant an extension of further leave on the  basis  of
         long residence if the applicant meets all the criteria in paragraph
         276B(i), (ii)  and  (v).   You  must  not  grant  an  applicant  an
         extension in order to complete the qualifying period  of  10  years
         for long residence, if they have not spent enough time in the UK to
         be granted indefinite leave."

221. The wording and reminder that  limited  leave  could  not  be  used  to
    complete the residence requirement  reaffirmed  the  consistent  theme,
    made clear as far back as the  2000  concession,  that  the  continuous
    lawful residence requirement should  not  be  compromised  through  the
    grant of a concession for other reasons (in this case in order to  take
    a test relating to knowledge of English, etc), where those reasons  did
    not apply.   Contrary to the applicants' submissions that the inclusion
    of paragraph 39E resulted in the  policy  becoming  ambiguous,  with  a
    tension between the requirement of  the  period  of  continuous  lawful
    residence  and  paragraph  39E,  the  above  section  made  clear  that
    paragraph 39E was not  inconsistent  with  the  core  lawful  residence
    requirement.

222. This version of the guidance, at page  [735]  CB,  defined  'continuous
    lawful residence' in identical terms to earlier versions.  The  section
    on 'Breaks in continuous  residence,'  (page  [736]  CB)  included  the
    provision relating to periods spent outside the UK; the need for  leave
    to enter on return; and a limit on the period of absence after the last
    expiry of leave (limited to 28 days when a person left  the  UK  before
    24th November 2016, which applied to GA as she  had  left  before  that
    date, but where her leave had expired more than 28 days earlier).  That
    section was consistent with the  later  'Example  4',  referred  to  by
    McCombe LJ, of a 'book-ended' returnee who had returned within 28  days
    of his last leave expiring.

223. As with earlier versions, at page [739] CB,  the  guidance  included  a
    section on 'Early applications,'  with  a  reiteration  that  the  long
    residence  rule  required  applicants  to  have  at  least  10   years'
    continuous lawful residence and reiteration that if an application  was
    made more than 28 days  before  completion  of  that  period,  the  ILR
    application must be refused.  At page [741] CB, the guidance  contained
    a section on 'Breaks in lawful residence,' which  included  permissible
    gaps in lawful residence  through  making  out  of  time  applications,
    depending on when the date of those applications were made,  where  the
    period of overstaying was calculated from the most recent of:  the  end
    of the last period of leave to enter, with any extension of any section
    3C leave, or the migrant having been deemed to have received a  written
    notice of invalidity.    Mr Jafferji  had referred to  'Example  3'  of
    this section, (page [743] CB) which was a case of someone who had a gap
    in lawful residence through making an application out of time  by  more
    than 28 calendar days due to hospitalisation, with  supporting  medical
    documentation.  He relied on this as an example of a discretion outside
    the Rules, which could only relate  to  'open-ended'  overstayers.   We
    reject  the  contention  that  the  example   benefitted   'open-ended'
    overstaying.  The example clearly focusses on the  length  of  a  time-
    bound gap, (as opposed to an 'open-ended' one), between two  grants  of
    leave, which is justified on the basis  of  exceptional  circumstances,
    described at page [741] CB as including serious illness, with  relevant
    supporting medical evidence.  While we accept that this  discretion  is
    wider  than  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is  discrete  in  scope  and
    explained.  It is also a long-standing discretion, referred to  in  the
    2009 Instructions and 2011 and 2013 versions of the guidance.

224. Turning next to the detail of 'Example 4', included in the  section  on
    gaps in lawful residence at page [743] CB, it stated:

         "Example 4

         An applicant's leave expired on 10 July 2012 but they only departed
         the UK on 1 August 2012.  They submitted an application  for  entry
         clearance on 5 August 2012.  When returning to the UK on 27 October
         2012 they submitted a long residence application.

         Question:  Would you grant the application in this case?

         Answer: Yes.  Grant the application as the rules allow for  periods
         of overstaying of 28 days or less when that period ends  before  24
         November 2016. This applicant submitted their application for entry
         clearance less than 28 days after their original grant of leave had
         expired and returned to the UK within 6 months of last leaving."

225. We accept the force of Mr Harland's submission that the  example  given
    does not detract from the requirement of continuous lawful residence of
    10 years.  It  is  also  consistent  with  the  'open-ended/book-ended'
    distinction. The guidance does not require the decision-maker to  grant
    entry clearance, which remains to be considered and  possibly  refused.
    It states that having been granted entry clearance and upon re-entering
    the UK with  a  new  grant  of  leave,  a  person,  as  a  'book-ended'
    overstayer, does not have their continuity of residence broken. It does
    not speak to the issue of the period of residence they have and  indeed
    no details of such period of residence are given - this is because  the
    example relates to the preservation  of  continuity  of  lawful  leave.
    Read in context, it cannot be read as suggesting that a person  without
    the required period of lawful residence somehow gains it.  It does  not
    create equivalence between a period of lawful residence, and  a  period
    of residence 'of any legality'. To construe it as doing so takes it out
    of the context of guidance to the contrary in the period from  2000  to
    2017; and  ignores  the  fact  that  the  policy  ceased  dealing  with
    residence 'of any legality' after the abolition of the 14  year  route.



226. Contrary to Ms Naik QC's assertion, GA did not meet the requirement  of
    'Example 4'. While she had been  an  overstayer  before  24th  November
    2016, she submitted her application for entry clearance  more  than  28
    days after her original grant had expired. 'Example  4'  is  consistent
    with  paragraph  276B(v)(a),  permitting  exceptions   for   book-ended
    overstaying within certain time limits.  For AW to fall within 'Example
    4', as Mr Jafferji suggested, it would have to be assumed that AW would
    be granted leave to enter the  UK  on  his  return,  'book-ending'  any
    period of overstaying.   We do not accept that  anything  prevented  AW
    from leaving the UK when he became an  overstayer.  It  does  not  also
    follow that had he done so, he would have been granted re-entry. We  do
    not regard 'Example 4' as evidence that the  policy  provided  guidance
    that was so unclear that AW  and  GA  were  unable  to  organise  their
    affairs advantageously, as Mr Jafferji suggested.

227. The guidance continued at page [744] CB  to  deal  with  'Out  of  time
    applications'  and  the  requirement  not  to  be  in  breach  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  We accept that  'Example  1'  (page  [745]  CB)  is
    consistent with, and mirrors, the previous 'Example  4'.   In  'Example
    1', relating to an application  made  before  24th  November  2016  (so
    paragraph 39E does not apply) the applicant had leave  to  enter  as  a
    student, valid until 31st July 2016.  They submitted  an  out  of  time
    application for leave to remain on 15th September 2016,  more  than  28
    days later. They were granted leave as a student on 15th October  2016.
    The question posed was whether there was therefore a  break  in  lawful
    residence. The answer was 'yes', despite them later having 'book-ended'
    leave, as the example was not dealing with the effect of paragraph  39E
    and was instead focussing on the length of the gap in leave -  in  this
    case, more than 28 days, the mirror of 'Example 4', which considered  a
    gap of less than 28 days.  'Example 1' does not suggest that  there  is
    no difference between 'book-ended' and 'open-ended' overstayers, as  Ms
    Naik QC and Mr Jafferji sought to argue.  In both Examples 1 and 4, the
    applicants were book-ended - the difference was  the  duration  of  the
    gap, and whether it was 28 days or less.   Had  they  not  been  'book-
    ended'  overstayers  and  were  relying  on  residence  'of  any  other
    legality' to meet the continuous  lawful  residence  requirement,  they
    would fail for lack of continuous lawful residence.  As  with  'Example
    4,' Example 1 did not speak to the issue  of  whether  the  person  had
    already acquired continuous lawful residence, in which case it may have
    been open to them to apply for ILR.

228. The guidance went on to recognise, at page [246]  CB,  in  relation  to
    the 'Treatment of temporary admission or temporary release',  the  fact
    that temporary admission could be for years, provided that 'book-ended'
    leave was subsequently granted. However, that  had  been  the  position
    since the 2009 guidance, see:  section  [2.3.7]  (page  [712]  CB)  and
    'Example 6' of the 2009 guidance (page [714] CB).  Put simply,  it  was
    an element of the policy introduced many years earlier.

229. The 2017 guidance repeated the exception relating to time spent in  the
    UK with a right to reside under the EEA Regulations (page [750] CB) and
    the 'public interest' provisions, replicating  paragraph  276B(ii),  at
    page [754] CB, as well as the section granting an extension of leave by
    reference to paragraph 276A2.  While Ms Naik QC placed emphasis on  the
    word 'includes', at [763] CB, as suggesting a wider discretion,  it  is
    clear that the discretion is  limited  as  in  earlier  versions,  with
    decision makers reminded that an applicant  must  meet  the  'leave  to
    remain rules for long residence'.

230. In summary, an analysis of the various versions of the  long  residence
    policy and its earlier incarnation of  the  long  residence  concession
    supports the respondent's contention that the core attribute of the  10
    year route has always been the requirement to have 10 years' continuous
    lawful residence.  Paragraph  39E  and  predecessor  provisions  are  a
    separate issue, relating to the effect on continuity  of  residence  of
    out of time applications.  To conflate that limited concession, so that
    residence 'of any other legality' is treated  the  same  as  continuous
    lawful residence, would undermine the very basis of the 10 year  route.
    The timeliness of repeated applications, categorised as a commitment to
    attempt to comply with the Rules and as demonstrating ties to  the  UK,
    ignores the enduring  purpose  of  the  10  year  route,  which  is  to
    recognise  those  who  have  acquired  10  years'   continuous   lawful
    residence.

231. While we accept that the understanding of the  Rules  has  changed  and
    that the scope of the  policy  has  changed  over  time,  as  the  long
    residence concession was  incorporated  within  the  Rules,  there  has
    consistently been consideration of, and guidance relating to, breaks in
    continuous lawful  residence;  temporary  admission;  those  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK under the EEA Regulations; early  applications;
    and the effect of absences from the UK.  Not  only  has  there  been  a
    consistent theme to these exceptions, so as to enable people to  manage
    their affairs accordingly, but the guidance also explains and  provides
    rationales for those exceptions.  Far from the policy guidance  failing
    to provide any foreseeable or accessible outcome in respect  of  'open-
    ended' overstayers, the  examples  make  clear  that  a  person  could,
    provided they were able to obtain leave to re-enter, leave the  UK,  in
    order to manage their affairs, for specified periods, while maintaining
    continuity of lawful residence.  In contrast, it  is  not  possible  to
    discern from the policy documents that the respondent  intended  'open-
    ended' overstaying to become equivalent to continuous lawful  residence
    and that proposition is inconsistent with the guidance relating to  the
    prohibition of the grant of limited leave to remain in order  to  'make
    up' any missing period of lawful residence.

232. We are not persuaded that the letter adduced by the applicants for  the
    third party decision lends support to their contention that the  policy
    has wide  discretion,  which  permits  the  equivalence  of  open-ended
    overstaying with continuous lawful  residence.  The  document  was  not
    adduced to prove an  unpublished  policy  and  whilst  the  applicants'
    representatives have referred to a number of other cases  where  'open-
    ended' overstayers have had leave granted, this  is  the  one  decision
    whose rationale we were asked to consider.

233. It related in fact to the refusal  of  an  application,  but  where  it
    suggested the possibility of exercising discretion for an  'open-ended'
    overstayer.   It is a  decision  that  was  discussed  in  the  witness
    statement of Richard Holmes,  the  senior  Home  Office  official,  who
    provided a detailed analysis and critique of it.  Broadly speaking,  he
    said that the decision's rationale was fundamentally flawed and that it
    was an incorrect decision. We accept his criticism that  the  rationale
    for the decision is internally inconsistent and flawed.   It  describes
    an applicant who entered the UK with leave in 2009,  and  whose  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 12th August 2018.   He  then  applied  on  5th
    April  2019  for  leave  as  a  tier  1  entrepreneur  and  varied  his
    application, for ILR, in 20th May 2019.  The  decision  maker  accepted
    that the applicant did not have 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence
    and continuity had ceased on 12th  August 2018, but  then  referred  to
    the 'out of time' provisions of the guidance relating  to  applications
    made before 24th November 2016.  Put simply, the  decision  focused  on
    the extent of the delay of the 'out of time' application, referring  to
    a section of the guidance on  'out  of  time'  applications  which  was
    clearly not relevant, without explanation for why  the  'out  of  time'
    provisions would have saved the applicant's application  from  failing,
    for lack of lawful residence.  The lack of explanation is critical,  as
    the decision repeatedly refers to the residence requirements not  being
    met. The rationale for the decision is confusing but this does not lend
    support to the applicants' contention in the cases before us  that  the
    guidance itself  is  confusing  or  vague;  rather  that  the  specific
    decision relied upon is fundamentally flawed.

234. We also considered the meaning of the policy not only by  reference  to
    the wording in the versions from 2000 to 2017 but in the context of the
    applicants' challenge that to interpret it as having  a  circumscribed,
    narrow discretion meant the respondent would risk making  arbitrary  or
    oppressive decisions, on the basis that the operation of the policy was
    not rationally connected with its objective and/or any restrictions  on
    the applicants were more than was necessary to accomplish  the  purpose
    of the policy (the so-called 'de Freitas'  test  -  see  de  Freitas  v
    Permanent Secretary of Ministry of  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Land  and
    Housing [1999] 1 AC 68, at [80]);  or  that  the  policy,  as  narrowly
    interpreted, would fail (and in  the  applicants  case,  did  fail)  to
    achieve a 'fair balance.'

235. We do not accept the operation  of  the  policy,  as  we  construe  its
    meaning, makes it incompatible with a 'rationality review', or that  it
    is incapable of resulting in a 'fair balance'.   We  do  so  for  three
    reasons.  First, as Mr Harland rightly points out, the  long  residence
    policy cannot be read in isolation from other policies, for example  in
    relation to leave to remain outside the Rules, or  policies  on  family
    life, private life and exceptional circumstances. To  the  extent  that
    the applicants criticise what they regard as too narrow a focus on  the
    requirement of qualifying residence, the answer is that this is but one
    policy,  in  the  context  of  other  policies  which  consider   wider
    circumstances other than residence.

236. The second and third reasons are connected. The long  residence  policy
    at its heart comprises two  strands.  The  first  strand  is  the  core
    attribute of continuous lawful residence. The second strand is a set of
    practical applications and exceptions, which ensure that  the  validity
    of  that  policy  aim  is  maintained,  whilst  inequities  which   can
    reasonably be mitigated against are addressed. The exceptions,  already
    discussed in detail, and with which  the  applicants  seek  to  compare
    themselves, are the very evidence of the  respondent  striking  such  a
    'fair  balance',  using  worked  examples,  with  detailed  rationales.
    Whilst the applicants seek to challenge these as somehow  confusing  or
    examples of unfairness, they are, in our view, the opposite: an example
    of processes  that  have  been  developed  with  gradual  and  discrete
    expansion over many years, in a controlled way.

237. The second reason for compatibility with a rationality review  and  the
    policy striking a fair balance is the need for policy to  maintain  its
    core aim of recognising continuous lawful residence.   We  accept  that
    were the policy to require decision-makers to treat residence  'by  any
    other legality' as equivalent to  continuous  lawful  residence,  there
    would be no rational distinction between 10  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence and the old '14 year' route or the new '20 year' route.  That
    'bright line' which  distinguishes  the  two  routes  is  one  that  is
    longstanding;  and  is  also  consistent  with   the   long   residence
    concession, which referred to the European Convention on Establishment.
     Whilst we note and accept Mr Jafferji's submission that there has been
    an expansion beyond that 10 year residence  period,  at  its  core,  it
    remains the cornerstone.  Were  that  cornerstone  to  be  removed  and
    replaced with discretionary assessments  of  individual  circumstances,
    unrelated to the  specific  exemptions  that  have  been  outlined  and
    published by the respondent over many years, it   that  would,  in  our
    view, inevitably result in a form of a 'sliding scale,' rather  than  a
    distinction between long residence on  the  10  year  route  and  other
    applications such as the 20 year route or  applications  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on  the  basis  of  right  to  respect  for  a
    person's private  or  family  life.    Such  a  'sliding  scale'  would
    undermine the very purpose of the 10 year route, the recognition  of  a
    specified period of lawful residence.

238. The third reason is that the exceptions outlined in the  policy  answer
    the criticism that the policy fails  to  draw  a  rational  distinction
    between its purpose and its mechanisms and impact on applicants, and is
    incapable of achieving such a 'fair balance'.  As we have outlined, the
    numerous exceptions do just that.  The applicants' criticism is, at its
    core, a complaint that there ought to be a similar exception for  them,
    to reflect the fact that they have had some period of lawful residence,
    just not enough.  As we have already outlined, that would result  in  a
    'sliding scale' which  would  risk  the  very  arbitrariness  that  the
    applicants complain of.  The exception that they seek is of a different
    nature to the exceptions contained within  the  policy,  all  of  which
    recognise the core attribute of the period  of  lawful  residence,  but
    also  recognise  the  practical  needs,   within   limits,   of   early
    applications; those who need to leave the UK;  and  EEA  nationals;  to
    pick three examples.  What the applicants instead want is an  exception
    from the period of lawful residence itself.

239. In summary, in relation to ground (1), we conclude that the  respondent
    correctly considered and applied  her  long  residence  policy  to  the
    applicants, GA and AW.

Residual discretion

240. We further consider, nevertheless, whether  the  policy  permitted  and
    the respondent had failed to consider and apply,  residual  discretion,
    which undoubtedly exists under section 3 of  the  1971  Act.   In  that
    regard, we return to the authority of Kalsi [2021] EWCA  Civ  184.   We
    consider whether that was a case which ought to be distinguished on the
    basis that it related to the points-based system, rather  than,  as  Mr
    Jafferji contended, a policy which had wider scope for the exercise  of
    discretion as exemplified by the long residence policy.  We  note  that
    the Court of  Appeal's  discussion  of  the  existence  of  a  residual
    discretion was relatively limited and the issue was answered, in  their
    view, at [70] by reference to the authority of R (Junied) v SSHD [2019]
    EWCA Civ 2293.  We are conscious that in the context of a  points-based
    system, the question of exercise of discretion will be necessarily fact
    specific, but we agree that while there is  some  residual  discretion,
    the application of it to disregard the  core  attribute  of  continuous
    lawful residence, would, by analogy to the  points-based  system,  make
    the long residence policy unworkable, and would result in the  'sliding
    scale' of circumstances to which we have already referred. In the  case
    of Kalsi, the applicant had referred (at [57]) to a residual discretion
    to do what was fair and what 'justice required,' in the  context  of  R
    (Mehta)  [1975]  2  All  ER  1087,  and  'special  circumstances'.  The
    applicants' circumstances are that they  are  overstayers  who  applied
    under the 10 year route substantially earlier than 10 years;  and  upon
    their applications being  rejected,  simply  made  swift  further  paid
    applications.   We agree with  Mr  Harland's  submission  that  to  the
    extent there remains a residual discretion, there are no such  'special
    circumstances' in the applicants' cases.





Ground (3) - the respondent's consideration of the applicants' human rights

241. We consider next  ground  (3),  as  the  strength  of  the  applicants'
    article 8 claims feed into  whether  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    conclude  that  the  applicants'  further  submissions  had   realistic
    prospects of success, for the purposes of paragraph 353.

242. We were conscious of one of the key challenges by Ms  Naik  QC  and  Mr
    Jafferji as to the brevity or absence of consideration in the  impugned
    decisions of the applicants' article 8 rights, (page [242] CB, for  GA;
    and page [297] CB, for  AW);  and  the  absence  of  reference  in  the
    decision in GA's case to her UK residence up  to  and  including  2008.
    The central thrust of the applicants' argument is that  the  respondent
    had  treated  the  applicants'  failure  to  meet  the  long  residence
    requirements as amounting to a lack of exceptional circumstances.  This
    resulted in the respondent's consideration of their  article  8  rights
    being divorced from any substantive article  8  consideration.    There
    was the supplemental argument that the respondent had  not  provided  a
    'minded to refuse' process, similar to that in Balajigari v SSHD [2019]
    EWCA Civ 673.    However, in our view, these arguments take both of the
    decisions out of context.

243. We return to where we began  in  this  judgment,  which  is  to  remind
    ourselves that these are challenges to refusals by  the  respondent  to
    treat the further submissions as fresh  claims.   In  both  cases,  the
    applicants' previous applications had  been  refused  and  their  human
    rights had been considered in wider detail by two  separate  judges  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and dismissed by them.  We do not accept, as  a
    valid criticism, that the respondent could not conclude that there  was
    no realistic prospect of success, as  the  decisions  rejected  by  the
    First-tier Tribunals had  not  originally  been  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded.  The original ILR  applications  were  considered,  we  must
    assume in detail from a human rights  perspective,  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunals, which dismissed the applicants' human  rights  appeals.   It
    was only a short time after  that  both  applicants  submitted  renewed
    applications, and taking their cases at their highest, the new  article
    8 issue was the 'place marker' of 10 years'  residence,  a  few  months
    after their  last  human  rights  appeals  were  rejected.   While  the
    applicants  criticise  the  respondent  for  the  circularity  of   the
    reasoning of her decisions and not considering the further  submissions
    at all, as supported by the GCID notes for GA,  we  conclude  that  the
    impugned decisions reflected the circularity of the applications.   The
    decisions considered the  previous,  recent  rejections  of  article  8
    claims, noted the reliance on the duration of residence of any legality
    in the UK, and focussed on that  residence  not  meeting  the  10  year
    continuous lawful residence rule.  The applications themselves  did  no
    more than to rely on the duration of UK residence and swift renewal  of
    ILR applications.  The challenge that the respondent failed to consider
    whether to grant limited leave to remain is answered by the  fact  that
    had the applicants succeeded  before  the  First-tier  Tribunals,  they
    would have been granted limited leave  to  remain,  but  they  did  not
    succeed in their appeals. The narrow  focus  of  the  decisions  merely
    mirrors the narrow  focus  of  the  applications.   In  the  particular
    circumstances of these applicants, while the engagement with article  8
    was undoubtedly limited, they followed the recent article  8  decisions
    by the First-tier Tribunals.  The decisions, when taken in context,  do
    not offend the principles requiring a proportionality assessment  or  a
    rationality review.

Ground (2) - the arguable unlawfulness of the decisions under paragraph 353

244. This ground can be dealt with briefly, and follows on from our  reasons
    in relation to ground (3).  We have referred to the well-known case law
    in relation to our review of the paragraph 353 decisions: (WM  (DRC)  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1495).  The key is the combination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunals' rejections of both article 8 appeals,  followed  months
    later by claims formulated either as 10 year  ILR  applications,  which
    did not meet the Rules or policy; or article 8 claims  where  the  only
    difference was the  'place  marker'  being  passed.   Wider  article  8
    factors relating to family and/or private life were considered  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decisions. While GA's  first  ILR  application  had
    referred to a different period of UK  residence  than  her  second  ILR
    application, shortly before  her  second  ILR  application,  her  human
    rights appeal had already been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.  In
    the circumstances, the respondent was unarguably entitled  to  conclude
    that the applicants did not satisfy paragraph 353 - any  appeals  would
    have been later  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunals,  just  as  their
    earlier human rights appeals had been rejected only months earlier.

The fourth new ground - lack of 'foreseeability' and accessibility'

245. As we previously indicated, our conclusions in relation  to  the  first
    three grounds address the challenge posed in AW's new,  fourth  ground.
    In AW's further amended grounds ([50] to [55], at pages [60]  and  [61]
    CB), the ground refers first to the criticism of the Court of  Appeal's
    drafting of the Rules in Hoque; second, to the ambiguity in the claimed
    purpose of  the  policy  guidance;  third;  that  that  the  respondent
    operates a policy more generous than the Rules; and  fourth,  that  any
    decision taken under the policy will breach the applicants'  article  8
    rights. There is no elaboration on this ground in the combined skeleton
    argument for the  hearing  before  us,  and  in  oral  submissions,  Mr
    Jafferji returned to his criticism about the confusion in  relation  to
    the Rules, which in turn meant that it was unclear how the respondent's
    policy operated.

246. Dealing with each of the points in turn, a criticism of the Rules  does
    not render the policy unclear. For the reasons already given, we regard
    the policy as consistent with  the  'bright  line'  requirement  of  10
    years' continuous lawful residence, subject to  discrete  and  rational
    exceptions, clearly explained and  developed  over  time.   Second,  we
    reject the claimed 'ambiguity'  in  the  purpose  of  the  policy.  The
    purpose is  a  constant  theme  since  the  introduction  of  the  long
    residence concession, namely to strike the 'fair balance'  between  the
    need to maintain the 'bright line'  and  appropriate  exceptions  which
    recognise specific individual circumstances, which do not undermine the
    10 year requirement.  Third, the fact that the policy is more  generous
    than  the  Rules  does  not  make  it  lacking  in   accessibility   or
    foreseeability - on the contrary, it provides applicants with  detailed
    guidance and examples, which permits them to arrange their affairs  how
    they see fit.  The final point is  a  reiteration  of  the  applicants'
    submission in relation to proportionality in  relation  to  article  8,
    which is answered in our conclusion on ground (3).  The essence of this
    ground is a claim that the policy is so vague and confusing  as  to  be
    not fit for use - that is not a proposition we accept.

247. In the circumstances, the applicants' applications are refused  on  all
    grounds.

248. We invite Counsel to draw up an appropriate order.




             Signed:   J Keith


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:   3rd June 2021
