
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         Syed (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 00144 IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 18th January 2013                            |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                              SHOUKATH ALI SYED
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms N Manyarara, counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) The Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 do not apply  to  a  decision
under the Immigration Act 1971, which is not an immigration decision  within
the meaning of section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002.



(2)    There is no statutory instrument under the 1971 Act dealing with  the
means of giving notice for the purposes of section 4(1) of a decision  under
that Act, which is not an immigration decision.

(3)  Accordingly, the Secretary of State  has  to  be  able  to  prove  that
notice of such a decision was  communicated  to  the  person  concerned,  in
order for it to be effective. Communication will be effective if made  to  a
person authorised to receive it  on  that  person's  behalf:  see  Hosier  v
Goodall [1962] 1 All E.R. 30; but the Secretary of State  cannot  rely  upon
deemed postal service.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 5th June 1976.  His appeal
    against the decision of the respondent, made on  24th  April  2012,  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom to India, following the  refusal  of
    his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom was dismissed
    after a hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Onoufriou,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 2nd October 2012.

 2. On 16th January 2012 the appellant had applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds  of  long  residence  under
    section 276B of HC 395,  as  amended,  based  on  at  least  ten  years
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellant's immigration history as shown by the reasons for refusal
    letter, dated 24th April 2012, was that he entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 9th February 2002 with entry clearance as a student valid  from  4th
    February 2002 to 31st August 2003.  He was granted further leave  until
    31st December 2004 as a student.   He  was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain as a student until  31st  January  2006  and  again  until  31st
    October 2006.  He was then granted further leave to remain  until  14th
    November 2011 as a work permit holder followed by a  further  grant  of
    leave in the same  capacity  until  12th  February  2013  following  an
    application made on 31st January 2008.  The respondent asserted that on
    17th April 2009 information was received that he was no longer employed
    by the employer in respect of which his work permit  had  been  granted
    and his leave was curtailed on 20th October 2009 so  as  to  expire  on
    19th December 2009.  It was asserted that notice of the curtailment  of
    his leave was sent to his last known address in Southampton, which  was
    returned twice and the notice was then served on  file.   It  was  said
    that the appellant's leave to remain expired on 19th December 2009  and
    therefore he  did  not  have  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of  his
    application.

 4. The main point on which permission to appeal was  granted  was  whether
    the appellant's leave had been validly  curtailed  in  the  absence  of
    evidence that he had known of the curtailment.  The  appellant  claimed
    that the respondent had accepted  that  the  notice  sent  by  recorded
    delivery had not actually been served  and  service  on  file  was  not
    sufficient to terminate his leave.

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal judge it does not  appear
    that it was in issue that on  22nd  October  2009  and  again  on  17th
    November 2009 the respondent attempted to serve notice on the appellant
    of curtailment of his leave by recorded delivery  but  the  notice  was
    returned on both occasions.  In paragraph 35 of his  determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge referred to regulation 6 of  the  Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003 and said that the appellant  was  served  by
    recorded delivery at the address which he had given to the Home  Office
    and at which he confirmed in his evidence he was residing at  the  date
    the notice of curtailment was served.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    was therefore satisfied that the notice  for  curtailment  was  validly
    served and that it was communicated to  the  appellant.   He  said  the
    notice was served twice by recorded delivery  and  he  thought  it  was
    highly unlikely that on two occasions the appellant failed  to  receive
    the notice from the Post Office advising him that a  recorded  delivery
    letter was available for his  collection.   Accordingly  his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom was validly curtailed in October 2009.

 6. The appellant's case was that he knew nothing of the attempts to  serve
    him with notice of curtailment of his  leave  and  did  not  receive  a
    notice from the Post Office stating that a recorded delivery letter was
    available for collection.  It was said that it was hardly  likely  that
    he would have applied for indefinite leave to remain if  he  had  known
    that his leave had been curtailed.  It  was  further  claimed  that  by
    serving the notice on file the respondent accepted that service on  the
    appellant by recorded delivery had not in fact been effected since  the
    letters to the appellant had been returned by the Post Office.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Deller conceded that the appellant's  leave
    had not been curtailed so that he had no leave remaining,  because  his
    leave was permitted to run beyond the date upon which it was said  that
    the notice of curtailment was served, to 19th December 2009, so that he
    did not have a right of appeal against this curtailment of  his  leave.
    Both he and Ms Manyarara agreed that if notice of  curtailment  of  his
    leave had not been validly served upon him, then his leave  would  have
    continued until 12th February 2013, so that the decision to remove  him
    from the United Kingdom would have been unlawful because at the time of
    the decision he would have had leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    If the appellant's leave had continued then the refusal  to  grant  him
    indefinite leave would not have left him without leave so that he would
    not have had a right  of  appeal  against  such  refusal,  see  section
    82(2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  .   In
    order to avoid any prejudice to  the  appellant  as  a  result  of  the
    expiration of the appellant's leave, if he still had leave, pending  my
    determination Mr Deller withdrew the decision refusing the  appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain,  leaving  the  decision  to
    remove the appellant as the immigration decision in  respect  of  which
    his right of appeal continued.  Mr Deller gave an undertaking that  the
    application would not be reconsidered by the Secretary of State pending
    the final determination of the appeal.

 8. Section 3(3)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides that in  the  case
    of a limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom a  person's
    leave may be varied, whether by restricting, enlarging or removing  the
    limit on its duration, or by adding, varying  or  revoking  conditions.
    Section 4(1) of the 1971 Act provides as follows:

         "The power under this Act to give or  refuse  leave  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration officers, and  the
         power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom, or to vary any
         leave  under  section  3(3)(a)  (whether  as  regards  duration  or
         conditions), shall be exercised by the  Secretary  of  State;  and,
         unless otherwise allowed by or under this Act, those  powers  shall
         be exercised by notice in writing given  to  the  person  affected,
         except that the powers  under  section  3(3)(a)  may  be  exercised
         generally in respect of any class  of  persons  by  order  made  by
         statutory instrument."

 9. Mr Deller did not suggest that the words "by notice in writing given to
    the person affected" did not carry a requirement  that  the  notice  of
    variation of leave should be communicated to the  person  in  question.
    In his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge took the  view  that
    the provisions of the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 applied to
    the notice of curtailment sent to the appellant.  Mr  Deller  expressed
    considerable reservations as to whether this was correct  but  was  not
    able to make a concession on behalf of the respondent that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge had made an error of law and left the issue for  me
    to decide.  The reasons for Mr Deller's reservations are apparent  when
    one considers the terms of the 2003 Regulations.

10. The Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  were  made  pursuant  to
    section 105 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which
    provides as follows:

         "Notice of immigration decision

         (1) The Secretary of State may make regulations requiring a  person
         to be given written notice where an immigration decision  is  taken
         in respect of him.

         (2) The regulations may, in particular, provide that a notice under
         subsection (1) of a decision against which the person  is  entitled
         to appeal under section 82(1) must state-

             (a) that there is a right of appeal under that section, and

             (b) how and when that right may be exercised.

         (3)The  regulations  may  make   provision   (which   may   include
         presumptions) about service."

    It can be seen that the power to make regulations  under  this  section
    relates to "immigration decisions" only.

11.   Regulation 4 provides as follows:

         "Notice of decisions

         4.-(1) Subject  to  regulation  6,  the  decision-maker  must  give
         written notice to a person  of  any  immigration  decision  or  EEA
         decision taken in respect of him which is appealable.

         (2) The decision-maker must give written notice to a person of  the
         relevant grant of leave to enter or remain if, as a result of  that
         grant, a right of appeal arises under section  83(2)  of  the  2002
         Act.

         (3) If the notice is given to the representative of the person,  it
         is to be taken to have been given to the person."

12.   Regulation 5 of the 2003 Regulation  deals  with  the  contents  of  a
    notice given under regulation 4(1).  Regulation 6  deals  with  certain
    notices under the 1971 Act deemed to comply with  the  Regulations  and
    provides as follows:

         "(1)     This regulation applies where the power to -

             (a) refuse leave to enter; or

             (b) vary leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

             is  exercised  by  notice  in  writing  under  section  4   of
             (administration of control),  or  paragraph  6(2)  (notice  of
             decisions of leave to enter or remain) of Schedule 2  to,  the
             1971 Act.

         (2)      If -

             (a) the statement required by regulation 5(3) is  included  in
                  or accompanies that notice; and

             (b) the notice is given in accordance with  the  provision  of
                  regulation 7;

         the notice is to be taken to have been given under regulation  4(1)
         for the purposes of these Regulations." (My underlining)

    Regulation 7 then goes on to deal with service of notice  in  providing
    that a notice required to be given under regulation 4 (my  underlining)
    may be given  in  various  ways  including  recorded  delivery  and  in
    regulation 7(2) provision is made for notice to be deemed to have  been
    given by placing the  signed  notice  on  the  relevant  file  where  a
    person's whereabouts were  not  known,  the  address  provided  to  the
    decision-maker was defective, false or no longer in use by  the  person
    and no representative appeared to be acting for the  person.   In  this
    case it has not been suggested  that  the  notice  was  served  on  any
    representative of the appellant.

13.   Regulation 4(1), as we have seen, provides that subject to  regulation
    6, the decision-maker must give written  notice  to  a  person  of  any
    immigration decision or EEA decision taken in respect of him  which  is
    appealable.  It may  be  that  the  words  "which  is  appealable"  are
    unnecessary because in regulation 2 "immigration decision" is  said  to
    have the same meaning as in section 82(2) and (3A)  of  the  2002  Act.
    The effect of the decision in the appellant's case, as has already been
    observed, was that the appellant was not left without leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and therefore the decision in his case was not an
    appealable decision.  Indeed a copy  of  the  notice  of  variation  of
    leave, dated 20th October 2009, indicated that the  appellant  was  not
    entitled to appeal  against  the  decision  since  section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not provide a right of
    appeal when an applicant still had leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and so was entitled to stay here.  The notice went on to
    state that he had been granted permission to stay until  19th  December
    2009 and was not required to leave the United Kingdom as  a  result  of
    the decision.

14.   The difficulty presented to the respondent is that the  provisions  of
    regulation 7 dealing with service apply to  a  notice  required  to  be
    given under regulation 4 which, as it  has  been  seen,  relates  to  a
    notice in respect of  an  immigration  decision  carrying  a  right  of
    appeal, which was not the case here.  The  fact  that  certain  notices
    under the 1971 Act are deemed to comply with the 2003 Regulations  does
    not in my view mean that a notice to  which  the  Regulations  did  not
    apply could be said to have been validly served  by  reference  to  the
    service provisions under the regulations.

15.   The correctness of this view is borne out by a  passage  in  paragraph
    4.29 of Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice,  Eighth  Edition,  in
    which it  is  said  that  the  2003  Regulations  do  not  provide  for
    notification of a decision which does not give a right of  appeal.  The
    passage points out that in order to avoid  difficulties  regarding  the
    interpretation of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 in relation to
    the continuation of leave  pending  a  variation  decision,  regulation
    3C(6) was substituted by section 11(4) of the Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 to provide  for  the  power  to  make  regulations
    determining when an application was decided for  the  purposes  of  the
    section. Regulation  2  of  the  Immigration  (Continuation  of  Leave)
    (Notice) Regulations 2006 provides as follows:

            "For the purpose of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  an
         application for variation of leave is decided-

         (a) when notice of the decision has been given in  accordance  with
         regulations made under section 105 of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002(1); or where no such notice is required,

         (b) when notice of the decision has been given in  accordance  with
         section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971."

16.   In my view the First-tier Tribunal judge  made  an  error  of  law  in
    construing regulation 7 as applying to decisions in  respect  of  which
    there was no right of appeal.  I also take the view that the First-tier
    Tribunal  judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the  decision   had   been
    communicated to the appellant, since the respondent's case was that the
    notices had been returned un-served and service on the file necessarily
    involved the proposition that there had been no service.   The  finding
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  that  it  was  unlikely  that  the
    appellant failed to receive a notice from the Post Office advising  him
    that a recorded delivery letter was available  for  collection  was  an
    irrelevant finding, since the return of the letters by the Post  Office
    proved that they had not been served on the appellant.

17.   The respondent was not able to  rely  upon  service  on  the  file  by
    reference to regulation 7(2)  because  that  only  applied  to  notices
    required to be given under regulation 4.

18.   It may very well be that the First-tier Tribunal judge was  misled  by
    paragraph 4.32 of Macdonald, which he quoted in his  determination,  in
    which it was said  that  section  4(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    required a written notice to be given to  the  unsuccessful  applicant.
    He or she must also be  given  written  notice  under  the  Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003, if he or she had a right of  appeal.   Thus
    there was a double requirement to give notice: (i) in all  cases  under
    section 4(1) and (ii) in cases where there was a right of appeal, under
    the Notices Regulations.  The passage went  on  to  say  that  the  two
    regulations were married by regulation 6 of  the  Notices  Regulations,
    which provided that the notice could be the same one for both purposes,
    provided that it contained all  the  necessary  information.   For  the
    reasons which I have already given, in my view a notice which is  given
    in accordance with the 2003 Regulations but not actually  served,  does
    not satisfy the requirements of section 4(1) for notice in  writing  to
    be given of curtailment of leave where there is  no  right  of  appeal.
    The words "for the purposes of these Regulations"  in  regulation  6(2)
    does not have the effect of validating  service  for  the  purposes  of
    section 4(1) of the 1971 Act.

19.   The misunderstanding of the effect of the 2003  Regulations  is  shown
    by the fact that  in  Chapter  51.1  of  the  respondent's  Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance it is suggested that regulation 5 of the 2003
    Regulations applies to an IS151A notice of  liability  to  be  removed,
    which it is said  is  not  an  appealable  immigration  decision.   The
    following appears:

        "Notice of liability (section 10)


        The IS151A Part 1 (Notice that a person is  to  be  treated  as  an
        illegal entrant/a person liable  to  administrative  removal  under
        section 10 of the Immigration & Asylum Act 1999) can be  served  on
        those liable to administrative removal (as outlined  in  the  first
        five bullet points above).
        The Notice of Liability is not an appealable immigration  decision.
        It informs the individual they are an  illegal  entrant/immigration
        offender and they are liable to  detention  and  removal.  It  also
        allows reporting restrictions to be placed on the  individual.  See
        Section 51.5 below.


        Statement of reasons


        To comply with the requirement set out in regulation 5(1)(a) of the
        Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003, the  IS.151A  Part  1  must
        contain  a  statement  of  reason(s).  A  non-exhaustive  list   of
        paragraphs that could be copied and pasted into the IS151A  Part  1
        are listed below. The wording should then be  amended  to  fit  the
        individual circumstances of the case:
        ...
        ...


        Service


        The Notice of Liability  can  be  served  in  person  or  by  post.
        However, in deception an interview under caution by an  immigration
        officer may be required first. See Chapter 37 for  further  details
        on enforcement interviews


        ..."


20.   The decision of the Court of Appeal in R v Appeal Committee of  County
    of London Quarter Sessions, Ex parte Rossi [1956] 1 All E.R. is helpful
    not only in confirming that notice in a recorded delivery letter  which
    has been returned has not been given but also in indicating what  would
    be required for a notice in writing to be given to the person affected.
     In that case the issue was whether  the  applicant  for  an  order  of
    certiorari had been given notice of an adjourned hearing in  an  appeal
    to Quarter Sessions in affiliation proceedings.  Section  3(1)  of  the
    Summary Jurisdiction (Appeals) Act 1933 provided that:

         "... the clerk of the peace...shall in due course  give  notice  to
         the appellant, to the other party to the appeal, and to  the  clerk
         to the court of summary jurisdiction as to the date, time and place
         fixed for the hearing of the appeal.  A notice required by this sub-
         section to be given to  any  person  may  be  sent  by  post  in  a
         registered letter addressed to him at his last or  usual  place  of
         abode."

21.   The clerk of the peace sent to the applicant a  letter  by  registered
    post telling him of the time, date and place of the adjourned  hearing,
    but the letter was returned unopened and undelivered. The issue  before
    the Court of Appeal was whether notice in due course had been given  to
    the applicant.  It was held that it had not been.  Denning LJ, said:

         "It is argued that it is sufficient to comply with  s  3(1)  if  he
         send a registered letter to the respondent, even though it  is  not
         received by him, and known not to be received.  I do not think that
         is correct. When construing this section, it is  to  be  remembered
         that it is a fundamental principle of our law that no one is to  be
         found guilty or made liable by an order of any tribunal  unless  he
         has been given fair notice of the proceedings so as to  enable  him
         to appear and defend them.

         ...

         This could be done by proof that a notice had been sent to  him  in
         good time by post  in  a  registered  letter  which  had  not  been
         returned, for it could then be assumed that it had  been  delivered
         in the ordinary course of post: see the Interpretation Act, 1889, s
         26."

22.   Morris LJ said, in relation to the  phrase  "...shall  in  due  course
    give notice to ... the other party to the appeal...as to the date, time
    and place fixed for the hearing  of  the  appeal"  that  there  was  an
    obligation to "give" such notice. It seemed to him that it was  of  the
    very essence of such notice that it should be communicated to or should
    reach the party interested.

23.   The notion that notice of variation  should  be  communicated  to  the
    person concerned is supported by paragraph 31 of HC  395,  as  amended,
    which provides:

      "Under Section 3(3) of the 1971 Act  a  limited  leave  to  enter  or
        remain in  the  United  Kingdom  may  be  varied  by  extending  or
        restricting its duration, by adding, varying or revoking conditions
        or by removing the time limit (where upon any condition attached to
        the leave ceases to apply). When leave to enter or remain is varied
        an entry is to be  made  in  the  applicant's  passport  or  travel
        document (and his registration certificate  where  appropriate)  or
        the decision may be made known in writing in some other appropriate
        way."

24.   Furthermore in  Robina  Rafiq  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [1998] Imm  AR  193  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
    endorsement of  a  passport  with  a  stamp  signifying  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave in circumstances where the passport  was  retained  by
    the Secretary of State and not given or sent to the appellant  did  not
    amount to the grant of indefinite leave to remain  since  the  decision
    had not been communicated to the appellant.

25.   There  still  remains  the  question,  however,  of  what  amounts  to
    communication of a decision to vary leave where  there  is  no  appeal.
    Provision  has  been  made  for  alternative  means  of   communicating
    decisions granting or refusing  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.
    Article 8 of the Immigration (Leave to Enter  and  Remain)  Order  2000
    provides that a notice giving or refusing leave to enter  may,  instead
    of being given in writing as required by section 4(1) of  the  Act,  be
    given by facsimile or electronic mail, and in  the  case  of  a  notice
    giving or refusing leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  visitor,  it
    may be given orally, including by means of a telecommunications system.
     Furthermore by virtue of article 9 such a notice may  be  given  to  a
    responsible person acting on behalf of the person concerned.  By virtue
    of article 10(1) where notice refusing leave to enter as a visitor  has
    been given orally under article 8(3)  or  given  under  article  9,  an
    immigration  officer  shall  give  the  person  concerned  as  soon  as
    practicable a notice in writing that he  has  been  refused  leave  and
    stating the reasons for the refusal.  By virtue of  article  10(3)  any
    notice required by paragraph (1) may be delivered or sent  by  post  to
    his last known or usual place of abode or the address provided  by  him
    for receipt of the notice.  These provisions, however, do not relate to
    a notice of a non-appealable decision to vary leave.

26.   Section 26 of  the  Interpretation  Act  1889  has  been  replaced  by
    section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978, which provides as follows:

         "References to service by post.
         E+W+S+N.I.
         Where an Act authorises or requires any document to  be  served  by
         post (whether the expression "serve" or the  expression  "give"  or
         "send" or any other expression is used) then, unless  the  contrary
         intention appears, the service is deemed to be effected by properly
         addressing, pre-paying and posting a letter containing the document
         and, unless the contrary is proved, to have been  effected  at  the
         time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary  course
         of post."


      An example of where an Act authorises a document to be served by  post
    is section 3(1) of the Summary Jurisdiction (Appeals) Act 1933 referred
    to above.

27.   In his judgment in Retail Dairy Co Ltd v Clarke [1912] 2  KB  388,  in
    which case the court was concerned with the meaning of the term  "send"
    in section 20(1) of the  Sale  of  Food  and  Drugs  Act,  1899,  which
    provided for the sending of a warranty or invoice by the vendor to  the
    purchaser, Ridley J said:

        "Section 26 of the Interpretation Act, 1889, throws no  light  upon
        the  matter.  It  has  no  application  where  the  statute  to  be
        interpreted says nothing about service by post."

    In the instant case section 4(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  did  not
    authorise or require notice of the decision to be served  by  post;  it
    said nothing about service by post, so that in my view section 7 of the
    Interpretation Act 1978 did not apply.  The consequence is that if  the
    respondent had chosen to send the  notice  by  ordinary  post,  service
    would not have been deemed to have been effected.

28.   In the absence of an order made by statutory instrument under  section
    4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 dealing with the giving of  notice  of
    variation of leave where there is no right of appeal, the Secretary  of
    State has to be able to prove that notice of a decision  varying  leave
    to remain under section 3(3)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 where there
    is no right of appeal was communicated to the person concerned  for  it
    to  be  effective.  Where  there  is  no  "immigration  decision"   the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003  do  not  apply.  Communication
    would be effective if made to a person authorised to receive it on that
    person's behalf, see Hosier v Goodall [1962] 1 All  E.R.  30,  but  the
    Secretary of State cannot rely upon deemed postal service.

29.   In these circumstances the First-tier Tribunal judge made  a  material
    error of law in his determination of the appeal  in  finding  that  the
    appellant's  leave  to  remain  had  been  validly  terminated  by  the
    attempted service by recorded delivery  which  the  respondent  herself
    acknowledged had not been achieved.   As  Mr  Deller  conceded  if  the
    appellant's leave had not been terminated the decision  to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom was unlawful.

30.   Therefore I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  re-
    make the decision by  allowing  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision to remove the appellant from the United  Kingdom  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  Mr  Deller  indicated  that  the  appellant's
    outstanding  application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  will   be
    determined in the light of this determination.



Signed                                       Dated

P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal








