
PP and SP (paragraph 252 - effect of deletion) India [2005] UKAIT 00141




                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 3 June 2005
Determination promulgated: 30 September 2005


                                   Before:

                 Mr L V Waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)
                                 Mr P Bompas
                               Mr A E Armitage

Between


                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MUMBAI
                                                                  Respondent


Effect of deletion of paragraph 252 (leave to enter as spouse  or  child  of
special voucher holder) of Immigration Rules  on  applications  made  before
date of deletion but not decided until after date of deletion


Representation:





For the appellants:    Mr N Ahmed of counsel, instructed by Jasvir  Jutla  &
                       Co, solicitors


For the respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellants are both citizens of India.  They  have  appealed  with
    permission  against  the  determination  of  an  adjudicator  (now   an
    Immigration Judge), Mr A G  O'Malley,  sitting  in  Stoke-on-Trent,  in
    which he dismissed their respective appeals  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse their respective applications for entry clearance to
    come to the United Kingdom for settlement as the children of a  special
    voucher  holder.   By  virtue  of  article  5(1)  of  the  Asylum   and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 (Commencement  No  5
    and Transitional Provisions) Order 2005, the appeals now take effect as
    reconsiderations pursuant to article 5(2) of that Order.


    Combined hearing


 2.   At the start of the hearing before us, the  representatives  for  both
    parties confirmed that they had no objection to a combined  hearing  of
    both reconsiderations. We therefore directed that both reconsiderations
    be heard together  in  accordance  with  rule  20  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 as applied by  rule  29  of
    those Rules.


      Background


  3.  On 17 April 2002, the appellants made  separate  applications  to  the
    respondent for entry clearance to come to the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    children  of  a  special  voucher  holder,  namely  their   mother,   [
     ].  It is not in dispute between the parties that she had been granted
    a special voucher in 1996 or 1997, and had entered the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to the terms of that voucher on 26 April 1997.

4.    The appellants' applications were made  under  paragraph  252  of  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules (HC 395) which was  still  in
    force at that time in the following terms:

         "The requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom
         as the spouse or child of a special voucher  holder  are  that  the
         person concerned:


         (i)        is  in  possession  of  a  valid  United  Kingdom  entry
         clearance for settlement in the United Kingdom  in  this  capacity;
         and
         (ii)      can and will be maintained and accommodated adequately by
         the special voucher holder without recourse to public funds."


      Notices of refusal


5.    However, the respondent's decision in relation  to  both  applications
    was not made until 18 October 2002, by which  date  paragraph  252  had
    been deleted from the Immigration Rules.  It had in fact  been  deleted
    with effect from 18  September  2002  by  Cm  5597.   The  respondent's
    notices of refusal addressed to both appellants were  mutatis  mutandis
    in identical terms.  The  material  part  of  those  notices  reads  as
    follows:

          "You have applied for entry clearance with a view to admission  to
         the United Kingdom as the dependant of a special voucher holder but
         I am not satisfied that entry is being sought for a purpose covered
         by the Immigration Rules.   Furthermore,  I  have  considered  your
         application in accordance with paragraph  317  of  the  Immigration
         Rules but I am not satisfied that you are living outside the United
         Kingdom in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances and are
         mainly dependent financially on relatives  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  I therefore refuse your application."

    For present purposes, it suffices to say that  both  appellants  accept
    that they were unable as  at  the  date  of  decision  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 317.


      Appeal to adjudicator


  6.    The  appellants  both  exercised  their  right  of  appeal   to   an
    adjudicator.  Their appeals were heard together by Mr A G  O'Malley  on
    16 April 2004.  By his determination, which was promulgated on 29 April
    2004, he dismissed both appeals.


      Permission to appeal


7.    The appellants then applied  for,  and  were  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the former Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  The grounds on which
    permission was granted were in  identical  terms.   The  material  part
    reads as follows:

         "The proposed grounds of appeal are that the Adjudicator  erred  in
         law  in  regarding  himself  as  precluded  from  considering   the
         Claimant's application  under  paragraph  252  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, and that had he given proper  consideration  to  the  appeal
         under paragraph 252 he may have come to a different  decision.   It
         is  further  submitted  that   the   Adjudicator   erred   in   his
         consideration and findings  in  relation  to  the  Article  8  ECHR
         [European Convention on  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms]
         aspect of the appeal.  The grounds merit further  consideration  by
         the Tribunal."

8.    During the course of the hearing before us,  Mr  Ahmed,  who  appeared
    for both appellants, confirmed that they were no longer pursuing  their
    respective claims under Article 8 (right to  respect  for  private  and
    family life) of the Human Rights Convention.  In light of the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in Huang and others v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 105, particularly at paragraphs 59  and
    60, he was plainly right to do so.  He accepted that in  the  event  of
    our  concluding  that  the  adjudicator  was  right  to   dismiss   the
    appellants' appeals under the Immigration  Rules,  it  was  clear  that
    their appeals on human rights grounds under Article  8  would  have  no
    realistic prospect of success.  It is therefore unnecessary for  us  to
    give any further  consideration  to  that  aspect  of  the  appellants'
    grounds.

9.    The sole issue which is before  us  is  whether  the  adjudicator  was
    right to conclude, as he did, that he was  precluded  from  considering
    the appeals under paragraph 252 of the Immigration Rules by  virtue  of
    paragraph 27 of the Rules, which reads as follows:

         "An application for entry clearance is to be decided in  the  light
         of the circumstances existing at the time of the  decision,  except
         that an applicant will not be  refused  an  entry  clearance  where
         entry is sought in one of the categories  contained  in  paragraphs
         296-316 solely on account of his attaining  the  age  of  18  years
         between receipt of his application and the date of the decision  on
         it."

    It is not in dispute that both appellants were well over the age of  18
    years at the date of their entry clearance applications.  The exception
    contained in  paragraph  27  is  therefore  not  relevant  for  present
    purposes.


      Appellants' submissions


10.   We heard submissions first from Mr Ahmed on behalf of the  appellants.
     He  acknowledged  that  no  transitional  provisions  were  made  when
    paragraph 252 was deleted from the Immigration Rules  on  18  September
    2002.  Nevertheless, he submitted that the provisions of  paragraph  27
    were to be read in conjunction with paragraph  4  of  the  same  Rules,
    which reads as follows:

         "These Rules to come into effect on 1 October 1994 and  will  apply
         to all decisions  taken  on  or  after  that  date  save  that  any
         application made before 1 October 1994 for entry  clearance,  leave
         to enter or remain or variation of leave to enter or remain,  other
         than an application for leave by a person seeking asylum, shall  be
         decided under the provisions of HC 251, as  amended,  as  if  these
         Rules had not been made."

11.   He argued that by  analogy  the  appellants'  applications  should  be
    decided under the provisions of paragraph 252 as  if  those  provisions
    had not been deleted from the Rules after the date of  the  appellants'
    applications but before the date  of  the  respondent's  decision.   He
    submitted that it did not necessarily follow from the  mere  fact  that
    paragraph  252  had  been  deleted  from  the  Immigration  Rules  that
    applications made before its deletion were no longer to  be  determined
    in accordance with its provisions.  Paragraph 27 was  not  intended  to
    penalise applicants who had applied  for  entry  clearance  before  the
    deletion came into effect.

12.   He also relied upon the provisions of paragraph 26 of the  Immigration
    Rules which reads as follows:

         "An  application  for  entry  clearance  will  be   considered   in
         accordance with the provisions in these Rules covering the grant or
         refusal of leave to enter.   Where  appropriate,  the  term  'Entry
         Clearance  Officer'  should   be   substituted   for   'Immigration
         Officer'."

13.   He argued that where the Immigration Rules are being changed,  a  fair
    balance must be struck between the parties.  Paragraph 27  referred  to
    the "circumstances" existing at the time  of  decision.   He  submitted
    that the term "circumstances" was intended  to  refer  to  the  factual
    situation as at the date of decision, and not to the legal position  as
    at that date.  On the basis of the factual situation as it  existed  at
    the date of the  respondent's  decision,  both  appellants  would  have
    succeeded in their respective applications if paragraph 252  had  still
    been in force at that time.

14.   He also stated that he was relying on the  reported  determination  of
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (chaired by the  former  President,  Mr
    Justice Ouseley) in HG and RG (India - Special  Voucher  Rules)  [2005]
    UKIAT 00002 in which the Tribunal had stated at paragraph 20:

         "Mr Jafferji urged that we should not  simply  dismiss  the  appeal
         because  on  any  reapplication  for  entry  clearance   by   these
         Appellants they would inevitably fail under paragraph  252  because
         that had now been removed from the Immigration  Rules.   We  accept
         that there is force in that argument and that the Appellants should
         be  entitled  to  have  their  application  for   entry   clearance
         considered under paragraph 252.  If we were to say that  there  had
         been no decision as yet by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  the
         application of paragraph  252,  notwithstanding  the  form  of  the
         decision  on  both  occasions,  the  Appellants'  success  will  be
         dependent on the existence of an obligation on the Entry  Clearance
         Officer to consider an undetermined application on the basis of the
         entry clearance provisions extant at the date of  application  even
         though now repealed.   We have not heard  a  satisfactory  argument
         one way or another as to the power of the Entry  Clearance  Officer
         in relation to such a matter, although we think  it  probable  that
         the obligation is to apply the Rules as they were at  the  date  of
         application." (emphasis added)

15.   Mr Ahmed submitted that the  reconsiderations  before  us  constituted
    exceptional cases.  The appellants had not been called for interview by
    the respondent until the day after paragraph 252 had been deleted  from
    the Immigration Rules.  Their respective applications could  have  been
    determined by the respondent at an earlier date.  The appellants  would
    have benefited if that had been  done  because  they  would  then  have
    qualified for entry clearance under paragraph 252.  Their  applications
    had been made some six months prior to the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision.  Many other applicants were  in  the  same  position  as  the
    appellants.

16.   He also relied upon  footnote  2  to  paragraph  3.14  of  Macdonald's
    "Immigration Law and Practice in  the  United  Kingdom"  (5th  edition)
    which reads as follows:

         "In R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex p Bibi  and  Purvez  [1986]
         Imm AR 61, DC, the  date  of  application  was  used  to  determine
         whether the Pakistani wife and children of a  Commonwealth  citizen
         settled  in  the  UK  on  1  January  1973  should  be  treated  as
         Commonwealth citizens or aliens.  The date of application is  often
         the important date in transitional provisions  for  new  rules  and
         policies."


      Conclusions


17.   We did not find it necessary to call upon Mr Smart to  address  us  on
    behalf of the respondent.  Following Mr Ahmed's confirmation  that  the
    appellants were no longer seeking to rely on Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention, the sole issue which falls to be determined for  the
    purposes of these reconsideration is whether the adjudicator was  right
    to conclude, as he did, that he was  precluded  by  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 27 of the Immigration Rules from considering the  appellants'
    appeals under paragraph 252 of those Rules by reason of the  fact  that
    paragraph 252 had been deleted from  the  Rules  by  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision.

18.   The terms of paragraph 27 (as set out  above)  are  plain.   With  the
    exception of an application for entry clearance made by someone who was
    under the age of 18 years at the  date  of  application,  but  who  has
    attained full age by the date of decision, paragraph 27  stipulates  in
    terms that an application for entry clearance is to be decided  in  the
    light of the "circumstances" existing at the time of the decision.   It
    is common ground between the parties that the  exception  contained  in
    paragraph 27 does not assist either of the appellants before us.

19.   The issue is therefore whether the reference to "circumstances" is  to
    be construed as meaning only the factual circumstances existing at  the
    date of decision, or whether it should  be  interpreted  as  comprising
    both  the  factual  circumstances  and  the  legal  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules in existence at that date.  Mr  Ahmed  contended  for
    the former construction.  He was unable to direct us to  any  authority
    on the point one way or the  other,  apart  from  the  passage  in  the
    reported determination of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in HG and  RG
    at paragraph 20 in the terms set out above.

20.   That determination was prepared by  Mr  Justice  Ouseley,  the  former
    President of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Words falling  from  the
    lips of such an experienced and learned judge are plainly deserving  of
    the most careful consideration.  Nevertheless, it  is  clear  from  the
    final sentence of paragraph 20, read in the context of the paragraph as
    a whole, that the Tribunal was expressing no more than a tentative view
    on the point.  The passage on which Mr Ahmed relies was plainly no more
    than an obiter dictum, and  notwithstanding  the  distinguished  source
    from which it emanates, it is not one which is  binding  upon  us.   In
    light of the plain wording of paragraph 27 as set out  above,  and  for
    the reasons which follow below, it is one from  which  we  respectfully
    dissent.

21.   In the absence of any binding authority on the point, it is for us  to
    arrive at our own conclusion as to whether the effect of  paragraph  27
    was, contrary to the adjudicator's conclusion, such as to  require  the
    appellants' entry clearance applications to be determined on the  basis
    of the factual circumstances as they existed at the date of decision as
    if the provisions of paragraph 252 were still in force at that time, or
    whether he was right to find, as he did,  that  paragraph  252  was  no
    longer in force as at the date of decision, and that it was not open to
    him to allow the appellants' appeals as if it were.  We have little (if
    any) hesitation in arriving at the latter conclusion.

22.   Read in context, the reference to "circumstances" in paragraph  27  is
    plainly  intended  to  embrace,  not  just  the  factual  circumstances
    existing at the date of decision, but  also  the  legal  provisions  in
    force at that time.  As Mr Ahmed properly acknowledged before us,  when
    paragraph 252 was deleted from the Immigration  Rules,  there  were  no
    transitional provisions dealing with the position of individuals,  such
    as the appellants, who had  applied  for  entry  clearance  under  that
    paragraph prior to the date of deletion, but  whose  applications  were
    not decided until after the date of deletion.

23.   Paragraph 27 contains in terms an exception safeguarding the  position
    of applicants who  were  under  the  age  of  18  as  at  the  date  of
    application, but who had attained full age by  the  date  of  decision.
    Similar  provisions  dealing  with  the  effects   of   a   change   of
    circumstances between the date of application and the date of  decision
    are to be found elsewhere in the Immigration Rules.  By way of example,
    rule 4 safeguards the position of applicants who had applied for  entry
    clearance, leave to enter or remain or variation of leave to  enter  or
    remain (other than an application for leave by a person seeking asylum)
    prior to the date on which the present Immigration Rules  replaced  the
    previous Rules.  Rule 4 stipulates that such  applications  are  to  be
    decided under the terms of the previous Rules as if the  present  Rules
    had not been made.

24.   Further examples of transitional provisions are to be found  elsewhere
    in the Immigration Rules.  By way of example, the Statement of  Changes
    in Immigration Rules (Cm 2663) stipulated at paragraph 2:

         "Paragraph 111 of HC 251 of 1990 and paragraph 60(i) of HC  395  of
         1994 shall not apply to any application for an  extension  of  stay
         for the purpose of studying made by a national of the  Ivory  Coast
         or Sierra Leone whose current leave to enter or remain was  granted
         before 21 September 1994."

25.   The Immigration Rules contain transitional provisions  protecting  the
    position of applicants in a  number  of  different  cases.   The  issue
    before us is whether similar transitional provisions  may  properly  be
    implied where an express provision for them has not been  made  in  the
    Rules, in particular in the circumstances of the appellants before  us.
    Applying  the  well-established  principle  of  statutory  construction
    enshrined in the Latin tag "inclusio unius est exclusio alterius"  (the
    inclusion of one is the exclusion of another), we are satisfied that it
    would not be right for us to imply the existence of  such  transitional
    provisions where the Secretary of State for the Home Department has not
    considered it appropriate to include them in the Immigration Rules, and
    in the various changes made from time to time to those Rules.

26.   In arriving at that conclusion, we have  taken  account  of  the  fact
    that under section 3(2) of the Immigration Act  1971  as  amended,  the
    Immigration Rules and any changes to  them  are  required  to  be  laid
    before both Houses of Parliament, and are subject to disapproval  by  a
    resolution of either House passed within the following 40 days.  To the
    extent that the Rules, and subsequent changes made to  them,  have  not
    been disapproved by either House, they may be regarded as  constituting
    the will of Parliament as to the terms on which persons  not  otherwise
    having the right of abode in the United Kingdom are to  be  allowed  to
    enter or remain.  Accordingly, in so far as the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department, acting with the approval of  Parliament,  has  not
    considered it appropriate to include in express terms any  transitional
    provisions in the Immigration Rules dealing with  the  consequences  of
    the deletion of paragraph  252  on  pending  applications,  we  do  not
    consider that we would be justified in doing so by implication alone.

27.   For these reasons, we are satisfied that the adjudicator was right  to
    conclude that paragraph 27 of the Immigration Rules did indeed have the
    effect of precluding him from considering the appellants' appeals under
    the provisions of paragraph 252 as if those provisions  were  still  in
    force at the date of decision.  Despite the submissions put forward  by
    Mr Ahmed, we are satisfied that the adjudicator made no error of law in
    arriving at that conclusion.  There is therefore no arguable basis  for
    interfering with his decision.


    Reporting


28.   It is intended that this determination should be reported for what  we
    say regarding the effects of the  deletion  of  paragraph  252  of  the
    Immigration Rules on applications for entry clearance made  under  that
    paragraph prior to deletion, but not decided until after deletion.




    Decision


29.   The adjudicator did not make a material error of law and his  original
    determinations of both appeals shall stand.


Signed                                       Dated: 3 June 2005

L V Waumsley

Senior Immigration Judge


Approved for electronic distribution
