
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Ahmadi (s. 47 decision: validity; Sapkota) [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 March 2012                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                javad ahmadi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)  A  removal  decision  under  s.  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
Nationality Act 2006 cannot be made in respect of  a  person  until  written
notice of the decision to refuse to vary that person's leave to  remain  has
been given to that person. The current practice of the  Secretary  of  State
to  incorporate  both  decisions  in  a   single   notice   is   accordingly
incompatible with  the  relevant  legislation.  As  a  result,  the  present
usefulness of s. 47 is highly questionable.

(2)  The fact that, as  the  legislation  stands,  the  Secretary  of  State
cannot make a removal decision at the same time as a  decision  refusing  to
vary leave, or (for practical  purposes)  before  a  person's  s.  3C  leave
begins, underscores the  correctness  of  the  Tribunal's  determination  in
Patel (consideration of Sapkota - unfairness) [2011] UKUT  484  (IAC),  that
what is likely to  be  decisive  in  cases  of  this  kind  is  whether  the
Secretary of State has, in fact, addressed paragraph 395C  removal  factors,
when taking the variation decision.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1990,
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 February 2007  and  claimed  asylum
    two days  later.   That  claim  was  refused  by  the  respondent  who,
    nevertheless, granted the appellant discretionary  leave,  because  the
    appellant was at that time a minor.  On 10  June  2009,  the  appellant
    applied for a variation of that leave but the application  was  refused
    by the respondent on 15 July 2009.

2.   The appellant appealed to the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.   His
    appeal was heard at Hatton Cross on 19 November 2009 by an  Immigration
    Judge, who dismissed it.  The appellant was found not to be a  credible
    witness.  The judge did not believe the appellant's account  of  having
    fled Afghanistan and concluded that it would not be  a  breach  of  the
    United Kingdom's responsibilities  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  to
    return the appellant to Afghanistan.  By  the  same  token,  the  judge
    found that it would not be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR to  return
    the appellant who, furthermore, was found not to  be  entitled  to  the
    grant of humanitarian protection.  None of those findings is challenged
    by the appellant.

3.   In paragraph 44 of the determination, the judge addressed Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  He found that the appellant had formed a private life in the
    United Kingdom, where  the  appellant  had  taken  various  educational
    courses.  The judge concluded, however, that any interference with  the
    appellant's  Article  8  rights,  as  a  result  of  his   removal   to
    Afghanistan, would be proportionate to the legitimate public end sought
    to be achieved.   The  Article  8  finding  was  not  appealed  by  the
    appellant.

4.   The final matter dealt with by the judge  was  paragraph  395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  That paragraph provided as follows:-

         "395C.   Before a decision to  remove  under  section  10  [of  the
                Immigration and Asylum Act 1999] is given,  regard  will  be
                had to all the relevant factors known to  the  Secretary  of
                State, including:


              (i) age;


              (ii)     length of residence in the United Kingdom;


              (iii)    strength of connections with the United Kingdom;


              (iv)     personal history, including  character,  conduct  and
                    employment records;


              (v) domestic circumstances;


              (vi)     previous  criminal  record  and  the  nature  of  any
                    offence of which the person has been convicted;


              (vii)    compassionate circumstances;


              (viii)   any representations received on the person's behalf."


5.   In paragraph  46  of  the  determination,  the  judge  noted  that  the
    respondent, in the refusal  letter  addressed  to  the  appellant,  had
    considered the factors set out in paragraph 395C. The judge  considered
    that the Secretary of State had "exercised  her  discretion  correctly"
    under paragraph 395C, before making his own finding that there were "no
    factors in this case which militate against removal".

6.   Before the Immigration Judge, Mr Malik had submitted on behalf  of  the
    appellant that, although paragraph 395C  had  been  considered  by  the
    respondent, the immigration decision to refuse to vary leave to  remain
    was not in accordance with the law, because it had  not  in  fact  been
    accompanied or closely followed  by  a  decision,  that  the  appellant
    should be removed from the United Kingdom by way of removal directions.
     In making that submission, Mr Malik relied on  the  judgments  of  the
    Court of Appeal in TE (Eritrea) [2009] EWCA Civ 174.  The judge was not
    persuaded by that submission; but permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  matter  was  properly
    arguable.

7.   It was, thus, the central aspect of the  appellant's  case  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, that the respondent had not, in fact,  made  a  removal
    decision in respect of him.  That was the apparent understanding of the
    parties, when the appeal came before  the  Upper  Tribunal  last  year.
    However, shortly after that Tribunal had made  its  determination,  the
    respondent disclosed a copy of a letter of 6 July  2011,  comprising  a
    combined immigration decision entitled "Refusal to vary leave to  enter
    or remain and decision to remove", which was dated 27  July  2009,  and
    which  had  not  been  included  in  the  respondent's   bundle.    The
    determination of the Upper Tribunal was, accordingly, set  aside  under
    rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  on  14
    July 2011, with the result that the appeal came before me  on  7  March
    2012.

8.     On that day it was common ground that  the  document  dated  27  July
    2009 comprised both a decision to refuse to vary the appellant's  leave
    to remain in the United  Kingdom,  and  also  an  actual  or  purported
    decision under s.47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006,  that  the  appellant  should  be  removed  in  accordance   with
    directions, if and when his leave ended.   The  validity  of  the  s.47
    decision is in issue between the parties; and, if the s. 47 decision is
    invalid, the issue arises as to whether the variation  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law.  In a skeleton argument, served shortly before
    the 7 March hearing, Mr Malik submitted that the respondent's  apparent
    practice of making "combined" decisions of  these  kinds  is  unlawful,
    since on a true construction of the relevant legislation, the  decision
    to refuse to vary leave has to have been both made and  served  on  the
    person concerned, before a decision can be taken under s.47.

9.   The relevant provisions of s.47 are as follows:

         "47. Removal: persons with statutorily extended leave


              (1) Where a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom is extended by section 3C(2)(b) or 3D(2)(a) of the
                  Immigration Act 1971 (c.77)  (extension  pending  appeal),
                  the Secretary of State may decide that the person is to be
                  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,  in  accordance  with
                  directions to be given by an immigration  officer  if  and
                  when the leave ends.


              (2) Directions under this section may impose any  requirements
                  of a kind prescribed for the purpose of section 10 of  the
                  Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c.33) (removal of persons
                  unlawfully in United Kingdom)."


10.  The relevant provisions of s.3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971  are  as
    follows:-

         "3C. Continuation of leave pending variation decision


              (1) This section applies if -


                  (a)  a person who has limited leave to enter or remain  in
                      the United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of  State
                      for variation of the leave,


                  (b)  the application for variation  is  made  before  that
                      leave expires, and


                   (c)   the  leave  expires  without  the  application  for
                      variation having been decided.


              (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
                      period when -


                  (a)  the application for variation is neither decided  nor
                      withdrawn,


                  (b)  an appeal under section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                      Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 could be  brought  [,
                      while the appellant is in the United Kingdom] against
                      the  decision  on  the  application   for   variation
                      (ignoring any possibility of an appeal  out  of  time
                      with permission), or


                  (c)  an appeal under that section against that decision [,
                      brought while the appellant is in the United Kingdom]
                      is pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that
                      Act).
              ...


               (6)  The  Secretary  of  State       may   make   regulations
                  determining  when  an  application  is  decided  for  the
                  purposes of this section; and the regulations -


                  (a)  may make provision  by  reference  to  receipt  of  a
                       notice,


                  (b)  may provide for a notice to be treated as having been
                       received in specified circumstances,


                  (c)  may make different provision for  different  purposes
                       or circumstances,


                  (d)  shall be made by statutory instrument, and


                  (e)  shall be subject  to  annulment  in  pursuance  of  a
                       resolution of either House of Parliament."


11.  Although neither party drew  my  attention  to  them,  the  Immigration
    (Continuation  of  Leave)  (Notices)  Regulations  2006   are   plainly
    relevant, being made pursuant to s.3(C)(6).  Regulation 2  provides  as
    follows:-

         "2.  Decision on an application for variation of leave


              For the purpose of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  an
             application for variation of leave is decided -


              (a) when notice of the decision has been given  in  accordance
                  with  regulations  made   under   section   105   of   the
                  Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; or where  no
                  such notice is required,


              (b) when notice of the decision has been given  in  accordance
                  with section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971."


12.  The Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003  (SI  2003/658)  have  been
    made  under  s.105  of  the  2002  Act.   The  relevant  provisions  of
    regulation 4 are as follows:-

         "Notice of decisions


         4.-(1)   Subject to regulation  6,  the  decision-maker  must  give
              written notice to a person of any immigration decision or EEA
              decision taken in respect of which is appealable."


    Regulation 6 deals with certain decisions to refuse leave to enter  and
    decisions to vary leave to enter, and is not relevant  to  the  present
    case.


13.  Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides:-

         4.   Administration of control


              (1) The power under this Act to give or refuse leave to  enter
                  the United  Kingdom  shall  be  exercised  by  immigration
                  officers, and the power to give leave  to  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, or to vary any leave under section 3(3)(a)
                  (whether as regards  duration  or  conditions),  shall  be
                  exercised by the Secretary of State; and, unless otherwise
                  [allowed by or under] this  Act,  those  powers  shall  be
                  exercised  by  notice  in  writing  given  to  the  person
                  affected, except that the powers under section 3(3)(a) may
                  be exercised generally in respect of any class of  persons
                  by order made by statutory instrument."

14.  Mr  Malik  drew  attention  to  Chapter  51.3  (Administrative  Removal
    Procedure) of the respondent's Enforcement Instruction Guidance,  which
    says this:-

         "Prior to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
         2006 a decision to remove could only be made once an individual had
         no leave to enter or remain (e.g.  when  they  were  Appeal  Rights
         Exhausted).  This meant that where  an  individual  had  continuing
         leave during an appeal against refusal to vary  or  curtailment  of
         leave, it was not possible to make a removal  decision.   Moreover,
         it  meant  that  when  the  administrative  removal  decision   was
         subsequently served, it could trigger a second right of appeal...


         Under section 47  a  decision  to  remove  can  be  made  where  an
         individual has continuing leave during a period in which an  appeal
         could  be  brought  (statutorily  extended  leave  under   sections
         3C(2)(b)  or  3D(2)(a)).    This   means   that   a   decision   to
         administratively remove is made at the same time as a variation  or
         curtailment decision.  The section 47 decision should  be  included
         in the decision letter curtailing or refusing to vary leave.  Where
         it is not included in the decision  letter  the  ICD.4547  decision
         notice can be used... A section 47 decision cannot be made once  an
         appeal has been lodged.


         A section 47 decision will trigger an additional  right  of  appeal
         under section 82(2)(ha) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
         Act 2002.  However, where an appeal is lodged  the  issues  arising
         from the two decisions (e.g. refusal to vary leave and the  removal
         decision) will be dealt with in a single in-country appeal."


15.  The essence of Mr Malik's submissions can be shortly put.  Section  47,
    far from mandating the practice described in the respondent's Guidance,
    that a decision under that section "should be included in the  decision
    letter curtailing or refusing to vary leave", in fact prevents  such  a
    practice.  The s.47 decision can be taken only after the leave to enter
    or remain is extended by s.3C(2)(b); and that can happen only while  an
    appeal against the decision regarding leave "could be  brought".   Such
    an appeal may be brought only once the person has  been  given  written
    notice of the decision.

16.  Instead of supporting the respondent's practice, as  described  in  the
    Guidance, Mr Malik submits that the  already  well-known  case  law  of
    Mirza [2011] EWCA Civ 159 and Sapkota [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1320  in  fact
    support him.  In particular, Mr Malik relies on paragraph [101] of  the
    judgments in Sapkota:-

         "[101].  I accept that the SSHD had to take the variation  decision
               first.  I also  accept  that  the  removal  decision  cannot
               literally be taken at the same time, because, as  Sedley  LJ
               acknowledged in Mirza, the right to make a removal  decision
               only arises the moment the initial leave period expires (for
               section 47 of the 2006 Act) or when the applicant's presence
               in the UK is unlawful (for section 10)  of  the  1971  Act).
               However, once it is established that, in the absence of good
               reason, the SSHD is obliged to  serve  a  'one-stop'  notice
               under section  120  and  is  obliged  to  take  the  removal
               decision promptly  thereafter,  that  must  impinge  on  the
               lawfulness  of   the   'immigration   decision'   concerning
               variation.  It seems to  me  that  if  the  SSHD  takes  the
               variation  decision  in  circumstance  where   it   is   not
               contemplated that the  removal  decision  will  be  promptly
               taken thereafter and there is no good reason for that  delay
               or 'segregation in fact', then  that  must  make  the  first
               decision 'not in accordance with the law'.  It  would  be  a
               decision that was taken in disregard of  the  SSHD's  public
               law duties.  So, on this analysis, there is no  question  of
               the variation decision being lawful when  first  made,  then
               becoming unlawful  thereafter,  so  changing  its  character
               after the manner of Schr�dinger's cat."


17.  It is, I consider,  plain  that  the  policy  behind  the  respondent's
    guidance, involving combined decisions as  to  leave  and  removal,  is
    entirely understandable and sensible.  It accords with  the  "one-stop"
    principle enshrined in s.120 of the 2002 Act and  guarantees  that  the
    person concerned knows exactly the case he or she must make under  that
    section or on appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If  the  removal
    decision cannot be made contemporaneously with the  decision  regarding
    leave,  the  respondent  will  have  only  the  short  period  of  time
    prescribed  in  rule  7(1)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, within which to make and communicate  the  s.47
    removal decision.  But, as Mr Deller submitted, if a "one-stop"  notice
    is given with the decision regarding leave, it is difficult to see  how
    representations in response to that notice can be made and  considered,
    before a removal decision has to be taken.

18.  In fact, the situation is even worse. Irrespective of the issue of  the
    "one-stop" notice, the respondent will not, in  practice,  be  able  to
    assume she has the entirety of  the  period  prescribed  in  rule  7(1)
    within which to make a s. 47 decision, since  as  soon  as  the  person
    concerned gives notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the
    variation decision, his or her  leave  is  no  longer  extended  by  s.
    3C(2)(b) but, rather, by  s.  3C(2)(c).  As  the  respondent  will  not
    immediately be aware this has happened (see  rule  12(1)  of  the  2005
    Rules), the respondent can have no confidence that any s.  47  decision
    made after s. 3C(2)(b) leave  has  started  to  run  will  be  a  valid
    decision.

19.  It is, accordingly, without any enthusiasm that  I  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that Mr Malik is, in substance, correct in  his  submissions
    regarding the ambit of s. 47 and that the respondent's current practice
    of including a s.47 decision  in  the  same  decision  letter  as  that
    regarding the refusal or curtailment of leave is incompatible with  the
    relevant legislation.

20.  Were it not for  the  Immigration  (Continuation  of  Leave)  (Notices)
    Regulations 2006, it might have been possible to adopt  a  construction
    of s.47(1) and s.3C(2)(b), to the effect that, after an application has
    in reality been decided by the respondent, s.3C(2)(b) applies  for  the
    purposes of s.47, even before the decision is communicated  in  writing
    to the person concerned, which is the point at which  he  or  she  will
    realise that there is a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, even without the 2006 Regulations such a construction would be
    open to serious objection.  In the  light  of  regulation  2  of  those
    Regulations it is, I find,  impossible  to  take  that  course.   Until
    notice of the decision has been given in writing, the  application  has
    not even been decided, for the purposes of s.  3C(2)(a).   Accordingly,
    s.3C(2)(b) has no application, for the simple reason that there  is  no
    "decision on the application for variation".

21.  It will be apparent that, in the  circumstances  of  the  present  case
    (and others like it), the respondent cannot be said to have  failed  to
    contemplate taking a removal  decision,  in  the  manner  described  in
    paragraph [101] of the judgments in  Sapkota.   On  the  contrary,  the
    criticism is that she has purported to make the decision too soon  and,
    as a result, has not made a removal decision at all.  Mr Deller did not
    seek to submit that the removal decision contained  in  the  "combined"
    document of 27 July 2009  fell  to  be  regarded  as,  in  some  sense,
    inchoate, until the document had been given to the appellant.   In  any
    event, any such proposition founders on the clear wording of s.47(1).

22.  The result  is  that,  notwithstanding  the  respondent's  obvious  and
    communicated intention or "contemplation" to make a removal decision in
    respect of the appellant, such  a  decision  remains  unmade,  and  was
    unmade at the date of the hearing before the Immigration Judge.  As the
    Guidance correctly observes, a s.47 decision cannot  be  made  once  an
    appeal against the decision regarding leave has been made.

23.  It would clearly be possible for Parliament to amend s.47 of  the  2006
    Act, so as to enable the respondent to make simultaneous decisions,  in
    cases of the present kind.  Unless and until that is done,  however,  a
    s.47 decision can be made only once the  variation  decision  has  been
    given  to  the  person  concerned,  compatibly  with  the   Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003.  A s. 47 decision cannot be made  once  the
    person  concerned  has  initiated  an  appeal  against  the   variation
    decision.  For the reasons already indicated, it would  appear  that  a
    One-Stop Notice  under  s.120  cannot  be  issued  with  the  variation
    decision.  In practice, therefore, the present usefulness  of  s.47  is
    highly questionable.

24.     The fact that I accept Mr Malik's submissions  regarding  the  ambit
    of s. 47 does  not,    however,  mean  that  the  immigration  decision
    against which the appellant appealed  -  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  -
    inevitably falls to be treated as not in accordance with the law.  That
    is the result for which Mr Malik contended, relying on Sapkota. But, as
    the Upper Tribunal has  held  in  Patel  (consideration  of  Sapkota  -
    unfairness) India [2011] UKUT 484 (IAC), the correct interpretation  of
    Sapkota, Mirza and the other  relevant  authorities  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, is that  a  failure  to  take  the  two  immigration  decisions
    together or nearly together is not invariably unlawful in  the  absence
    of special justification [30] [31]. What is likely to  be  decisive  is
    whether the Secretary of State has, in fact,  addressed  the  paragraph
    395C removal factors when taking the variation decision and whether the
    judge at first instance has done so on appeal.

25.    In the present case, that is, of course, exactly what  happened  (see
    paragraphs 4 and 5 above). The paragraph 395C factors were specifically
    considered by the respondent and, on appeal, by  the  judge.  The  fact
    that the respondent did so on the mistaken assumption that he was  also
    making a valid decision under s. 47  does  not  mean  that  one  should
    ignore the respondent's consideration, or  the  judge's  consideration.
    At paragraph 33(iii) of Patel, the Tribunal held that:


             "The fact that no formal s. 47 decision has been made  has  had
             no impact on the reasoning of the decision maker  who  explains
             clearly that if there is no voluntary departure  following  the
             determination of the appeal, the family will be removed".


26.   By analogy with paragraph 33(iii),  the  fact  that,  in  the  present
    case, no valid s. 47 decision has been made has had no  impact  on  the
    reasoning of the respondent or the judge, as regards the paragraph 395C
    factors, which were properly addressed by  both,  with  the  judge  re-
    exercising the discretionary decision. Similarly, the fact that, as  in
    Patel, the opportunity to make a s. 47  decision  has  passed  did  not
    invalidate the consideration of paragraph 395C, as it  applied  to  the
    facts of the appellant's case.

27.  What has emerged from the analysis in the  present  case  is  that  the
    respondent's assumption that the two immigration decisions can be  made
    together is wrong and that the  window  of  opportunity  for  making  a
    separate s. 47 decision is, in practical terms, illusory.  But,  dismal
    as they are, these conclusions, in my view,  serve  to  underscore  the
    correctness of the analysis in Patel of  the  effect  of  the  majority
    judgments in Sapkota. If, contrary to Patel, the effect of Sapkota  was
    (except in some undefined  special  category  of  cases)  to  make  any
    variation of  leave  decision  unlawful  if  not  accompanied  or  soon
    followed by a removal decision,  then  the  Court  of  Appeal  has,  in
    effect, required the respondent to do  what  is,  in  practical  terms,
    impossible.

28.   Mr Malik did not seek to submit that the  consideration  of  paragraph
    395C by the judge was flawed on its own terms. His  entire  submissions
    on behalf of the appellant were directed to securing the  finding  that
    the variation decision was not in accordance with the  law  because  it
    was unaccompanied or not shortly followed by a removal decision. I can,
    in any event, see nothing wrong  with  the  judge's  decision  in  that
    regard or on any other material matter, including Article 8.


Decision

29.    The determination of the Immigration Judge does not contain an  error
    of law, such as to make it appropriate for that determination to be set
    aside. The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.


Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
