
DE (suicide - psychiatric treatment - J applied) Turkey [2005] UKAIT 00148



|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                  |                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Hatton Cross                  |Determination Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2005                         |                         |
|                                        |21 October 2005          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Senior Immigration Judge)                    |
|Mrs S M Kebede (Immigration Judge)                                |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|And                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mrs C Gordon of Counsel, instructed by
                       Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss A Gill, Home Office Presenting Officer


This  case  concerns  an  Appellant  whose  core  account  of   HADEP/DEHAP
sympathies and Alevi Kurdish ethnicity was found not credible but who had a
history of depression and claimed suicide risk  on  return.   The  Tribunal
should assume (following J [2005] EWCA Civ 629) that the Secretary of State
will  provide  appropriately  qualified  escorts  on  return.  Approach  to
analysis  of  suicide  risk  (J  applied).    Adequate  medical   treatment
available in Turkey for mental health conditions and Articles 3 and 8  ECHR
not engaged.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the appellant  a  Turkish
      National against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs J E Nichols,
      who dismissed her appeal against the Secretary of State's  refusal  to
      recognise her as a refugee under paragraph  336  of  HC  395  and  the
      refusal of leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.   This  decision  is
      reported for what  it  says  in  paragraphs  69-78  about  psychiatric
      treatment in Turkey for a returning asylum  seeker  whose  account  is
      found otherwise incredible, and application of the test  in  J  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 629 to claimed suicide risk.

   2.  The  medical  evidence  is  summarised  at  paragraphs   38-54.   The
      availability of medical treatment is considered at paragraphs 55  -57.
      Our findings in relation to the approach to a claimed suicide risk are
      set out at paragraphs 63-72.

   3. The appeal  was  brought  under  Section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Articles 3 and 8 of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights.

   4. The appellant's core claims are as follows -

     a) The appellant  relied  upon  her  actual  and  perceived  political
        opinion (HADEP) and her ethnicity (Alevi Kurd);
     b) Before coming to the United Kingdom she  lived  in  a  district  of
        Istanbul, moving regularly from one district to  another  with  her
        husband and children.  She worked as  a  quality  controller  in  a
        jeans manufacturing textile business and was comfortably off;
     c) Her husband was  a  keen  HADEP/DEHAP  activist  who  came  to  the
        attention of the authorities and  was  cautioned  on  a  number  of
        occasions,  never  formally  joined  the  Party  but  continued  to
        distribute publications.  In 2000, he joined the Party.  At  Newroz
        2003, he was arrested and taken away; she had not seen  him  since,
        but paradoxically, the police began to pursue the appellant to find
        her husband and arrested her on at least  four  occasions,  without
        charge;
     d) The appellant attended the May Day 2003 celebrations  in  Istanbul,
        taking with her  an  illegal  publication;  she  was  arrested  and
        detained, sexually abused  and  physically  beaten,  then  released
        because she was a mother.  She did not report her abuse; the arrest
        is said to have been witnessed by her cousin, Mr BK,  who  saw  her
        being treated roughly by police  and  driven  away  to  the  police
        station.   The cousin has refugee  status  in  the  United  Kingdom
        after an appeal heard in September 2003;
     e) In September 2003, the police  allegedly  visited  the  appellant's
        home while she was at work,  looking  for  her  husband.   She  was
        frightened, and moved in  with a neighbour, who asked her to  leave
        after two or three days, as the neighbour was nervous;
     f) When she returned home, the police came and arrested her between 8-
        11 pm, took her to the police station and detained  her  for  three
        days, raping and beating her again.  She was kept in a  small  dark
        cell and had her hair pulled; she  did  not  report  the  abuse  on
        release;
     g) She was then released and told  a  male  work  colleague  what  had
        happened to her.  He arranged for an agent to get her  out  of  the
        country, with her two children; the appellant left  on  24  October
        2003 and arrived in the United Kingdom 5 days later, claming asylum
        on arrival;
     h)  The  appellant  has  well-documented,  longstanding,  but   rather
        confusing mental health  problems  and  problems  in  managing  her
        children.  In the United Kingdom, she has lived near her mother and
        sister in north London until dispersed to Glasgow.  She also has  a
        brother here.   Her husband's parents still live  in  Istanbul  and
        there is no satisfactory evidence that they would not  be  prepared
        to help her if she returned to Turkey.

   5. The Immigration Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on both  asylum
      and human rights grounds having rejected her account as incredible for
      the reasons set out at paragraph 93 to 107 of the determination.

   6. The Adjudicator decided the appeal in July 2004, before the entry into
      force of s.8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
      etc.) Act 2004, but that  section  has  retrospective  effect  and  in
      considering credibility now, we must have regard to behaviour which we
      are directed to treat as designed or likely to conceal information  or
      to mislead

   7. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom illegally  on  29  October
      2003 to join her mother, already  an  asylum  seeker  here.   She  had
      travelled for five days concealed in a lorry, with the  assistance  of
      the lorry driver.  She claimed asylum; she had  no  passport  and  had
      travelled without any nationality documents.

   8. Pursuant to s.8 (2) and (3) an Immigration  Judge  may  not  in  those
      circumstances treat the appellant's claim as entirely credible. It  is
      a matter for that Immigration Judge to decide  exactly  how  much  the
      appellant's credibility  is  damaged  by  her  behaviour  in  arriving
      clandestinely in the United Kingdom.  In the present appeal, that is a
      matter for this Tribunal on the evidence before us.

      Grounds for review and grant of permission to appeal

   9. The grant of permission to appeal is treated as a  decision  that  the
      Immigration Judge's determination should  be  reviewed  for  the  same
      reasons.   In  the  grant  of  leave  the  Senior  Immigration   Judge
      considered that the Immigration Judge (or the Adjudicator, as she then
      was):

                i) erred in law by reaching her credibility  finding  before
                   considering the psychiatric report;

               ii) erred in  holding  it  against  the  appellant  that,  on
                   medical advice, the appellant chose not to testify; and

              iii) erred in making a finding of fact that the appellant  was
                   not arrested at a May Day celebration as alleged, without
                   making it clear that the Home Office concession  in  that
                   regard was not accepted.  Relying on that concession, the
                   appellant failed to call a vital witness, Mr BK.


      Procedural history of the reconsideration hearing

  10. The appeal was listed for 8 March 2005 but was adjourned, there  being
      no up to date medical evidence. An all female court  was  directed  at
      the appellant's request.   On 3 April 2005, the Immigration  Appellate
      Authority  ceased  to  exist  and  was  replaced  by  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal. A Practice Direction issued on 4 April  2005  by
      the President of the new AIT sets out the position where an appeal  is
      pending and already remitted on the first day of the new Tribunal -

           "14.11      Where, immediately before 4 April  2005,  an  appeal
           was pending before an Adjudicator, having been  remitted  to  an
           Adjudicator by a Court or the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  it
           will have already been decided  that  the  original  Immigration
           Judge's  determination  cannot   stand.    The   Tribunal   will
           accordingly proceed to rehear the appeal."

  11. That direction is based upon rule 9  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      (Treatment of  Claimants  etc.)  Act  2004  (Commencement  No.  5  and
      Transitional Provisions) Order 2005.  The  appeal  was  therefore  re-
      listed  after  the  coming  in  to  being  of  the   AIT,   for   full
      reconsideration,  to  be  heard  on  21  April  2005.   It  was  again
      ineffective on that date, by reason of the lack of an all female court
      (as previously directed) and the lack of medical opinion as to whether
      the appellant was fit to testify.    There  was  also  a  question  of
      psychiatric evidence relating to the appellant's  daughter  who  is  a
      dependant of the appellant.    The reconsideration was adjourned again
      to 24 May 2005.

  12. The 24 May hearing was again ineffective, because the crucial  witness
      to the May Day arrest (Mr BK) was out of  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
      substantial period for a family visit to Germany.     The  appeal  was
      therefore re-listed once more, this time 21 July, by which time an all
      female court would be available. This being a remitted appeal, it  was
      then heard by a panel of two Judges.  The appeal was treated as having
      passed the 'error  of  law'  stage  and  been  set  down  for  further
      reconsideration based on the grounds for review.

      The abortive oral hearing

      The Secretary of State's withdrawal of concession

  13. For the Secretary of State, Ms Gill indicated at the beginning of  the
      hearing that she would not maintain her concession in relation to  the
      appellant's  attendance  at  the  May  Day  demonstration.   For   the
      appellant, Ms Gordon objected on the basis that she  had  insufficient
      notice of that withdrawal and that it was not open to the Secretary of
      State  to  withdraw  a  concession  in  that  way  (Carcabuk  and  Bla
      (00/TH/01426)).

  14. The appellant was on notice that the Immigration Judge  at  least  had
      not accepted the concession (indeed, that was among  her  grounds  for
      review);  and  Mr  BK,  the  appellant's  witness  to  the   May   Day
      demonstration was unavailable for cross-examination despite a previous
      adjournment  specifically  so  that  he   could   attend.    Mr   BK's
      unavailability related  to  a  domestic  emergency  with  one  of  his
      children; there was no medical evidence to support  that,  but  we  do
      have his witness statement,  to  which  we  give  such  weight  as  is
      appropriate.  The appellant was unable to testify  and  it  is  common
      ground that she will not be able to do so in future.   Ms  Gordon  did
      not request an adjournment to give a further opportunity for Mr BK  to
      testify; she was content at the  beginning  of  the  oral  hearing  to
      proceed with the case as it stood.  The Tribunal has seen no  evidence
      to confirm the reason for his absence.

  15. Ms Gordon conceded at the beginning of the oral part  of  the  hearing
      that, in the absence of Mr BK, this element of her grounds for  review
      fell away (although she renewed her arguments on  this  point  in  her
      written submission - see paragraph 34 below). We are also  obliged  to
      have  regard  to  section  8  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
      Claimants etc.)  Act  2004  and  to  its  effect  on  the  appellant's
      credibility.  The appeal proceeded by way of written submissions  with
      seven days being allowed to both parties to  submit  in  writing  that
      which they would have said had  the  appeal  proceeded  orally.   Both
      parties accepted that the appellant would not be able to testify.

  16. We treat the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
      concession in relation to the May Day demonstration was  withdrawn  on
      appropriate notice (the seven days allowed  for  written  submissions)
      but in any event, that is of little moment, since at the oral hearing,
      Ms Gordon had agreed that the only live issue was the  effect  of  the
      medical evidence before the Immigration Judge and  before  us  on  the
      credibility  finding  by  the  original   Immigration   Judge.    Both
      representatives agreed that it was necessary for  this  appeal  to  be
      dealt with on the material and arguments we have before  us.    Points
      (ii) and (iii) therefore both fall away, as Ms  Gordon  very  properly
      recognised at the beginning of the hearing.

      The oral proceedings

  17. The Tribunal therefore  began  hearing  the  appeal,  with  a  Turkish
      interpreter translating the  oral  argument  to  the  appellant.   The
      appellant attended from Glasgow, to where she was dispersed,  and  was
      accompanied by her two children and her brother.  There is no  witness
      statement from the brother and it does not appear that there  was  any
      intention that he should testify.  The appellant's London based mother
      and sister did not attend or give evidence and  we  have  received  no
      explanation for their absence.

  18. During the submissions of the Home Office Presenting Officer,  at  the
      point where Ms Gill was submitting that the  appellant's  case  was  a
      fabrication, the appellant became  very  upset,  sobbing  and  wailing
      loudly.  It was then just before 1 p.m.; the Tribunal retired for  the
      short adjournment and indicated that if  the  appellant  was  able  to
      continue, we would do so at 2 p.m.

  19. Ms Gill and Ms Gordon attended in chambers to discuss the case, as  it
      was rapidly clear that the appellant would not  be  sufficiently  calm
      for  the  hearing  to  proceed  in  her  presence  at  2  p.m.    Both
      representatives agreed that there was no  realistic  possibility  that
      the appellant would be fit to testify in the foreseeable  future,  and
      after discussion, it was also agreed that written submissions on  both
      sides would be the appropriate way to finalise the reconsideration  of
      this appeal, which had  already  been  adjourned  on  three  occasions
      between March and July 2005. The appellant's Counsel  would  take  the
      appellant to the local mental hospital for possible  admission,  given
      her hysterical state; the Tribunal indicated  that  we  hoped  to  see
      further medical evidence of her  present  state,  and  that  we  would
      resume at 2 p.m.

  20. At 1.30 pm the appellant's Counsel took her to the  hospital  locally,
      and was unable to return at 2 p.m.  We do not criticise her for  that;
      we resumed the adjourned hearing at 2:20 p.m. and adjourned it on  the
      basis already agreed, directing, as already discussed with Ms  Gordon,
      that both parties should send written  submissions  by  email  to  the
      Chairman, Mrs Gleeson to reach her not later than 4.00 pm on  28  July
      2005.  It was agreed that the appeal would be determined on the papers
      and on submissions.  Ms Gill's submissions were received on time.   Ms
      Gordon's were two hours late, but the Tribunal has  extended  time  by
      that period, in the interests of justice.

      Secretary of State's submissions (Ms Gill)

  21. As set out above, Ms Gill had commenced her oral submissions when  the
      hearing was adjourned.  In her written  submission,  she  adopted  the
      oral submissions  to  that  point  as  forming  part  of  her  written
      submission.  She reminded the  Tribunal  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      found the appellant not credible.  The only live  issue  was  that  of
      psychiatric evidence, and most of  the  medical  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal had been before the Immigration  Judge.   The  appellant  was
      still unable to testify and the evidence  added  very  little  to  her
      claim. Mr BK's statement should not carry any weight  without  medical
      evidence of his daughter's illness and his being tendered  for  cross-
      examination.

  22. There were  additional  problems  with  the  appellant's  credibility,
      should the Tribunal consider that the  error  of  law  enabled  it  to
      reopen the credibility finding.  When unable  to  name  the  place  of
      HADEP meetings which she claimed to have attended  (asylum  interview,
      paragraphs 38-40), the appellant changed her account and said that  it
      was  rallies  which  she  had  attended,   not   meetings.    It   was
      extraordinary for a woman who had never attended such a rally with her
      husband to attend for the first time after  his  arrest  for  carrying
      HADEP/DEHAP literature, and to do so carrying  an  illegal  newspaper.
      The family had been harassed since 2000 and the danger was then at its
      highest for a number of years.  It simply did not make sense  for  her
      to take such a risk.

  23. It was also very curious that having been detained on  three  or  four
      occasions, the appellant could not remember the  name  of  the  police
      station where she was detained.  The authorities told  her  that  they
      did not wish to see her again, which  was  odd,  if  they  were  still
      searching for her husband.  There was no indication  that  the  search
      had widened to take in other family members or her  husband's  parents
      in Istanbul.

  24.  Finally,  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  determination  of   the
      appellant's mother's appeal in 2004.  If  this  appellant's  political
      connections and problems were by then of four years' standing, it  was
      very surprising that the appellant's mother should not have  mentioned
      this at her own hearing, particularly as by that time  this  appellant
      was safely in the United Kingdom and  could  not  be  harmed  by  such
      revelations.

  25. Ms Gill argued that the claim was simply fabricated;  the  appellant's
      husband might have left her, but she did not appear to be seeking him.
       Ms Gill submitted that the  medical  evidence  did  not  mention  any
      recommendations for HIV, STD or  pregnancy  tests,  and  although  the
      appellant now sought an all-female Court, she had been able to discuss
      her case with a male doctor.  In her  11  March  2005  statement,  the
      appellant said she knew of human rights organisations  in  Turkey  but
      was not prepared to go to them.  They were all the same, or  insulting
      in their approach to those who approached them.   Ms Gill asked us  to
      dismiss the asylum claim.

  26. As to the human  rights  claims  under  Articles  3  and  8,  Ms  Gill
      submitted that the medical evidence  did  not  reach  the  appropriate
      threshold.  There was no evidence to suggest that  the  support  which
      the appellant had been able to use in the United Kingdom would not  be
      available in Turkey. Ms Gill pointed out that there  were  members  of
      the appellant's husband's family in Istanbul who could help her.

  27. Ms Gill submitted that the medical evidence was inconsistent;   on  21
      February 2004, Dr Neil S Egnal, Consultant Clinical Psychologist found
      the appellant to be suffering mild depression  and  mild  to  moderate
      Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, but  on 24 April  2004,  Dr  Catherine
      King in her psychiatric report found the appellant  to  have  a  major
      depressive disorder.  There was no mention  of  any  reason  for  such
      deterioration.

  28. Ms Gill argued that the appellant's oral evidence regarding her health
      was inconsistent:  at the screening interview, she claimed  to  be  in
      good general health and not to have been treated by a  doctor  in  the
      last six months.  Six months earlier, she had seen a doctor for stress-
      related heart problems.  She did not mention suicide.   When  speaking
      to Dr King in April 2005, the appellant claimed for the first time  to
      have taken an overdose approximately two months before her journey  to
      the United Kingdom and to have been treated in hospital.

  29.  A letter from Dr R J McNeill  of  13  May  2005  indicated  that  the
      appellant had denied feeling suicidal at her first interview with  the
      doctor, admitting only to feeling  down  and  having  bad  dreams.  Dr
      Catherine King's report of 29 March 2005 recorded her as 'thinks about
      suicide daily'.

  30. In sum, Ms Gill's submission was that the appellant's approach to  her
      suicidal ideation was inconsistent and that  nothing  in  her  medical
      evidence suggested that such serious suicidal  feelings  would  appear
      and disappear in this manner. She also contended that,  the  appellant
      having been  found  generally  incredible,  her  depressive  condition
      and/or Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder might not have occurred for  the
      reasons given.

  31. There were  medical  facilities  in  Turkey  which  would  assist  her
      (paragraphs 5.129-5.153 CIPU Country Report Turkey April 2005) and she
      had her husband's parents  in  Istanbul,  who  could  support  her  on
      return.  The  appellant's  claim  should  therefore  fail  both  under
      Article 3 (N) and under Article 8.  Ms Gill asked us  to  dismiss  the
      human rights appeal also.

      Appellant's submissions (Ms Gordon)

  32. For the  appellant,  Ms  Gordon  relied  upon  her  skeleton  argument
      prepared for the abortive hearing  on  21  July,  which  set  out  the
      appellant's history and indicated that the appellant relied  upon  her
      actual and perceived  political  opinion  (HADEP)  and  her  ethnicity
      (Alevi Kurd).   The appellant's core account was set out;  she  relies
      upon four arrests, the first of which (May Day 2003) was witnessed  by
      her cousin, Mr BK.  He did not witness the alleged rape  but  did  see
      her being treated roughly by police and  driven  away  to  the  police
      station.   The cousin had refugee status  after  an  appeal  heard  in
      September 2003.

  33. The appellant relied upon a home visit  in  September  2003  when  the
      police asked where her husband was, after which she moved to live with
      a neighbour, who eventually asked her to leave as  the  neighbour  was
      nervous.  When she returned home, the police  came  and  arrested  her
      between 8-11 pm, took her to the police station and detained  her  for
      three days, raping and beating her again.  She was  kept  in  a  small
      dark cell and had her hair pulled.  She was then released and  told  a
      male work colleague what had happened to  her.   He  arranged  for  an
      agent to get her out of the country.

  34. The skeleton argument also dealt with the medical evidence (paragraphs
      15-35).  We shall return to that, particularly with reference  to  the
      appellant's ability to give evidence.    The appellant argued that she
      would be seen as a separatist on return, and that due to her  risk  of
      self  harm,  to  return  her  would  breach  her  human  rights  (with
      particular regard to her previous suicide attempt).   Her  family  all
      had refugee status and her husband was still missing.

  35. Her psychiatric situation was said to be severe, such that  she  would
      be high risk of suicide both in the United Kingdom  and  if  returned.
      The appellant's bond with her mother was at a level higher than normal
      adult child-parent relationships (Kugathas) and Article 8  would  also
      be interfered with at a level  not  proportionate  to  the  dependency
      between mother and daughter.

  36. Ms Gordon's final submission, prepared  after  the  abortive  hearing,
      adds the following matters to the submission prepared for the hearing.
         She explained her failure to re-appear after lunch and  in  effect,
      the first  three  pages  of  her  skeleton  argument  contain  written
      evidence as to the course of events at the hospital to which she  took
      the appellant.  It took almost an hour for the appellant to calm  down
      after her outburst during the hearing.  The appellant  was  prescribed
      Diazepam, but not admitted, then returned to stay with her  mother  in
      North London.  On 25 July 2005, four days after the abortive  hearing,
      she returned to Glasgow, accompanied by her children and  her  London-
      resident mother.

  37. The submissions proper begin at page 4. In relation to the  withdrawal
      of the Secretary of State's concession that the appellant was arrested
      at the May Day demonstration as claimed,  the  appellant  relied  upon
      Carcabuk and Bla and the Secretary of State's  indication  that  there
      was no need for Mr BK to be tendered  for  cross-examination  on  this
      point.  He was the crucial witness to the events  on  May  Day.    The
      witness Mr BK had attended seven hearings of this appeal to  Counsel's
      knowledge and the appellant's explanation of his absence at  the  last
      hearing should be accepted.  The Tribunal notes that the appellant had
      seven days from the date  of  the  abortive  hearing  to  get  medical
      evidence of the reason for Mr BK's non-appearance but did not do so.

  38. Ms Gordon submitted that on Carcabuk and Bla principles, it  was  much
      too late  for  the  Presenting  Officer  to  withdraw  the  concession
      regarding  the  appellant's  arrest  and  detention  at  the  May  Day
      demonstration by the date of the reconsideration hearing, particularly
      as no notice of such withdrawal had been given. The  appellant  should
      therefore be treated as having been so arrested.   Again,  we  do  not
      find that, given the seven days allowed for  written  submissions  and
      her inability to testify, the appellant was placed at  a  disadvantage
      by that withdrawal.  There is no indication that if the  hearing  were
      re-listed, Mr BK would attend.

  39.  Ms  Gordon  challenged  the  Secretary  of  State's  attack  on   the
      Immigration Judge's credibility findings.  The appellant's account was
      not inconsistent at the level which would make a positive  credibility
      finding an error of law.  If there were  gaps  in  the  evidence,  the
      Tribunal should not be prepared to fill them with speculation.   Where
      an appellant was mentally ill and unable to testify, greater  scrutiny
      of such evidence as was before the Tribunal should be expected. Regard
      should be had to the impossibility now of  putting  to  the  appellant
      questions relating to the issues troubling the  Immigration  Judge  at
      the first hearing.  Failure to have a pregnancy, STD or HIV  test  did
      not mean that the appellant was not telling the truth about her  rape.



  40. Given the Home Office policy in relation to the availability of female
      Immigration Officers to interview female appellants, it  was  improper
      of the Secretary of State to hold against the appellant her failure to
      disclose the rape allegation to the male officer who interviewed  her,
      nor  her  ability  to  tell  the  male  doctor  assisting   with   her
      difficulties with the children (Dr Egnal) about her experiences.   The
      appellant's  outburst  in  court  coincided   with   the   interpreter
      translating to her the Presenting Officer's submission  that  she  was
      fabricating her account.

  41. Ms Gill argued that the rape claim had been disclosed  immediately  on
      entry and the appellant's account was not inconsistent.   Her  brother
      accompanied her to court.  She relied upon J v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
      629; the appellant's claim was both foreign and domestic.  The suicide
      risk existed in the United Kingdom and would be aggravated  by  return
      to her country of origin.

      Medical and social worker evidence

  42. On 21 February 2004, due to difficulties with the children, Dr Neil  S
      Egnal, a Consultant Clinical Psychologist assessed the appellant,  and
      her six and seven year old daughters, GE and SE, at the request of the
      appellant's solicitor, who was concerned.   He describes her as having
      often contemplated committing suicide, feeling shame, afraid to go out
      alone, and suffering bouts of depression,  nightmares,  forgetfulness,
      fainting spells and torture flashbacks.  She  had  been  referred  for
      counselling  and  prescribed  medication  for  her  depression.    The
      children were in a bad way; GE had a stammer, nail biting, poor  sleep
      pattern, loss of appetite, fits of crying and aggressive behaviour  at
      school, and SE suffered bedwetting, restlessness, anxiety, poor  sleep
      pattern, loss of appetite and crying spells.

  43. The assessment of the appellant was careful and  rigorous.   Dr  Egnal
      found her to display  features  of  mild  to  moderate  Post-Traumatic
      Stress Disorder (nightmares, panic attacks, irritability, and loss  of
      sleep, loss of appetite, fainting spells  and  memory  flashbacks)  as
      well as features of a mild depressive disorder.   He  used  the  Stein
      Thematic Apperception Test and the internationally  recognised  DSM-IV
      tests for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and depressive illness.

  44. He found the  children  also  to  be  suffering  mild  depression  and
      moderate Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,  and  missing  their  father.
      All the family were receiving medication and the  appellant  had  been
      advised  to  attend  counselling.   The  children  should   be   given
      counselling also to 'assist them  in  overcoming  the  loss  of  their
      father and help them in coming to terms with  the  events  surrounding
      their departure from Turkey'.  The appellant does  not  seem  to  have
      taken up the counselling option.

  45. A report from Dr Catherine King of 24 April 2004, which was before the
      Immigration Judge, was based upon a three hour  interview  which  took
      place on 29 April  2004  (presumably  a  typographical  error  for  29
      March).  The report, after setting out the history taken, analyses the
      appellant's psychiatric state at point 4.  The appellant is  described
      as emotionally cut off, irritable towards her children,  dependent  on
      her family, numb, withdrawn, and often tearful at home.    Her  mother
      was mothering the children for her, as the  appellant  had  difficulty
      making even the simplest decisions about them.  She  was  experiencing
      intrusive memories and recurrent dreams of the rape and beatings.  She
      felt detached and estranged  towards  others,  and  numb  towards  her
      children.  Dr King misdescribes GE's age as  10;  she  gets  SE's  age
      right.

  46. The appellant told Dr King of  an  overdose  taken  approximately  two
      months before coming to the United Kingdom (August 2003).   Dr  King's
      analysis at paragraph 5 of these symptoms lacks detail but the  doctor
      was nonetheless satisfied that the appellant had  a  Major  Depressive
      Disorder (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder).

  47. At paragraph 5.4, Dr King considered the effect of removal to  Turkey;
      the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder would be retriggered to an  intense
      degree and the appellant would deteriorate further.  She  had  already
      thought out her plans for suicide (eating rat poison or taking pills).
         She was highly dependent on numerous close family  members  in  the
      United Kingdom who were helping to parent her children.    Taking  her
      away from her support system would impact upon  that  and  might  well
      push her into serious self-harm.     In the  event,  as  noted  below,
      relocation to Glasgow where she has no family support has not had  the
      effect of pushing the appellant into  serious  self-harm  as  Dr  King
      feared, although the appellant has had difficulties in  parenting  her
      children which caused concern at their schools.

  48. Dr King advised management and treatment  of  the  appellant's  mental
      state by a General Practitioner and psychiatrist, preferably with  the
      support of a Community Mental Health  Team  (CMHT).   She  would  need
      supportive psychotherapy and later cognitive behavioural therapy  from
      a specialist trauma clinic, as well as medication (in April  2004  she
      was  already  taking  an  antidepressant).  If  that  did  not   work,
      Mitrazepine or Sertraline, both SSRIs,  were  recommended  (Sertraline
      had  been  licensed  for  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder).  Dr  King
      recommended that treatment begin as soon as possible,  with  cognitive
      behavioural therapy only once the appellant was  partially  recovered.
      A letter from the same specialist on 24 May 2004  indicated  that  the
      appellant was highly likely  to  become  stressed  if  asked  to  give
      evidence, with a worsening of intrusive flashbacks and exacerbation of
      symptoms.

  49. In early November  2004,  the  appellant  was  dispersed  by  NASS  to
      Glasgow, away from her extended family support.  The Tribunal was  not
      notified of this until the following March (2005).   On  13  April,  a
      referral was made to an NHS assessment clinic in Glasgow,  and  by  17
      May 2005, the  child  GE  had  been  referred  to  the  University  of
      Glasgow's Department of Psychiatry. On 16 May,  Dr  McNeill  contacted
      the Glasgow City  Social  Work  Services,  concerned  as  to  how  the
      appellant was coping.    By 2 June, there were also problems  at  GE's
      school and the appellant was given  an  appointment  with  the  school
      psychologist for Monday 6 June.  GE has had three further appointments
      to support her, and the appellant was seen in July; she will  be  seen
      again in August.

  50. On 29 March 2005, Dr King saw the appellant again this  time  for  two
      hours.  The family's health visitor was concerned that she might  harm
      her children.  The children's school had arranged for them  to  see  a
      psychologist.  The appellant's sister  and  mother  had  travelled  to
      Scotland to help the appellant care for herself and her children,  but
      they had returned; they were not living with her now.

  51. Dr King assessed  the  appellant's  complaints  as  similar,  but  her
      depression as more severe due to lack of family  support  in  Glasgow.
      The  appellant  had  been  prescribed  Citalopram  40  mg   (an   SSRI
      antidepressant, for sleep,  prescribed  by  Dr  McNeill  in  Glasgow);
      Amitryptiline 25 mg (a tricyclic antidepressant for sleep  and  severe
      headaches)  and  Lofepramine  70mg  twice  a  day  (also  a  tricyclic
      antidepressant).  It does seem surprising that the appellant should be
      prescribed three different antidepressants simultaneously; it  may  be
      that they were sequential attempts  to  control  her  depression.  The
      appellant's mood was worse in the mornings and she had lost 3  kgs  in
      weight.

  52. The appellant still had strong feelings of shame about the rape.   Her
      General Practitioner would not give her much  medication  at  a  time,
      only 10 days' worth, and she thought about  suicide  daily.   She  was
      functioning at a very low level and Dr King considered she  should  be
      referred to a local Community Mental Health Team for  assessment  from
      the local community psychiatrist.  Discussing the  past  retraumatised
      her.  She recommenced cognitive behavioural therapy once the appellant
      was more stable.  Nothing appears to have happened on that front since
      the previous report.

  53. On May 13 2005, Dr McNeill, the appellant's  General  Practitioner  in
      Glasgow, provided a medical report.  She had been moved to Glasgow  on
      11 November 2004 or thereabouts; at any rate, that was  the  date  she
      joined  his  practice.   When  seen,  the  appellant  was   physically
      unremarkable.  She told him she had stopped taking the  antidepressant
      she was taking in London, and felt alone and unsupported.  She  denied
      feeling suicidal.  He prescribed Lofepramine but the appellant stopped
      using it after only a short time; it was  not  helping  her.  He  then
      prescribed Citalopram and referred the appellant  to  a  psychiatrist,
      but not yet seen.

  54. The   appellant was attending a weekly session in Cranhill  Church  to
      see the health visitor attached to the practice  (who  was  supporting
      her) and the health visiting staff  nurse.   On  12  May,  she  seemed
      unwell and was scared of harming her children.  She would lock herself
      in her bedroom  rather  than  risk  that.     The  antidepressant  was
      changed again.

  55. The General Practitioner considered that the appellant was suffering a
      significant depressive illness and would need a  prolonged  period  of
      treatment, and possibly a period of psychiatric  inpatient  treatment.
      He was concerned that her health might suffer adversely  if  she  were
      returned to Turkey at that time.

  56. It is clear that without her family to support  her  in  Glasgow,  the
      appellant's condition has not improved. Disappointingly,  although  it
      was specifically requested, no  medical  evidence  has  been  produced
      since her outburst at the hearing last week.   We prefer the  evidence
      of Dr McNeill and Dr Egnal to that of Dr King:  the reports of Dr King
      lack rigour (failing to notice that the appellant was  only  currently
      taking one antidepressant, failure to apply DSM-IV or  ICD-10,  errors
      in the ages of the children and a lack of  reasoning  in  the  opinion
      sections).  Dr McNeill and Dr Egnal have  spent  more  time  with  the
      appellant and are in a better position to comment; their  reports  are
      more careful and rigorous.

  57.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  appellant  is  reluctant  to  continue
      medication and  has  tried  a  number  of  drugs  without  significant
      improvement. She has  had  no  counselling  or  cognitive  behavioural
      therapy and the extent to which  she  is  able  to  use  any  superior
      medical facilities in the United Kingdom is  unclear.   We  note  that
      although she is coping badly in  Glasgow,  she  has  not,  as  feared,
      descended into serious self-harm or hospitalisation in the absence  of
      her London family members.

  58. We accept the diagnosis that she is depressed  and  may  be  suffering
      from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, but having regard to our  general
      findings on credibility, we do not accept that it has been established
      that the reason for that depression is as alleged.  We note  that  the
      appellant was treated for stress and heart problems six months  before
      coming to the  United  Kingdom.  We  consider  that  the  problem  now
      presented may well be of long standing  and  one  for  which  she  was
      previously being treated in Turkey.

      Availability of mental health treatment in Turkey

  59. Ms Gordon suggests that the appellant as a suspected separatist  would
      have no access to medical  facilities  in  Turkey.   She  produces  no
      evidence to back up this assertion, and we reject it.  In  any  event,
      for the reasons set out at paragraph 65 below, we have not  found  the
      appellant to be an Alevi Kurd or a suspected separatist; she is simply
      a returning failed asylum seeker.

  60. On the availability of treatment for her mental  health  problems,  we
      note that the appellant was receiving treatment in February  or  March
      2003 in Turkey.  That suggests that such  treatment  is  available  in
      Turkey;  the only background material put before us  was  the  current
      CIPU Country Report (April 2005),  referred  to  by  Ms  Gill  in  her
      submissions,  which sets out the availability of treatment for  mental
      health problems in Turkey -




           "5.149  According  to  the  World  Health  Organisation's  (WHO)
           Department of Mental Health  and  Substance  Dependence  Project
           Atlas (updated 2003) the country  has  disability  benefits  for
           persons with mental disorders. "After being approved by a mental
           health board as a chronic mental health patient, the patient can
           benefit from the social security  services."  Mental  health  is
           part of the primary health  care  system.  Actual  treatment  of
           severe mental health is available at the primary level.  "Mental
           health in primary care is available  in  only  some  provinces."
           Regular training of primary care professional in  the  field  of
           mental health is present and the approximate number of personnel
           trained over the last two years totalled 3,000.


           5.150 The WHO Project Atlas (updated 2003) further  states  that
           there are 1.3 psychiatric beds per 10,000  population,  and  one
           psychiatrist,   one   neurosurgeon,   one    neurologist,    one
           psychologist and one social worker per 100,000 population.

           5.151 The Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  contacted  Hacettepe
           University Hospital Psychiatric Department  in  April  2002  and
           confirmed that antipsychotic and  antidepressant  medication  is
           available in Turkey.

           5.152 According to the WHO Project Atlas (updated 2003)
                 "The following therapeutic drugs are generally available at
                 the primary health care level: carbamazepine, ethosuximide,
                 phenobarbital,   phenytoin   sodium,   sodium    valproate,
                 amitriptyline,  chlorpromazine,   diazepam,   fluphenazine,
                 haloperidol, lithium, biperiden, carbidopa, and  levodopa."



           5.153 The WHO Project Atlas (updated 2003) continues

                 "The mental health department was  established  within  the
                 Ministry of Health  in  1983  with  the  primary  tasks  of
                 improving   mental   health   services,   development   and
                 dissemination  of  preventive   mental   health   services,
                 integration of mental health with primary  care,  community
                 education and protection  of  the  community  from  harmful
                 behaviours. The means of achieving these aims were  through
                 determination  of  standards,  training  programmes,   data
                 collection, research, creation of counselling  and  guiding
                 units, creation of psychiatric clinics in state  hospitals,
                 assigning   proper   tasks   to    personnel,    developing
                 rehabilitation facilities, carrying  out  public  education
                 through the help of media, educating the public on  harmful
                 behaviour, and taking care of those who  succumb  to  those
                 behaviours." "

  61. We note that Diazepam is one of the WHO list  of  drugs  available  in
      primary care in Turkey and is the drug presently  prescribed  for  the
      appellant.

      Conclusions

  62. As already stated, under  the  transitional  provisions,  this  appeal
      which was listed as a remitted oral hearing before 4 April  now  falls
      to be treated as a further reconsideration after error of law has been
      established.  The error of law which had already been established  was
      the failure to consider medical evidence before  reaching  conclusions
      as to credibility; it was our task to reconsider  credibility  in  the
      light of that medical evidence (and the new medical evidence before us
      now), then to determine whether any change in the credibility  finding
      would be material to the outcome of this appeal.

  63. This was a reserved determination on written submissions, as  set  out
      above.  The Tribunal was, in the event, only required to consider  the
      question of credibility.  We reminded ourselves that under  section  8
      the option of finding the appellant entirely credible  was  no  longer
      open to us. We saw the appellant's apparent breakdown during the brief
      oral hearing, but  neither  of  us  is  medically  qualified  and  any
      conclusions based upon such observation  cannot  be  determinative  of
      this appeal.   It  is  clear  from  the  medical  evidence  that  this
      appellant has a history of depression,  that  she  is  in  the  United
      Kingdom without her husband and has difficulty parenting her children.
       The case is not without difficulty and the Tribunal has  considerable
      sympathy for the appellant's predicament and her health problems.

  64. The question is whether the appellant's core claim should  be  treated
      as credible, and if not, whether the mental ill-health from which  she
      undoubtedly suffers puts her at risk of suicide on return.  if so,  we
      must establish whether the Turkish state has available  the  necessary
      facilities to protect her to the Horvath standard,  having  regard  to
      the high level set for Article 3 ECHR in foreign cases such as this.

  65. With those restrictions in mind, we proceeded  to  reconsideration  of
      the credibility evidence.  The Immigration Judge accepted  that  there
      was  nothing  inherently  implausible  in   this   appellant's   claim
      (paragraph 88) and that if the  appellant's  account  were  true,  she
      might be at continued risk on return.  However,  she  disbelieved  the
      key claim that the appellant was an  Alevi  Kurd  (albeit  on  grounds
      which were not put to the appellant because she did not testify).  The
      grounds for review do not deal with that issue and nor does either  of
      Ms Gordon's skeleton arguments; we are therefore  not  seised  of  the
      question whether this appellant is indeed an Alevi  Kurd.   We  accept
      the unchallenged findings of the Immigration Judge on this element  of
      the claim.

  66. The following credibility points emerged -

           a) As the Immigration  Judge  observed,  there  are  significant
              contradictions in the appellant's core account (paragraphs 94-
              101 of the determination) which are not related to  her  rape
              but are plain and inexplicable inconsistencies in relation to
              what happened to  her  husband  and  to  her  mother-in-law's
              description of the  family  circumstances.   The  Immigration
              Judge was entitled to regard those as reducing credibility.

           b) We consider that inconsistencies set out at paragraphs 94-101
              are more than sufficient to justify the  Immigration  Judge's
              finding that there was in fact no family DEHAP/HADEP link.

           c) We also consider that if the appellant's husband  disappeared
              at the hands of  the  authorities  as  claimed,  it  is  most
              unlikely that they would continually arrest and ill-treat her
              to get her to tell them where he was; they would  know  where
              he was as it would be wherever they had themselves put him;

           d) The Immigration Judge was not bound by a decision of  another
              Immigration Judge at first  instance,  especially  given  the
              variation in the factual accounts.   The  appellant's  mother
              did  not  mention  the  matters  now  relied  upon  as   this
              appellant's core account, although  the  appellant  was  then
              living with her mother in London.

  67. For all the above reasons, having reconsidered the credibility  issues
      on the  evidence  before  the  Immigration  Judge,  we  conclude  that
      although the  Immigration  Judge's  negative  credibility  finding  is
      erroneous in law, that error  is  not  material,  since  on  a  proper
      examination of all the evidence before the Immigration Judge, we reach
      the same conclusion.

  68. We have also considered whether the new medical evidence provided  for
      us at the reconsideration hearing alters that credibility  assessment.
      We note that -

           a) The appellant has had the opportunity to improve the  medical
              evidence available and has provided further reports.

           b) However, the effect of those reports is not  to  clarify  but
              further to confuse the assessment of her  mental  health  and
              the  risk  of  suicide;  if  anything,  her  GP's  assessment
              indicates that she now denies being  suicidal  and  she  may,
              very slightly, be improving..  The appellant  does  not  take
              her medication and has  had  no  counselling  in  the  United
              Kingdom.

           c) There is no satisfactory medical evidence from Turkey of  the
              appellant's past medical and mental health history, and

           d) There is evidence concerning  the  appellant's  dispersal  to
              Glasgow and the effect of it on her health.   She  is  having
              difficulty in coping with the children as is set out  in  the
              Scottish reports.  However, we note  that  she  was  not  ill
              enough to be hospitalised, despite her apparent breakdown  in
              court, and returned to  Glasgow  voluntarily  on  the  Monday
              after our hearing, spending just four days with her mother in
              North London.

      Having considered the additional evidence, we  do  not  find  that  it
      improves the  appellant's  situation  and  we  maintain  our  negative
      credibility assessment.  Having regard to all the  different  accounts
      given, for the reasons set out above, we find that her account of  the
      alleged May Day incident and rape (which is  correctly  identified  in
      the grant of leave as the core of this appeal) is simply not credible.

      Effect of Suicide Risk

  69. We then considered the claimed risk of suicide if this appellant  were
      to be returned today,  guided by the Court of Appeal's decision in J v
      SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, which sets out the  correct  application  of
      the 'real risk' test in foreign cases.  The Immigration Judge did  not
      have the benefit of the analysis in that decision, which we have found
      to be of great assistance in approaching the present appeal.

  70.  We considered whether the risk to the appellant  in  the  process  of
      return is  such  as  to  engage  the  ECHR.   The  appellant  will  be
      personally served with this determination.  We remind ourselves of the
      helpful analysis of the question of the mechanism of return in J -

      "61.  As regards the risk of suicide en route to Sri Lanka, the IAT's
           finding was not perverse... They made it clear that the
           authorities in the UK would be involved in the arrangements. The
           IAT were entitled to infer that the Secretary of State would
           take all reasonable steps to discharge his obligations under
           section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 ("the 1998 Act"). As the
           IAT said in AA v Secretary of State for the Home Department at
           paragraph [39]:
           "Third stage-transit: there are no reasons to suppose that the
           Secretary of State would not provide appropriately qualified
           escorts. This is known to be done. Other measures in other cases
           may include accompanying family members."
      62.   In our judgment, the IAT were entitled to take judicial notice
           of the arrangements that, no doubt conscious of his obligations
           under section 6 of the 1998 Act, the Secretary of State makes to
           escort vulnerable persons who are removed to their countries of
           origin. This is reflected in a document that we were shown which
           sets out Home Office policy for dealing with claimants who
           threaten suicide.
      63.   As regards the criticisms made of the finding in relation to the
           risk upon arrival in Sri Lanka, the IAT were entitled to
           conclude on the evidence before them that the appellant would
           have family support on his return to Sri Lanka. Having regard to
           the very high threshold for article 3 in foreign cases of this
           kind, the IAT's decision cannot be characterised as perverse. In
           particular: (i) the adjudicator had found that any subjective
           fears which the appellant might have on return were not
           objectively justified; (ii) he would have family support on his
           return; and (iii) he would have access to medical treatment in
           Sri Lanka which it was conceded was adequate (the IAT noted in
           this regard that most of the treatment in the UK had consisted
           in the prescription of anti-depressant medication; he had only
           been placed in an institutional setting on two occasions). "

  71. Following J, the Tribunal is therefore entitled to take account of the
      Secretary of State's obligation  to  provide  appropriately  qualified
      escorts and of the available family support from the  appellant's  in-
      laws  in  Istanbul.   Her  subjective  fears  were   not   objectively
      justified; she would have family support on return; and we  find  that
      she would have access to adequate medical treatment.   As  in  J,  the
      appellant's  treatment  in  the  United  Kingdom   consists   of   the
      prescription of anti-depressant  medication  (which  is  available  in
      Turkey).  The difference is that this  appellant  has  not  even  been
      hospitalised whilst in the United Kingdom.

  72. If there is a suicide risk, it must be a real risk, that is, more than
      'not fanciful', and having regard to the manner in which the ECtHR has
      applied it in  different  circumstances,  the  following  guidance  is
      provided in J-
      "26.  First, the test requires an assessment to be made of the
           severity of the treatment which it is said that the applicant
           would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum level of
           severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
           assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
           the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be serious"
           such that it is "an affront to fundamental humanitarian
           principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
           risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paragraphs [38-39].
        1. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
           or threatened act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman
           treatment relied on as violating the applicant's article 3
           rights. Thus in Soering at paragraph [91], the court said:
           "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may be
           incurred, it is liability incurred by the extraditing
           Contracting State by reason of its having taken action which has
           as a direct consequence the exposure of an individual to
           proscribed ill-treatment."(Emphasis added).
           See also paragraph [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said that
           the examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on the
           foreseeable consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri
           Lanka..."
        1. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article 3
           threshold is particularly high simply because it is a foreign
           case. And it is even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment
           is not the direct or indirect responsibility of the public
           authorities of the receiving state, but results from some
           naturally occurring illness, whether physical or mental. This is
           made clear in paragraph [49] of D and paragraph [40] of Bensaid.


        1. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a
           suicide case (paragraph [37] of Bensaid).
        1. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach of
           article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance is whether
           the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state
           upon which the risk of suicide is said to be based is
           objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-founded, that
           will tend to weigh against there being a real risk that the
           removal will be in breach of article 3.
        1. Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance is whether
           the removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms
           to reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective
           mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily against an applicant's
           claim that removal will violate his or her article 3 rights. "

  73. In the present appeal, we find that there is no reliable  evidence  of
      any past suicide attempt.  On the appellant's  interview  and  witness
      statement evidence, there are patent contradictions;  on one  version,
      she last saw a doctor six months before coming to the  United  Kingdom
      and was hospitalised after the claimed rape, yet  elsewhere  she  says
      that the rape occurred just two  months  before  her  journey  to  the
      United Kingdom.  Those accounts are inconsistent; if the appellant saw
      a doctor six months before her journey, the rape would  have  predated
      the May Day rally at which she says her troubles began.   Her  account
      to Dr King was that it took place in August, yet elsewhere,  she  says
      that it took place  after  she  returned  home,  having  hidden  in  a
      neighbour's  house  during  September  (it  would  thus  have   almost
      immediately preceded her journey to the United Kingdom).  Even  making
      full allowance for her psychological difficulties,  the  appellant  is
      not being frank about the  sequence  of  events  between  the  alleged
      suicide and the claimed rape, which further damages  her  credibility.
      We therefore do not find that she has attempted suicide in the past.

  74. We considered the evidence as to the  appellant's  present  or  future
      suicidal ideation and the risk of an  attempt  on  return  to  Turkey.
      Neither Dr McNeill nor Dr Egnal puts the suicide risk as  high  as  Dr
      King does.  However, Dr McNeill  is  restricting  her  dosage  of  her
      antidepressant to ten days at a time (though it is not  clear  whether
      that is sufficient for a suicide attempt).   Ms  Gordon's  submission,
      that the  Turkish  authorities  would  not  be  prepared  to  treat  a
      suspected separatist, is unsupported by  any  objective  evidence  and
      also founders on the lack of credibility of this  appellant's  claimed
      separatist past. As  noted  above,  her  usual  medications  are  also
      available in Turkey and the appellant does not seem  to  have  derived
      any particular benefit either from medication or other medical support
      here in the United Kingdom.

  75. Reports of her suicidal ideation are surprisingly variable.  Following
      the test in J, we answer the questions therein set out as follows -

        1) The appellant's claim is fabricated and incredible, even to  the
           low standard required by these appeals; the core claim does  not
           establish a risk of ill-treatment of this appellant if  returned
           to Turkey now at the minimum level of severity, or  indeed,  any
           risk at all at the hands of the Turkish authorities;

        2) This is a foreign case and the Article 3 threshold  in  relation
           to the claimed suicide risk on return is therefore  particularly
           high.  The alleged inhuman  treatment  in  this  case  would  be
           neither the direct nor the indirect responsibility of the public
           authorities of the receiving state, but  is  claimed  to  result
           from the appellant's mental illness;

        3) We recognise that an Article 3 claim can in principle succeed in
           a suicide case;

        4) The appellant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state  is
           not objectively well-founded,  on  the  facts  found,  and  that
           weighs against there being a real risk that the removal breaches
           Article 3;

        5) Turkey has effective mechanisms to reduce the risk  of  suicide.
           Ms Gordon's contention  that  suspected  separatists  would  not
           receive medical treatment is unsupported either by the objective
           evidence or by the appellant's account, given that we find it to
           be a fabrication.  She is not,  on  our  findings,  a  suspected
           separatist  at  all  and  thus  any  differential  treatment  of
           suspected separatists (of which there is no evidence)  does  not
           apply to her.

  76. This appellant's core account contains significant  discrepancies  and
      inconsistencies, and on a proper construction of the medical evidence,
      they are not resolved in her favour.  We must also have regard to  the
      operation of section 8 of the  2004  Act.   On  the  facts  as  found,
      Article 3 cannot avail her.

  77. We have considered Article 8 and the 'truly exceptional' test in Huang
      [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105.   We  have  regard,  again,  to  the  lack  of
      credibility at the heart of this account, but we  recognise  that  the
      appellant  is  unwell  and  that  her  life  is   difficult.    'Truly
      exceptional' means more than that.  The question  whether  a  person's
      circumstances are 'truly exceptional' is, as Huang makes it  clear,  a
      question of fact for the Tribunal (Laws LJ,  paragraph  40).  We  have
      considered the appellant's arguments as to her exceptional status, but
      having regard to the difficulties in her medical evidence and with her
      credibility in general, we do  not  find  that  any  of  her  personal
      circumstances are 'truly exceptional' in the Huang sense.

  78. It follows that, having regard to the treatment  available  in  Turkey
      and the United Kingdom's obligations to ensure her safety  during  the
      return journey, the removal  of  the  appellant  to  Turkey  would  be
      proportionate, having regard to the United Kingdom's right to  control
      immigration.  There are adequate mental health  facilities  in  Turkey
      (which we find are  available  to  this  appellant)  should  she  find
      herself in difficulty after her return.

  79. This Tribunal is not satisfied,  therefore,  that  the  appellant  has
      proved, even to the lower standard, that she would be at  risk  either
      on Refugee Convention or Article 3  grounds,  or  (following  J)  that
      there is a serious suicide risk engaging Articles 2 and  3  ECHR,  nor
      that Article 8 ECHR is engaged  such  that  to  return  her  would  be
      disproportionate. The appeal is therefore dismissed both on asylum and
      human rights grounds.

      DECISION

      The original Tribunal made a material error of law.  The following
      decision is accordingly substituted:

        a) The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
        b) The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.




      Signed                                                     Dated:   23
      September 2005


      Mrs J A J C Gleeson
      Senior Immigration Judge
