
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Mumu (paragraph 320; Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 00143(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 April 2012                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                        TRISHITA FARJANA GOFFAR MUMU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Miah, Counsel, instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

(1)  The weight to be  given  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  interests  in
conducting the proportionality balancing exercise under Article 8(2) of  the
ECHR  is  not  to  be  automatically  diminished   by   reference   to   the
consideration -


    (a) that a person may be able to take  advantage  of  an  exception  in
       paragraph 320(7C) in any future application for entry clearance; or,
       conversely


    (b) that there is a danger the person may be  refused  under  paragraph
       320(11) by reference to conduct that has led to his or  her  current
       application being refused under paragraph 320(7A).


The  principle  in  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40  has  no  bearing  on  these
scenarios.


(2)   Although  paragraph  320(7A)  applies  only  where  someone  has  been
dishonest, the dishonesty does not need to be  that  of  the  applicant  for
entry clearance or leave to enter (AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA  Civ  773).  For
paragraph 320(11)  to  apply,  however,  it  needs  to  be  shown  that  the
applicant (as opposed to someone acting without his or  her  knowledge)  has
contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the  intentions  of   the
immigration rules.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh whose claimed  date  of  birth
    is 16 November 1987.  On 27 August  2009,  the  appellant  applied  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present
    and settled in this country.  On 22 April 2010, the respondent  refused
    the appellant's application.  The reasons for the refusal were that the
    respondent noted that the appellant had previously  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a  visitor,  which  application  had
    been refused and an appeal against that refusal subsequently withdrawn.
     In connection with that application, the  appellant  gave  a  date  of
    birth of 16 November 1990, which was confirmed by her passport.  In the
    present refusal, the respondent noted that the appellant claimed now to
    have lost that passport and that her date  of  birth  was  16  November
    1987.  She submitted an education certificate  with  the  new  date  of
    birth  but,  the  respondent  noted,  this  would  have  involved   the
    appellant's taking her secondary school certificate examination at  the
    age of 19, when that examination was usually taken at the  age  of  16.
    Moreover, according to  a  document  verification  report  headed  "For
    Disclosure", examination of the education certificate and  verification
    checks revealed that the certificate was not genuine.

2.    In  the  light  of  these  conclusions,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application on two bases.  First, the respondent considered
    that, on the premise the appellant was born on 16  November  1990,  she
    failed to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 277 of the  Immigration
    Rules, which required her not to be under the age of 21 on the date  of
    arrival in the United Kingdom.  Secondly, the  respondent  refused  the
    application by reference to paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules,
    which requires entry clearance to be refused:-

         "(7A)    Where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
              documents or information have been submitted (whether or  not
              material to the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the
              applicant's  knowledge),  or  material  facts  had  not  been
              disclosed, in relation to the application."




The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision  of  the  respondent.   Her
    appeal was determined at North Shields on 14 December 2010 by  a  judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge concluded that the appellant had
    submitted  a  false  education  certificate,  as   contended   by   the
    respondent, and that the appellant had done so in  order  to  make  her
    appear older than  her  true  age.   The  judge  also  noted  that  the
    appellant's previous application had given her  date  of  birth  as  16
    November 1990.

4.    The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  failed  to  satisfy   the
    requirements of paragraph 277 of the Immigration Rules,  by  reason  of
    her age, and that she had provided a false document in support  of  her
    application,  thereby  attracting  refusal  under  paragraph   320(7A).
    Finally, the judge noted that although the  appellant  had  not  raised
    human rights in her grounds of appeal, these had been  referred  to  by
    the respondent in the refusal decision.  The judge found that there was
    no evidence before her to show  that  the  appellant  and  her  sponsor
    husband had established a family life together or that the marriage was
    genuine and subsisting.  She dismissed the appeal.

5.   Permission to appeal against the judge's decision  was  sought  by  the
    appellant, who contended that the judge had failed to  appreciate  that
    the burden of proving that paragraph 320(7A) applied in her case lay on
    the respondent and that the requirement to be 21 or over  in  order  to
    satisfy paragraph 277 of the Rules was incompatible with  the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in Quila and Bibi [2010] EWCA Civ 1482.


Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

6.   Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  that
    Tribunal on 6 May 2011.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  considered  that
    the First-tier Tribunal judge had been "clearly wrong  about  paragraph
    277" and had arguably applied the wrong burden of proof in relation  to
    paragraph 320(7A).  In her response  under  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the respondent stated  that  she
    did not oppose the appellant's grounds, which alleged  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law; but the respondent contended that the decision
    in the appeal should be re-made  by  dismissing  it,  as  regards  both
    paragraph 277 and paragraph 320(7A).  On 2  November  2011,  the  Upper
    Tribunal decided, without a hearing pursuant to rule 34, to  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge.  In doing  so  it  noted
    that the age issue in  paragraph  277  had  now  been  finally  settled
    against the respondent by the judgments of the Supreme Court  in  Quila
    and Bibi [2011] UKSC 45.

7.   Applying the procedures set out in  section  108  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002, in the absence of Mr Miah  we  probed
    the  respondent's  reasons  for  contending  that  the  full   document
    verification report contained material, the disclosure of which to  the
    appellant would be contrary to the public interest.   Having  done  so,
    and by agreement with Mr Parkinson, we informed Mr Miah that  we  could
    disclose to him the fact that the  full  document  verification  report
    made reference to the relevant officer of the respondent having carried
    out  an  online  verification  of  the  education  certificate,   which
    disclosed the appellant's age as  being  given  as  16  November  1990.
    Indeed, amongst the materials which appear to have  been  disclosed  to
    the      appellant      there      is       a       printout       from
    www.educationboardresults.gov.bd/arch  /result.php, regarding the  2006
    secondary school certificate examination in respect of  the  appellant.
    This bears  the  same  names  of  the  appellant  as  in  the  disputed
    certificate, together with the same father's name and school  and  roll
    number.  However, it clearly gives the appellant's date of birth as 16-
    11-90.

8.   Mr Miah submitted that his instructions were that, although  there  had
    been a previous application for entry clearance as  a  visitor,  giving
    that date of birth, what the appellant said regarding her date of birth
    in the present application was "all true and no  false  documents  have
    been used".

9.   We are in no doubt that the respondent  has  satisfied  the  burden  of
    proof to show, on the balance of probabilities, that paragraph  320(7A)
    applies in the present case.  In so finding, we have had regard to  the
    totality of the evidence, except that the only matter to which we  have
    had regard in the  restricted  document  verification  report  is  that
    concerning the online verification of the  education  certificate.   We
    have not had regard to any other matter contained in that report, which
    has not been the subject of disclosure to the appellant.

10.  It has not been disputed that the appellant  made  an  application  for
    entry clearance as a visitor, giving exactly the same date of birth  as
    was disclosed on the online verification report.  These  matters  fully
    persuade us that deception had been  sought  to  be  practised  on  the
    respondent  in  relation  to  the  current   application,   where   the
    appellant's date of birth has been falsely given as 16 November 1987.

11.  It  has  been  suggested  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  others,
    including her father, may have  been  responsible  for  this  attempted
    deception and that she is innocent of it.  We have grave doubts  as  to
    this; but, in  any  event,  paragraph  320(7A)  does  not  require  the
    appellant even to have been aware of the false representations or false
    documents submitted.  Whoever put forward the false  materials  plainly
    did so dishonestly.  The motivation was obvious: to  pretend  that  the
    appellant was over the age of 21, so as not to fall foul  of  paragraph
    277 of the Immigration Rules.  It matters not that  the  appellant  was
    not  herself  dishonest,  although  she  would  have   to   have   been
    extraordinarily supine not to have been aware of what was being done on
    her behalf.  The judgments in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 make  it
    plain that, although dishonesty is required, it need not necessarily be
    that of the applicant.

12.  The irony is, of course, that,  in  retrospect,  the  appellant  and/or
    those acting on her behalf  need  not  have  falsified  her  age.   The
    requirement in paragraph 277 to be 21 or over has been struck  down  by
    the Court of Appeal  and  the  Supreme  Court;  with  the  result  that
    paragraph 277 has now been amended to substitute a reference  to  being
    under  18.   That  does  not,  however,  in  any  way  operate  so   as
    retrospectively to expunge the dishonesty  that  was  employed  in  the
    present case.



The appellant's Article 8 submissions

13.  Mr Parkinson did not take issue with the contention on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, were an application to be made at the present time, that she
    would satisfy the requirements of paragraph 277, and would have done so
    at the date of decision, reading down the reference to 21 years of  age
    in paragraph 277, as it then was.

14.  For the appellant, Mr Miah submitted that, notwithstanding  an  adverse
    finding in relation to paragraph 320(7A), the appellant's appeal should
    be allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.  We set out below  the  essence
    of Mr Miah's submissions. The relevant  provisions  of  the  Rules  are
    reproduced in the Appendix to this determination.

15.  If the appellant were to make a fresh application for  entry  clearance
    as a spouse, she would meet all  the  requirements  of  paragraph  277.
    Assuming that the appellant herself had not been actively  involved  in
    using deception in connection with the present  application,  the  fact
    that paragraph  320(7A)  had  operated  so  as  to  cause  the  present
    application to be  refused  could  not  be  held  against  her  by  the
    respondent, in considering the fresh application.  Indeed, even if  the
    appellant had been  actively  involved  in  that  deception,  paragraph
    320(7B)(d)(ii), which would require the fresh application to be refused
    until  ten years had elapsed since the original application  for  entry
    clearance, would not apply.  As a person  applying  as  a  spouse,  the
    appellant would be excluded from the operation of paragraph 320(7B)  by
    reason of paragraph 320(7C)(a)(i).

16.  The result of all this, according to Mr Miah, was that it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the rights of the appellant and  the
    sponsor under Article 8 of the ECHR to require the appellant to  go  to
    the trouble of making a fresh application for entry clearance.  In this
    respect, Mr Miah sought to rely upon the  judgments  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

17.  In Chikwamba, the issue was the proportionality of requiring  a  person
    to go abroad in order to make an application for entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom as a spouse.  On the particular facts of that case,  the
    House of Lords found that it would be a  disproportionate  interference
    with the Article 8 rights of the appellant and her family in  order  to
    require her to do  that.   The  precise  extent  of  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba is a matter of some debate (see eg Hayat (nature of Chikwamba
    principle) [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC)).  However, we are in no doubt  that
    the principle cannot successfully be invoked in a case of  the  present
    kind.  There are  clear,  cogent  policy  reasons  why  an  application
    tainted by dishonest representation etc should be refused.  The same is
    true of paragraph 320(7B), which deals, in a graduated  way,  with  the
    effect of such dishonesty on future applications for  entry  clearance.
    The fact that paragraph 320(7B) is subject to the exceptions set out in
    paragraph 320(7C)  cannot  rationally  be  used,  in  conjunction  with
    Chikwamba, in order to destroy the efficacy of paragraph  320(7A).  The
    fact that someone cannot have past  dishonesty  held  against  them  in
    their next application for entry clearance does not mean that  it  must
    necessarily be regarded as  disproportionate  in  Article  8  terms  to
    refuse their present application, on the basis of that dishonesty.

18.  Nothing in what we have just said  should  be  taken  to  amount  to  a
    finding that it will never be disproportionate in Article  8  terms  to
    uphold a decision under paragraph 320(7A).  Each case ultimately  turns
    on its own facts.  There may well be cases where,  despite  the  public
    policy issues inherent in paragraph 320(7A), it would  nevertheless  be
    disproportionate to refuse entry clearance.  The point we wish to make,
    however, is that the effect of 320(7B) and 7(C) is not such as to cause
    paragraph 320(7A) to be "read down" in a general way.

19.  Mr Miah's final submission was almost an inversion of the one  we  have
    just considered.  He drew attention to paragraph 320(11), whereby entry
    clearance is normally to be refused, where an applicant "has previously
    contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the  intentions  of  these
    Rules".  Paragraph 320(11) refers to published guidance giving examples
    of circumstances in which, amongst other things, an applicant  who  has
    previously used deception in an  application  for  entry  clearance  is
    likely to be considered as having contrived in  a  significant  way  to
    frustrate the intentions of the  Rules.   Mr  Miah  did  not  draw  our
    attention to any such guidance.  He nevertheless contended  that  there
    was a prospect that the present appellant would fall foul of  paragraph
    320(11), were she to make a  fresh  application  for  entry  clearance.
    Given that she had her spouse waiting for her in the United Kingdom and
    that she could satisfy the requirements of paragraph 277, the  prospect
    of a fresh refusal under paragraph  320(11)  meant  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to dismiss the present appeal.

20.  We do not consider that this submission has any merit.  Once again,  it
    represents an attempt to mount a generalised attack on  the  policy  of
    Part 9 of the Immigration Rules, whereby actual or attempted abuses  of
    the immigration controls of the United Kingdom carry  consequences  for
    future applications.  We are not in any position  to  speculate  as  to
    whether  the  respondent,  faced  with  a  future  application  by  the
    appellant, will seek to invoke paragraph 320(11).  One  obvious  matter
    will be that  the  respondent  will  need  to  be  satisfied  that  the
    applicant (as opposed to someone  acting  without  her  knowledge)  has
    contrived in a significant way  to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
    Rules.  Whatever guidance is in force at the relevant time will need to
    be  properly  applied.   The  respondent  will,  furthermore,  need  to
    consider the Article  8  rights  of  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,
    according to the evidence put forward at the relevant time.

21.    We therefore approach Article 8 in the  present  case  on  the  basis
    that the weight to be given to the respondent's interests in conducting
    the proportionality balancing exercise under Article 8(2) is not to  be
    automatically diminished by reference to the consideration -

         (a) that a person may be able to take advantage of an exception in
        paragraph 320(7C) in any future application  for  entry  clearance;
        or, conversely

         (b) that there is  a  danger  the  person  may  be  refused  under
        paragraph 320(11) by reference to conduct that has led  to  his  or
        her current application being refused under paragraph 320(7A).

 22.    We accept that the appellant meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    277 for admission   as a spouse. No evidence  has  been  adduced  which
    shows that it would be unreasonable for the sponsor to continue  family
    life with the appellant in Bangladesh; but  even  if  it  had  been  so
    shown, we do not find  that  the  decision  under  appeal  -  based  on
    paragraph 320(7A) - represents a disproportionate interference with the
    Article 8 rights of the appellant or the sponsor. The  application  the
    appellant made to the respondent was marred by  dishonesty.  Those  who
    engage, or who might be tempted to engage,  in  dishonest  attempts  to
    deceive the United  Kingdom  authorities  in  relation  to  immigration
    control need to be aware that such actions  will  have  disadvantageous
    consequences for those  who  are  the  intended  beneficiaries  of  the
    dishonest conduct. In the present case, the appellant and  the  sponsor
    have chosen to marry against the backdrop that  the  appellant  had  no
    automatic entitlement to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  all  the
    circumstances,  it  is,  we  consider,  not  disproportionate  for  the
    respondent to  refuse  the  application,  on  the  basis  of  paragraph
    320(7A).



Decision

23.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside,  we
    re-make the decision in the appeal as follows.  The appeal is dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.







                                Signed                                  Date




                                       Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane


    |                                            |
|APPENDIX                                    |

                                   PART 9

    GENERAL GROUNDS FOR THE REFUSAL OF ENTRY CLEARANCE, LEAVE TO ENTER OR
         VARIATION OF LEAVE TO ENTER OR REMAIN IN THE UNITED KINGDOM


       Refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom




   320.   In addition to the grounds for refusal of entry clearance or leave
        to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, and subject to
        paragraph 321 below, the following grounds for the refusal of entry
        clearance or leave to enter apply:

   Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom  is
   to be refused


   ..........

    (7A)  where false representations have been made or false documents  [or
        information] have been submitted (whether or not  material  to  the
        application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
        material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
        application.
   (7B)   subject to paragraph 320(7C), where the applicant  has  previously
        breached the UK's immigration laws by:
        (a)  Overstaying;
        (b)  breaching a condition attached to his leave;
        (c)  being an Illegal Entrant;
        (d)  using Deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
             to enter or remain (whether successful or not);
             unless the applicant:
             (i)    Overstayed  for  28  days  or  less  and  left  the   UK
                 voluntarily, not at the expense (directly or indirectly) of
                 the Secretary of State;
             (ii)  used Deception in an application for entry clearance more
                 than 10 years ago;
             (iii) left the UK voluntarily, not at the expense (directly  or
                 indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than 12  months
                 ago;
             (iv)  left the UK voluntarily,  at  the  expense  (directly  or
                 indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more  than  5  years
                 ago; or
              (vi) was removed or deported from the UK more  than  10  years
                 ago.
   Where more than one breach of the UK's  immigration  laws  has  occurred,
   only the breach which leads to the longest period of absence from the  UK
   will be relevant under this paragraph.
   (7C)   Paragraph 320(7B) shall not apply in the following circumstances:
       (a)    where the applicant is applying as:
           (i)    a spouse, civil partner or unmarried or same-sex  partner
               under
               paragraphs 281 or 295A,
           (ii)   a fianc�(e) or proposed  civil  partner  under  paragraph
               290,
           (iii)  a parent, grandparent or other dependent  relative  under
               paragraph 317,
           (iv)   a person exercising rights of access  to  a  child  under
               paragraph 246, or
           (v)    a spouse, civil partner, unmarried or same-sex partner of
               a refugee  or  person  with  Humanitarian  Protection  under
               paragraphs 352A, 352AA, 352FA or 352FD; or
       (b)    where the individual was under the age of 18 at the  time  of
           his most recent breach of the UK's immigration laws.



   Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
   should normally be refused


   .............


   (11)   where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant  way
       to frustrate  the  intentions  of  these  Rules.  Guidance  will  be
       published giving examples of circumstances in which an applicant who
       has previously overstayed, breached  a  condition  attached  to  his
       leave, been an Illegal Entrant or used Deception in  an  application
       for entry clearance, leave to enter or remain (whether successful or
       not) is likely to be considered as having contrived in a significant
       way to frustrate the intentions of these Rules.

   ..............".



