
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 January 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                                   Between

                                     JL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)   Those writing medical  reports  for  use  in  immigration  and  asylum
    appeals  should  ensure  where  possible  that,  before  forming  their
    opinions, they study any assessments that have already been made of the
    appellant's  credibility  by  the  immigration  authorities  and/or   a
    tribunal  judge  (SS  (Sri  Lanka)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155   [30];   BN
    (psychiatric evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279  (IAC)  at
    [49], [53])). When the materials  to  which  they  should  have  regard
    include previous determinations by a judge, they should not  conduct  a
    running commentary on the reasoning of the  judge  who  has  made  such
    findings, but should  concentrate  on  describing  and  evaluating  the
    medical evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012] EWCA Civ 1560 [37].

(2)   They should also bear in mind that when an advocate wishes to rely  on
    their medical report to  support  the  credibility  of  an  appellant's
    account, they will be  expected  to  identify  what  about  it  affords
    support to what the appellant has said and which is  not  dependent  on
    what the appellant has said to the doctor  (HE  (DRC,  credibility  and
    psychiatric reports) Democratic Republic of Congo [2004] UKAIT 000321).
    The more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that the account given by
    the  appellant  was  to  be  believed,  the  less  likely  it  is  that
    significant weight will be attached to it (HH  (Ethiopia)  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 306 [23]).

(3)   The authors of such medical reports also need to understand that  what
    is expected of them  is  a  critical  and  objective  analysis  of  the
    injuries and/or symptoms displayed.  They  need  to  be  vigilant  that
    ultimately whether an appellant's account of the underlying  events  is
    or is not credible and plausible is a question of legal appraisal and a
    matter for the tribunal judge, not the expert  doctors  (IY  [47];  see
    also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [17]-[18]).

(4)   For their part, judges  should  be  aware  that,  whilst  the  overall
    assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports may well involve
    assessments of  the  compatibility  of  the  appellant's  account  with
    physical marks or symptoms, or mental condition: (SA  (Somalia)  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1302). If the position were otherwise, the central  tenets  of
    the Istanbul Protocol would  be  misconceived,  whenever  there  was  a
    dispute about claimed causation of scars, and judges  could  not  apply
    its guidance, contrary to what they are enjoined to do by SA (Somalia).
    Even where medical experts rely heavily on the  account  given  by  the
    person concerned, that does not mean their reports lack or  lose  their
    status  as  independent  evidence,  although   it   may   reduce   very
    considerably the weight that can be attached to them.





                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a  national  of  China  with  an  unusual  immigration
    history.  She had gone to New Zealand on a student visa in  2001  which
    expired in January 2002 but she remained illegally in New Zealand until
    September 2004 when she returned to China.   She  then  obtained  entry
    clearance to come to the UK as a student,  valid  from  December  2005-
    October 2006.  She did not undertake any studies, instead working in  a
    takeaway.  She then became an overstayer.  On  20  June  2010  she  was
    arrested on suspicion of shoplifting and received a police caution  for
    this offence.  The respondent issued directions for her removal  on  10
    December 2010 but on 8 December she  claimed  asylum.  We  consider  it
    would be appropriate to make an anonymity direction in respect  of  the
    appellant.

2.   The basis of her asylum claim was that on return from  New  Zealand  in
    2004 she met, in Beijing, YWW, with  whom  she  began  a  relationship.
    However, after being together for six to seven months  he  disappeared.
    Some unknown men came  to  her  flat  and  started  searching  it;  she
    realised they were government officials; when they saw a photo of  this
    man and her together they arrested her.  She  was  detained  for  three
    months, during which time she was ill-treated and  gang-raped/raped  on
    several occasions.  On one occasion she tried  to  kill  herself.   Her
    parents somehow found out where she was and were able  to  bribe  those
    responsible for detaining her so that she was released.  She spent  six
    to seven months in hospital before flying to the UK.  She claimed  that
    her detention was  prompted  by  government  suspicions  of  her  being
    associated with a Taiwanese spy, intent  on  discrediting  the  Chinese
    nation.

3.   The respondent did not believe her story and on 20 January 2012 made  a
    decision to remove, having refused to grant  her  asylum.   Her  appeal
    came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  Lingard  who   in   a
    determination sent on 26 April  2012  dismissed  her  appeal.   At  the
    hearing the appellant was not tendered to give evidence.

4.   There is a medical dimension to the appellant's case  and  in  addition
    to the appellant's written evidence the FtT  judge  had  before  her  a
    medico-legal  report  by  Dr  Naomi  Hartree  from  the  Helen   Bamber
    Foundation (HBF) dated 27 February 2012 together with an addendum dated
    26 March 2012, inpatient  records  from  Air  Force  General  Hospital,
    Beijing, NHS hospital records and a GP letter relating to a smear  test
    and result. In her addendum Dr Hartree said she did  not  consider  the
    appellant was psychologically fit to give evidence. At the hearing  the
    judge also heard oral evidence from Dr Hartree who has worked  for  the
    HBF since 2009.  Dr Hartree  said  that  the  appellant  had  described
    herself as a "normal" happy person prior to her imprisonment  in  China
    but from that time onwards her mental health deteriorated severely and,
    since arriving in the UK, her mental health continued to be poor  since
    she tried to "keep everything inside".  She had not reacted well  to  a
    period  of  immigration  detention  in  the  UK,   becoming   intensely
    distressed.  The appellant had told Dr Hartree she had found her asylum
    interview very  difficult  because  she  had  to  talk  about  her  ill
    treatment in prison.

5.   Before continuing with our summary  of  Dr  Hartree's  evidence  it  is
    important to mention that the appellant's evidence both to the UKBA and
    Dr  Hartree  was  that  since  arrival  in  the  UK  she  had  begun  a
    relationship in 2007 with a man called  Danny  who  was  of  Vietnamese
    origin.  Their relationship lasted some two years during which time she
    miscarried after a pregnancy and he became physically  violent  towards
    her.

6.   Dr Hartree's written report recorded scars and  lesions  noted  on  the
    appellant's body during a clinical examination.  Her  report  described
    the appellant as having a cluster of symptoms indicating a diagnosis of
    post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  with  psychotic  features.   She
    described the appellant as having become socially isolated, vulnerable,
    traumatised, withdrawn and afraid of making contact with her parents in
    Beijing for fear she may cause them trouble.

7.   Dr Hartree's written report expressed her  view  that  the  appellant's
    physical scars and  lesions  as  well  as  her  psychological  symptoms
    correspond closely with her history and her hospital record from  China
    reflected injuries and symptoms corresponding to a history  of  torture
    and ill-treatment.  From a clinical point of  view  and  in  accordance
    with the Istanbul Protocol (see below) she had no reason to  doubt  the
    appellant had suffered ill-treatment as described.

8.   In Dr Hartree's opinion the appellant  required  long-term  therapy,  a
    trial of antidepressant treatment and a sense of stability in her life.
     If the appellant is removed from the UK there  was  a  high  risk  her
    mental health state would  deteriorate  very  seriously  owing  to  her
    genuine and persistent fear of further arrest in China or  if  not  re-
    arrest, fear of destitution.  She would be unlikely  to  access  or  be
    able to use therapy and treatment unless she has support and  stability
    in her life.

9.   Dr Hartree's report also commented on the respondent's refusal  letter,
    considering that her traumatised state may have explained her delay  in
    claiming asylum despite her educated background and that it also  meant
    she had considerable difficulty in recalling details  of  her  life  in
    China and being accurate about dates.

10.  The FtT judge was not persuaded to accept the  appellant's  account  as
    credible.  She said that she could only  give  limited  weight  to  the
    appellant's recent witness statement because she had not been  tendered
    to give evidence.  She found  that  Dr  Hartree's  description  of  the
    appellant's difficulties in recalling experiences, names and dates  was
    contrary to the fact that all accounts she had given in the context  of
    her claim  for  asylum,  were  well  summarised,  detailed,  lucid  and
    generally chronologically cohesive.  Hence claims  that  the  appellant
    had a bad memory  could  not  provide  a  proper  explanation  for  her
    inconsistencies/omissions   or   chronological    deficiencies.     She
    considered it significant that the appellant had been prepared to  stay
    on illegally in New Zealand despite having no fear of return  to  China
    at that time.  She counted against the appellant the fact that she  had
    only claimed asylum after being placed  in  immigration  detention  and
    facing  removal.   Noting  that  the  appellant  was  relatively  well-
    educated, she did not accept that the appellant did not know she  could
    claim asylum when she came to the UK in 2005.  She did not accept  that
    the appellant only felt able to divulge details of her  rape  and  ill-
    treatment to a male immigration  office  during  her  asylum  interview
    because she believed this would  secure  her  release.  She  placed  no
    reliance on the Chinese Air Force General Hospital records.

11.  Coming to Dr Hartree's evidence, the judge stated:

         "102.    However, I recognise the  Foundation  maintain  a  careful
             filtering process so I must  take  note,  and  I  do,  of  the
             contents of any medico-legal  report  from  this  source.   Dr
             Hartree has had varied hospital experience before  becoming  a
             GP and also I accept she has a wealth  of  medical  experience
             but she is not a specialist/consultant in any particular field
             and  it  is  not,  of  course,  for  Dr  Hartree  to  come  to
             credibility assessments about the  appellant's  accounts.   Dr
             Hartree appears to have read relevant  documents  relating  to
             the appellant's asylum claims and result of her application.


         103. I have  to  bear  in  mind  that  Dr  Hartree  has  identified
             marks/scars on the appellant's body as being  consistent  with
             her  claims.   However,  during  the  hearing,  under   cross-
             examination,  Dr  Hartree  conceded  that  the  marks  on  the
             appellant's body which are claimed by the appellant to be as a
             result of persecution in China,  could  have  been  caused  in
             circumstances other than those identified  by  the  appellant.
             While stretch marks around the  lower  lumber  region  of  the
             appellant's  body  may  well,  as  the  report  suggests,   be
             consistent with a person having been detained  without  proper
             sustenance, at the hearing Dr  Hartree  conceded  these  might
             also by the result of other things, for example, the aftermath
             of an eating disorder.


         104. I am bound to  take  account  of  the  contents  of  testimony
             recorded as given for the first time by the appellant  (to  Dr
             Hartree) of the appellant being the victim of  physical  abuse
             in a number of ways at the hands of her  former  boyfriend  in
             the UK.  Particularly as Dr Hartree refers to  the  difficulty
             in aging scars or other marks to  the  appellant's  body  (now
             attributed to ill-treatment in a Chinese prison  during  2005)
             having in truth been caused as a result of  domestic  violence
             meted out to the appellant after her arrival in the UK.


         105.     It may well be  that  the  appellant  has  certain  mental
             health issues.  I cannot discount that there could be a  great
             many reasons for this other than as a result  of  her  claimed
             past experiences in China."

12.  The judge also considered the fact that the appellant was  not  on  any
    medication nor undergoing any counselling, appeared to be working  hard
    at her studies  and  perceived  as  a  "popular  member"  of  her  BTEC
    Subsidiary Diploma in Fashion and Clothing and A-Level  Textile  course
    were all pointers to her being able to function satisfactorily.

13.  In addition to disbelieving the appellant's  asylum  claim,  the  judge
    also rejected her claim to have had no contact with her parents, noting
    that it was not until she had been  offered  means  of  contacting  her
    parents, via Red Cross, that the appellant said she  did  not  want  to
    contact them.

14.  In the course of going on to reject the appellant'  Article  8  grounds
    of appeal the judge observed:

         "128.    While I recognise, by reference to Dr Hartree's report and
             to other information in the public domain that  mental  health
             care  within  China  may  be  expensive  it  is,  nonetheless,
             available and I reiterate that at present the appellant is not
             on any mental health care regime of any sort, does  not  taken
             [sic] medication related to any mental  health  condition,  is
             not involved in the receipt of relevant  counselling  and  has
             provided no evidence to show she received  any  mental  health
             care of assessment prior to making her asylum application."

15.  Permission to appeal was granted in August 2012. The  principal  ground
    of appeal (ground 1) was that the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr
    Hartree's medical evidence (as set out in para 102) betrayed a  failure
    to appreciate that her reports contained independent evidence that  the
    appellant had been tortured by the authorities in China.  As  amplified
    by ground 5 it was alleged that the judge had failed to  recognise  the
    distinction explained in R (on the application of AM) [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    521 between "evidence" and "proof".  It was said that contrary  to  the
    judge's view Dr Hartree  was  in  a  qualified  position  to  make  the
    assessment of the appellant as an independent medical expert.   It  was
    observed that the HBF was one of two expert bodies acknowledged by UKBA
    to have recognised expertise  in  the  assessment  of  physical  and/or
    psychological/psychiatric/psychotic effects of torture (the other being
    the Medical Foundation (which is now known as Freedom from Torture)).

16.  Ground  2  took  issue  with  the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr
    Hartree's opinion that  the  appellant's  scars  were  caused  by  ill-
    treatment in China.  The judge's concern that the expert in her written
    report had not addressed whether the scars could have  been  caused  by
    domestic violence at the hands of her former boyfriend was said  to  be
    flawed by failure to consider the precise  details  given  in  the  Air
    Force General Hospital record and failure to take into account the view
    stated at [187] of the Istanbul Protocol (the Manual of  the  Effective
    Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman  or
    Degrading  Treatment  or  Punishment,  submitted   to   the   UN   High
    Commissioner for Human Rights on 9 August 1999) that:

         "Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all  lesions  and  not
         the consistency of each lesion with a particular  form  of  torture
         that is important in assessing the torture story"

17.  Ground 3 submitted that the judge fell into error  in  paras  105-6  by
    failing to consider the appellant's vulnerability and its linkage  with
    her fear and risk on return to China.

18.  Ground 4 argued that the judge had  failed  to  take  into  account  Dr
    Hartree's addendum report dated 26 March 2012, which, inter  alia,  had
    said that it was unlikely the appellant would access available  medical
    treatment in China.

19.  Ground 6 argued that the judge had failed to  recognise  that  the  COI
    evidence indicated that  at  least  56  million  patients  with  mental
    ailments had not received any treatment and that for women suicide risk
    was a serious risk.  Thus "treatment is not available".

20.  In oral submissions Ms Clarke contended that the  judge  was  incorrect
    to say  that  Dr  Hartree  was  "not  a  specialist/consultant  in  any
    particular field".  She was a medical expert working within one of  the
    two recognised centres dealing with victims of torture.  Her  expertise
    enabled her to assess causation.  In attaching significance to the fact
    that the appellant was not on medication or receiving counselling,  the
    judge had ignored Dr  Hartree's  finding  that  she  was  unwilling  to
    undergo treatment and had built a wall around herself and that her PTSD
    could not be easily treated.   The  judge  had  bypassed  the  doctor's
    assessment of credibility. The report by  Dr  Hartree  was  independent
    evidence which also considered the  hospital  records  from  China  and
    noted that their clinical findings accorded with her  own.   The  judge
    had also overlooked Dr Hartree's explanation for why the appellant  had
    not claimed asylum earlier.  The doctor had clearly taken into  account
    whether the appellant's scars could have been  caused  by  her  violent
    boyfriend.  Crucially the doctor also considered whether the  appellant
    was feigning her symptoms but rejected the possibility.  By not  taking
    Dr Hartree's two reports together the judge had erred.

21.  Mr Tufan for the respondent contended that the judge's approach to  the
    medical evidence was consistent with the approach set out by the  Court
    of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and S v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1153: the judge had considered  this  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence as a whole.  The judge's determination reflected  an  in-depth
    consideration of the medical evidence.  What the judge stated [102] was
    factually correct.  Credibility  assessment  is  the  function  of  the
    judge, not the medical expert.  To say a scar is diagnostic of /typical
    of/highly consistent/consistent (to use the Istanbul Protocol hierarchy
    of attribution of causes in descending order of likelihood) is not  the
    same as saying a claimant is credible.

22.  The doctor was obliged to consider possible alternative causes  of  all
    scars and in this respect the judge was entitled to note  that  in  her
    written reports the doctor  had  only  done  this  at  [143]  regarding
    certain scars and in her oral evidence she had conceded  that  some  of
    the scarring could have been caused  by  the  aftermath  of  an  eating
    disorder and/or domestic violence.  The grounds failed in particular to
    note that in her oral evidence at the hearing Dr Hartree  had  in  this
    way qualified her written reports.

23.   As regards the complaints made against the judge's assessment  of  the
    availability of medical treatment  in  China,  the  doctor  was  not  a
    country expert and the judge's assessment was entirely consistent  with
    the leading cases on Article 3/8 ECHR dealing  with  available  medical
    assistance.

24.  There was no reason to think, concluded Mr Tufan, that  the  judge  had
    ignored the doctor's second report and in any event  it  added  nothing
    substantive to the earlier report.

Our assessment

25.  We have decided that despite giving reasons which in many respects  are
    careful and  thorough,  the  FtT  materially  erred  in  law  in  three
    respects.  First, the judge's reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    credibility lack transparency.  We  have  summarised  those  the  judge
    herself developed, but our difficulty lies in the  fact  that  she  saw
    these as complementing  those  given  by  the  respondent  without  any
    comment on why she found the latter "cogent": at [85] she stated that:

         "... the writer of the refusal letter has set  forth  a  number  of
         cogent reasons for disbelieving the  appellant's  core  account  of
         claimed experiences in China and the reasons she has identified for
         fearing now to return there (see paras  50  -  81  of  the  refusal
         letter)".


    In  these   paragraphs   the   respondent   identified,   inter   alia,
    inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account  of  when  she  met  her
    boyfriend in China; in her account of having been able to obtain a  new
    Chinese passport  on  1  March  2005,  when  according  to  her  asylum
    interview she was at that time still in detention (end of 2004  -  June
    2005); and in her account of how long she  was  locked  up  (couple  of
    days; 3 months).  The respondent also found implausible the appellant's
    claim that her parents were  somehow  able  to  presume  she  had  been
    arrested and then to locate her; and that she would have been  able  to
    exit China without difficulty on a new passport. There is nothing wrong
    with a judge placing reliance on reasons identified by  the  respondent
    but it must be made clear to the reader why such reasons are considered
    to carry weight.

26.  A second error we discern consists in  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's vulnerability (the appellant's ground 3). It is clear  from
    her determination that despite disbelieving  much  of  the  appellant's
    evidence including the account she gave of her  psychological  problems
    (the judge placed particular emphasis on  the  appellant's  ability  to
    perform well in her studies) the judge was prepared to accept she was a
    vulnerable person. To be specific, she  appeared  to  accept  that  the
    appellant had been the victim of physical abuse at  the  hands  of  her
    former boyfriend in the UK [104]; and, although rejecting  the  reasons
    given, accepted that "[i]t may well be the appellant has certain mental
    health issues".  Given  that  the  judge  described  the   respondent's
    reasons (as set out in the preceding paragraph) as  "cogent"  and  that
    they included  reliance  on  inconsistencies,   it  was  of  particular
    importance to see what findings, if  any,  the  judge  made  about  the
    possible relevance to these of the appellant being a vulnerable person.
     In the case of a vulnerable person, it  is  incumbent  on  a  Tribunal
    judge to apply the guidance given in the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No  2  2010,  Child,  Vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance. At [14]-[15] of this guidance, which deal with assessment  of
    evidence, it is stated:

         "14.     Consider the evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees of understanding by witnesses and  appellant  compared
             to those who are not vulnerable, in the  context  of  evidence
             from others associated with the appellant and  the  background
             evidence before you. Where there were clear  discrepancies  in
             the oral evidence, consider  the  extent  to  which  the  age,
             vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
             that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


         15.  The decision should record whether the Tribunal has  concluded
             the appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,  vulnerable  or
             sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered  the  identified
             vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and thus
             whether the Tribunal was satisfied whether the  appellant  had
             established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.
             In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given  to  objective
             indications of risk rather than  necessarily  to  a  state  of
             mind."

         Whilst in [14] above the focus is on oral  evidence,  it  is  clear
    from [15] and the guidance read as  a  whole  that  the  same  approach
    should inform assessment of discrepancies in the written record.

27.  Applying this guidance would have entailed  the  judge  asking  herself
    whether any of the inconsistencies in the appellant's account (as given
    in her asylum interview) identified by the respondent  in  the  reasons
    for refusal  - and described by the judge as being "cogent" - could  be
    explained by her being a vulnerable person.  This the judge did not do.



28.  The third error concerns the judge's treatment of the medical  evidence
    of Dr Hartree.  Whilst the judge  was  entirely  right  to  state  that
    assessment of credibility was ultimately a  matter  for  her,  she  was
    wrong to regard it as impermissible for the doctor to evaluate  in  any
    respect the truthfulness of the appellant's account ("... it is not, of
    course, for Dr Hartree to come to  credibility  assessments  about  the
    appellant's account").

29.  From leading cases dealing  with  medical  evidence  in  asylum-related
    cases it is clear that those writing medical reports  are  expected  to
    keep within certain parameters. As expert witnesses  they  have  duties
    under  Practice  Direction  10  of  the  Practice  Directions  of   the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal. They are to follow the guidance given in  the  Istanbul
    Protocol,  especially  [186-187]  dealing  with  different  degrees  of
    consistency[1] and [162] dealing with objectivity  and  impartiality[2]
    (SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 [30]). When considering causation of
    injuries said to have been inflicted by torture or other forms  of  ill
    treatment, they are to consider possible alternative  explanations.  As
    stated in SA (Somalia) at [28]:

         "It is also desirable that, in the case of marks  of  injury  which
         are inherently susceptible of a number of alternative or "everyday"
         explanations, reference should be made to such fact, together  with
         any physical features  or  "pointers"  found  which  may  make  the
         particular explanation for the injury advanced by  the  complainant
         more or less likely". (See also RT (medical reports,  causation  of
         scarring) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009)

30.  Those writing medical reports are to ensure where possible that  before
    forming their opinions they study any  assessments  that  have  already
    been made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration authorities
    and/or a tribunal judge ("It is essential that those who are  asked  to
    provide expert reports, be they medical or otherwise, are provided with
    the documents relevant to the  matters  they  are  asked  to  consider.
    Failure to do so is bound to lead  to  the  critical  scrutiny  of  the
    expert's report,  and  may  lead  to  the  rejection  of  the  opinions
    expressed in that report...." (SS (Sri  Lanka)  [20012]  EWCA  Civ  155
    [30]; BN (psychiatric evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010]  UKUT  279
    (IAC) at [49], [53])). Where the materials before  the  doctor  include
    previous determinations by a judge, they should not conduct  a  running
    commentary on the reasoning of the judge who has  made  such  findings,
    but  should  concentrate  on  describing  and  evaluating  the  medical
    evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012] EWCA Civ 1560 [37]. Doctors should bear in
    mind that when an advocate wishes to rely on their  medical  report  to
    support the  credibility  of  an  appellant's  account,  they  will  be
    expected to  identify  what  about  it  affords  support  to  what  the
    appellant has said and which is not dependent on what the appellant has
    said to the doctor  (HE  (DRC,  credibility  and  psychiatric  reports)
    Democratic Republic of Congo [2004] UKAIT 000321). The more a diagnosis
    is dependent on assuming that the account given by the appellant was to
    be believed, the less likely it is  that  significant  weight  will  be
    attached to it (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]). They  need  to
    understand that what is expected of them is a  critical  and  objective
    analysis of the injuries and/or symptoms displayed.  They  need  to  be
    vigilant  that  ultimately  whether  an  appellant's  account  of   the
    underlying events is or is not credible and plausible is a question  of
    legal appraisal and a matter for the tribunal  judge,  not  the  expert
    doctors (IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  306  [17]-
    [18]).


31.  But to say, as the judge did in this case, that medical  evaluation  of
    credibility can be no part of the  function  of  a  medical  expert  is
    erroneous; indeed, if the judge were right, the central tenets  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol would be misconceived whenever there  was  a  dispute
    about claimed causation of scars. Judges could not apply its  guidance,
    contrary to what they are enjoined to do by the Court of Appeal  in  SA
    (Somalia). In Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 the Court found no difficulty
    about a medical report being produced  to  corroborate  or  potentially
    corroborate an appellant's account of torture and indeed insisted  that
    it could not simply be treated as an "add-on" for  separate  assessment
    only after a decision on credibility had been reached. In SA  (Somalia)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 the Court clearly considered that one of the tasks
    a medical report was tendered to perform  was  "to  corroborate  and/or
    lend weight to the account of the asylum seeker by a clear statement as
    to the consistency of old scars found with the history given". The fact
    that the judge went on in her decision to assess what  Dr  Hartree  had
    said about causation only made more odd her earlier  blanket  dismissal
    of anything said by the doctor relating to credibility assessment.

32. Further, to say that it is not for a medical expert to make credibility
    assessments can amount to  a  failure   to  recognise  that  a  medical
    report, even if it may be of limited value, is  evidence independent of
    the claimant's evidence: see R (on the application of AM). As stated by
    Rix LJ at [30] of this judgment:

         "If an independent expert's findings, expert  opinion,  and  honest
         belief (no one suggested that her belief was other than honest) are
         to be refused the status of independent evidence because,  as  must
         inevitably happen, to some extent the expert starts with an account
         from her client and patient, then practically all meaning would  be
         taken from the clearly important policy that,  in  the  absence  of
         very exceptional circumstances  suggesting  otherwise,  independent
         evidence of torture makes the victim unsuitable for detention. That
         conclusion is a fortiori where the independent expert  is  applying
         the internationally recognised Istanbul Protocol designed  for  the
         reporting on and assessment of signs of torture. A  requirement  of
         "evidence" is not the same as a requirement of "proof",  conclusive
         or otherwise. Whether evidence amounts to proof, on any  particular
         standards (and the burden and standard of proof in asylum cases are
         not high) is a matter of weight and assessment".


33.  From the above it is clear that the status that a  medical  report  has
    as independent evidence is entirely a matter of weight and  assessment.
    As stated in SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 at [21]:

         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the  trial  judge...A  judge's
         decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve an error of
         law  on  his  part,  provided  he  approaches  that  evidence  with
         appropriate care and gives good reasons for his decision." (see  to
         similar effect Y and another (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362).

34.      Even where a medical expert relies heavily on the account given  by
    a client, that does not entail that his or her report  lacks  or  loses
    its status  as  independent  evidence,  although  it  may  reduce  very
    considerably the weight that can be attached to  it.   (We  would  also
    observe that, contrary to what Mr Tufan sought to argue at  one  point,
    the reference by Rix LJ in R (on the application of AM) to the Istanbul
    Protocol also makes clear that the main propositions set  out  in  this
    judgment were not intended to be confined only to cases of  persons  in
    detention in the UK.)

35.      We should clarify, however, that we do  not  consider  the  judge's
    failures in this case extended to failing to treat the medical  reports
    as independent evidence. Albeit flawed for reasons  already  explained,
    the FtT judge clearly did treat Dr Hartree's report as "evidence".  Her
    error was rather in seeking artificially to attach little or no  weight
    to it because of a  fixed  (mistaken)  view  about  the  legitimacy  of
    reports of this type making any kind of assessment of credibility.

36.  However, we do think that there  is  one  further  shortcoming  to  the
    judge's assessment of Dr Hartree's evidence.  Tribunal judges may  well
    need to exercise caution in the case  of  doctors  with  no  recognised
    expertise in torture cases, but from materials presented to  us  it  is
    clear that Dr Hartree works for one of two medical centres acknowledged
    by UKBA to have relevant experience (the UKBA Casework  Instruction  on
    "Handling claims involving allegations  of  torture  or  serious  harm:
    Interim Casework Instruction, Non Detained Pilot, 18 July  2011  states
    that "[b]oth Foundations are accepted  by  UKBA  as  having  recognised
    expertise in the assessment of  physical  and/or  psychological  and/or
    psychiatric and/or social effects of torture"). It is also  clear  that
    the HBF requires their doctors to prepare their reports according to  a
    clear methodology based on the Istanbul Protocol. Their doctors undergo
    specialised training in the clinical conditions of asylum  seekers  and
    the more technical aspects of the documentation of  scars  and  medico-
    legal report writing and new doctors are supervised initially  by  more
    experienced doctors. This fact makes the judge's  sentiments  in  [102]
    about Dr Hartree's lack  of  expertise  troubling.  It  may  have  been
    apposite to comment on the extent of the doctor's expertise  (see  e.g.
    the  observation  made  by  Keene  LJ  on  the  lack  of  a  specialist
    psychiatric qualification held by the doctor in  HH  (Ethiopia)  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 306 at [23], but, bearing  in  mind  Dr  Hartree's  curriculum
    vitae, the judge's  seeming  questioning  of  its  mere  existence  was
    misconceived.

37.  In our  judgement  the  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  findings  as
    identified above necessitate that we set aside her decision.

38.  The appellant was not called to give evidence before the FtT  judge  on
    account of Dr Hartree's opinion that she was medically unfit because of
    her mental health problems and the fact that Ms Clarke did not  suggest
    that the position would  be  different  next  time.  Hence  we  do  not
    consider that a continuation hearing would be justified simply in order
    to hear oral  evidence.   Nevertheless,  we  do  not  consider  we  can
    dispense with a further hearing for three reasons. First,  although  we
    already have not only Dr Hartree's written medical reports but also the
    record of the evidence she gave to the FtT judge, we consider that  any
    concerns the respondent or Tribunal might have about any aspects of her
    evidence should be put directly to her: see Y (Sri Lanka)  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 362. Second we need the parties' oral submissions on the  issue  of
    credibility, with particular regard to the question of what  weight  we
    should attach to the  inconsistencies  identified  in  the  appellant's
    account by the respondent in her refusal  letter.  Third  we  need  the
    parties' submissions on weight that should be attached to Dr  Hartree's
    written report in the light of her oral  evidence,  both  that  already
    given and that we anticipate she will give at the continuation hearing.
     We  also  consider  we  need  a  brief  medical  report  updating  the
    appellant's current mental health circumstances  and  direct  that  the
    appellant's representatives produce this within 14 days of  receipt  of
    the date fixed for the next hearing.  If contrary to what we have  just
    said, the appellant's representatives wish the appellant to  give  oral
    evidence, a specific written request to that effect must be made to the
    Tribunal (FAO UTJ Storey) within 14 days of receipt of  this  decision.
    Any such request would need to make  clear  why  Dr  Hartree's  earlier
    assessment that she was not fit to give evidence was no longer  thought
    apposite.

39.      The Tribunal will issue instructions  for  a  hearing  date  to  be
    fixed as soon as possible, listed for two and a half hours.



Signed                                  Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
-----------------------
   [1]These state:  "186... For each lesion and for the overall pattern of
   lesions, the physician should indicate the degree of consistency between
   it and the attribution
      (a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been caused by the
      trauma described;
      (b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
      described, but it is non-specific and there are many other possible
      causes;
      (c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
      described, and there are few other possible causes;
      (d) Typical of: this is an appearance that is usually found with this
      type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;
      (e) Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been caused in
      anyway other than that described.
      187. Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and not
      the consistency of each lesion with a particular form of torture that
      is important in assessing the torture story (see Chapter IV.G for a
      list of torture methods)."

   [2] The Court in SA (Somalia) refers to [161] but that appears to be an
   error for [162] which begins with the words, "A medical evaluation for
   legal purposes should be conducted with objectivity and impartiality".

