
EN (abandonment - first decision nullity- Devaseelan applied) Cameroon
[2005] UKAIT 00146

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at:  Field House          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  4 October 2005              |On 20th October 2005            |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Senior Immigration Judge)                    |
|Mr C J Hodgkinson (Immigration Judge)                             |
|Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr E Waheed of Counsel  instructed  by  Barry  Clark
                  Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms N Hough, Home Office Presenting Officer.

It is an error of law for a second Immigration Judge to regard himself as
bound by invalid determination of a first Immigration Judge; entitled,
nevertheless, to have regard to  first Immigration Judge's summary of the
appellant's first asylum claim and the account then given..

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.  The  appellant  was  granted  review  of  the  determination  of  an
      Immigration Judge, Mr C G M Timson, who dismissed her appeal  against
      the Secretary of State's refusal to recognise her as  a  refugee  and
      the setting of removal directions to Cameroon her country of  origin.
      Review was granted on all grounds of appeal  and  in  particular,  in
      relation to the Immigration Judge's application of the principles  in
      Secretary of State for the Home Department v D (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT
      00702* (formerly known as Devaseelan).  This decision is reported for
      what it says about the proper approach to  an  earlier  determination
      where, unknown to the first Immigration Judge, that determination was
      a nullity because the appellant had left the United Kingdom before it
      was promulgated.

   2. On entry, the appellant's asylum claim was based upon the risk to her
      on return to Cameroon of female genital mutilation  (FGM).   She  has
      reached adulthood without being subjected to it but at 21 claimed  to
      have  been  held  down  and  threatened  with  late  female   genital
      mutilation.  Her mother gave her money to go to Douala  to  her  aunt
      for safety and the aunt then  organised  her  flight  to  the  United
      Kingdom.

   3. That account was considered in the appellant's absence by  the  first
      Immigration Judge.  the appellant was then in the Republic of Ireland
      (Eire) and returned later the same year, to make a fresh asylum claim
      in which her fear of female genital mutilation was  intertwined  with
      her  mother's  status  as  a  Government  opponent,  women's   rights
      champion, and SDF member.  When  the  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
      second Immigration Judge, the appellant applied for review, only then
      seeking to amend her grounds of appeal to argue  perceived  political
      opinion.   The  appellant  complains  in  particular  of  the  second
      Immigration Judge's reliance upon  the  difference  between  the  two
      accounts, contending that he misapplied the Devaseelan principles.

      Facts and chronology

   4. The appellant left the Cameroon on 8 March 2002, travelling to the UK
      via Kenya and arriving here on 9 March 2002. She was  interviewed  on
      13 March and her asylum appeal was refused on 16 March 2002.  She is
      a Christian, though at different places in her account she  describes
      herself as Catholic or Presbyterian.  It has never been her case that
      she is a Muslim.

   5. On 25 April 2002, the appellant left the United Kingdom and travelled
      to Eire to join her sisters there, without  notifying  the  Appellate
      Authority of her departure or making arrangements for her mail to  be
      forwarded.

   6. On 9 May 2002, less than a fortnight after her departure,  the  first
      Immigration Judge determined the appeal.  He was not aware  that  the
      appellant    abandoned  the  appeal  by  departing  from  the  United
      Kingdom, but that is the legal effect of her departure.

   7. The Tribunal has not seen the first  asylum  application,  the  first
      interview  or  any  of  the  evidence  which  was  before  the  first
      Immigration Judge.  The first Immigration  Judge's  determination  is
      fully reasoned.  It was the only available evidence before us and the
      second Immigration Judge of the account that the  appellant  gave  in
      her first claim and on entry.  It is not suggested on the appellant's
      behalf that his determination is an inaccurate summary of her primary
      account on entry.  The determination was promulgated in July 2002, to
      her notified address for  service.   That  month,  according  to  the
      appellant, her mother died in the Cameroon.

   8. The appellant remained in Eire from April - November 2002,  where  it
      seems she made another asylum claim.  We do not have details of that,
      but it must have failed as she was returned to the United Kingdom  by
      Eire in November 2002.

   9. On 3 December 2002, the appellant renewed her  asylum  claim  in  the
      United Kingdom and made a witness statement in support of it.     The
      appellant was interviewed in Liverpool on 15 January  2003,  but  the
      decision took some time.

  10. On 31 January 2004, while the asylum  application  was  pending,  the
      appellant married a Mr L by whom she   a daughter,  LL,  six  months
      later (19 June 2004,).     In June 2004,  she  was  served  with  the
      letter of refusal and notice of decision and appealed promptly.

  11. On 5 August 2004, the appellant made a second witness statement.   On
      22 September 2004, the appeal against the second  refusal  of  asylum
      was heard at Bradford before the second Immigration Judge.

  12. At that hearing, Mr Waheed applied for an adjournment and   sought to
      persuade the second Immigration Judge that the substance of the first
      Immigration Judge's determination should be ignored in the  light  of
      the guidance given by the IAT in Devaseelan.

  13. In her grounds of appeal before the  second  Immigration  Judge,  the
      appellant   raised an Article 8 element relating to her marriage  and
      daughter.

  14. The appellant now relied on her mother's alleged political activities
      as a member of the Social Democratic Front (SDF),  which  she  linked
      strongly to the risk  of  female  genital  mutilation  on  return  to
      Cameroon.  She explained the late raising of this second issue;   she
      said that on entry she was traumatised by the prospect of  return  to
      Cameroon and, whilst she felt able  to  mention  the  female  genital
      mutilation risk, did not feel able to mention her mother's  politics.
      The second Immigration Judge did not find those  activities  credible
      for reasons set out at paragraph 25 of the determination.

  15. The second Immigration Judge observed that, apart from the very  late
      addition of political activity as part of her FGM claim,  the  second
      asylum claim raised exactly the same issues as the first. He  treated
      the facts in relation to FGM as determined by the  first  Immigration
      Judge.

  16. The second Immigration Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant
      but did not find her evidence credible; in particular (paragraph  25)
      he found it incredible that she   been able to mention  the  risk  of
      FGM on entry, a particularly emotive  issue,  but    felt  unable  to
      mention her mother's political activities, the opposite of  what  one
      would normally expect.

  17. He considered the appellant's claim on the alternative basis that  it
      might be credible;  based upon  the  IAT's  decision  in  NG  (FGM  -
      Cameroon) [2004] UKIAT 00247 ,  which  reviewed   objective  evidence
      from Cameroon and found that FGM was not routinely  practised  there,
      and that internal relocation was open to those at risk.   The  second
      Immigration Judge reviewed the up-to-date evidence  on  Cameroon  and
      the new variation in the appellant's account, but was  not  satisfied
      that his decision should differ from that of  the  first  Immigration
      Judge.

  18. The Article 8 claim  was  briefly  considered  and  dismissed  on  DM
      (Croatia) grounds. The appellant's husband was a failed asylum seeker
      with a pending Immigration Appeal Tribunal  hearing  and  no  status.
      There is no challenge  to  that  aspect  of  the  second  Immigration
      Judge's determination.

      Error of law

      Appellant's submissions (Mr Waheed)


  19. In grounds of appeal to this Tribunal, Mr Waheed sought for the first
      time to add a ground  of  perceived  political  opinion  as  well  as
      membership of a particular social  group.  He  defined  the  proposed
      group as 'Women/Mother's Family'.

  20. Paragraph 3 of the grounds of  appeal  refers  mystifyingly  to  acts
      knowingly tolerated by the Iranian  authorities  or  from  which  the
      Iranian authorities would not provide effective protection,  although
      the appellant's country of origin is Cameroon.  We  have  disregarded
      that ground.

  21. Mr Waheed indicated that he would not proceed with Ground  A  of  his
      grounds of appeal (that the Immigration Judge's  application  of  the
      procedure rules was contrary to law); but he did rely  on  Ground  B,
      that there was an error of law in applying Devaseelan in  the  manner
      already indicated and   upon Ground C in relation to the  Immigration
      Judge's refusal to  adjourn  the  appellant's  appeal  to  await  the
      appellant's husband's appeal, although he did not press that with any
      vigour.

  22. The core of this appeal was and remains the Devaseelan  point.   Were
      it not for the Home Office concession before the  second  Immigration
      Judge, that the appellant was indeed out of the country at  the  time
      of the first Immigration Judge's determination  and  thus,  that  the
      first Immigration Judge's determination was a nullity as  the  appeal
      already been abandoned) Mr Waheed would have found himself in the odd
      position of having to prove that on behalf of the appellant that  she
       abandoned her first appeal.

  23.  On  the  proper  construction  of  the  second  Immigration  Judge's
      determination, it is common ground that the appellant   abandoned her
      appeal  in  that  way,  and  that  the  determination  of  the  first
      Immigration Judge was, although he did not realise that,  in  fact  a
      nullity.  The appellant's  solicitors  did  not  seek  to  appeal  or
      challenge that determination as served.

  24. Mr Waheed therefore submitted that as a matter of law it was not open
      to  the  second  Immigration  Judge  to  regard  the  female  genital
      mutilation point as settled by that nullified determination, and that
      the second Immigration Judge should  have  decided  the  question  of
      credibility  in  relation  to  the  FGM  claim  afresh,  rather  than
      restricting himself to the decision of the first  Immigration  Judge.



  25. Mr Waheed further contended that the asylum interview on  the  second
      claim made a clear link between the death of the  appellant's  mother
      and the threat of FGM to her, and that to exclude that link  and  not
      re-investigate female genital mutilation   fatally tainted the second
      Immigration Judge's credibility decision.

  26. The appellant's case now was that she   been targeted for late female
      genital mutilation because of her mother's  political  activities  in
      encouraging young girls not to respect traditions and supporting  the
      SDF.   If returned her mother's opponents would kill  her  (interview
      record, Questions 32  and  40)  or  at  the  very  least,  insist  on
      performing female genital mutilation on her.

  27. The error of law was accordingly material and the second  Immigration
      Judge ought to have excluded from  his  mind  the  first  Immigration
      Judge's decision. Those instructing Mr Waheed did not  represent  the
      appellant in the earlier appeal and were unable to give  any  further
      details of it, other than those contained  in  the  decision  of  the
      first Immigration Judge.

      Respondent's submissions (Ms Hough)

  28. For the Secretary of State Ms Hough referred to the claimant's second
      witness statement (paragraphs 7 to 9 on page 92  of  the  appellant's
      bundle).   The Immigration Judge   indeed failed to  reopen  FGM  but
      even if that were an error of law, in the light of NG, paragraph  28,
      there was no risk of circumcision for an adult  woman  such  as  this
      appellant.  The Immigration Judge   checked and updated the objective
      evidence and (paragraph 25) found that the appellant   not  mentioned
      her mother's SDF connection because she was stressed during the first
      asylum claim.

  29. Under rule 48.5 of the 2002, Rules the onus was on the  appellant  to
      keep the Appellate Authority aware of her address for service and  to
      ensure that she discovered the outcome of her  appeal.   As  regarded
      the  adjournment  request,  given  the  reasons  set   out   in   the
      determination, there was no error of law there.

  30. On  the  appellant's  own  evidence,  the  Immigration  Judge    been
      entitled to reject the new evidence because if there   been political
      problems they should have been mentioned at  the  earlier  stage.  If
      anything, the ubiquity of the link between the SDF  and  FGM  in  the
      second interview strengthened rather than weakened that point.

  31. There was no necessity for the second Immigration Judge to ignore the
      first  Immigration  Judge's  determination   which   contained   full
      reasoning because the first Immigration Judge   not been  aware  that
      the appellant was already out of the country, any error  of  law  was
      not material.  It  was  clear  from  the  first  Immigration  Judge's
      determination that the appellant's own evidence   not  mentioned  the
      SDF on the first occasion.

      Appellant's further submissions in reply

  32. In reply, Mr Waheed indicated that that was not the manner  in  which
      the Devaseelan principles   been treated.   The appellant's  mother's
      SDF support and opposition  to  traditional  cultural  practices  was
      difficult to compartmentalise as suggested  and  the  facts    to  be
      considered as a whole.

  33. The outcome might indeed have been different if the first Immigration
      Judge's decision not been treated as binding under Devaseelan and the
      credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  had  been  reopened.    The
      appellant   was not cross-examined on the evidence before the date of
      the first Immigration Judge's decision and  credibility  should  have
      been considered as a whole.

  34. Mr Waheed relied upon the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Katrinak  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001]  EWCA  Civ  832  in
      which Schiemann LJ criticised the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  for
      reaching a conclusion which  may  possibly  have  been  open  to  it,
      without a process of reasoning which was clearly set out,  and  after
      having stopped the appellant's advocate from developing his  case  as
      he wished (paragraph 25).

      Conclusions


  35. We first consider whether the Immigration Judge erred in refusing  an
      adjournment  to  enable  the  appellant's  case  to  be  heard  after
      resolution  of  her  husband's  appeal  to  the  Immigration   Appeal
      Tribunal, due to be heard on the same day as the  appellant's  appeal
      to the second  Immigration  Judge.   the  rules  for  adjournment  in
      November 2004, were contained in  rule  40  of  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum (Procedure) Rules 2003, -

      "40- Subject to  any  provision  of  these  Rules  or  of  any  other
      enactment, an adjudicator or the Tribunal may adjourn the  hearing  of
      any appeal or application.

       (2)  An adjudicator or the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing on the
      application  of  a  party,  unless  satisfied  that  the   appeal   or
      application cannot otherwise be justly determined

       (3)  Where a party applies for an adjournment of a hearing, he must-

   a) if practicable, notify all other parties of the application;

   b) show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and

   c) produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon in support  of  the
      application."

  36. The appellant was not married to her husband when in Cameroon.  He is
      a witness only to the Article 8 element of  the  appeal.   She  lives
      with him and they would both have been aware of the  clash  of  dates
      long before the second Immigration Judge  hearing.   No  attempt  was
      made to comply with rule 40(3) and  apply  on  notice.   Mr  Waheed's
      argument to the second Immigration Judge was that if the  appellant's
      husband's appeal were allowed  he  would  have  indefinite  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom, which would impact on her own Article 8
      claim, but in those circumstances,  fresh  representations  could  be
      made.  We do  not  consider  that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in
      considering that the appellant's appeal could be justly  disposed  of
      before her husband's was  finally  concluded  (paragraph  10  of  the
      determination).

  37. We turn now  to  the  question  of  the  second  Immigration  Judge's
      approach to the first Immigration Judge's determination.  We began by
      reminding ourselves of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal's guidance  in
      Devaseelan,

           "37.   ...  the   first   Adjudicator's   determination   stands
                 (unchallenged  or  not  successfully  challenged)  as   an
                 assessment of claim the appellant was then making  at  the
                 time of that determination.  It  is  not  binding  on  the
                 second Adjudicator; but on  the  other  hand,  the  second
                 Adjudicator is not hearing an appeal  against  it.  As  an
                 assessment of the  matters  that  were  before  the  first
                 Adjudicator it should simply be regarded as  unquestioned.
                 It may be built upon and as a result the  outcome  of  the
                 hearing  before  the  second  Adjudicator  may  be   quite
                 different from  what  might  have  been  expected  from  a
                 reading of the first determination only but it is not  the
                 second Adjudicator's role to consider  arguments  intended
                 to undermine the first Adjudicator's determination...


      40.   We now pass to matters that could have been  before  the  first
           Adjudicator but were not.

           iv)   Facts personal to the appellant that were not  brought  to
                 the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were
                 relevant to the issues before him, should  be  treated  by
                 the second Adjudicator with the  greatest  circumspection.
                 An appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  to  the
                 available facts in an effort to obtain a  more  favourable
                 outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point
                 of  view  of  credibility.  (Although  considerations   of
                 credibility will  not  be  relevant  in  cases  where  the
                 existence of the additional factors beyond  dispute).   It
                 must   be borne  in  mind  that  the  first  Adjudicator's
                 determination was made at a  time  closer  to  the  events
                 alleged and in terms of both the fact finding and  general
                 credibility assessment would tend to have  the  advantage.
                 For this reason the adduction of  such  facts  should  not
                 usually lead to any  reconsideration  of  the  conclusions
                 reached by the first Adjudicator.


           v)    Evidence of other facts  -  country  evidence  -  may  not
                 suffer from the  same  concerns  as  to  credibility,  but
                 should be treated with caution.  The reason  is  different
                 from  that  in  (iv),  evidence  dating  from  before  the
                 determination of the first  Adjudicator  might  well  have
                 been relevant if it   been tendered to  him:  but  it  was
                 not, and  he  made  his  determination  without  it.   the
                 situation in the appellant's own country at  the  time  of
                 that determination is very  unlikely  to  be  relevant  in
                 deciding whether the appellant's removal at  the  time  of
                 the second Adjudicator's determination  would  breach  his
                 human rights.  Those representing the appellant  would  be
                 better advised to assemble  up-to-date  evidence  than  to
                 rely  on  evidence  which  is  (ex-hypothesi)  now  rather
                 dated."



  38. The thrust of that passage is that the  first  hearing  is  the  best
      account, taken as it is at the closest point to the original  events,
      and  should  always  be  the   starting   point   for   any   further
      consideration.  It follows then that if the first Immigration Judge's
      determination were not  nullified  by  the  appellant's  abandonment,
      there is no question but that the Immigration Judge would  have  been
      entitled to consider it.

  39. There has been no attempt by either party to put before us the source
      material for the first Immigration Judge's conclusions  of  fact  and
      his summary of the evidence before him.  The question is,  therefore,
      whether the second Immigration Judge was in any  way  prevented  from
      treating the first Immigration Judge's summary of  that  evidence  as
      relevant to the second determination, and  whether  his  approach  to
      that determination as a whole was correct.  We divide the points  for
      determination as follows -

        a) On the present facts, whether the second Immigration  Judge  was
           entitled to have regard to the first determination at  all,  and
           if so, to what extent?

        b) If he could consider the first determination, whether  he  erred
           in law in regarding the question of female genital mutilation as
           settled by the first Immigration Judge? And

        c) If so, whether such error of law was material on the  particular
           facts of this case, in the context of the  authorities  and  the
           current background evidence?

  40. We answer those questions as follows -

        d) The first determination contains a summary  of  the  appellant's
           documentary evidence on entry to the United Kingdom.   There  is
           no dispute but that the evidence as summarised was her  case  on
           entry.  the second  Immigration  Judge  could  have  taken  into
           account the first Statement of  Evidence  Form,  interview,  and
           witness statements if he   them;  they were not  available,  and
           there can be no objection at all to a  clear  summary  of  their
           contents, professionally prepared (albeit under a mistake of law
           as to the task he was  undertaking)  by  the  first  Immigration
           Judge;

        e) However, as regards the conclusions of fact and law in the first
           determination, as that determination was a nullity,  the  second
           Immigration Judge erred in law in having any  regard  to  those.
           In particular, it was  wrong  in  law  for  him  to  regard  the
           question of credibility of the female genital mutilation risk as
           having been settled by the first Immigration  Judge,  since  the
           determination was of an appeal which no longer  existed  at  the
           date of decision.

  41. The Tribunal considers that it is an error  of  law  for  the  second
      Immigration Judge to treat himself as bound by the findings  of  fact
      or law in a determination which was a nullity because  the  appellant
      had left the jurisdiction before it was  promulgated;  but  that  the
      second Immigration Judge may nevertheless have regard  to  the  first
      Immigration Judge's recital of the materials and evidence before  him
      and in particular, the account given by the appellant at the  earlier
      hearing. We now consider in detail the materiality of such  an  error
      on the particular facts of this appeal.

      Materiality of error of law

  42. The second Immigration Judge had  the  advantage  of  being  able  to
      compare the account which the appellant gave on return to the  United
      Kingdom in late 2002, (after her  attempted  claim  in  Eire  and  no
      doubt, discussions of her situation with her sisters who lived there)
      with that which she gave on entry to  the  United  Kingdom  in  March
      2002.  The difference between the two fact sets is substantial.   the
      account before the first Immigration Judge -

        f) Makes no mention at all of the SDF problem  or  the  appellant's
           mother's anti-government views and activities.

        g) Is of a claimed risk to a twenty one year old woman of FGM which
           runs counter to the background evidence that  FGM  was  normally
           performed on girls between four and six years old  or  at  least
           pre-puberty.

        h) In her Self Completion Form prepared for her second  claim,  the
           appellant mentioned her mother's political  activities  for  the
           first time at Questions 1, 3 and 5 of Section A  of  that  form;
           Question 1 and 7 of Section C4, political opinions; and Part  D,
           further information.  She said she was a Catholic.

        i) In the statement prepared to accompany  that  form  in  December
           2002, there is mention of her mother's attitude to the  cultural
           practice of female genital mutilation  but  no  mention  of  the
           political elements later relied upon.

        j) In the asylum interview on 15 January 2003, the appellant stated
           she was Presbyterian rather  than  Catholic  and  mentioned  her
           mother's SDF activities at Questions 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 29,
           32, 40, 42, 43 and in the concluding questions.   The  appellant
           was able to hand in a copy of her mother's birth certificate and
           SDF ID card for the first time.

        k) Nevertheless, it was not until the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
           Tribunal from  the  second  Immigration  Judge's  decision  were
           settled (17 June 2004,) that the appellant  specifically  relied
           upon the political element of her mother's history.

        l) The appellant's August 2004 witness statement (which  must  have
           been prepared on advice) added human rights as a claim  but  did
           not mention the political aspects now relied upon.

  43. The account  as  now  given  is  so  intertwined  with  her  mother's
      political activity that it is unrecognisable from the  rather  simple
      account which was before the first Immigration  Judge.    We  do  not
      consider that the passages quoted from Devaseelan indicate  that  the
      Immigration Judge erred in taking that into account, indeed it  seems
      to us that this is the classic situation where incremental  increases
      are made in an account over the passage of time. were the Immigration
      Judge not permitted to take into account the earlier versions of  the
      appellant's account and the differences between them, that would have
      the result of permitting  the  appellant  to  benefit  from  her  own
      reticence in relation to what appears now to be a significant part of
      her core account.

  44. We   consider that it was open to the Immigration Judge  to  observe,
      as he did, that he would have  expected  the  appellant  to  be  less
      embarrassed in talking about her mother's  politics  than  about  the
      prospect of a horrific mutilation of a very private part of her body,
      rather than as she now contends, finding it possible  to  talk  about
      female genital mutilation but not politics.  That is a  sensible  and
      sustainable position to take.

  45. We   have regard to the effect on this account of Section  8  of  the
      2004, Act if, as seems clear, the appellant has delayed in  revealing
      this part of her account.  It was open to the appellant to  be  frank
      about the case as she now puts it in March 2002, but she did  not  do
      so until January 2003, and her explanation  is  unsatisfactory.   The
      Tribunal cannot, on that basis, treat this account as wholly credible
      and the Immigration Judge did not err therefore in finding her not to
      be a witness of truth.    The degree  to  which  he  did  so  is,  as
      always, a question of fact for the Immigration Judge.

  46. Our primary conclusion is that the  Immigration  Judge's  credibility
      findings are sustainable despite the error of law in his approach  to
      the  first  determination.   However,  for  completeness,   we   have
      considered his analysis of the background evidence and authorities on
      the country position (paragraphs 27-28).  It is not an error  of  law
      to  follow  the  leading   country   guidance   determination.    the
      Immigration Judge referred to NG (FGM -Cameroon) [2004] UKIAT 00247 -



    1. "The Appellant plainly identified her own religious persuasion as
       Catholic. As such, if she feared that having to live in a Muslim
       area of the country might expose her to a risk of being located by
       her stepfather or perhaps subjected again to pressure from local
       Muslims to convert or marry or undergo FGM, Cameroon was a country
       in which there were several areas where the population was
       predominantly Christian. The Adjudicator was quite entitled to
       conclude she could resettle safely in a Christian area.
    1. Ms Mallick set much store by the evidence (which included IRB,
       Canada materials and the CIPU Report of a Fact-finding Mission to
       Cameroon 17-25 January 2004,). She submitted that it indicated:
           (i) FGM was a widespread and routine practice in Cameroon; and
           (ii) it was not only practised on young girls but was also
           practised on women prior to marriage, regardless of her age.
    1. We are bound to say we do not consider the objective country
       materials bear out that FGM is routinely practised on women and
       girls in Cameroon. It certainly continues to be practised on a
       significant percentage of the female population, but, even on the
       highest figures cited by Ms Mallick, it is only inflicted on one in
       five (i.e. 20%). Furthermore, on her own figures, the main victims
       were women and girls residing in predominantly Muslim areas of the
       country. the January 2004, Fact-finding mission report states at
       paragraph 9.11 that a diplomatic source   stated that FGM occurs in
       three out of ten provinces in the east, south-west and far north.
    1. It is true that even in the predominantly Christian areas of the
       country, FGM is still practised. We are also prepared to accept that
       the government has not passed laws to make FGM illegal or to
       repudiate the custom. However, whilst we accept that it can be
       practised on women of any age prior to marriage, it is equally clear
       that it is normally practised on young girls aged 6-8 years. That is
       plainly stated in the CIPU Report at paragraph 6.70.
    1. Ms Mallick urged us to find that the Adjudicator was wrong (and that
       we would be wrong) to rely on this passage from the CIPU Report.
       However, even on the alternative sources she urged us to prefer, the
       Amnesty International report in particular, there is no suggestion
       that the practice of FGM is inflicted as often on post-adolescent as
       on pre-adolescent females.
    1. Ms Mallick submitted that, even if we found that the Appellant would
       not be at risk of being pursued or located by her stepfather or
       members of his family, we should find that it would be unduly harsh
       to expect a young woman on her own to relocate within Cameroon. In
       this regard she drew our attention to passages in the background
       materials highlighting discrimination against women in a number of
       areas. She also pointed out the poor record of the authorities in
       Cameroon: at paragraph 5.28 there was reference to "arbitrary
       arrests and detentions" and at paragraph 6.1 mention of numerous
       serious abuses of human rights. However, the background evidence
       fell well short of establishing a consistent pattern of gross, mass
       or flagrant violations of the human rights of women. The legal
       system in Cameroon permitted freedom of movement (CIPU, 6.51). Also
       relevant was that this particular appellant   shown herself able to
       turn to Catholic Church members for help and support.
    1. Whilst, therefore, the Appellant might face hardship in other parts
       of Cameroon outside her home or other Muslim areas, we do not
       consider that the evidence justified a conclusion that this
       Appellant would face a real risk of serious harm. "

  47. The October 2003 CIPU Country Report on Cameroon remains  the  latest
      background  evidence  on  this  issue.   FGM  in  Cameroon   is   not
      widespread, and is carried out mainly on Muslim girl children.  It is
      principally a pre-puberty  exercise,  or  occasionally,  pre-marital.
      There are provinces where it is not practised, it is rarely practised
      on adult women, and if so, only before marriage.

  48. This appellant is now a married woman and is 23 years  old.  She  has
      the support of her husband  if  she  is  returned  now.   It  is  not
      suggested that his appeal has subsequently succeeded, nor that  there
      is any insurmountable obstacle to their joint  return.   Her  husband
      cannot be troubled by her genital entirety; he married her  and  they
      have a daughter.  The risk to such a woman is well  below  the  level
      required to engage either the Refugee Convention or the ECHR.  To the
      extent that the appellant relies upon any risk to  her  one-year  old
      daughter, the risk to a Christian child of a man who is not  troubled
      by the FGM issue and a mother who  positively  objects  is  small  to
      vanishing point.

  49. It follows that the Immigration Judge's error on the Devaseelan point
      is not material, whether or not the appellant is treated as credible.
       The  Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the  political  element  of  the
      account, after oral evidence and submissions.  His reasons for  doing
      so are properly explained and sound (R (Iran) & Ors  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  at  paragraph
      90(3)).

      Decision

  50. For all of the above reasons, the decision of this Tribunal  is  that
      the original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law  and  the
      original determination of the appeal shall stand.






                                                         Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge


                                                             24 October 2005
