
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

         AA (Involuntary returns to Zimbabwe) Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT 00144 CG

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing: 5, 6 & 7 October
2005


                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 Mr H J E Latter (Senior Immigration Judge)
                  Mr C P Mather (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M Henderson, instructed by the Refugee
Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kovats, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

On the evidence  available  to  this  Tribunal  and  in  the  light  of  the
Respondent's concession, failed asylum-seekers returned to Zimbabwe  are  at
risk of persecution for a Convention reason and  are  accordingly  refugees.
The process of return and reception in Zimbabwe is different  from  that  in
other countries with which the Tribunal is familiar.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

                                      I

Introduction

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  According to his passport  he
     was born on 8 April 1975.  He arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  6
     November 2002.  He failed  to  comply  with  conditions  of  temporary
     admission granted on that date.  On 20 June 2005 he was arrested as an
     illegal  entrant.   He  thereupon  claimed  asylum.   His  claim   was
     considered under the Fast Track procedure.  It was refused on 27  June
     2005 and on the same date the Respondent made his decision  to  remove
     the  Appellant  as  an  illegal  entrant.   The  Appellant   appealed.
     Following a hearing on 4 July 2005, the Immigration Judge allowed  the
     Appellant's appeal on the grounds that his removal to  Zimbabwe  would
     breach both the Refugee Convention  and  Article  3  of  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights.  The Respondent applied for review of that
     decision.   Reconsideration  was  ordered  on  14  July   2005.    The
     reconsideration came  before  the  Tribunal  on  18  July  2005.   The
     Tribunal heard argument on the issue of whether there was an error  of
     law in the Immigration Judge's decision.  Following  consideration  of
     that question, the reconsideration was adjourned for determination  on
     the merits and the appeal was removed from the Fast Track system.

Background

  2. The number of Zimbabwean nationals in this country claiming asylum  or
     an entitlement to remain under a provision of the Human Rights Act  is
     considerable.  Their claims  are  determined  by  the  Respondent  and
     appeals against adverse decisions are heard by this Tribunal (before 4
     April 2005 by Immigration  Adjudicators  and  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal).  Although the standard of proof is low, a very  substantial
     proportion of the claims fail to meet even that standard, so that  the
     consequence  has  been  judicial  affirmation  of   the   Respondent's
     decision.  At that point, the claimant has no entitlement to remain in
     the United Kingdom.

  3.  Removal,  however,  is  a  different  matter.   It  appears  that  no
     unsuccessful claimants were removed to Zimbabwe during the period from
     January 2002 to  16  November  2004:   the  Respondent  had  suspended
     involuntary removals "because of the situation in Zimbabwe" as he  has
     put it.  We enquired at the hearing how  many  unsuccessful  claimants
     were at that date awaiting removal to Zimbabwe.   We  have  been  told
     that the number cannot be disclosed.

  4. Following the recommencement of removals in November 2004, there  were
     suggestions that those removed from the  United  Kingdom  as  rejected
     asylum seekers were subject to ill-treatment on return.   Two  motives
     for ill-treatment were alleged.  It was said  that  claimants'  asylum
     claims themselves showed treachery to Zimbabwe; alternatively  it  was
     said that their compulsory removal from the United Kingdom was a cloak
     for attempts to infiltrate 'Blair's spies' into Zimbabwe.

  5. This issue was one (but only one) of the  matters  considered  by  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal in a  Country  Guidance  case,  SM  [2005]
     UKIAT 00100.  Having considered the material before it,  the  Tribunal
     put the matter like this at paragraph 42 of its determination:

           "The Tribunal is satisfied in the light of the  statements  made
           by the Zimbabwean authorities that returnees are  regarded  with
           contempt and suspicion on return and  do  face  a  very  hostile
           atmosphere.  This by itself does not indicate that all returnees
           are at real risk of persecution but that returnees are liable to
           have their background and circumstances carefully scrutinised by
           the authorities."



  6. That determination was given on 11 May 2005.  Rumours of ill-treatment
     of  returned  asylum  seekers  persisted.   A  number  of  individuals
     threatened with removal sought permission for Judicial Review  of  the
     arrangements made for their removal, on  the  basis  that,  given  the
     allegations  of  ill-treatment,  rejected  asylum  seekers  could  not
     lawfully be removed to Zimbabwe  without  a  proper  consideration  of
     whether their status as failed asylum seekers gave  rise  to  a  claim
     under the Refugee Convention.  A number  of  those  applications  were
     stayed pending directions to be given by Collins J on 4  August  2005.
     On that date, by arrangement, consent or order, it  was  decided  that
     further proceedings in all the  Judicial  Review  applications  should
     await the determination of a suitable appeal by  this  Tribunal.   The
     reason why that  arrangement  was  so  obviously  right  is  that  the
     Tribunal can and must consider and determine the underlying facts in a
     way that is not open to the High Court in Judicial Review proceedings.



  7. The Appellant's appeal was immediately identified as suitable for  the
     purpose.  Although it is specifically the  appeal  of  this  Appellant
     that we determine, we have heard evidence and  arguments  directed  to
     the wider issue of whether rejected asylum seekers are as such at risk
     of persecution  on  their  return  to  Zimbabwe.   This  determination
     incorporates our findings on that issue, as well as our conclusions on
     the Appellant's own appeal.

  8. We should say that, in the meantime, removals to  Zimbabwe  had  again
     been suspended.  The Respondent undertook on 27 July 2005  to  suspend
     them, but we understand that there were in fact no  removals  after  6
     July.  Again, we sought figures at the hearing.  After  it  concluded,
     we were told that the number of Zimbabwean claimants awaiting  removal
     as at 6 July, after the  failure  of  their  claims,  also  cannot  be
     disclosed.  We are, however, aware from our own experience within  the
     Tribunal that the number of appellants who, despite lack of success in
     their appeal, have not been removed, is large.  Perhaps  that  is  why
     the Respondent will not disclose the precise figure.

  9. The number of involuntary removals in the period from 16 November 2004
     to 6 July 2005 appears, from the figures given by Mr  Walsh,  to  have
     been  210  at  the  most.   Those  unsuccessful  claimants  whom   the
     Respondent actually removed must constitute a tiny proportion  of  the
     whole.  It may be of interest to add that in this  period  there  were
     six British Airways flights to Harare every week.

The Appellant's claim

 10. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, as we  have  said,  on  6
     November 2002.  He had an apparently valid Zimbabwean passport  issued
     some three months previously.  We do not know the basis upon which  he
     sought leave to enter.  He was not granted leave  to  enter,  but  was
     granted temporary admission and released on condition that  he  return
     to the airport for  interview.   His  passport  was  retained  at  the
     airport.  He did not return; he did not seek to recover his  passport;
     he did not do anything to regularise his stay.  He is believed to have
     been working in the United Kingdom in the ensuing period of two  years
     and seven months.

 11. He was encountered by police on 20 June 2005.  In  his  dealings  with
     the police, he initially gave the name and identity  of  his  brother,
     apparently under the false impression that  his  brother  had  current
     leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Unfortunately  for  the
     Appellant, that turned out not to be the case, and he  was  originally
     arrested on the basis of the expiry of his brother's leave.  He  then,
     for the first time, admitted his true  identity  and  claimed  asylum.
     The substantive basis of his claim  was  that  he  was  a  member  and
     supporter of the opposition MDC party for six years.  He said that  he
     was held as an opposition activist for six months  following  a  clash
     between MDC and ZANU-PF  supporters,  apparently  in  June  2000.   He
     claimed that following  his  release  from  detention,  ZANU-PF  youth
     supporters stoned his house and in August 2002 came to  look  for  him
     and, not finding him, threatened his parents.  He claimed that at that
     point he left Zimbabwe in fear of his life.

The Appellant's credibility

 12. The factual basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  was  analysed  by  the
     Respondent and again by the Immigration Judge  in  the  light  of  the
     evidence the Appellant supplied to support  it.   The  Appellant  said
     that he had been a member of the MDC for some years and  that  he  had
     voted in the 2000 elections.  It is true that he was able to name  the
     leader of the MDC, but he was wrong in the name that he  provided  for
     the vice president  or  deputy  leader.   He  was  not  able  to  name
     accurately any members of the MDC's shadow cabinet.  In respect of the
     2000 elections, he gave the name of the constituency and the  name  of
     the candidate for whom he voted and who was, he  said,  elected.   But
     the constituency he named does not exist;  the  person  he  named  was
     elected, but in a different  area;   and  the  Appellant's  own  local
     candidate was a person he did not  name.   Most  striking  of  all  is
     perhaps the Appellant's ignorance of what the initials MDC stand for.

 13. It may not be very surprising that at his interview on  26  June  2005
     the Appellant knew very little about the MDC.  When he originally made
     his claim on 20 June, he made no  reference  to  having  himself  been
     politically active at all.

 14. Although he claimed to have been fleeing for his  life  following  the
     incident in August 2002, it is clear that he could have travelled much
     earlier than he did.  He had sufficient money for the purpose  in  his
     bank account, and his claim that he had to delay while his father sold
     cattle to raise money is clearly false.  He  obtained  a  passport  in
     August 2002, apparently, it must be said, without any difficulty  from
     the Zimbabwean authorities.  He obtained a visa to visit South  Africa
     in mid-September.  Yet he did not leave until  November.   It  is,  of
     course, also highly unlikely  that  if  he  had  been  the  object  of
     searches by ZANU-PF groups or by the Zimbabwean authorities  he  would
     have been  able,  as  he  claimed,  to  visit  family  members'  homes
     regularly during a three-month period  in  which  he  claimed  he  was
     avoiding attention.

 15. According to his passport, the Appellant travelled to South Africa  on
     5 November 2002.  He was granted  temporary  residence  as  a  visitor
     until 12 November.  The passport indicates clearly that  he  travelled
     by rail.  At his screening interview, he said that he had travelled to
     South Africa by air; at  his  full  interview  he  said  that  he  had
     travelled by road.  He did not claim asylum in South Africa.  He  left
     South Africa on the same day as he arrived and  travelled  to  France.
     He did not claim asylum in France.  As we have said, he also  did  not
     claim asylum in England until he was arrested, when he  gave  a  false
     name, no doubt in the hope of evading attention.   He  claimed  asylum
     immediately after he was arrested and then  gave  his  own  name.   He
     claimed  that,  despite  journeying  so  far  in   order   to   escape
     persecution, and despite having lived in the United Kingdom  for  many
     months, speaking English, being aware of the British media and  having
     at least one relative here, he knew nothing about the  possibility  of
     claiming asylum.

 16. The Respondent did not believe the Appellant.  The  Immigration  Judge
     did not believe the Appellant and said so in  his  determination.   He
     found solely that it was plausible that the Appellant had been held on
     remand for six months and then released (but not that  there  was  any
     political motivation for his detention) and that his siblings'  rented
     lodgings and part of his father's suburban house had been destroyed by
     the authorities (but that nevertheless his father and  his  father-in-
     law both had rural homes available to them and  him).   In  all  other
     respects, he rejected the account the Appellant had given him.  It  is
     not now suggested that in  that  respect  the  Immigration  Judge  was
     wrong.  The Appellant did not give evidence before us.

 17. There is no doubt in our mind that the  Appellant's  claim  to  asylum
     was, in all its substantive parts, fraudulent, and that the  Appellant
     himself has been deliberately dishonest in  almost  all  his  dealings
     with the authorities in this country.

The Immigration Judge's determination

 18. The basis of the Appellant's claim as  he  put  it  at  his  screening
     interview was this:

           "Right now I have no shelter in  Zimbabwe  and  my  life  is  in
           danger.  I will starve if I go there as I have no way of getting
           money.  Nowhere to sleep.  And  one  of  my  parents  might  get
           arrested when I go back because they say that the Zimbabweans in
           the UK are the ones supporting the opposition.  I could even  be
           taken at the airport.  I think that's all."

 19. The concern expressed here, which, as we  have  already  pointed  out,
     depends not at all on any history of  opposition  activities,  is  one
     which the Immigration Judge very properly  considered  as  a  separate
     issue following his finding that the Appellant's own  account  of  his
     history was entitled to  little  credit.   In  his  determination,  he
     records that at the hearing before him the Appellant  again  expressed
     his fear of return on this basis, and wrote this:

           "I turn to address that  which  has  been  the  subject  of  the
           Appellant's initially stated fear and of his  keen  emphasis  at
           the hearing, namely whether he faces a risk of  persecution  and
           abuse on return solely as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.   In  this
           regard, I make the  finding  that  the  fear  expressed  by  the
           Appellant is genuinely  held.   For  all  that  he  has,  in  my
           finding, manufactured that portion of his account alleging  past
           persecution and political activity, I am satisfied that the fear
           he currently expresses is subjectively real to him  and  affects
           him to a  not  insubstantial  degree.   The  question  must  be,
           however, whether there  are  objective  grounds  justifying  the
           holding of such a fear such as show that the Appellant is  to  a
           reasonable degree of likelihood at risk of such  persecution  or
           abuse."

 20. In determining that question, the  Immigration  Judge  expressly  took
     into account the following:   first,  his  view  that  there  was  "no
     relevant country guidance decision on the point"; secondly,  the  fact
     that this issue was "strongly dependent on ... recent developments and
     materials";  thirdly, the  then  current  (April  2005)  CIPU  country
     assessment;  and fourthly, a report added to the EIN website on 4 July
     2005.  Having considered those materials  and  matters,  he  concluded
     that there was indeed a general risk of persecution of refused  asylum
     seekers returned to Zimbabwe and so allowed the Appellant's appeal  on
     the basis that his return would  breach  the  Refugee  Convention  and
     Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The Respondent's application for review

 21. In his  application  for  review,  the  Respondent  alleged  that  the
     Immigration Judge erred in law in two respects.   First,  contrary  to
     his view, there was country guidance, which he was not entitled simply
     to ignore, although it might be that he could show that there were new
     facts since that guidance was given.  This particular ground  has  not
     been  pursued  further.   It  is  evidently   regrettable   that   the
     Immigration Judge was not aware  of  SM,  and  that  the  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer who appeared before him apparently did not draw his
     attention to it.  It is, however, clear  that  the  Immigration  Judge
     regarded the situation as having recently changed, so it may  well  be
     that he would have read the country guidance in that light if  it  had
     been cited to him.

 22. Of considerably more substance is the Respondent's second  ground  for
     review, which is that  the  report  on  the  EIN  website,  which  the
     Immigration Judge cites at length  in  his  determination,  and  which
     appears  to  provide  almost  the  entire  evidential  basis  for  his
     decision, was not before him at the hearing, but was the result of the
     Immigration Judge's own researches after the hearing.  The  Respondent
     complains that he had no opportunity to  deal  with  the  report,  and
     alleges a breach of natural justice.

 23. In his submissions on this issue before the  Tribunal  at  an  earlier
     hearing, Mr Symonds of the Refugee Legal Centre pointed out  that  the
     Appellant was unrepresented before the Immigration Judge and  that  it
     was the latter's duty to assist an unrepresented Appellant so  far  as
     he properly could do so.  It was the Respondent who had chosen to  use
     the Fast Track procedure, which prevented adequate preparation  before
     the  hearing.   It  was  inevitable  in  the  circumstances   that   a
     conscientious Immigration Judge would do research after  the  hearing.
     It was, he submitted, inconceivable that the Respondent could be taken
     by surprise by the Immigration Judge's use of material found  on  EIN,
     which was,  he  said,  a  well-known  site  provided  for  asylum  and
     immigration practitioners.  He said further that the material used  by
     the Immigration Judge was properly sourced.  He further submitted that
     the Fast Track Procedure Rules prevented there being an adjournment or
     delay in a Fast Track case on the basis of new evidence discovered  by
     the Immigration Judge himself, because  Rules  28(c)(i)  and  30(1)(b)
     prevented any such course of action unless the  evidence  in  question
     was "filed or given by or on behalf of  a  party".   Mr  Symonds  also
     pointed out that in his grounds for  review  the  Respondent  had  not
     referred to any material which might cast any doubt on the material on
     which the Immigration Judge had relied.

Error of law

 24. We do not accept that the Immigration Judge  was  bound  by  the  Fast
     Track Procedure Rules not to adjourn or take the case out of the  Fast
     Track procedure.  It is clear from his determination that he took  the
     view, in the light of the material of which he became aware, that  the
     evidence produced on behalf of the Respondent - that  is  to  say  the
     CIPU Report - was not sufficient  for  him  to  determine  the  appeal
     justly.  This alone would have permitted him  either  to  adjourn  the
     hearing or to take the case out of the Fast Track procedure.   In  any
     event, the Fast Track Procedure Rules do not prevent the judge from re-
     listing an appeal for further argument.  This is the course the  judge
     should have taken having discovered the further  evidence.   It  would
     not have been contrary to the Rules for the matter to be  relisted  at
     short notice for further submissions.

 25. We are satisfied that the Immigration Judge was entitled  to  consider
     material obtained  by  himself  after  the  hearing.   We  accept,  as
     submitted by Mr Symonds, that the judge was under a duty to give every
     assistance that he  properly  could  to  an  unrepresented  Appellant.
     Normally judges of any sort are discouraged  from  doing  research  of
     their own after the conclusion of the hearing, but there may  well  be
     circumstances, particularly in Fast Track cases, where an Appellant is
     unrepresented, where the interests of justice justify such  a  course.
     We do not, however, say that it is likely that they would ever require
     a judge to take into account material which might have been  available
     to him, but was not been presented to him at a hearing.

 26. What is clear, from general principles, from Rule 51(7) of the  Asylum
     and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, from Macharia  v  IAT
     (Court of Appeal, 11 November 1999) and KC [2005] UKIAT 00010, is that
     the parties must have an opportunity of  commenting  on  all  evidence
     which an Immigration Judge takes into account.  It is not the  process
     of post-hearing research  which  necessarily  is  wrong:   it  is  the
     process of deciding an appeal on material of which  the  parties  were
     given no proper notice.  Rule 51(7) is expressly made to apply to Fast
     Track cases (see Rule 27 of the Fast Track Procedure Rules).  We would
     regard it as beyond argument that this general principle  of  fairness
     is intended to apply to Fast Track cases despite any  difficulty  that
     would be caused by a narrow reading of Fast Track Rules 28 and 30.

 27. It is clearly open to  an  Immigration  Judge  to  give  notice  that,
     although he has not yet  had  an  opportunity  to  read  a  particular
     document, he will take it into account when he has done  so.   But  it
     does not follow from that that both parties ought to be  prepared  for
     him to take into account material  that  has  not  been  mentioned  or
     identified as relevant to the appeal in question.  The fact  that  the
     report in question was on the EIN  website  advances  the  Appellant's
     case not at all.  As is  acknowledged,  that  is  a  website  for  the
     benefit of immigration and asylum practitioners.  It does not  aim  to
     maintain any balance between the interests of claimants and  those  of
     the state.  It is not known whether there  is  any  independent  check
     made on facts asserted in various reports, before  those  reports  are
     themselves incorporated into the EIN website.  In the present case  it
     is notable that, contrary to what was asserted by Mr  Symonds  in  his
     submissions, the report upon which the  Immigration  Judge  relied  is
     partly unsourced, and is partly a compilation  of  newspaper  reports,
     themselves unsourced.

 28. It is in our view entirely unreasonable to expect  the  Respondent  to
     deploy evidence and arguments to counter material of this  sort  which
     it has never been suggested would form  part  of  the  basis  for  the
     decision in an individual appeal.

 29. Mr Symonds also submitted that there had in fact  been  no  breach  of
     natural justice, because the appeal was in  the  Fast  Track  and  the
     issue of the  risk  to  failed  asylum  seekers  was  clear  from  the
     Appellant's  own  case  and  from  the  documents  produced   by   the
     Respondent.  Even that, however, could  not  justify  the  Immigration
     Judge placing reliance on documents  without  giving  the  parties  an
     opportunity of commenting on them.  There might be cases where in fact
     there  was   no   prejudice   because   any   further   evidence   was
     uncontroversial or related only to a peripheral issue in  the  appeal.
     In this case, however, the further evidence went to the heart  of  the
     appeal.  The Respondent was clearly prejudiced by the fact that he did
     not have an opportunity of making representations about  the  material
     extracted from the EIN  website  by  the  Immigration  Judge.   It  is
     important to  ensure  that  informed  decisions  are  made  in  asylum
     appeals, on evidence which has been properly tested, or at least  that
     the parties have had an opportunity of properly testing  it.   Failure
     to give the parties  an  opportunity  of  making  submissions  on  the
     evidence creates a real risk of injustice.  Further, if decisions  are
     based on evidence which cannot be tested they may themselves undermine
     the integrity of the system of refugee status determination.

 30. For the foregoing reasons, we are satisfied that there was an error of
     law in the Immigration  Judge's  decision,  and  that  the  error  was
     material, because it affected his decision by causing him to  reach  a
     conclusion on the basis  of  evidence  which  he  should  have  either
     ignored or given the parties an opportunity to comment on.

 31. We therefore proceed to decide whether the Appellant's  appeal  should
     be allowed or dismissed.

                                     II

Procedural issues

 32. When it became clear that this appeal was to form the basis of Country
     Guidance on  the  question  of  returning  failed  asylum  seekers  to
     Zimbabwe, both parties  indicated  their  wish  to  submit  additional
     evidence.  The Tribunal considered that it was clearly appropriate  to
     allow them to do so, because it had not been possible or  practicable,
     within the confines of the Fast Track procedure and,  given  that  the
     Appellant was then unrepresented, to assemble the parties'  full  case
     on this issue at that stage.  In this reconsideration  we  have  taken
     into account substantial documentary evidence from both sides,  paying
     particular (but not exclusive) attention to the  passages  upon  which
     either party specifically relied.  We have heard  oral  evidence  from
     (1) a representative of a human rights NGO operating in  Zimbabwe  and
     (2) Professor Ranger (who were called on behalf of the Appellant)  and
     (3) Mr Mark Walker and (4) Mr Iain Walsh (who were called on behalf of
     the Respondent).

 33. An Order made by the Tribunal under section  11  of  the  Contempt  of
     Court Act 1981 applies to this case and prevents the disclosure of the
     identity of most of the sources of the material  which  we  take  into
     account and to which we refer in this determination.  At the beginning
     of the hearing of the evidence, an application was made by Mr  Kovats,
     supported by Mr Henderson, that the hearing should be partly or wholly
     in private.  The reason given  was  that  it  would  be  difficult  to
     conduct the hearing without revealing  sources  and  identities  which
     ought not to be revealed.

 34. We take the view  that  asylum  hearings,  particularly  in  cases  of
     general importance and more particularly still where the matter to  be
     tried is essentially a general rather than a personal one,  should  be
     in public.  In fact, our power  to  conduct  hearings  in  private  is
     limited  by  Rule  54.   We  have  considerable  doubts  whether   the
     convenience of the parties in presenting  their  appeal  could  comply
     with the "strictly necessary" requirement of Rule 54(4);  and  it  was
     not suggested that Rule 54(3) could support the application  that  was
     being made.  We accordingly decided that we would  sit  in  public  to
     hear this reconsideration, although the identity  of  the  sources  of
     some of the evidence we have heard would not be revealed.  We made  it
     clear to Mr  Kovats  and  Mr  Henderson  that  they  should  draw  our
     attention to any specific matter that might require us to  revise  our
     decision.  In the result, we dealt very briefly with a few  procedural
     matters in private.  None of them had any impact on  our  decision  on
     this appeal or on the material that we take into account in making it.

The legal context

 35. The argument advanced on behalf of the Appellant is  that  he  is  now
     protected by the Refugee Convention and by Article 3 of  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights from being removed to Zimbabwe, because  he
     would be persecuted on his return there.  His claim is that  the  risk
     of his persecution arises solely  from  his  being  a  person  who  is
     returned from the United Kingdom after having  unsuccessfully  claimed
     asylum here.  He does not rely on any merit in his asylum  claim:   as
     we have pointed out, there is none.  He relies instead solely  on  the
     consequences arising from the fact that the claim has  been  made  and
     rejected.

 36. It will be seen at once that his argument is distinctly  unattractive.
     This country, like any other  signatory  to  the  Refugee  Convention,
     takes a  pride  in  giving  proper  shelter  to  those  who  seek  its
     protection having fled  from  persecution,  or  fear  of  persecution,
     elsewhere.  The Appellant is not such a person.  If  his  argument  is
     successful, there is  a  risk  that  any  Zimbabwean  can  obtain  the
     protection of the Refugee Convention simply by coming  to  the  United
     Kingdom and claiming asylum, even though there is no merit at  all  in
     his claim.  If the Appellant's claim is right, residence as a  refugee
     in the United Kingdom and all the benefits,  whether  by  standard  of
     life, employment, social security,  or  health  services,  which  such
     residence offers are potentially open  to  any  Zimbabwean  who  could
     manage to get here and  who  is  prepared  to  indulge  in  a  cynical
     manipulation of the asylum system.  No court in any country that is  a
     party to the Refugee Convention  would  wish  to  see  the  Convention
     abused in that way.

 37. In making our decision we are, however, constrained  by  a  number  of
     matters.  The law which we are about to set out is binding on us.   As
     a result, there were no submissions on these issues  by  either  party
     before us.

 38. First of all, it is clear that status  under  the  Refugee  Convention
     does not depend on  having  left  one's  own  country  under  fear  of
     persecution:  the fear may arise from  facts  which  occur  after  the
     claimant's departure.  So, for example, a person may be a refugee  not
     because his party was the opposition party when he left  his  country,
     but because since he left there has been a coup, so  that  members  of
     his party are now for the first time in danger.  A claimant's  ability
     to found his claim to refugee status sur place,  that  is  to  say  on
     circumstances developing since his departure from his own country,  is
     universally recognised amongst countries that are signatories  to  the
     Refugee Convention.

 39. Secondly, the possibility that a brutal  regime  may  treat  returning
     asylum seekers as traitors has been recognised in the courts  of  this
     country previously.  The leading case is Mbanza v SSHD [1996]  Imm  AR
     136, where the Court of Appeal adopted dicta of Laws J in R v  IAT  ex
     parte Senga (unreported, 9 March  1994),  following  which  the  issue
     under consideration in this appeal has often been  called  the  "Senga
     question".  Those cases were decided before the coming into  force  of
     the Human Rights Act 1998.  The Court of Appeal  pointed  out  that  a
     claimant would need to show that any ill-treatment could  properly  be
     characterised  as  inflicted  for  a  "Convention  reason".   For  the
     purposes of the present appeal, this particular issue  is  put  beyond
     our consideration by Mr Kovats' concession on behalf of the Respondent
     that "if failed Zimbabwean asylum seekers do  as  such  have  a  well-
     founded fear of persecution, this would be for  a  Convention  reason,
     namely perceived or imputed political opinion" (Respondent's  skeleton
     argument, paragraph 24).  Thus the sur place principle, the  decisions
     in Senga and Mbanza, and the Respondent's concession  remove  from  us
     any task of deciding whether an argument like the  Appellant's  is  in
     truth a valid claim to refugee status.  We are bound by concession and
     by higher authority to say that it is.

 40. What then of the entire absence of good faith in the  conduct  and  in
     the claim of this particular Appellant?  Mbanza draws attention to the
     difficulty faced in maintaining a claim  of  fear  of  persecution  on
     return if the claimant himself has been  found  not  to  be  credible.
     This issue was not raised before us, for  the  good  reason  that  the
     danger in the present case, if it exists at  all,  is  said  to  arise
     solely from the fact of being returned after making an  asylum  claim.
     As to whether a claimant is entitled to rely on a risk arising  solely
     from conduct intended by him to create the risk, again we are bound by
     authority.  In Danian v SSHD [1998] Imm AR 462, the Immigration Appeal
     Tribunal decided that the benefits of the Refugee Convention were  not
     available to a person whose claim was based solely on his own  conduct
     after leaving his own country, if that conduct was directed solely  to
     erecting a sur place claim that he  would  not  otherwise  have.   The
     Tribunal (constituted, it  should  be  said,  by  the  then  President
     together with two of the members of the Tribunal  as  now  constituted
     for this appeal) based its reasoning in part of a decision of the  New
     Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority, Re HB (1995) IJRL 332.   But
     the Tribunal's determination was decisively overruled on appeal to the
     Court of Appeal, [2000] Imm AR 96, which held that the benefits of the
     Refugee Convention were available to  those  who  qualified  for  them
     regardless of any question of good  or  bad  faith.   In  one  or  two
     decisions following the Tribunal's determination of Danian, but before
     it had been reversed  on  appeal,  the  Tribunal  had  alluded  to  an
     additional justification for decisions denying refugee status in these
     cases:  that being a refugee under the Convention should be  a  matter
     of need rather than of choice, and that a person whose  claim  was  in
     essence that he had indulged in  certain  conduct  simply  because  he
     chose to be a refugee was not entitled to be regarded  as  one.   That
     reasoning was not specifically examined by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
     Danian;  but there is no doubt that  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Danian is binding on us.  It is therefore not open to us  to
     decide that the conduct of the Appellant in this case deprives him  of
     any benefits of Refugee status, if the facts show that he is  at  risk
     of persecution on return to Zimbabwe.

 41.  Constrained  as  we  are  by  existing  principles  of  law,  we  are
     accordingly in this appeal concerned entirely with  findings  of  fact
     and assessment of risk.  We direct ourselves to the specific  question
     of determining what risk, if any, the Appellant would face if,  having
     claimed asylum and failed, he is returned to Zimbabwe from the  United
     Kingdom.  We examine the evidence in order to determine that issue  as
     a matter of fact.  We  are  concerned  with  what  the  risk  is,  not
     primarily with what either  of  the  parties  think  it  is.   As  the
     Immigration  Judge  pointed  out,  although  he  had  found  that  the
     Appellant himself feared return, it was still necessary  to  determine
     whether the fear was objectively justified.  But we need to point  out
     that similar considerations apply to the evidence adduced on behalf of
     the Respondent.  Much of the oral evidence we  heard  appeared  to  be
     directed to establishing what the Respondent's view was.  The  process
     by which the Respondent forms a view, and his consistency in analysing
     and applying the evidence available to him, is a matter which  may  be
     of considerable importance in Judicial Review.  But it is of little or
     no importance in an appeal such as  this.   The  evidence  taken  into
     account by the Respondent is of interest to  us  only  insofar  as  it
     enables us to understand what the risk actually is.  In this  context,
     the Respondent's own assessment of the risks or view of the  facts  is
     irrelevant.

 42. In some types of case, for example  deportation  appeals  and  appeals
     raising issues of proportionality under the Human Rights Act, there is
     no doubt that the Respondent has a duty, which may or may not  involve
     the  exercise  of  a  discretion,  to  consider  and  balance  various
     interests  before  taking  an  immigration  decision  adverse  to   an
     individual.  In such cases,  the  Respondent's  view  is  entitled  to
     considerable respect in any subsequent appeal.  (See, for  example,  N
     (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 at [64].)   This  is  not  such  a
     case.  The only issue is the existence or not of a  risk  to  returned
     failed asylum seekers.   That is a  matter  of  fact,  prediction  and
     assessment, and the views of the  Respondent  are  not  of  themselves
     relevant to the determination of the appeal.

Establishing a general risk

 43. How then does the Appellant prove that there  is  a  general  risk  to
     returned asylum seekers, independent of their individual circumstances
     or history?  This is a matter on which there were submissions  on  the
     law.

 44. The starting-point is Hariri v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  807.   Laws  LJ
     (with whom Arden and Mummery LJJ agreed) said this at [8]:

           "In those circumstances, as it seems to me, the 'real risk'  ...
           could not be  established  without  its  being  shown  that  the
           general situation was one in which ill-treatment of the kind  in
           question generally happened:  hence the  expression  "gross  and
           systematic".  The point is one of  logic.   Absent  evidence  to
           show that the appellant was at  risk  because  of  his  specific
           circumstances, there could be no  real  risk  of  relevant  ill-
           treatment unless the situation to which the appellant  would  be
           returning was one  in  which  such  violence  was  generally  or
           consistently happening.  There is nothing else in the case  that
           could  generate  a  real  risk.   In  this  situation,  then,  a
           'consistent  pattern  of  gross  and  systematic  violation   of
           fundamental human rights', far from being at variance  with  the
           real risk test is, in my judgment, a function or application  of
           it."

 45. This wording was examined (in the context of a claim based on  Article
     3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, but it is not  suggested
     that the principle is any different) in Batayav v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ
     1489.  Munby J gave the leading judgment.  Sedley  LJ  concurred.   In
     the course of his judgment Sedley LJ  said this:

           "37.  I want to add a word, however,  about  the  evaluation  of
                 conditions which are alleged  to  create  a  real  risk  of
                 inhuman treatment.  The authority of this  court  has  been
                 lent, through the decision in Hariri , to  the  formulation
                 that ill-treatment which is 'frequent'  or  even  'routine'
                 does not present a real risk to the individual unless it is
                 'general' or 'systematic' or 'consistently happening' ...


           38.   Great care needs to be taken with such epithets.  They are
                 intended to elucidate the jurisprudential concept  of  real
                 risk, not to replace it.  If a type of  car  has  a  defect
                 which causes one vehicle in ten to crash, most people would
                 say that it presents a real risk to anyone who  drives  it,
                 albeit crashes are not generally or consistently happening.
                   The  exegetic  language  in  Hariri  suggests  a   higher
                 threshold than the IAT's  more  cautious  phrase  in  Iqbal
                 [2002] UKIAT 02239, 'a consistent pattern', which the court
                 in Hariri sought to endorse.


           39.   There is a danger, if Hariri is taken  too  literally,  of
                 assimilating risk  to  probability.   A  real  risk  is  in
                 language and  in  law  something  distinctly  less  than  a
                 probability, and it cannot be  evaluated  by  lexicographic
                 stages into something more than it is."

 46. Munby J alluded in his judgment to submissions made on behalf  of  the
     Respondent that evidence of frequent ill-treatment would  not  suffice
     to establish a real risk.  He said, at [10]:

           "I have to say that I have some misgivings about  this.   Having
           had the opportunity of reading  in  draft  what  my  Lord,  Lord
           Justice Sedley, has to say on the  point  I  respectfully  agree
           with it."

 47. Mummery LJ (who, it will be remembered, was a member of the  Court  in
     Hariri [2003] EWCA Civ 807) specifically agreed with both judgments.

 48. In Batayav v SSHD (No 2) [2005] EWCA Civ 366, the judgment  was  given
     by Buxton LJ, with whom Ward  LJ  and  Wilson  J  agreed.   Buxton  LJ
     referred to the dicta of Laws LJ in Hariri and at [5] went on  to  say
     this:

           "It is quite true that in Mr  Batayav's  own  appeal  Sedley  LJ
           expressed some reserve about the  particular  language  used  in
           that statement of  Laws  LJ.   That  was  not  the  view,  as  I
           understand it, of the other members of the court.   However,  be
           that as it may, it is clear that to establish an Article 3  case
           of the sort that  Mr  Batayav  seeks  to  establish  significant
           evidence must be given of conditions  in  the  system  that  are
           universal, or very likely to be encountered by anyone who enters
           that system."

 49. With the greatest respect, we  have  to  say  that  the  reference  to
     Batayav's previous appeal appears to  incorporate  a  misapprehension.
     As we have shown above, the other two members of  the  Court  on  that
     occasion  agreed  with  Sedley  LJ's  reservations.    The   resulting
     uncertainty about the precise formulation of the test applied  in  the
     first Batayav v SSHD, together with the introduction of what may be  a
     new formulation ("conditions that are universal or very likely  to  be
     encountered") in Batayav v SSHD (No 2) might provide ample opportunity
     for doubt about the proper test to be applied in this appeal.

 50. We prefer to approach the matter from a slightly different angle.   In
     our judgement the question is simply whether the evidence  establishes
     that there is  a  real  risk.   The  way  in  which  a  real  risk  is
     established will depend on the circumstances, the alleged risk and the
     availability of evidence.  We doubt whether there is likely to be  any
     rule that is appropriate in all cases.  Any expression of a rule would
     be clearly wrong if it had the effect that, in order to establish  the
     risk of harm to him, a claimant was required to show that  the  actual
     harm was universal or nearly so - that is, certain or nearly so.

 51. Sometimes it will be necessary to show a generality of harm.  This may
     be particularly so in cases where a claimant bases his case simply  on
     the characteristics of the country to  which  he  is  being  returned,
     without referring to the acts of any malevolent  individual.   If  his
     case is simply based on the awfulness of his country, he will  clearly
     need to  show  that  the  awfulness  extends  to  the  whole  country,
     otherwise his claim lacks substance:  he fails to establish  the  risk
     of harm because he can avoid it.  If his  claim  (like  Batayav's)  is
     based on the conditions in Russian prisons, he needs to establish that
     he will be incarcerated and also that prisons in general pose the risk
     he fears.  If they do not, he may be unable to show that  there  is  a
     real risk that he will suffer the harm, as his dispatch to one of  the
     worse (rather than one of the better) prisons would  be  a  matter  of
     pure speculation.  Given that  he  showed  that  he  was  at  risk  of
     imprisonment in Russia, his case became stronger  the  more  universal
     the conditions of which he complains.  But that is  not  to  say  that
     there is an artificial barrier that his evidence has to pass.  It  all
     depends.  It is a matter of logic;  and the way  the  rules  of  logic
     work will differ from case to case.

 52. It is for that reason that we do not think that the  Court  of  Appeal
     intended to set down any general rule in any of the three decisions to
     which we have referred.  In each case the Court  was  approaching  the
     risk alleged in that case and testing the evidence  by  the  rules  of
     logic.  It is not surprising that different words should be used  each
     time; nor is it surprising that in the first Batayav v  SSHD  all  the
     members of the Court associated themselves with  the  warning  against
     changing the question by fixing it in a particular form of words.

 53. In the present appeal, the Appellant needs to establish a real risk to
     returned asylum seekers.  He does not need to show that all, or nearly
     all, returned asylum seekers are harmed.  He needs only to  show  that
     all returned asylum seekers are at real risk of harm.  He can do that,
     as a matter of logic (and in our judgment as a matter of law)  by  any
     evidence that properly  leads  to  the  conclusion  in  question.   We
     proceed to determine whether he has done so.

 54. We have summarised the evidence at some length in this  determination.
     There is a reason for this.  Because of the sensitivity of the sources
     from which it derives, much of the evidence before us cannot  be  made
     public  in  its  original  form.   By   incorporating   it,   suitably
     anonymised, into this  determination  we  can  nevertheless  make  the
     substance of it generally available.

                                     III

The evidence for the Appellant

 55. The witnesses who gave oral evidence for the Appellant were witness  1
     and Professor  Ranger,  who  had  prepared  an  expert  report  and  a
     supplementary report.  Because  of  the  request  for  anonymity,  the
     sources and witnesses are not all named.  The sources  are  listed  in
     the appendix for purposes of reference.  The RLC offered to call those
     witnesses whose statements they had  prepared,  and  who  are  in  the
     United Kingdom, for cross-examination.  The Respondent did not ask for
     any to be called.

The evidence of witness 1

 56. This witness is a trustee of source F.  In his statement, he  confirms
     that  this  organisation  works  with  others  to  document  cases  of
     torture.  Its operations in Zimbabwe have  brought  it  into  conflict
     with the present regime which has sought  to  repress  its  activities
     through harassment and persecution.  It is  his  view  that  the  NGOs
     including his organisation  are  not  in  a  position  effectively  to
     monitor removals to Zimbabwe.  They are not  given  advance  lists  of
     returnees.  Even if it were possible to meet  with  returnees  at  the
     airport, it would not follow that the presence of an NGO would  ensure
     that those who may be detained airside would necessarily  be  produced
     or otherwise accounted for.  Once a returnee left the airport, it  was
     currently almost impossible for NGOs to maintain contact  or  to  know
     his location.  The widespread humanitarian crisis directly  caused  by
     Operation Murambatsvina has been and continues to be the main focus of
     the Zimbabwean NGO community and monitoring the treatment of returnees
     cannot be the priority at the present time.

 57. It is his view that Zimbabweans ill-treated  by  the  state  would  be
     extremely reluctant to contact NGOs  for  assistance  as  the  act  of
     making contact, if it came to light, would attract reprisals and  NGOs
     themselves are under constant surveillance.  There is also a risk that
     NGOs have been infiltrated  by  agents  of  the  Central  Intelligence
     Organisation (CIO).  In his  statement  dated  3  October  2005,  this
     witness refers to the field report.  He considered as  inaccurate  the
     proposition that human rights NGOs in Zimbabwe are operating in a  way
     that would effectively identify evidence of  human  rights  abuses  of
     returned asylum seekers.  He agrees  with  the  witness  statement  of
     witness 2.  He referred  to  paragraph  22  of  Mr  Walsh's  statement
     referring to the case of a particular returnee and the view  taken  by
     organisation F.  He confirmed that the hospital documentation was seen
     and a personal examination carried out by a medical  director  of  the
     organisation  who  is  an  internationally  respected  figure  in  the
     treatment of torture.

 58. In his oral evidence, witness 1 confirmed that he stood by his witness
     statement.  He had spoken to the head of source J  but  had  not  been
     able to contact the spokesman identified in the field report for  this
     organisation.  The head of the organisation said that they  could  not
     investigate or monitor returnees unless they knew who they were.  They
     were not informed.   Those  who  were  ill-treated  were  unlikely  to
     approach an NGO.  The exceptions were human rights workers  who  would
     know of the appropriate mechanisms.  The majority of those ill-treated
     would go undetected and would not expect to get  redress.   Witness  1
     said that he agreed with this analysis.

 59. He was familiar with the spokesman for source K.    This  organisation
     was formed to address the needs of those who face intimidation because
     they were treating victims of torture and to represent those  who  did
     not agree with the stand taken by the  Zimbabwe  Medical  Association.
     He would not expect it  to  be  directly  aware  of  ill-treatment  of
     returnees.  He would also not be expect ill-treatment to  be  reported
     to  source  B  which  was  a  regional  organisation  covering  twelve
     countries and dealing primarily with issues of governance.   He  would
     be surprised if most victims were even aware of its existence.  He was
     aware of source A and agreed with the statement of witness 3  at  871-
     2.  He agreed with the comments reported  at  paragraph  25(d)  of  Mr
     Walsh's statement that anyone returning from the United Kingdom or the
     United States would be  liable  to  the  interrogation  on  return  on
     suspicion of being a spy or an agent.  It was his belief that this was
     likely to include ill-treatment:  the interrogation would include more
     than being required to  answer  questions.   He  confirmed  in  cross-
     examination that he was aware that the  RLC  had  been  attempting  to
     obtain clarification of some of the matters in the field report.

The evidence of Professor Ranger

 60. Professor Ranger's expert report is dated 28 July  2005.   He  made  a
     supplementary  statement  dated  2  August  2005  responding  to   the
     statement of Mr Walsh.  His report sets out the basis of his expertise
     which was summarised by the Tribunal in paragraph 14 of SM.  It is not
     necessary for us to repeat  it.   Nothing  in  the  evidence  at  this
     hearing has cast any  doubt  on  Professor  Ranger's  expertise.   His
     evidence deals firstly with  the   issue  of  the  view  held  by  the
     Zimbabwe regime of those who have sought asylum in the United  Kingdom
     and whether he agreed that it was  safe  to  enforce  the  removal  of
     rejected asylum seekers.  He refers to ministerial statements  and  to
     comments in  the  state  controlled  press  and  in  particular  to  a
     quotation from the previous Minister of  Information,  Jonathan  Moyo,
     published in the Herald newspaper of 17 December  2004.   This  refers
     to:

           "threats  by  the  United  Kingdom  to   deport   about   10,000
           Zimbabweans which could be a cover to deploy elements trained in
           sabotage, intimidation and violence and destabilise the  country
           before and during next March's Parliament elections."


 61. Professor Ranger then deals with the argument that this  statement  is
     in direct contradiction to a subsequent statement  by  the  Zimbabwean
     Minister for Justice, Patrick Chinamasa,  made  to  Parliament  on  16
     September 2004 that Zimbabwe would unconditionally take back all those
     returned from the United  Kingdom.   Jonathan  Moyo  was  subsequently
     subjected to an attack by President Mugabe during a Central  Committee
     meeting and removed from that committee.  He was  later  removed  from
     the Cabinet and stood  as  an  independent  in  the  March  elections.
     Professor Ranger notes that the Minister of Justice was also disgraced
     at the same time as Jonathan  Moyo.   Professor  Ranger  refers  to  a
     number of newspaper reports indicating a  power  struggle  in  ZANU-PF
     between the  old guard and a  younger  group  resulting  in  Moyo  and
     Chinamasa being ousted.  He notes that President Mugabe kept  Jonathan
     Moyo in post long after his statement on returned  deportees  and  was
     very  reluctant  to  lose  him  from  the  Information  Ministry.   In
     Professor Ranger's view, the sacking was far from being a  repudiation
     of his statements as Minister of Information.

 62. There has continued to be hostile comments in the Zimbabwean press  in
     newspapers directly under the control of the  President's  office  and
     the Ministry of Information.  These include an article in  the  Sunday
     Mail on 19 December 2004 that deportees "are enough to cause mayhem in
     the country" and saying that some were being sent  back  "planted  and
     paid by Britain to carry out subversive activities including  possible
     killings".  In assessing the views of the Zimbabwean regime, Professor
     Ranger takes the view that these allegations  against  asylum  seekers
     must be set in the  context  of  longer  term  assertions  of  British
     conspiracies.  Over the previous five years, Britain has been  accused
     of   recruiting    Zimbabweans    for    sabotage,    espionage    and
     destabilisation.  There continue to be allegations of a hidden British
     hand in Zimbabwean affairs.  The press in Zimbabwe has asserted that a
     recent South African church delegation led by Archbishop  Ndungane was
     funded by British intelligence and that  Anna  Tibaijuka,  the  United
     Nations  representative,  who  produced  a  very  critical  report  on
     Operation Murambatsvina was an agent of the British Government.

 63. Professor Ranger's report confirms that the man currently in charge of
     the CIO is Didymus Mutasa whom he describes  as  notorious  for  using
     violence against political opponents in Makoni district in  the  past,
     against the MDC  and  more  recently  against  supporters  of  ZANU-PF
     challenges in the party primaries.  The  CIO  under  Mutasa  has  been
     invested with responsibility for food distribution and was involved in
     Operation Murambatsvina.  Mutasa is notorious for  his  statement  in
     November 2002 that "we will  be  better  off  with  only  six  million
     people, with our own people who support the liberation  struggle.   We
     don't want all  these  extra  people".   He  has  accused  Britain  of
     conspiratorial interference in  Zimbabwean  affairs  and  is  said  to
     believe that  many  British  spies  have  been  infiltrated  into  the
     country.

 64. It is Professor Ranger's view that the violence used by the CIO cannot
     be attributed to a lack of discipline by "rotten  apples"  with  those
     affected having a  right of complaint to a higher authority.  Beatings
     during interrogation are a fundamental part of CIO practice  and  will
     not be punished.  Professor Ranger sets out the history  of  the  CIO.
     It was founded during the UDI period and in the  1970s was involved in
     assassinations, dirty tricks and poisonings according  to  an  account
     later published by its then director in  "Serving  secretly,  Rhodesia
     into Zimbabwe 1964-1981".  President Mugabe inherited the organisation
     and most of its senior white officers.  It carried on  the  traditions
     of the 1970s during the  Matabeleland  violence  of  the  1980s.  The
     repression in  Matabeleland  was  aimed  at  the  elimination  of  the
     structures of Nkomo's party, ZAPU and the destruction of what survived
     of his guerrilla army, SIPRA.  The CIO used interrogation, torture and
     killings to achieve its aims.  Professor Ranger refers to a March 2005
     Redress report entitled "Zimbabwe: The Face of Torture  and  Organised
     Violence!".  This asserts that the use of torture is deeply ingrained,
     particularly within the CIO.  In 2004, the  budget  for  the  CIO  was
     increased six fold.  It is Professor Ranger's view that the nature and
     outlook of the organisation does not seem to have  changed  in  thirty
     years.  It has always hunted down opponents for the regime often using
     extreme violence.

 65.  It  is  Professor  Ranger's  view  that  given  the  regime's  belief
     in Britain's infiltration of spies, the CIO would be tasked  to  root
     them out and given that it is widely believed that some  at  least  of
     the asylum deportees are  British  agents  they  can  expect  to  face
     interrogation.  He confirms that the CIO detain  asylum  deportees  at
     Harare Airport and interrogate them.  He refers to the report  of  the
     interrogation of witness 8.  It is his view that it is highly unlikely
     that a deportee would escape interrogation.

 66. Professor Ranger is now aware of considerably more evidence concerning
     the fate of deportees than when he gave evidence  to  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal in SM.  He refers to recent reports of cases of actual
     abuse  in  the  British  broadsheet  press  and  in   particular   the
     Independent on Sunday on 3 July 2005 and The  Times 4 July 2005 and  5
     July 2005.  These and similar articles appear in the joint bundle.  He
     refers to reports of interrogation and ill-treatment of returnees  and
     of other reported problems  after  their  release  from  the  airport.
     Professor Ranger commented that the  Zimbabwe  Government  feels  more
     than ever under threat, with calls from Britain, the  US  and  the  EU
     that it should be brought to the Security Council over  the  clean  up
     operation, with demands from the IMF for repayments and the threat  of
     suspension by the World Bank.   The  authoritarian  character  of  the
     regime has been increasingly on display.

 67. In summary, Professor Ranger comments on  what  conclusions  he  would
     currently draw as to how rejected asylum claimants would be treated if
     expelled to Zimbabwe.  He described his response as a development from
     the evidence he gave to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  in  February
     2005.  There he pointed to cause  for  considerable  concern  but  was
     cautious given the very  short  period  that  had  elapsed  since  the
     suspension on returns had been lifted.   Since  then  there  has  been
     evidence of violence in several places and the objective situation has
     worsened in many ways.  The effect of the clean up operation has  been
     to make further accommodation scarce and expensive.  The food shortage
     is worse than it was.  People going to rural areas from the town  have
     been excluded from food relief lists drawn up by the head-men.  It  is
     his opinion that there is a substantial  risk  that  any  one  removed
     following an asylum claim in the United Kingdom  will  be  dealt  with
     violently and  oppressively.   Some  will  be  detained  and  tortured
     whereas others will be released  but  remain  under  surveillance  and
     threat.  Their families may well be frightened to associate with  them
     and the urban "clean up" and food shortages will make it difficult for
     them to return to their homes or to relocate.

 68. In his oral evidence Professor Ranger confirmed that  beating  was  a
     systemic feature of a CIO investigation.  When he had  given  evidence
     in February 2005 in SM, at that stage was only one  reported  case  of
     ill-treatment to a returnee.  The pattern of  the  statements  by  the
     Zimbabwean media was that returnees would be regarded with  suspicion.
     He would infer from this a likelihood  of  ill-treatment.   By  August
     2005, there were a number of reported cases of ill-treatment.  When he
     saw the field report he was struck by  the  fact  that  there  was  no
     evidence of the monitoring capacity of NGOs.  He  believed  it  was  a
     fantasy to say that the  NGOs  would  be  in  a  position  to  monitor
     returns.  He agreed with the comments made in the statement of witness
     2.  The evidence from the Home Office did not change his  view  as  to
     whether the NGOs would be in a position to monitor  returns.   He  had
     read the press reports of the visit by the delegation from the  United
     Kingdom Government in September 2005 and took the  view  that  it  was
     damaging and in  particular  the  references  to  the  fact  that  the
     Government would now  realise  what  "liars  and  frauds"  the  asylum
     seekers were.

 69. In cross-examination, he took issue with the  general  conclusions  in
     the field report.  He would only expect the NGOs to  know  of  matters
     which had been reported to them.  The judgment of witness  2  was  one
     reason why Professor Ranger did not credit the judgment of  the  field
     report.  The NGOs would not have the capacity and would  not  know  of
     the extent of abuse.  The subsequent silence of those ill-treated  was
     a key feature and arose from fear.  It was his view that the risk  had
     not increased but there was now more evidence to demonstrate the  fact
     that the risk existed.  When giving evidence in February 2005 he  had
     not intended to give the impression that there  was  a  monitoring  of
     returns by the Zimbabwe Association (paragraph 41 of SM).  There  had
     been an attempt to trace asylum seekers who were returned but this did
     not amount to monitoring.  It had not been his intention to imply that
     returnees were monitored as the Zimbabwean Association and  NGOs  were
     unable to do this.

 70. He confirmed in  answer  to  questions  from  the  Tribunal  that  the
     Zimbabwean press did attempt to  have  it  both  ways,  arguing   that
     returnees were spies but on the  other hand  liars  and  frauds.   The
     further evidence about the treatment of returnees did not surprise him
     but had confirmed his views.  It was his view that some returnees were
     likely to be mistreated but it was difficult to determine who.  He did
     not believe that the CIO people at  the  airport  acted  randomly  but
     neither did they act systematically.  It was difficult  to  discern  a
     system.  There would be a grave risk to some people.  It would be part
     of the CIO tactics to aim for activists but also  to  pick  up  either
     people.  The CIO was becoming a huge organisation.   At  the  airport,
     the likelihood was that they would use their  fundamental  techniques.
     It was his view that returning asylum seekers would be  more  at  risk
     than the population at large and the risk to them arose  because  they
     would be funnelled into a moment of encounter with the CIO.   At  that
     point, they would face a particular danger.  It was  believed  amongst
     asylum seekers that there were  CIO  operatives  working  under  cover
     amongst them.  When pressed as to  the  risk  for  a  returned  asylum
     seeker who was not an opponent of the regime, he said that his  honest
     answer was that he did not know whether there was  a  risk  but  there
     would be in depth questioning by the CIO and there would be some  risk
     of physical ill-treatment.  We understood his answer not to mean  that
     he did not know whether there was a risk but that it was difficult  to
     assess risk for a particular returnee:  some would be ill-treated, but
     it was difficult to predict who.

The witness statement of witness 2

 71. Witness 2 is the founding director of source F.  He has been  actively
     monitoring human rights  violations  and  torture  in  Zimbabwe  since
     1998.  He has contributed to many reports on human  rights  observance
     and is the author of a number of reports.  He met several members  of
     the delegation from the British Government along with officials of the
     British Embassy on 7 September 2005.  The  delegates  wanted  to  know
     about the present situation in Zimbabwe and about the NGOs ability  to
     investigate the treatment of failed  asylum  seekers  removed  by  the
     British authorities.  It was explained that the situation in  Zimbabwe
     was seriously destabilised and getting worse.   It  was  significantly
     more chaotic since  Operation  Murambatsvina.   Clients  of  the  NGOs
     disappeared and NGOs work had been disrupted.   For  individual  cases
     the human rights community relied on passive capture:   they  did  not
     find the victims but the victims found them.  It  was  his  view  that
     only a tiny minority of individual  cases  of  torture  and  organised
     violence by the state were recorded by the NGO  community.   The  vast
     majority of victims did not make  a  complaint  to  NGOs  for  obvious
     reasons.  There was conclusive evidence of  sustained  and  systematic
     human rights abuses amounting to a massive attack by the state on  its
     citizens.

 72. The major effort of the NGOs was seeking to report on the catastrophic
     humanitarian situation resulting from the regime's actions.  There was
     an appreciable risk of ill-treatment for people who  did  not  declare
     open affiliation to ZANU-PF and the government as well  as  a  serious
     humanitarian situation in which ordinary Zimbabweans  were  likely  to
     suffer persistent hunger and possible  starvation.   Many  Zimbabweans
     were  fleeing  because  of  the  humanitarian  situation  but  it  was
     important  to  note  that  many  were  also   victims   of   political
     violence.  The NGOs had not been asked about specific returnees by the
     delegation but whether they had obtained evidence about the  treatment
     of individual returnees.  For this evidence to be available  either  a
     person must go to the media or approach an NGO to lodge  a  complaint.
     The human rights NGOs had themselves been targets of the  state  since
     2000.  Repression increased as international  pressure  on  the  state
     increased.  To approach an NGO would be  a  good  reason  for  further
     harassment by the state.  Most NGOs would advise someone who  reported
     such ill-treatment to keep their head down and not take  the  risk  of
     making a fuss for himself or the NGO.  It would be fantasy to say that
     NGOs have a system in place that  could  be  relied  upon  to  produce
     specific evidence of mistreatment of individual asylum seekers  either
     at the hands of the CIO or thereafter.

The statement of witness 3

 73. This witness is a representative of source A.  In her statement dated
     4 October 2004, the meeting with representatives of the Home Office is
     confirmed.  The witness also confirms the presence of witness 2 at the
     meetings.  He is described as one of the most knowledgeable sources on
     the Zimbabwean NGO community.  Organisation F is the main organisation
     in the Forum focussed  on  reporting  on  and  supporting  victims  of
     torture.  Information would have to reach the  NGO  community  in  the
     first place and as regards a person being returned  to  Zimbabwe  such
     cases would not necessarily be known about unless the report was  made
     to organisation A or  was  reported  in  the  press.   Most  cases  of
     violations in Zimbabwe went unreported and most victims chose  not  to
     make reports for fear of further intimidation or harassment.   Witness
     3 could not say categorically whether someone who  had  sought  asylum
     from Britain would be discriminated against by ZANU-PF.  She  knew  of
     no specific reports of persons who had been harassed by the Zimbabwean
     authorities following their removal from the United Kingdom, but could
     say that they were credible reports that the distribution of food  was
     being used as a political tool by ZANU-PF.

The witness statement of witness 4

 74. Witness 4 is an official  of  source  D.   The  witness  confirms  the
     correctness of the field report when commenting on general  conditions
     and Operation Murambatsvina.  The report also  correctly  records  the
     organisation's view that an asylum  seeker  removed  from  the  United
     Kingdom was likely to be singled out and liable to suspicion as a  spy
     and would be interrogated.  Someone who had  sought  asylum  from  the
     United Kingdom would be viewed as a traitor or  enemy  of  the  state.
     Torture during interrogation by the CIO was  usual  as  was  degrading
     treatment.  There was evidence that MPs had been tortured by  the  CIO
     and witness 4 comments how much worse  the  position  of  an  ordinary
     person under interrogation on suspicion as  a  traitor  would  be.   A
     person who had been ill-treated was unlikely to reveal such  treatment
     outside their families for fear of attracting  the  attention  of  the
     CIO.  It was not the view of organisation D that they would expect  to
     hear of systematic mistreatment.  Although no cases had come to  their
     attention, this was consistent with the fact that bringing a complaint
     would be regarded as both futile and dangerous to the claimant and his
     family.  There was no reason why the CIO would not  use  its  ordinary
     methods of interrogation against a returnee  including  ill-treatment.
     Someone who had sought asylum from the United Kingdom would be  marked
     out as a traitor and watched over.  There was a constant demonising of
     the United Kingdom and a returnee would probably be  viewed  as  worse
     than an ordinary opposition supporter.

The witness statement of witness 5

 75. This statement is made by a Zimbabwean citizen who has been recognised
     as a  refugee  and  has  made  a  statement  in  the  Judicial  Review
     proceedings on an undertaking that all steps necessary will  be  taken
     to  secure  his  anonymity.   He  used  to  work  for  the   Rhodesian
     Intelligence  Corps   as   a   military   intelligence   officer   and
     subsequently, when Rhodesia  became  Zimbabwe,  and  the  Intelligence
     Corps became part of the Zimbabwean Defence Force.  He was a member of
     the unit responsible for military intelligence aspects of security  at
     Harare Airport.  Procedures were in place to ensure that the passenger
     manifest was copied to airport intelligence.  The  list  was  analysed
     and the name of anyone  believed  to  be  of  interest  to  the  three
     security agencies, military  intelligence,  police  internal  security
     intelligence and the CIO,  would  be  highlighted.   Once  the  flight
     landed, passengers who disembarked would  file  past  the  immigration
     desk and then past the CIO desk  and  at  this  stage  the  CIO  would
     approach a passenger in whom there was interest and take  him  to  the
     CIO office.  There were other cases when the CIO would become involved
     after an immigration officer had established  a  passenger's  identity
     and nationality or the person had been questioned  by  other  security
     services at the airport.  If the person was of interest  to  the  CIO,
     they  were  taken   to   the   CIO   headquarters   for   questioning.
     Interrogation was done at the CIO headquarters away from the  airport.
     At the airport itself, security procedures were kept discreet to avoid
     attention.  During this witness's posting at the airport a  number  of
     people were  deported  to  Harare,  mainly  from  South  Africa.   The
     procedure adopted for these deportees were slightly different  to  the
     procedures previously described.  The South African authorities  would
     have given the deportee's passport to the pilot, rather the  deportee.
     On landing, the pilot would  hand  the  passport  to  the  immigration
     officers.  The  deportees  were  taken  to  a  room  adjacent  to  the
     immigration section and when the other passengers  had  been  cleared,
     they would be handed over to the CIO.

 76. Witness 5 has kept in touch with former colleagues and has  been  told
     that all returned asylum  seekers  are  questioned  because  they  are
     considered to be a security risk.  It is believed that they are  being
     trained in military procedures and espionage in the United Kingdom and
     they are being sent to destabilise Zimbabwe.  He has  been  told  that
     they are all handed over to the CIO, who  carry  out  questioning  and
     then decide what should be done.  Those returnees who are released are
     nevertheless kept under surveillance, made to attend ZANU-PF  meetings
     in their area and denounce the MDC, and in some cases are required  to
     report to a police station.  As will be apparent below, we regard  the
     evidence from this witness as crucial.

Statement of witness 6

 77. This statement is provided by a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe  who  has  been
     granted refugee status and again makes his statement on an undertaking
     to secure his anonymity.  He also  was  a  member  of  the  Zimbabwean
     Intelligence Corps.  It is his evidence that the deportee's papers are
     handed to a senior immigration officer to whose office the deportee is
     taken.  The officer team, comprising representatives of the  military,
     the police and the CIO, would  be  in  attendance.   Once  the  senior
     immigration officer was  satisfied  of  the  deportee's  identity  and
     nationality, he would hand him over to the senior person in  the  team
     who would take the deportee into an interview room.  Each agency would
     interview the deportee about any issues of concern  they  might  have.
     The CIO would check for any political activities.  Once it was decided
     which agency would have custody, the deportee would be taken  by  that
     agency for interrogation.  The CIO  have  their  own  cells  and  safe
     houses.   Witness  6  has  been  told  that  the  CIO  considers   the
     deportation  of  asylum  seekers  to  be  a  cover  for  the   British
     authorities to fool the  Zimbabwean  authorities  into  thinking  that
     Britain has no interest  in  Zimbabwe.   The  CIO  believes  that  the
     deportees are being used to spy for the British in Zimbabwe.  He  said
     that within the Zimbabwean intelligence community the implication of a
     person having been interrogated is that the interrogated  person  will
     have been ill-treated.   The  fact  the  deportee  is  released  after
     interrogation does not mean that he or she is out of danger.  He knows
     of  people  who  have  been  interrogated   and   detained   in   such
     circumstances but later becoming the object of interest from  the  CIO
     in their home areas.

The witness statement of witness 7

 78. Witness 7 is a citizen of Zimbabwe  who  was  returned  following  the
     suspension on removals in 2004.  He asserts that he has been seriously
     mistreated.  He gives an account of having joined the MDC  in  January
     2000.  He became an active member.  He first suffered  from  violence
     around the time of the March  2002  Presidential  elections.   He  was
     detained and ill-treated.   He suffered  further  problems  in  August
     2002 and then moved to stay with a relative.  Following  threats  from
     ZANU-PF supporters, he left Zimbabwe arriving in the United Kingdom on
     1 October 2002.  He was given temporary admission.  He did not report
     back to Gatwick as required.  He was frightened to get in  touch  with
     the  Home  Office  and  overstayed.   Following  the  lifting  of  the
     suspension on removals, he  tried  to  make  a  voluntary  return  and
     approached the Zimbabwe Embassy.  They were unable to help him and he
     went to a police station where he was arrested and detained.   He  was
     removed on 2 December 2004.

 79. He was escorted off the plane by one of the air crew and  handed  over
     to people in plainclothes.  He  was  not  taken  through  immigration
     control but to a different side of the airport.  He was questioned  by
     people who identified themselves as from the CIO.  He  was  questioned
     about why he had been in the United Kingdom and  accused  of  being  a
     British agent and working for the MDC.  He was kicked and punched.  He
     was then taken by truck to another  building  where  he  was  stripped
     naked and interrogated further.  He was left  naked  without  food  or
     water for about four days.  He was subjected  to  further  humiliating
     treatment.  He was given his clothes back and also given some food and
     water but continued to be the victim of  ill-treatment  and  violence.
     After he was eventually released, his family  were  horrified  at  the
     state he was in.   He  hoped  that  his  release  indicated  that  the
     authorities  had  finished  with  him.   He  renewed  some  low  level
     activities for the MDC.  He was arrested again in March 2005.  He  was
     held for several weeks but not physically mistreated.  In April  2005,
     he was released but told to report every Friday.  As his  family  were
     frightened for him arrangements were made for him to  leave  Zimbabwe.
     He was eventually able to leave, travelling to South Africa  and  then
     returning to the United Kingdom.

 80. There is a medical report relating to witness  7  dated  19  September
     2005.  This report confirms the presence  of  injuries  to  his  front
     teeth described as highly consistent with forceful blows with  a  hard
     object such as a rifle butt.  There are other  injuries  to  his  body
     described as consistent with his description given of their cause.  He
     is described as having many of the features of post  traumatic  stress
     disorder as defined by ICD 10 criteria.  The  witness  has  a  pending
     asylum application.  He has not been cross-examined on  his  evidence.
     It records treatment of a returnee who had not in fact claimed  asylum
     before being returned but nonetheless,  assuming  the  account  to  be
     true, shows the interest of the CIO in returnees and the extent of the
     mistreatment when a full investigation is carried out.

The evidence of witness 8

 81. The statement of this witness is part of the documentation relating to
     his claim for asylum.  This witness was returned  to  Zimbabwe  on  17
     December 2001.  He was questioned by the CIO  who  mocked  him  saying
     that they knew political activists were fleeing the country to  report
     lies abroad.  They had sources in the United Kingdom who informed them
     about the activities of people  like  him  and  the  chaos  they  were
     causing.  They said he would now be punished.  They demanded  to  know
     everything he had done since arriving in the United Kingdom  and  what
     information he had given about  Zimbabwe.   He  was  beaten.   He  was
     called a sell-out.  At one point a chair with a rung between its  legs
     was put over his neck and an officer sat on  the  chair  pressing  the
     rung down on his neck.  He was told he would be transferred to prison.
      He was able to escape when he asked to go to the toilet.   He  saw  a
     small window, climbed through and was able to get a  lift  into  town.
     He contacted an aunt who told him that he was not to go to any of  his
     relatives' homes as the CIO been looking for him.   Arrangements  were
     made for him to return to the United Kingdom.  He  claimed  asylum  on
     the basis that he would be perceived by the regime as a traitor.   The
     Respondent granted him asylum in April  2003.   This  witness  is  the
     returnee referred  to  in  paragraph  41  in  SM  where  the  Tribunal
     commented about the doubts it felt about this account but that comment
     must be seen in the context of the very limited evidence  produced  at
     that hearing as compared with the further evidence  produced  at  this
     hearing.  This evidence shows how one returnee is said  to  have  been
     treated in 2002 and forms part of the background picture.  It is worth
     noting that removals were suspended  from  January  2002  to  November
     2004.  None of the evidence before us tends to show that the situation
     has improved  since  2002.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears  to  have
     deteriorated for anybody that is conceivably capable of being seen  as
     a less than wholehearted supporter of the regime.  The seriousness  of
     the present situation is clear not only  from  the  CIPU  Report,  the
     newspaper reports and the background  information,  particularly  from
     the UNHCR.

                                     IV

The Respondent's evidence

 82. Most of the Respondent's evidence  centred  around  a  field  trip  to
     Zimbabwe that had been carried out on the Respondent's behalf  between
     4-10  September  2005.   Because  of  the  central  position  of  this
     evidence, we start by setting out a summary of its  findings  here  in
     order for  the  subsequent  account  of  the  evidence  to  be  better
     understood.  The methodology and other  aspects  of  the  report  were
     dealt with in evidence by Mark Walker, who was part of the joint  Home
     Office and Foreign and Commonwealth Office delegation.  The delegation
     spent five days speaking to various sources.  It was explained  during
     the course of evidence that the Country Information  and  Policy  Unit
     has recently been sub-divided so that the Policy Unit and the  Country
     Information Unit have  been  separated.   Interestingly,  it  was  the
     Policy Unit that was represented on this delegation and  Mr  Henderson
     was to comment during submissions that it would have been  better  for
     the Country Information Unit to have played its part, rather than  the
     Policy Unit.  He queried whether there was a tendency  for  a  policy-
     based delegation to try to look for evidence  to  justify  the  policy
     rather than the more neutral exercise of gathering information.

 83. The sources interviewed were, in many cases,  unwilling  to  have  the
     identity of their organisation and/or their spokesmen identified.   As
     we say elsewhere, we respected by the making of  an  order  under  the
     Contempt of Court Act 1981.   We  have  followed  the  wishes  of  the
     sources in the preparation of this determination but  have  chosen  to
     err, if at all, on the side of anonymity.

The field report

 84. The first source (A) is the Human Rights NGO Forum and Legal Resources
     Foundation.  Its spokesman did not wish to be identified.   The  Forum
     was founded in 1998 following food riots in order to provide legal and
     psycho-social  assistance  to  victims.   It  has  now  expanded   its
     objectives to assist victims of organised violence, by which it  means
     "the  inter-human  infliction  of  significant,  avoidable  pain   and
     suffering by an organised group according to  a  declared  or  implied
     strategy and/or  system  of  ideas  and  attitudes".   The  Forum  has
     seventeen  member  organisations.   The  source  explained  that  they
     believe some asylum seekers are  seeking  to  exploit  the  plight  of
     genuine asylum seekers in order to be able to go to the United Kingdom
     and remit money home.  Although the Forum has an office in London  and
     has put in place a service whereby a failed asylum seeker who  is  due
     to be removed can approach it, with a view to the Forum arranging  for
     a lawyer to meet the returnee on arrival at  Harare,  nobody  has  yet
     taken advantage of the service.  The Forum believes that its existence
     will be known through  the  close-knit  Zimbabwean  community  in  the
     United Kingdom.

 85. One member of the Forum (source F) has an extensive  network  of  safe
     houses and other facilities spread across Zimbabwe to which  returnees
     with problems can apply for assistance.  The spokesman  for  source  A
     did not know the extent to which failed asylum seekers have sought  to
     use those facilities.  The spokesman accepted that  it  is  impossible
     for anyone to be certain that isolated incidents do not occur but went
     on to say that the Forum would expect  to  have  heard  if  there  was
     systematic mistreatment of returnees.  They have not heard  that.   He
     acknowledged that lack of evidence to substantiate the claims does not
     mean the claims may not be well-founded.

 86. In the one case which they attempted to follow up, where a report  was
     received that one  person  who  had  been  returned  through  Bulawayo
     claimed to have been assaulted, when they found the person he was very
     evasive and the Forum did not believe the claim was genuine.  Source A
     believed that if there were genuine cases of  mistreatment  to  failed
     asylum seekers, it was not simply because they had  sought  asylum  in
     the United Kingdom but because they had  political  opinions  and  had
     been involved in activities.

 87. Source B was identified to us  but  was  otherwise  anonymous  at  the
     hearing.  Its spokesman has been asked to be referred to as a  "senior
     spokesman for a regional human rights NGO".  The NGO is concerned with
     human rights in southern Africa and is involved in  human  rights  and
     governance issues.  The spokesman said the NGO had extensive  contacts
     across the NGO sector.  He said that prior to the 2000 elections,  the
     Zimbabwe Government had been concerned only with high profile  critics
     and not in  any  significant  way  with  those  who  are  involved  in
     opposition at the grass roots level.  Around the 2000  elections,  the
     Government increasingly targeted lower level political  activists  and
     particularly teachers (because of their perceived influence  on  young
     people and their standing  in  their  communities).   Since  the  2000
     election,  he  said  that  persecution  has  not  been  continual   or
     systematic, but has occurred in reaction  to  particular  events  (for
     example, teachers around the periods  of  by-elections).   Source  B's
     view was that the majority of  current  asylum  seekers  are  actually
     economic migrants who apply for asylum in order to find a  better  way
     of life but accept that part of the process is failure.  The spokesman
     said that he has known many people who  take  leave  from  their  jobs
     whilst claiming asylum in order to have a  route  back  into  life  in
     Zimbabwe if the claim is unsuccessful.  He said there are close  links
     between  Zimbabweans  in  the  country  and   the   diaspora   whereby
     information is passed around about the asylum decision-making process.
      He felt that the main target at the moment for Government persecution
     is NGOs.  NGO activists and  others  perceived  as  opponents  of  the
     Government are at risk of being  arrested  and  beaten.   There  is  a
     favourite police tactic used where there is no  will  or  evidence  to
     bring a prosecution, of arresting a suspect on Friday so that they can
     be detained over the weekend.   He  suggested  the  Zimbabwean  prison
     conditions are so poor that this is a more serious deterrent  than  it
     sounds.

 88. He said that he did not believe that returning failed  asylum  seekers
     would be targeted for mistreatment as it would suit the Government  to
     hold such figures up as examples that the United  Kingdom  is  not  as
     wonderful as others tend to think.  The spokesman said he thought  the
     people who were deported for other immigration offences, such as being
     turned back at the airport in the United Kingdom, would be unlikely to
     face difficulties on return.  His experience is that they usually  get
     a new passport, save up and try again.  However, he  went  on  to  say
     that the source's activities are such that they  engage  with  a  wide
     range of NGOs and others in the field of human  rights.   He  believed
     that the  source  would  have  heard  if  there  had  been  systematic
     mistreatment of returning  failed  asylum  seekers  and  he  has  not.
     Having said that, he was concerned that  the  Zimbabwe  Government  is
     becoming more ruthless and vindictive.  He described how  mistreatment
     is becoming  increasingly  personal  and  the  state  is  increasingly
     fragmented with different concentrations of power.   These  fragmented
     parts are operating less and less coherently and rationally  and  that
     those who  are  now  most  likely  to  be  mistreated  are  those  who
     personally aggravate someone in authority.  He described this  not  as
     systematic targeting but an almost random lashing out  at  people  who
     cause difficulties.

 89. Source C was disclosed to us anonymously, as was its  spokesman.   The
     source believes that  upwards  of  90  percent  of  Zimbabwean  asylum
     seekers in the United  Kingdom  are  economic  migrants.   The  source
     suggested that if failed asylum seekers  who  are  returned  from  the
     United Kingdom are  identified  as  such,  they  could  expect  to  be
     questioned by Immigration and the CIO and perhaps even threatened  and
     accused of betrayal  before  being  released.   They  may  be  visited
     subsequently at home but  the  source  was  not  aware  that  any  had
     suffered mistreatment  at  that  stage.   The  source  felt  it  would
     definitely know if there  was  systematic  mistreatment  of  returning
     failed asylum seekers.

 90. Source D was a  church  organisation  in  Zimbabwe.   The  source  has
     extensive contacts with  local  clergy  throughout  Zimbabwe  and  its
     activities have not been curtailed by Government action against  NGOs.
     The source believes that the violence and intimidation experienced  by
     people in Zimbabwe is random  with  the  intention  of  maintaining  a
     generalised atmosphere of fear.  The  source  has  not  heard  of  any
     reports of returning failed asylum seekers or  others  returning  from
     the United Kingdom being  mistreated.   However,  it  noted  that  the
     chance of hearing about such things is restricted by the absence of an
     independent media and the source did not rule out the possibility that
     individual returnees may be persecuted.

 91. The source said that there is no express  duty,  among  the  extensive
     networks  which  it  has,  to  pass  back  to  the  centre  individual
     allegations of mistreatment.  The source, however, did think it  would
     expect to hear  of  systematic  mistreatment.   Whilst  the  spokesman
     expressed an intention to encourage its networks to  pass  information
     to the centre so that it could subsequently be sent on to the  British
     Embassy, he did say that part of the problem is that  people  tend  to
     regard such mistreatment as a private matter to be kept in the family,
     for fear of attracting the attention of the CIO.

 92. The spokesman said that if there were mistreatment of returnees,  that
     could apply to anyone returning to Zimbabwe from  the  United  Kingdom
     (or the USA).  He went on to say that anyone returning from the United
     Kingdom would be liable to be interrogated on return on  suspicion  of
     being one of "Blair's spies".  He felt that people visiting the United
     Kingdom as tourists or on business might face some interrogation about
     their motives and activities on return and that,  as  a  result,  some
     business people are reluctant to travel to  the  United  Kingdom.   He
     felt that problems do not occur for returnees from other countries.

 93. The spokesman went  on  to  briefly  discuss  Operation  Murambatsvina
     saying that the operation had caught both MDC and ZANU-PF  supporters,
     although it was targeted at MDC-dominated areas.

 94. Source E was identified to  us  and  obtains  information  from  media
     sources.  The spokesman said that the source has extensive connections
     in Zimbabwe and has not through those picked up any  reports  of  ill-
     treatment of returnees from the United Kingdom.  However, he  stressed
     that Zimbabwe was a country where anything can happen and that it is a
     cruel and violent place.  His view was that simply  by  going  to  the
     United Kingdom, a person could be considered  disloyal  and  that  the
     regime was quite capable of persecuting such people despite the source
     having no reports of such treatment.

 95. Source F is one of the constituent parts of source A.   The  delegates
     on the field trip interviewed three people from source F  whose  names
     and positions were given to us.  (We  heard  evidence  from  a  fourth
     person working with the source, who is referred to as witness 1.)  The
     delegation  had  two  meetings  with  this  source.   The  source  has
     extensive links among the NGO community and despite having to  operate
     underground to some extent  has  the  ability  to  conduct  individual
     investigations.  There are restrictions on NGOs generally as a  result
     of the introduction of an NGO Bill.  (For more  about  this,  see  the
     October 2005 Country of Origin Information Report.  A copy of  a  late
     draft of this report was supplied to us in the bundle and we were told
     that it was not anticipated the document would change materially prior
     to its publication.   It  should  be  noted  that  Country  of  Origin
     Information Reports replace CIPU  Reports  and  has  been  renamed  to
     reflect the split of  responsibilities  within  the  old  CIPU.)   The
     source said that it is now able to operate more  or  less  as  it  did
     prior to the introduction of the Bill but that does not mean that they
     are free to operate as they would like.  They would  wish  to  have  a
     more extensive support  network  but  the  current  political  climate
     precludes that.  They  have  extensive  contacts  and  so  can  gather
     information, but do not  have  sufficient  people  on  the  ground  to
     respond to the information as quickly as they would like.

 96. The report records that source F has investigated two cases  of  abuse
     which it considers to be genuine.  It becomes aware of allegations  of
     abuse from newspaper reports and has been able to use its contacts  in
     the NGO community to attempt to verify the claims.   However,  it  has
     been unable to locate those mentioned in reports, save in one instance
     where the person  concerned  refused  to  speak  to  the  source.   It
     considers that supports the view that returned failed  asylum  seekers
     are reluctant to come forward and that generally  returnees  are  very
     secretive.  The source told the delegation that it  is  not  therefore
     possible to say that individual cases of mistreatment  do  not  happen
     and the source is unwilling to state either way whether there  has  or
     has not been systematic abuse of returnees.   Whilst  the  source  has
     seen ten  allegations  of  abuse  that  have  been  sent  to  it,  the
     references to the individuals were by initials only and the source has
     been unable to proactively investigate the  truth  of  the  statements
     made.  They have been unable to speak to anybody whose  stories  match
     the allegations.  It felt that individuals, if they continued to  feel
     threatened, are more likely to relocate to South  Africa  or  Botswana
     rather than expose themselves to an NGO constantly under surveillance.

 97. The source went on to say that if the authorities were  interested  in
     an individual it would be because of  their  political  opinions,  not
     because they had sought asylum in the United Kingdom.   It  also  said
     that the fact of being  a  returned  asylum  seeker  could  result  in
     aggressive questioning at the airport in order  to  ascertain  whether
     they were opposition supporters, but the source felt that if they were
     found not to be they would no longer be of continued interest  to  the
     authorities.  They were, however, unable to discount  the  possibility
     that they could remain of interest.  It was  the  source's  view  that
     those who were described as "MDC  foot  soldiers",  namely  those  who
     distribute leaflets or put up posters and arrange  meetings,  are  the
     ones most at risk of persecution because they are  vulnerable,  easily
     picked up and beaten,  and  such  treatment  is  unlikely  to  attract
     adverse comment.   In  contrast,  the  higher  profile  activists  are
     protected to a degree by their own profile and the outcry  that  could
     follow mistreatment, although there are exceptions to that.

 98. Source G is an international human rights organisation.  The spokesman
     dealt in part with Operation Murambatsvina and food shortages.   Asked
     whether they were aware of mistreatment of persons returning from  the
     United Kingdom, the source stated that they had not heard of any  such
     cases  either  directly  or  through   their   contacts   with   other
     organisations.  It went on to warn that because of the intricate cross-
     relationships  based  on  family  ties,  tribal   groups   and   totem
     membership, it is easy for the authorities  to  find  out  about  such
     things as the political affiliation of any new arrival in an area.

 99. Source H is content to be identified as the  Zimbabwe  Peace  Project.
     Its vision is to be authoritative in  documenting  acts  of  political
     violence  and  human  rights  abuse  and  the  promotion  of  conflict
     transformation initiatives.  It operates a network of two hundred  and
     forty human rights monitors  (two  for  each  constituency  throughout
     Zimbabwe).  Their task is to monitor human rights abuses and feed  the
     information back through regional offices to the central organisation.
      The source has not received reports of  any  mistreatment  of  failed
     asylum seekers or other people returned from the  United  Kingdom  but
     they are aware of allegations in the  press  and  are  quite  able  to
     imagine that such things might be  happening.   The  source  suggested
     that a reason that failed asylum seekers might be treated  differently
     from other immigration offenders or others who have visited the United
     Kingdom is that it is assumed in pursuit of  the  asylum  claims  that
     they must have made disloyal statements about the  situation  and  the
     Zimbabwe Government in particular.  The field report says:

           "As a result, and based on the treatment that others who are  of
           interest to the Government face, eg NGO  activists,  they  could
           imagine that the treatment they might face would include  having
           their  luggage  tampered  with  and  extended   questioning   by
           immigration officials and the CIO.  Once picked up by  the  CIO,
           it is likely that the line  of  questioning  would  extend  well
           beyond  the  issue  in  hand  to  general  views,   connections,
           background.  The source would imagine  that  the  treatment  for
           those who are returning from the UK could  be  worse  for  those
           from other countries because of the  political  climate  between
           the two countries."

100. The source said that he thought that the  Intelligence  Services  were
     sophisticated enough to know whether there were asylum seekers on  any
     particular flight into Harare before it arrived.  In any  event,  they
     would be able to identify them from their passports that they had been
     removed from the United Kingdom and this would serve to identify  them
     as people of  potential  interest.   He  said  that  even  though  the
     Security Services have sophisticated intelligence that they  also  act
     on the basis  of  suspicion  which  may  arise,  for  example  because
     somebody has been away for a while.  This source did  not  think  that
     failed asylum seekers were, on the  whole,  likely  to  face  societal
     difficulties in the area to which they are returned.

101. Source I is the International  Organisation  for  Migration  who  have
     fifty-two staff in Zimbabwe.  Part of their responsibility is to  help
     returnees from  the  United  Kingdom  to  re-establish  themselves  in
     Zimbabwe.  The organisation has facilitated the return  of  more  than
     forty-four returnees, including some voluntary returning failed asylum
     seekers during the course of  the  year.   The  spokesman  said  their
     network of staff would expect to pick up any reports  of  mistreatment
     of returning failed asylum seekers (whether voluntary or enforced) but
     has not done so.  The last problem they encountered was in March 2004,
     when the CIO harassed returnees in Bulawayo asking what they had  been
     doing in the  United  Kingdom.   The  organisation  protested  to  the
     Zimbabwean Government, who responded by saying the activity  had  been
     by the local CIO operatives acting without  the  approval  of  central
     Government.  They promised to investigate further, but have  not  sent
     any response back to the organisation.  The IOM  said  that  it  would
     immediately report any incidents  of  mistreatment  or  harassment  of
     returnees to the British Embassy in Harare.

102. Source J is the Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights.  It  describes  its
     core objective as fostering a culture of human rights and  encouraging
     the growth  and  strengthening  of  human  rights  at  all  levels  in
     Zimbabwean society through the rule of law.  The spokesman  said  that
     overall the organisation believes that the asylum system in the United
     Kingdom is being abused by those who are not  deserving  and  are  not
     under any real threat.  They have said that although they are prepared
     to support asylum seekers in  the  United  Kingdom  through  their  UK
     lawyers,  when  they  do  so   they   investigate   thoroughly.    The
     organisation has one  hundred  and  seventy-two  lawyer  members  who,
     although aware of allegations contained in the media about  the  abuse
     of returning failed asylum seekers, none of  their  members  have  yet
     come across a genuine case of mistreatment of asylum seekers returning
     from the United Kingdom.  The organisation believes that their members
     operate reasonably freely and would have expected to pick up any  such
     cases but cannot rule out the  possibility  that  someone  so  treated
     would choose to keep a low profile.  It believes it would have  picked
     up any systematic targeting of failed asylum  seekers  returning  from
     the United Kingdom.

103. The organisation referred to one specific case where ill-treatment  on
     return in December 2004  had  been  alleged.   A  man  had  apparently
     contacted a human rights NGO in Zimbabwe alleging that he was a failed
     asylum seeker returned from the United Kingdom  who  claimed  to  have
     been interrogated and beaten up by  the  CIO.   The  organisation  was
     unable from his documentation to ascertain that he had  ever  been  to
     the  United  Kingdom,  and,  after  extensive   enquiries,   satisfied
     themselves that the man was in fact a CIO  agent  who  was  trying  to
     infiltrate the human rights NGO community.

104. The organisation said that returnees  from  the  United  Kingdom  face
     questioning at the airport on return to Harare and that the Government
     of Zimbabwe may regard leaving for some places, including  the  United
     Kingdom, as treachery.  The spokesman was able to give an  example  of
     an enforced returnee (who was not in fact a failed asylum seeker)  who
     was questioned about reports that Zimbabweans were  being  trained  as
     spies and insurgents in the United Kingdom.   He  said  that  CIO  are
     capable of beating people at the airport  but  did  not  identify  any
     group particularly at risk.  The spokesman himself said  he  had  been
     harassed by CIO officers in the toilets at the airport, but  had  been
     freed when he explained he was a lawyer  and  was  of  the  view  that
     someone less articulate might not have got away so easily.  He did not
     think that there would be any problems  for  returning  failed  asylum
     seekers at societal level.

105. Source K is the Zimbabwe Association  of  Doctors  for  Human  Rights.
     Their professed aim is to  advocate  access  to  good  quality  health
     services for all and to bring the skills of the medical profession  to
     the aid of victims of human  rights  abuses.   It  sees  its  role  as
     defending the  rights  of  health  professionals  who  are  persecuted
     because of their adherence to medical ethics.   It  has  approximately
     one hundred and eighty members of the organisation  spread  throughout
     Zimbabwe.  The spokesman said it does not get involved with individual
     cases, but would expect  to  hear  about  any  incidents  through  its
     membership and their extensive contacts.   The  organisation  has  not
     heard of any cases  of  mistreatment  of  returnees  from  the  United
     Kingdom.

106. Source L  is  British  Airways.   Their  spokesman  is  not  based  in
     Zimbabwe.  He said  that  flights  from  London  attract  a  lot  more
     attention from the  CIO  than  flights  from  other  destinations  and
     described the airport as "crawling with them"  for  flights  from  the
     United Kingdom.  He has not detected anti-BA  or  anti-United  Kingdom
     feeling  at  the  level  at  which  he  operates,  but  comments  that
     Government agents do as instructed by the  politicians.   He  believed
     that the CIO are very well informed and know exactly what is going  on
     in what he described as a police state.  He considered  that  problems
     faced by failed asylum seekers on return to Zimbabwe  would  be  as  a
     result of having been deported from the United  Kingdom,  rather  than
     for any political activity that they might have been engaged in before
     they left Zimbabwe.  We should say that there is no  basis  given  for
     that last expressed belief.

107. Source M is an international humanitarian organisation,  the  identity
     of which, and the identity of whose spokesman, were  revealed  to  us.
     The spokesman said he knows many people in the humanitarian  community
     in Zimbabwe and has not heard any  reports  that  returnees  from  the
     United Kingdom have been subjected to ill-treatment.

108. Source N was described as a diplomatic source.  We  do  not  know  the
     identity, or even the nationality, of this source who is said to  have
     told the Respondent that he had not heard of any reports  of  returned
     failed asylum seekers being mistreated on return.

109. We mention source O for the sake of completeness.  The Respondent says
     that the delegation met with the Director for Europe and the  Americas
     at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on a courtesy visit which  was  not
     part of the information gathering  programme.   They  were  told  that
     there was no problem with Zimbabwean citizens travelling overseas  and
     that there was a system for remitting  money  back  to  Zimbabwe  from
     abroad, which included the United Kingdom.  The Government is said  to
     be disappointed at the way that emigration from Zimbabwe is  portrayed
     and the stories which attach to it.

Oral evidence - Mark Walker

110. The first of the  Respondent's  oral  witnesses  was  Mark  Walker,  a
     country policy officer in the country specific asylum policy team.  He
     told us that he had been on the joint  Home  Office  and  Foreign  and
     Commonwealth Office delegation to Zimbabwe and was present at  all  of
     the meetings from which  the  information  in  the  field  report  was
     obtained.

111. His witness statement says that the contents of the report were,  with
     the exception of one organisation that had not responded at  the  date
     of his statement, approved by the sources.  He told  us  that  in  the
     main this was done by telephone contact with the  Embassy.   The  late
     response was from source D which has now responded.  That  source  has
     also made a witness statement and the statement was made by the person
     to whom the Mr Walker spoke.   It  was  put  to  Mr  Walker  that  the
     criticism in the spokesman's statement, that he did not recognise  the
     assertion attributed to the source in  the  field  report  that  "they
     would expect to hear of systematic mistreatment", did not support  the
     field report.  Mr Walker said he had no  comment  about  that  because
     what he had put in the field report reflects what he was told  at  the
     time.  When he was cross-examined about this, he said that, otherwise,
     the statement from that source expanded  on  the  field  report.   The
     spokesman had said to the Embassy that the field  report  was  a  good
     report of what had been said.  Mr Walker acknowledged that the witness
     statement subsequently made seemed to have been made on the  same  day
     as the spokesman  approved  the  field  report  to  the  Embassy.   He
     acknowledged that parts of the statement do not sit  comfortably  with
     what is in the field report, but he was adamant that what he was  told
     is what appears in that report.

112. In relation to source A, Mr Walker  confirmed  that  the  more  recent
     statement seemed to expand on what was put in the field report.   When
     it was put to him that it was in  fact  inconsistent  with  the  field
     report in relation to the purpose of the source's  London  office,  he
     again said that what was in the field report was what he was  told  at
     the time.  He also said that, in this particular case, the source  had
     confirmed the field report by sending back an amended copy and it  was
     the amended copy that had been incorporated into the final document.

113. He was asked whether he had met  with  witness  2  whilst  he  was  in
     Zimbabwe.  He said that he had met him at a background dinner  and  he
     was somebody that he would have arranged to speak to had he  had  more
     time.  He expressly denied that the reason for not  interviewing  this
     witness is that he had said unhelpful things at the dinner.  Mr Walker
     said it was apparent at the dinner that he had a great  deal  to  say,
     but they did discuss matters other  than  those  which  were  directly
     involved in the visit.  He accepted that the reference by witness 2 to
     human rights NGOs relying on "passive capture" was consistent with the
     delegation's findings and he said that it was true where NGOs  do  not
     go out to specifically track down individual  failed  asylum  seekers.
     It was put to him that witness 2 had said in his  statement  that  the
     British Government's officials were inconsistent because, on  the  one
     hand they take the  lead  internationally  in  condemning  huge  scale
     systematic abuse of the population by the regime,  and  on  the  other
     arguing to send people back.  Mr Walker said that point had  not  been
     made to him when he was in Zimbabwe and perhaps it  was  made  to  the
     Foreign and Commonwealth Office delegates.

114. Witness 1, who gave evidence before us, was  not  a  person  that  any
     member of the delegation had seen in Zimbabwe.  Mr  Walker  said  that
     the evidence he had given before us was not  different  from  anything
     which  had  come  from  source  F,  although  he   put   a   different
     interpretation on it.

115. Mr Walker was asked  why  he  had  not  gone  to  see  the  Zimbabwean
     Immigration Service.  He agreed that there had been a  visit  to  that
     department.  It was not only a courtesy visit, as had been  the  visit
     to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  When he was cross-examined  about
     it, he said that this was a meeting about visas and other  operational
     matters which were of particular interest to the Foreign Office.  When
     he was pressed to say why he did not go himself, he declined to say in
     open court (and did not do so at all).

116. He said that during the course of their investigations, the delegation
     did not ask about specific allegations  made  by  individuals,  saying
     that the object of the exercise was to find out  whether  the  general
     allegations about  mistreatment  are  true.   He  was  aware  of  some
     individual claims which had been set out in an article  in  The  Times
     before they went.  He said it was not the  delegation's  job  to  look
     into those individual claims, although the Embassy had been  asked  to
     see what it  could  find  out.   He  would  not  be  drawn  in  cross-
     examination on the details of the individual claims  but  he  did  say
     that he was  not  aware  of  any  pro-active  attempts  to  trace  the
     individuals concerned.  He was anxious to draw a  distinction  between
     saying that somebody had disappeared and that they could not be found.
      He also accepted that source F was the main organisation used by  the
     Embassy to attempt to investigate claims.  He was asked to explain how
     the delegation decided which organisations to visit and he  said  that
     the original suggestions came from him, based on sources used  by  the
     Respondent.  He said that at that stage he did not know about  witness
     2 because, although he had previously given help to the Respondent, Mr
     Walker was looking for organisations not individuals.

117. Mr Walker was asked about  the  different  sources.   He  agreed  that
     source B  works  with  Governments  and  NGOs  and  the  legal  sector
     throughout southern Africa and was not a source which a  victim  would
     approach direct.  However, he was anxious to point out that, as with a
     number of the sources, they have tentacles and contacts  throughout  a
     wide range of organisations.  One of the reasons for visiting source B
     was to assure the delegation that they would receive such feedback  as
     the source was able to give.  He said that in general the  discussions
     with the sources were about their networks and  their  connections  to
     other organisations and he was not expecting that they  would  receive
     direct reports from failed asylum seekers.  He was asked about his use
     of the word "systematic" and the fact that it appears  throughout  the
     field report.  He said it was his word and he used it to distinguish a
     pattern of behaviour from individual and isolated incidents.  All  the
     sources said that although they were not  confident  they  would  know
     about any individual case  of  mistreatment,  they  would  know  about
     systematic mistreatment.

118. In reference to source E,  he  again  agreed  that  this  was  not  an
     organisation that a failed asylum seeker would approach direct, but he
     again said that it is an organisation with an extensive network.

119. When he was again asked about witness 2, he again  confirmed  that  he
     did not disagree with the assertion in the  recent  statement  from  a
     member of source A that he was one of the most knowledgeable and fair-
     minded people.  He agreed that the witness statement made by witness 2
     was not inconsistent with the meeting which he had had with people  at
     source F and was not surprised by anything said  by  witness  2.   The
     final page of the witness statement from witness 2 says:

           "It is, however, fantasy to say that NGOs have a system in place
           that can be relied upon to  produce  specific  evidence  of  the
           mistreatment of individual asylum seekers removed by the  United
           Kingdom,  either  at  the  hands  of  the  CIO  on  arrival   or
           thereafter.  There is no such tracking system."

120. This was put to Mr Walker as being different from his own conclusions,
     but he said that there is no claim in the  field  report  that  anyone
     monitors individual asylum seekers who are  returned.   He  said  that
     there is a capacity to monitor and investigate individuals who may  be
     identified, but he acknowledged that no organisation is doing  general
     monitoring "just in case".  He said that whilst specific investigation
     is important, it is also very important not to overlook  the  networks
     which all these sources have and he again said that source F does have
     some resources to investigate through its own  contacts,  for  example
     lawyers and doctors.

121. Mr Walker accepted that the latest statement from a member of source A
     differed from the field report in  relation  to  the  purpose  of  its
     office in London.  However, he said that what he had put in the  field
     report was the message that he received when he was in  Zimbabwe.   He
     said he did not know where the misunderstanding had arisen but he  had
     given a clear account of what was said to him.   He  did  accept  that
     only one member of source A claimed  to  have  any  safe  houses.   He
     ventured to disagree with the statement where it said  that  source  A
     can only act if someone complains to it.  He  was  keen  to  emphasise
     that they can give feedback and include information in  their  report,
     even if help is not sought by an individual.

122. As to Operation Murambatsvina, he acknowledged that in  general  terms
     it had made it more difficult to trace people in Zimbabwe although  he
     questioned whether this would  make  any  difference  to  a  returning
     failed asylum seeker who, because he had not been in  Zimbabwe,  would
     not have been moved.

123. Mr Walker acknowledged that the evidence is that the British  who  are
     involved in returning failed asylum seekers identify forced  returnees
     to the Zimbabwean authorities.  He said he did not know if they  dealt
     with the CIO or other forms of authority, but he did acknowledge  that
     documents were handed over to Zimbabwean officials at the airport.  He
     did not know to which sort of authorities those documents were handed.

Oral evidence - Iain Walsh

124. The other witness for the Respondent was Iain Lawrence Stephen  Walsh,
     who is a deputy director in the Asylum and Appeals Policy Directorate,
     which is part of the Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate.   The
     statement which he prepared for this hearing was supplementary to  the
     one that he made for Judicial Review proceedings and signed on 29 July
     2005.   That  earlier  statement  contained  information   about   the
     procedures that the British Government has,  through  its  Embassy  in
     Harare, for investigating allegations of  mistreatment  of  returnees.
     His more recent statement is designed to update  the  position  of  HM
     Government on the issue of the treatment  of  returned  failed  asylum
     seekers based on the information in the field  report  and  subsequent
     witness statements produced by the  RLC.   Insofar  as  his  statement
     gives the Government's views on the safety of returned  failed  asylum
     seekers, that is not of particular concern to us.  We have  to  decide
     this for ourselves in these proceedings.  The statement  and  much  of
     his evidence is also  an  analysis  of  the  field  report  and  other
     evidence which, again, is our task.  We mention that, not in  any  way
     to disparage the evidence from  Mr  Walsh,  but  to  explain  why  our
     summary of it is relatively short in relation to the length of his two
     statements and his oral evidence.

125. Mr Walsh summarised the field report and then went on to say that  the
     majority of the organisations had stated they  would  expect  to  know
     about mistreatment of returning failed asylum seekers if  it  in  fact
     occurred.  He also said that it was a clear conclusion from the  field
     report that

           "A number of significant NGO bodies continue  to  consider  that
           they are capable of operating in a way which  would  effectively
           identify evidence of human  rights  abuses  of  returned  asylum
           seekers."

126. He drew comfort from the  readiness  of  the  NGOs  to  speak  to  the
     delegates on the field trip openly and argued that this was  a  reason
     not to accept the contrary arguments that NGOs in Zimbabwe  would  not
     be prepared to alert the Embassy if such abuses were occurring.

127. He dealt in his statement with fourteen  anonymised  cases  which  had
     been notified to the Respondent in a letter dated  28  July  2005  and
     gave the extent of what had been found  out  about  them.   Of  those,
     there were three that he dealt with in more detail than the others and
     accepted there was evidence which, if substantiated, could  show  that
     there had been serious mistreatment which might breach the  Article  3
     persecution threshold.   The first person gave an  account  of  having
     passed through Harare Airport but being mistreated subsequently.   The
     second travelled back on the same plane as  a  relative  who  saw  him
     taken off the plane at Harare Airport  under  escort  prior  to  going
     missing.  He re-appeared several days later, having been beaten at the
     hands of the CIO.  Mr Walsh gave reasons as to why he says  there  are
     doubts about this person's credibility.  The third said  that  he  had
     been handed over to the CIO on arrival at the airport and  ill-treated
     so badly that on release he could hardly walk.  Mr Walsh mentions that
     this man had been found not to be a credible witness by an Adjudicator
     during the course of his asylum appeal.

128. In his witness statement, Mr  Walsh  says  that  the  position  of  HM
     Government is that immigration officials and the CIO will be aware  of
     who is a returnee from the United Kingdom and that that person is more
     likely to be questioned that returnees from other countries.  He  said
     the Zimbabwean authorities would be looking to identify  those  people
     whom they considered might have political opinions or  be  undertaking
     political activities at odds  with  the  position  of  the  Zimbabwean
     Government and that they would not know when  they  began  questioning
     somebody whether they were a failed asylum seeker  or  a  returnee  in
     another capacity, although that information  may  be  revealed  during
     questioning.  The Government's view is that failed asylum seekers,  if
     identified as such, might be likely to face more in-depth  questioning
     than other returnees from the United Kingdom because their reasons for
     being in the United Kingdom for what may have  been  quite  a  lengthy
     period may not be as readily apparent as some  other  travellers,  and
     the authorities would want to have an account of what  the  individual
     had done whilst in the United Kingdom.   HM  Government  accepts  that
     where extended questioning takes place,  it  might  well  cover  wider
     issues than what the person has done in the United Kingdom and that if
     the  Zimbabwean  authorities  were  satisfied  on  the  basis  of  the
     questioning that an individual's  political  opinions/activities  were
     not  adverse  to  the  Zimbabwean  Government,  the  individual  would
     normally be allowed to pass through the airport  at  that  point.   He
     said that HM Government's position is that the mere  act  of  applying
     for asylum in the United Kingdom would not put an individual  at  real
     risk of being placed in  the  category  of  somebody  whose  political
     opinions or activities  were  determined  by  the  authorities  to  be
     adverse to the Zimbabwean Government and would therefore  not  put  an
     individual at  risk  of  mistreatment  or  persecution  on  return  to
     Zimbabwe.  Mr Walsh was prepared to accept on behalf of the Government
     that there may be rogue cases.

129. Finally, he accepted that if the Zimbabwean  authorities  identify  an
     individual as a political opponent, that individual  would,  depending
     on factors identified in SM, be at risk  of  serious  treatment  which
     could meet the Article 3 threshold.  However, he made the  point  that
     failed asylum  seekers  would  have  been  determined  by  the  United
     Kingdom's asylum decision-making and appeal process as  not  being  in
     this category.

130. When examined in chief, Mr Walsh had nothing to add to  his  statement
     following the receipt of the RLC witness statement.

131. When  cross-examined,  he  acknowledged  that  certain  parts  of  the
     population suffer gross  and  systematic  abuse  from  the  Zimbabwean
     regime and he acknowledged that there are  a  large  number  of  human
     rights abuses occurring in Zimbabwe.

132. He agreed with Professor Ranger as to the identity of  the  person  in
     charge of security in Zimbabwe and, in particular, the  CIO,  and  his
     published attitudes.  He was asked whether holding a political opinion
     adverse to the Zimbabwe Government's interest would  include  being  a
     spy or a traitor, and he said that the crucial factor would be to  see
     what a returnee believed and the question of the attitude of  the  CIO
     would depend on how the questioning of the returnee went.  He did  not
     agree that referring to the CIO questioning somebody  in  depth  meant
     that would involve beatings or ill-treatment but he did accept that if
     the answers to the questions raise suspicion, then the  way  in  which
     the CIO went about  its  conduct  of  an  interrogation  could  be  as
     highlighted by Professor Ranger.  When pressed about the way in  which
     people may be questioned by the CIO, and who may be suspected by  them
     of disloyalty, treachery or spying, Mr Walsh relied on  the  statement
     of the Government's position as set out in paragraph 26 of his  recent
     witness statement.

133. Throughout his cross-examination, Mr Walsh's line was that questioning
     by the CIO at the point when there was merely a suspicion  carried  no
     risk.  He referred to that as the first stage of the process.  He went
     on to say that if the CIO forms a view that the suspicion is made out,
     then that is the point at which a risk arises.  It was put to him that
     that was an implausible stance but he said that it would depend on the
     CIO's suspicion.  If the CIO officers had made  up  their  mind,  then
     there would be two stages to the  interrogation.   He  maintained  the
     stance that the interrogation in the initial phase would not routinely
     involve  torture.   He  said  that  the  difference  between  him  and
     Professor Ranger may be  dependent  on  the  meaning  and  context  of
     "interrogation".  He did not regard the distinction  between  in-depth
     questioning and interrogation as a material point.

134. Mr Walsh accepted that when a person is escorted back to Zimbabwe, the
     situation was not as Collins J had been told at  the  Judicial  Review
     hearing.  The escorts do get off the plane with the returnee and  hand
     him or her over to  the  Zimbabwean  authorities.   He  said  that  in
     relation to unescorted returnees, their papers would be handed to  the
     air crew on the aircraft, but there is no direction  as  to  when  the
     papers must be handed over.  He did, however, acknowledge that in most
     cases they are not handed to the returnee but to  the  authorities  in
     the receiving country.

135. When he was taken through the difference in his  position  as  between
     the recent witness statement for these proceedings and  that  prepared
     for the Judicial Review hearing, he said that  HM  Government  accepts
     that there is a real prospect of lengthy  questioning  by  people  who
     were returned  from  the  United  Kingdom.   He  could  not  say  with
     certainty that it would be the CIO but it could be by  them.   He  was
     reminded that in his  earlier  statement  he  had  described  how  the
     Embassy had developed  its  practices  to  investigate  the  issue  of
     mistreatment of returnees,  both  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  a
     general pattern and in individual cases.  He there made  reference  to
     the Embassy routinely meeting with and calling NGOs and how it is said
     that the Embassy was confident it would rapidly be made aware  of  the
     pattern  of   mistreatment   of   returnees   because   the   Zimbabwe
     political/NGO/diplomatic community is small and news travels fast.  He
     stood by that section of his statement as a  description  of  the  way
     that the Embassy carries out its work and that its best course was  to
     get a broad spectrum of advice from associations that are embedded  in
     the community.  He was satisfied the Embassy would know if  a  pattern
     of systematic mistreatment was  emerging,  but  of  course  could  not
     discount individual occurrences.  He did not think  it  was  right  to
     rely on one particular organisation's view.   He  accepted  that  many
     people would not wish  to  formally  report  their  treatment  and  he
     acknowledged that if NGOs did not find out  about  matters,  then  nor
     would the Embassy.

136. In relation to the cases that had been referred to the  Respondent  by
     the Zimbabwe Association, Mr Walsh said these cases had been  referred
     on to an NGO but as the Respondent was unable to disclose the names or
     much other information because it was prevented by a court order,  the
     NGO had not been able to achieve very much.  He  said  that  any  case
     where there was an  allegation  that  a  particular  person  has  been
     mistreated, that would be passed on to the  Embassy  with  a  view  to
     investigating the claim.

137. It was put  to  Mr  Walsh  that  Professor  Ranger  had  said  it  was
     misleading of the field report to conclude that there are human rights
     bodies operating in such a way as to  enable  them  to  identify  ill-
     treatment if it is occurring.  Mr Walsh said that the field report  is
     a factual account of  what  the  organisations  had  reported  to  the
     delegates.   All  their  accounts  had  been  checked  with  them  and
     therefore the field report is no more than an agreed  report  of  what
     was said to the delegates.  Mr Walsh's conclusions from what was  said
     is that they did say they would be aware  if  there  was  mistreatment
     occurring to returnees.  That was the Government's view  because  that
     is what the NGOs said to the delegates.  Only one  retracted  some  of
     what it said.  He acknowledged that not all the sources in  the  field
     report were of equal value.  Although there is  a  difference  in  the
     view of source A as between the field report and the later  statement,
     the later statement does not retract the view  that  the  organisation
     would know if there was evidence of systematic abuse.   He  said  that
     the subsequent statement was not a retraction but an expansion of what
     had been said earlier.

138. Mr Walsh accepted that source B was not one that would receive  direct
     complaints or reports but he said that they would expect to  be  aware
     through their connections such as other NGOs and sources.  Source C is
     not an NGO.  As to source D, Mr Walsh  accepted  that  the  subsequent
     statement had been made and  that  was  different  from  the  original
     statement to the delegation.  He accepted that they had changed  their
     stance.

139. He accepted that source E was not one to  which  people  would  report
     their  problems  directly.   He  was   taken   through   the   various
     organisations and readily accepted that many were not such that people
     would complain directly to them, but he maintained his view that  they
     were, in  the  main,  organisations  that  would  know  if  there  was
     systematic mistreatment from their networks.   He  accepted  that  the
     organisation at source M was not there to look into torture  and  that
     source N was not "the main plank of the Government's position".

Country of origin information report

140. As we have said earlier, we had in our bundle the draft of the October
     2005 Country of Origin Information Report.   We  have  not  considered
     that in any detail because, to a large extent, the evidence  which  we
     have been considering is effectively source material for the  document
     and the document draws upon the same sources.  It was not referred  to
     expressly by either party during the course of the hearing.

                                      V

Conclusions

141. This is a finely balanced case.  Both parties rely  on  circumstantial
     evidence.  Both  parties  rely  to  an  extent  on  supposition.   The
     Respondent relies in particular on the report produced  by  Mr  Walker
     after his visit to Zimbabwe.  He asks us to accept the  argument  that
     if returned asylum seekers were,  as  a  category,  at  risk  of  ill-
     treatment, the NGOs with whom he had contact would  have  heard  about
     it.  The Appellant points to reports and rumours of  ill-treatment  of
     returned asylum seekers going back over a considerable period of time.
      The Respondent says that none of them are to be believed, or that  if
     a few of the reports that do represent the truth they do  not  show  a
     general risk.  But the Appellant submits  that,  sporadic  though  the
     reports are, they do demonstrate a general risk.

142. It is the Appellant who has the burden of proof.  But we do  not  look
     at the Appellant's evidence in isolation.  We look at the evidence  as
     a whole.  That task is made no easier by the fact that the Appellant's
     evidence is of an entirely different nature from the Respondent's.

143. The Appellant's evidence is partly particular and partly general,  but
     it is all positive.  The Appellant's general evidence is  intended  to
     show that ill-treatment of returned asylum seekers is exactly the sort
     of thing one would expect to happen, given what is  known  in  general
     about the regime in Zimbabwe and the motivations and activities of the
     CIO.  The particular instances which the Appellant  brings  forth  are
     intended to demonstrate that what one would expect to happen  in  fact
     does happen.  The Respondent adduces no specific evidence  to  support
     the contrary view.  His evidence is entirely general,  and  it  argues
     from silence.  Whilst accepting much of what the Appellant says  about
     activities within the regime, the  Respondent  asserts  that  returned
     asylum seekers are at no particular risk.  He derives that proposition
     not principally from specific advice that the risk does not exist, but
     from sources who have informed him of what they might expect  to  have
     heard.  The Respondent points  to  no  individual  cases  of  returned
     asylum seekers who have not been ill-treated.  But perhaps he does not
     have to do so:  the burden of proof is not his.

144. At one level, and in particular  if  one  considers  the  Respondent's
     position first, his evidence appears quite persuasive.  A  delegation,
     consisting of Home  Office  and  Foreign  Office  officials,  went  to
     Zimbabwe, charged in part with investigation of  precisely  the  issue
     arising in this case.  Their visit was the object of  public  comment,
     but they were able to have private meetings with a  number  of  bodies
     who would be concerned.  Sources and  organisations  were  assured  of
     anonymity.  They were asked specifically whether they  were  aware  of
     any regular or systematic ill-treatment of returned asylum seekers  as
     such.  None of them said that they were  aware  of  any  such  general
     risk.  The majority of them said that they would expect to be aware of
     any such risk if it existed.  One of the organisations appears  to  be
     recognised as that which would have the task of alleviating  any  such
     specific ill-treatment if it were reported.   Even  that  organisation
     could point only to  a  tiny  number  of  specific  cases  that  might
     conceivably support the Appellant's case.  In these circumstances, the
     Respondent might well feel,  as  he  evidently  does,  that  the  risk
     asserted by the Appellant is not one that exists in fact.

145. Several of the points made by the Appellant against  the  Respondent's
     evidence have in our view little or no force.  We see no reason at all
     to doubt Mr Walker's word or the record of his conversations,  or  the
     integrity of his process for ensuring that the contents of his  report
     had been agreed by his sources.  We find the  subsequent  comments  of
     the sources to the Appellant's advisors to  be  of  little  effect  in
     supporting the Appellant's case.  Nor are we remotely persuaded by the
     Appellant's demonstration that very few of the organisations concerned
     are involved with human rights complaints by  individuals.   They  are
     monitoring  bodies,  and  many  of  them  referred  to  their  general
     knowledge of human rights abuses in Zimbabwe.  But some of  the  other
     points made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  against  the  Respondent's
     evidence do, we think, have considerable impact.  They are as follows.



146. First, although no doubt  Home  Office  officials  have  a  very  wide
     competence, it is surprising  that  the  investigation  of  facts  and
     country circumstances was made by policy staff.  It was not  made  by,
     or analysed by, members of the Country of  Origin  Information  staff.
     The way in which the investigation was conducted, and the way in which
     the results were presented to us, gives rise to the possibility  -  we
     say no more than that - that the investigators may have  had  existing
     policy in mind rather more  than  the  discovery  of  new  facts.   We
     emphasise that we do not suggest at all that the process of  gathering
     information and reporting it to us was intended to  mislead:   but  we
     have to recognise that, as Mr Walsh  in  particular  made  clear,  the
     results of the investigation were being put to us very clearly in  the
     context of Government policy and the Government's view.

147. Secondly, despite the facilities available to  the  investigation  and
     the level at which it was conducted, it reveals nothing of the  actual
     process which returned asylum seekers go through on their  arrival  at
     Harare Airport.  This is  particularly  surprising  in  the  light  of
     evidence that another unit within the same delegation, not led  by  Mr
     Walker, had discussions with members  of  the  Zimbabwean  Immigration
     Service.  Mr Walker declined to say why his part of the delegation had
     not had any similar discussions.  It may well be that there would have
     been comprehensive denials of any  ill-treatment  of  returned  asylum
     seekers:  but the point is that this particular fact-finding body  did
     not investigate those facts, or did not report on them.

148. Thirdly, we are bound to take into account a  point  we  have  already
     enumerated - that the Respondent relies not  at  all  upon  individual
     cases.  This is surprising from two points  of  view.   The  first  is
     that, as the evidence before us makes clear, there had been  a  number
     of individual reports of  ill-treatment.   Although  in  the  Judicial
     Review proceedings the Court was assured that they were being followed
     up with a view to investigating the facts, the evidence before us  was
     of little progress, and the implication was that  there  would  be  no
     more progress.  We do not accept the suggestion made by Mr Henderson's
     choice of words that that was because the individuals in question  had
     all disappeared in suspicious circumstances.  But, even  if  the  word
     "disappeared" is not used, the situation apparently is  that  none  of
     these individuals can be found.  It might be even more accurate to say
     that none of them has been found.  As  a  result,  the  Respondent  is
     unable to say in general that  the  individual  cases  have  been  the
     subject of further investigation in Zimbabwe, despite the presence  of
     a High Commission, local contacts with NGOs, and the delegation.

149. The complementary point of  view  is  that  the  Respondent  had  been
     returning refused asylum seekers to Zimbabwe  for  a  period  of  some
     months, apparently (as we can only  suppose  from  the  small  numbers
     returned) carefully selecting them from  the  much  larger  number  of
     those liable to be returned.  For much of the period during which  the
     returns  were  taking  place  there  were  sporadic  reports  of  ill-
     treatment, and the very fact that returns had been recommenced after a
     period of suspension must have drawn the attention  of  any  decision-
     maker to the need for constant review of the  safety  of  those  being
     returned.   Every  individual  being  returned  has  to  be  expressly
     identified by the Government in  this  country:   the  individuals  in
     question are not self-identified, as claimants and  complainants  are.
     Yet there is no evidence before us that the Respondent  has  monitored
     returns, or that the result of any investigations has  been  that  the
     individuals, whose identities he knows, were (or were generally)  able
     to pass through Harare Airport on their return without any appreciable
     difficulty.

150. We think it is right to say that we do not know why the Respondent did
     not rely on any individual cases.  We consider,  however,  that,  with
     all the information and powers of investigation at his  disposal,  his
     failure to trace individual complainants in Zimbabwe, and his  failure
     to provide any evidence of monitored satisfactory returns to  Zimbabwe
     are both, in the present context, exceedingly surprising.

151. The Respondent's argument is from silence:  but silence can speak, and
     it does so  when  opportunities  to  rebut  evidence  are  not  taken.
     Evidence on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  is  frail  or  apparently
     unsatisfactory may more easily discharge the burden of proof  when  it
     is shown that efforts to rebut it are more unsatisfactory still.

152. We turn then to the evidence provided on behalf of the Appellant.   We
     accept the submission made on behalf of the Respondent that there  are
     reasons for doubting the credibility of those who have  made  specific
     complaints about ill-treatment.  That does not mean, of  course,  that
     what they say is not the truth:  but it does not assist the  Appellant
     in establishing  that  it  is.   We  prefer,  however,  to  begin  our
     consideration of the Appellant's evidence with some generalities which
     do not appear to be subject to any reasonable dissent.

153. First, the CIO is the organ  by  which  President  Mugabe  enforces  a
     violent regime, intolerant of any shade of opposition,  irrational  in
     its motivation and indifferent to individual human rights.  We do  not
     need to dwell on the clear evidence of all that:  we accept  Professor
     Ranger's evidence on the general situation, derived from many years of
     experience and personal acquaintance with leading figures.

154. The CIO are not primarily  responsible  for  immigration  services  at
     Harare Airport.   They  do,  however,  have  a  presence  there.   The
     evidence we have seen makes it clear that when planes from the  United
     Kingdom arrive at Harare members of  the  CIO  are  present  in  great
     numbers.  Although there was some suggestion in the evidence before us
     that the Zimbabwean authorities  treated  arrivals  from  other  white
     Anglophone countries (the United States of America, Australia and  New
     Zealand, for example) with similar suspicion, it is in our view  clear
     that the CIO take a particular interest in arrivals  from  the  United
     Kingdom.  Nevertheless, it appears to be the case that ordinary travel
     to and from the United  Kingdom,  including  voluntary  departures  by
     those who have had dealings with the immigration authorities  of  this
     country, are dealt with in the usual way by immigration officers  (not
     the CIO) at the airport in Harare.

155. Involuntary departures are a different matter.  The evidence from  the
     Respondent in this appeal appears to demonstrate  that  the  following
     process is adopted.  The individual in question, if accompanied on the
     plane, is escorted from the plane and not handed over in Harare  until
     the escort has a satisfactory assurance that  the  passenger  will  be
     permitted to enter Zimbabwe.  The passenger's papers are handed by the
     United Kingdom authorities to the custody officers or the air crew  of
     the plane.  At that point, it  appeared  to  us  that  the  Respondent
     ceased to have any very clear interest in what happened.  The evidence
     was that the Respondent's understanding was that the air crew retained
     the documents during the flight and, on arrival in Harare, handed them
     to Zimbabwe officials.  The Respondent's witness  indicated  that,  by
     retaining the documents for the whole of the flight, the airline could
     be assured that a passenger who is being  involuntarily  removed  from
     the United Kingdom would not destroy his documents and so  hinder  his
     admission to Zimbabwe.  That may be so, but we find  the  Respondent's
     lack of interest in the process by which individuals that  he  returns
     to  Zimbabwe  are  received  by  the  Zimbabwean  authorities   rather
     alarming.

156. What is clear is that, as a result  of  a  combination  of  the  CIO's
     interest in flights from the United Kingdom and the  Respondent's  and
     the airline's way of dealing  with  the  documents  of  those  removed
     involuntarily, such  persons  are  not  dealt  with  by  the  ordinary
     immigration service.  They are drawn immediately to the  attention  of
     the CIO.

157. That seems to us to be the proper conclusion to draw from the  written
     evidence of witnesses 5 and 6.  They had first-hand knowledge  of  the
     mechanics of return, and their evidence  accords  also  with  that  of
     Professor Ranger.  Witness 5 sets out the procedure by which passenger
     manifests were faxed to the immigration office in Harare so that  they
     could be analysed by local officials, including the CIO.  In the  case
     of returns from the United Kingdom, the position was  that  passengers
     had to collect their baggage from a point immediately opposite the CIO
     desk.  Those in whom the CIO had an interest were at that point  asked
     to attend for interview.  But of  particular  interest  also  is  this
     person's  experience  specifically  of  deportations,   although   the
     deportations of which he had experience were, as he  put  it,  "mainly
     from South Africa".  He said that the South African authorities  would
     have given the deportee's passport to the pilot  rather  than  to  the
     deportee.  That parallels the process adopted by  the  United  Kingdom
     authorities in securing involuntary removals from the United  Kingdom.
     The witness goes on to say that when the plane landed, the pilot would
     hand the passport to the Zimbabwean immigration  officers.   Deportees
     were taken to a room adjacent to the immigration section,  where  they
     were required to wait until all the other passengers had been cleared.
      Deportees would then be handed over to the CIO.  Writing as he did on
     29 July 2005, this witness confirmed, on the  basis  of  contact  with
     former colleagues, that similar arrangements  remained  in  place  and
     that all asylum seekers returned from the United Kingdom  were  handed
     over to the CIO.

158. This process seems to us to distinguish returns to Zimbabwe from those
     of a number of other countries with which the  Tribunal  is  familiar.
     In Zimbabwe, there does not appear to be any  possibility  that  those
     disembarking from the plane will be treated initially all in the  same
     way, screened by local immigration  services,  and  only  referred  to
     police or intelligence services if reference to a database causes  any
     concern.  In the case of returns  to  Zimbabwe,  the  screening  never
     takes place.  The CIO have immediate access to all those who  are  the
     subject of involuntary return.

159. The Respondent's evidence suggested that in  such  circumstances,  CIO
     officers will first themselves conduct an anodyne screening interview.
      There is, of course, no particular reason for supposing that happens:
      the Respondent's view appears  to  be  based  on  his  experience  of
     reasonable civil servants throughout the world.  We  cannot  say  that
     his process of reasoning is applicable to Zimbabwe.  On the  contrary:
     it appears to us that the well-evidenced paranoia  of  the  Zimbabwean
     regime is likely in the highest degree to be expressed  against  those
     who have already presented themselves as  having  unsuccessfully  made
     allegations about their safety in Zimbabwe.  It has to be a matter  of
     inference:  but we prefer the evidence  of  Professor  Ranger  on  the
     likelihood of mistreatment of those who, whether  at  the  airport  or
     elsewhere, have an individual interview with a member of the CIO.

160. It is in this context that we  consider  the  evidence  of  individual
     cases of alleged ill-treatment.  It may be that none of  the  accounts
     individually carries an absolute assurance of  credibility.   Many  of
     the complainants have, as the Respondent points  out,  been  found  by
     Adjudicators not to have been entitled to credit in the  stories  they
     told in an attempt to secure status in this country.   They  have,  as
     individuals,  no  general  credibility.   They   are   not   entitled,
     individually, to "the benefit of the doubt".  But, when one takes into
     account those whose allegations have  been  the  subject  of  detailed
     evidence  before  us,  together  with  those  who  had  made   earlier
     allegations and are described summarily in Mr Walsh's  evidence,  they
     now constitute together a considerable body of  witnesses.   No  doubt
     each of them has a vested interest in making the claim  he  does  make
     (the phrase is Mr Kovats') but for some at least  of  them  it  is  no
     longer an interest in  maintaining  an  asylum  claim  in  the  United
     Kingdom as they are now in fact abroad.

161. And the truth of the matter is that, whatever doubts  one  might  have
     about the complainants individually, the  body  of  evidence,  from  a
     score of separate people, all goes one way.  Further, none of it seems
     itself to bear any marks of unreliability, and all of it accords  with
     what one would generally expect of the CIO.

162. If the Appellant's case  is  right,  the  Respondent's  argument  from
     silence - his assertion that if returned asylum seekers were  as  such
     at risk the NGOs would know about it - is mistaken.  How could this be
     so?  We think that there is a ready explanation.

163. The Appellant's claim succeeds if he shows a real risk:  he  does  not
     need to prove a certainty.  As we have attempted to explain above, the
     claim that every person returned involuntarily is at real risk of ill-
     treatment is not a claim that every  one  will  in  fact  suffer  ill-
     treatment.  Likewise, looking at the past, the Appellant does not need
     to show that all those who have been returned involuntarily did suffer
     ill-treatment.  He is entitled  to  rely,  as  he  does,  on  evidence
     pointing to a substantial number of cases in the  context  of  general
     evidence showing the source or reason for the risk.

164. A substantial number, in the context of  the  few  returns  that  have
     actually been undertaken, is obviously fewer still.   Only  those  who
     claim to have in fact suffered ill-treatment could make  a  complaint,
     and not all of them will complain.  So the  number  of  complaints  of
     which NGOs might possibly become aware is unlikely to be at all large.

165. The evidence before us was that NGOs in Zimbabwe are  the  subject  of
     general disapproval by the  regime  and  have  been  under  threat  of
     suppression or control.  Further, Operation Murambatsvina has affected
     an enormous number of people -  estimates in the evidence  range  from
     750,000 to  nearly  double  that  number  -  all  of  whom  may  raise
     individual  complaints  about  the  way  they  are  treated  by  their
     Government.   There  is  plenty  here  to  distract  hard-working  NGO
     officials from the possible plight of  a  small  number  of  claimants
     returned by the United Kingdom Government during  a  few  months.   Of
     course the NGOs might have heard of a general  risk,  but  it  is  not
     remotely surprising that they have not.  For  these  reasons  we  find
     that the field report does little or nothing to counter or  rebut  the
     evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant.

166. For the foregoing reasons we have reached the view,  on  the  evidence
     before us, that the process by which  the  United  Kingdom  Government
     enforces the involuntary return of rejected asylum seekers to Zimbabwe
     exposes them to a risk of ill-treatment at the hands of the CIO.

167. We can deal more shortly with other issues.  The question  of  whether
     such ill-treatment, if it did occur, would be of such a  level  as  to
     amount to persecution, was not specifically addressed by either party.
      We have made it clear that, even if not every one of  the  individual
     complaints is credible, taken together  and  with  Professor  Ranger's
     evidence, they  present  a  reliable  general  picture.   We  are  not
     surprised that we were not asked to  say  that  ill-treatment  at  the
     level reported would not be persecution.  It clearly would be.

168. Our findings as to risk, taken together with the legal principles  and
     the concession that we set out in part II of this determination,  mean
     that the Appellant has made his case.  He has a well-founded  fear  of
     persecution for a Convention reason if he is returned to Zimbabwe;  he
     has also established that he is  at  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
     Article 3 if he  is  so  returned  (Mr  Kovats'  concession  makes  it
     unnecessary to draw any distinction between  the  two  claims).    His
     claim is based on the consequences, and not the merits, of  the  claim
     itself.  The fact that the Appellant made a false claim, so generating
     the risk which would otherwise not have existed, does  not  alter  the
     fact that the real risk of serious harm exists now.  In this case,  we
     are not concerned with the Appellant's motives or intentions but  with
     the risk he faces on return.  He has become a refugee, entitled to all
     the benefits that that status carries, by making a false claim to be a
     refugee.

169. Nobody, least of all organisations concerned with the welfare of those
     who genuinely fear persecution (such as the Refugee Legal Centre,  who
     represent the Appellant in this case) can  take  any  comfort  from  a
     conclusion that can accurately be represented in that  way.   We  fear
     that our decision, based as it is firmly on the evidence we have heard
     and legal principles that are binding on us, will seem to  demonstrate
     or confirm that refugee law is inherently prone to  abuse.   For  that
     reason we allow ourselves the following  observations  before  parting
     from this case.

170. First, in relation to the evidence we have heard, it is possible  that
     we might have taken a different view if the Government  had  made  any
     arrangements  to  ensure  so  far  as  possible  that  those  returned
     voluntarily and  those  returned  involuntarily  are  not  so  readily
     distinguishable on arrival.  A part of the  risk  we  have  identified
     arises from the Government's apparent disinterest in the  precise  way
     in which passengers documents are dealt with by airline staff.  It  is
     also possible that we might have taken a different view if  there  had
     been evidence - from the  field  report  visit  or  otherwise  -  that
     substantial numbers of failed asylum seekers,  returned  involuntarily
     from the United Kingdom, had passed through Harare Airport without any
     problems.  If the Government is concerned to avoid risk to individuals
     and in making policy  decisions  based  on  fact,  it  will  no  doubt
     carefully monitor returns to any country regarded  as  dangerous,  and
     will present the resulting facts as evidence in asylum appeals.

171. We make these observations on the evidence not because we  think  that
     the Respondent bears any burden of proof in these appeals, but because
     we consider the evidence as a whole.  As we have said, we reached  the
     conclusion we did because, looking at the  evidence  as  a  whole,  we
     found that that adduced on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  is  a  broadly
     reliable guide to the facts.

172. Secondly, if Mr Kovats had not conceded the issue of whether the  ill-
     treatment would be for a "Convention reason", we should have wanted to
     examine that  question  with  great  care.   It  is  asserted  in  the
     Appellant's evidence that any ill-treatment would be  motivated  by  a
     perception of treachery.  That may be right:  given the concession  we
     did not need to consider the matter further.  But there seems also  to
     be evidence of the regime's general distaste for its own citizens,  an
     apparent wish to keep them on  the  move  and  a  wish  (expressed  by
     Didymus Mutasa, who controls  the  CIO)  of  ridding  the  country  of
     millions of "extra people".  If the ill-treatment arose from  attempts
     to encourage emigration, or discourage  return,  or  even  from  odium
     humani generis, that  would  probably  not  be  a  Convention  reason.
     Article 3 would nevertheless prevent the Appellant's return;   but  he
     would not have the status of a refugee.

173. Thirdly, we wonder whether Danian requires further examination.  Ought
     the Refugee Convention to be confined to cases of what might be called
     "real" need?  Does it genuinely require the status of  refugee  to  be
     given to a person like the Appellant whose claim  arises  solely  from
     his voluntary and dishonest acts in the safety of the United  Kingdom,
     or to others who, on the strength of this decision, may make an asylum
     claim purely in order to get the benefit of it?  Or are  such  persons
     adequately protected by the European Convention on Human Rights, which
     has been incorporated fully into English law since Danian was decided?
      That Convention would protect them from the risk of  harm  that  they
     have voluntarily or cynically chosen to incur, without giving them the
     benefits of refugee status.

174. As we have indicated, these are matters that do not call for  decision
     by us.  For the reasons we  have  given,  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
     allowed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
                                  APPENDIX

            Source

A           Human Rights NGO Forum
B           Regional HR NGO
C           Anonymous
D           A church organisation
E           Anonymous
F           Anonymous
G           An international human rights organisation
H           Zimbabwe Peace Project
I           International Organisation for Migration
J           Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights
K           Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights
L           British Airways
M           International humanitarian organisation
N           A diplomatic source





