
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL | |
|EB (no funding order - first stage reconsideration) Turkey [2005] |
|UKAIT 00145                                                       |
|                                  |                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 24 August 2005                       |                         |
|                                        |On 20 October 2005       |
|                                        |.........................|
|                                        |....................     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Senior Immigration Judge)                         |
|Miss B Mensah (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr J Collins, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Sheikh & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            FUNDING DETERMINATION

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Turkey.    A  Senior  Immigration  Judge
      ordered reconsideration of the determination of an Immigration  Judge,
      Mr W D Mark-Bell,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to give directions for her removal from the United Kingdom as
      an illegal entrant following the refusal of asylum.

2.    The appellant was represented at the hearing  before  the  Immigration
      Judge and gave evidence.    He found  that  she  was  not  a  credible
      witness, had not established the facts on which she sought to rely and
      was not at risk of persecution for a Convention reason or infringement
      of  her  human  rights.    The  grounds  of  appeal  allege  that  the
      Immigration Judge erred in law by relying on the  adverse  credibility
      finding made in an earlier determination of the appellant's  husband's
      appeal by an Adjudicator.

3.    Mr Collins argued that this was a material error of law which we  were
      in no position to rectify.   Mr  Ouseley  conceded  that  this  was  a
      material error of law.   Both representatives asked us to adjourn  the
      hearing for a full second stage reconsideration.

4.    We found that there were material errors of law.    We  adjourned  the
      reconsideration for a continuation hearing  at  the  Bradford  Hearing
      Centre before an Immigration Judge or panel  not  including  Mr  Mark-
      Bell.   We gave directions.

5.    At the end of the hearing Mr Collins asked for a funding  order.    Mr
      Ouseley said that he did not wish to make any submissions in  relation
      to this application.

6.    After hearing preliminary submissions from  Mr  Collins  we  took  the
      view that we would be assisted by detailed written  submissions.    Mr
      Collins asked for leave to submit these after the  hearing,  which  he
      has done.  We have considered these submissions.

7.    After dealing with preliminary matters, most of which are  covered  by
      what we have already said, the substance of Mr Collins submissions are
      set out in paragraphs 7 to  the  end  (paragraph  21).    These  merit
      inclusion in full;

      "7.   It is not in issue  that  the  appellant  in  the  instant  case
           applied pursuant to section 103A of the 2002 Act as inserted  by
           section 26 of the 2004 Act (at tab 1  of  the  Bundle)  to  "the
           appropriate  court"  for  reconsideration  of  the   Immigration
           Judge's decision on the basis of the Immigration  Judge's  error
           of law.


        8.  Pursuant to the "filter provision" (of paragraph 30 of  Schedule
           2 to the 2004 Act) a Senior Immigration Judge rather than a High
           Court Judge decided the  application  for  reconsideration.   As
           stated above reconsideration was ordered.


        9.  It is clear from paragraph 103D(1) of  the  2002  Act  that  the
           appropriate court which ordered reconsideration can  in  certain
           circumstances make a funding order  on  the  application  of  an
           appellant.  Paragraph 15.2 of the Practice Directions  referring
           to Regulations 5(4) and 5(5)  of  the  Community  Legal  Service
           (Asylum and Immigration Appeals) Regulations  2005  (at  tab  3)
           makes clear that such  power  is  exercisable  in  two  strictly
           defined  circumstances  when  either   the   appropriate   court
           dismisses or makes no order for reconsideration Ref 5(4), or the
           appropriate   court   having    ordered    reconsideration,    a
           reconsideration hearing of the appeal did  not  take  place  Reg
           5(5).


       10.  It is submitted that it clear from paragraph 103A(9) of the 2002
           Act and indeed  Reg  5(6)  of  the  LSC  Regulations  that  "the
           appropriate court" means the High Court  or  by  virtue  of  the
           filter  provision  the  member  of  the  Tribunal  who   ordered
           reconsideration.


      11.   Section 103D(2)  of  the  2002  Act  provides  that  "where  the
           Tribunal  has  decided  an  appeal   following   reconsideration
           pursuant to an order made under section  103A(1)"  then  on  the
           application of the appellant and pursuant to section 103D(3) the
           Tribunal may order a funding order in respect of the appellant's
           costs in respect of the application for reconsideration  and  in
           respect of the reconsideration.

      12.   It is submitted that in  the  instant  case  the  Tribunal  did
           "decide" the appeal following reconsideration to the extent that
           it clearly reconsidered  the  matter,  it's  decision  being  to
           adjourn and transfer it.  Prior to the AIT and under the IAT  it
           was made clear at section 103(3) of the 2002 Act (at tab 5) that
           in the IAT a remittal by the Tribunal was not  "a  determination
           of the appeal for the purposes of section 103(1).  There  is  no
           analogous provision in subsections 103AQ to 103D that in the AIT
           the Tribunal having reconsidered  the  appeal  but  deciding  to
           adjourn  and/or  transfer  it  that  would  not  amount   to   a
           "decision".  If the draftsman of subsections 103A  to  103D  had
           intended  that  decisions   to   adjourn   and/or   transfer   a
           reconsideration were "decisions" that would have been stated  in
           terms in the same way  that  section  103(3)  indicated  that  a
           remittal was not a determination.


       13.  Support for that submission can be seen from paragraph 15.5  of
           the Practice Directions  which  states  in  respect  of  funding
           orders "Unless it directs otherwise, the Tribunal shall hear any
           submissions as to  such  an  order  at  the  conclusion  of  the
           proceedings on the reconsideration."  Paragraph  5.15  does  not
           refer to a final decision on reconsideration or  as  to  whether
           the appeal  was  allowed  but  rather  the  "conclusion  of  the
           proceedings."  The conclusion of the proceedings  on  24  August
           2005 was the Tribunal adjourning and  transferring  the  matter.
           To that extent it was  appropriate  for  the  Tribunal  to  hear
           submissions on a funding order.  It is of note that at Reg  6(2)
           of the LSC Regulations there is a  reference  to  the  mandatory
           making of a funding order when an appeal is "allowed"  which  is
           obviously a final decision rather than at the conclusion of  any
           proceedings that may  have  taken  place  prior  to  that  final
           decision.


       14.  The above submissions might be right otherwise  representatives
           potentially would not be paid for work they have undertaken once
           reconsideration has been ordered and what is generally to as the
           'first stage' or 'error of law'  Hearing has taken place and  is
           adjourned and/or transferred.  It is clear from Section  103D(1)
           of the 2002 and Reg 5(5) referred to above that if an order  for
           reconsideration  has  been  made  but  for  whatever  reason  no
           reconsideration of the appeal takes place the appropriate  court
           can make a funding order.  There is no  analogous  provision  in
           section 103D(3) for when a first stage hearing has  taken  place
           but the adjourned/transferred hearing did not take place.


       15.  Indeed paragraph 15.8 of the Practice Directions makes it clear
           that the power referred to at paragraph 15.2(b) of the  Practice
           Direction covers  only  the  costs  in  respect  of  the  review
           application not any costs incurred in connection with  preparing
           for a reconsideration that does not take place.  Paragraph  15.8
           goes on to set out that in an appropriate case the Tribunal will
           consider representations for funding order to be  granted  under
           Section 103D(3) if a reconsideration hearing never  took  place.
           Again, there is no  provision  for  such  an  application  if  a
           reconsideration hearing did take place but was adjourned  and/or
           transferred.


       16.  The Tribunal is further respectfully referred to paragraph 15.4
           of the Practice Directions referring to Rule 33  of  the  Asylum
           and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (at  tab  4)
           "requires the Tribunal that has reconsidered an appeal to make a
           funding determination, where the appellant's representative  has
           specified in the application  for  reconsideration  that  he  is
           seeking a funding order".  In the instant case the Tribunal  has
           plainly reconsidered the appeal.


       17.  It is submitted that in the instant case  the  requirements  of
           Rule 33(1) are obviously satisfied that pursuant to  Rule  33(2)
           the Tribunal can make a separate funding Determination  as  well
           as making a principal Determination (cf paragraphs 14.1 to  14.4
           of the Practice Directions) giving reasons for finding that  the
           original Tribunal made an error of law.


       18.  The Tribunal is further  referred  to  paragraph  15.7  of  the
           Practice Directions  where  the  Tribunal  is  obliged  to  give
           reasons where it decides not to make a funding order  "following
           a reconsideration of an appeal" (referring to Reg  6(4)  of  the
           LSC Regulations).  In the instance case the Tribunal engaged  in
           a reconsideration of an appeal and as such should make a funding
           order unless appropriate reasons are provided  pursuant  to  Reg
           6(4).


       19.  Further an in any event it is clear  from  Reg  6  of  the  LSC
           Regulations that pursuant to Reg 6(3)  of  the  LSC  Regulations
           even if  the  appeal  is  not  allowed  on  reconsideration  the
           Tribunal can make a  funding  order  under  section  103D(3)  if
           satisfied that at the time the section 103A application was made
           there was a  significant  prospect  that  the  appeal  would  be
           allowed upon reconsideration.  It cannot  be  said  and  is  not
           argued that in the  instant  case  the  Tribunal  "allowed"  the
           appeal.  Given, however,  that  the  same  test  would  have  to
           applied by a differently constituted  Tribunal  after,  for  the
           sakes of argument, an ultimately  unsuccessful  substantive  (or
           second stage) reconsideration it seems, with respect,  odd  that
           this Tribunal should not be able to come  to  its  own  decision
           under Reg 6(3) at this stage of the proceedings.


       20.  For all the above reasons it is submitted that the Tribunal can
           and should at this stage of the proceedings make a funding order
           in the instant case.


        21.   Whatever  view  the  Tribunal  takes  in  respect  of   these
           submissions it is respectfully submitted that given the lack  of
           clarity in the various Rules and Regulations  the  Tribunal  may
           wish to provide guidance on this issue so that it does not  take
           up the time of the Tribunal on future occasions."


8.    The relevant provisions of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
      Claimants, etc) Act 2004 appear in paragraph 103D.   They provide;

      "103D Reconsideration: legal aid

      (1)   On the application of  an  appellant  under  Section  103A,  the
           appropriate court  may  order  that  the  appellant's  costs  in
           respect of the application under section 103A shall be paid  out
           of the Community Legal Service Fund established under section  5
           of the Access to Justice Act 1999 (c.22).

      (2)   Subsection (3) applies where the Tribunal has decided an  appeal
           following reconsideration pursuant to an order made -

            (a)  under section 103A(1), and
            (b)  on the application of the appellant

      (3)   The Tribunal may order that the appellant's costs -

            (a)  in respect of the application for reconsideration, and
            (b)  in respect of the reconsideration,
            shall be paid out of that Fund.

      (4)   The Secretary of State may take regulations about  the  exercise
           of the powers in subsections (1) and (3).


      (5)   Regulations  under  subsection  (4)  may,  in  particular,  make
           provision -


           (a)   specifying or  providing  for  the  determination  of  the
                 amount of payments;
            (b)   about the persons to whom the payments are to be made;
           (c)    restricting  the  exercise  of  the  power  (whether   by
                 reference to the prospects of success  in  respect  of  the
                 appeal at the time when the application for reconsideration
                 was made, the fact that a reference  has  been  made  under
                 section 103C(1), the circumstances of  the  appellant,  the
                 nature  of  the  appellant's  legal   representatives,   or
                 otherwise).


      (6)   Regulations under subsection (4) may make provision -


       (a)  conferring a function on the Legal Services Commission;
           (b)   modifying a duty or power of the Legal Services Commission
                 in respect of compliance with orders under subsection (3);
           (c)   applying (with or  without  modifications),  modifying  or
                 disapplying a provision of, or of anything done  under,  an
                 enactment relating to the funding of legal services.


      (7)   Before making regulations under subsection (4) the Secretary  of
           State shall consult such persons as he thinks appropriate.


      (8)   This section has effect only in relation to an appeal decided in
           -
       (a)  England,
       (b)  Wales, or
       (c)  Northern Ireland


      (9)   In relation to  an  appeal  decided  in  Northern  Ireland  this
           section shall have effect -


           (a)   as if a reference to the Community Legal Service fund were
                 to the fund established under paragraph 4(2)(a) of Schedule
                 3 to the Access to Justice (Northern  Ireland)  Order  2003
                 (S.I.2003/435 (N.I. 10))(, and


       (b)  with any other necessary modifications."


9.    The  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  Practice  Directions  contain
      Reconsideration  Procedures  at  paragraph  14  and   Legal   Aid   on
      Reconsideration Provisions at paragraph 15.   These provide;

            "14        Procedure on reconsideration

           14.1  Subject to paragraph  14.12,  where  an  appeal  has  been
                 ordered under  section  103A   to  be  reconsidered,  then,
                 unless and to the extent that they are directed  otherwise,
                 the parties to the appeal should assume that the issues  to
                 be considered at the hearing fixed for the  reconsideration
                 will be whether the original Tribunal made a material error
                 of law (see rule 31(2)) and, if so, whether, on  the  basis
                 of the original Tribunal's findings  of  fact,  the  appeal
                 should be allowed or dismissed.

           14.2  Where the Tribunal decides that the original Tribunal made
                 a material error  of  law  but  that  the  Tribunal  cannot
                 proceed under rule 31(3) to substitute a fresh decision  to
                 allow or dismiss the appeal because findings  of  fact  are
                 needed which the Tribunal is not in a position to make, the
                 Tribunal will make arrangements for the adjournment of  the
                 hearing or  for  the  transfer  of  the  proceedings  under
                 paragraph 12.3 so as to enable evidence to be  adduced  for
                 that purpose.

           14.3  Where the Tribunal acting under  paragraph  14.2  adjourns
                 the  hearing,  its  determination,   produced   after   the
                 adjourned  hearing  has  taken  place,  will  contain   the
                 Tribunal's reasons for finding that the  original  Tribunal
                 made a material error of law.

           14.4  Where the Tribunal acting under paragraph  14.2  transfers
                 the proceedings, it shall prepare written reasons  for  its
                 finding that the original Tribunal made a material error of
                 law and those written reasons shall  be  attached  to,  and
                 form part of,  the  determination  of  the  Tribunal  which
                 substitutes a  fresh  decision  to  allow  or  dismiss  the
                 appeal.

           14.5  The references in paragraph 14.1 to 14.4 to  the  original
                 Tribunal include references to an adjudicator in  any  case
                 where, by virtue of article 6 of  the  Commencement  Order,
                 the order under section 103A is  made  in  respect  of  the
                 decision of an adjudicator.

           14.6  Under article 5 of the Commencement Order, any appeal that
                 was pending before the IAT immediately before 4 April  2005
                 shall on and after that date be  dealt  with  in  the  same
                 manner as if the Tribunal had originally decided the appeal
                 and was reconsidering its decision.

           14.7  Rule 62(7)  provides  that,  in  the  case  of  an  appeal
                 described in paragraph 14.6, the reconsideration  shall  be
                 limited  to  the  grounds  upon  which  the   IAT   granted
                 permission to appeal.  In most cases,  those  grounds  will
                 require the Tribunal to decide whether the adjudicator made
                 a material error of law.

           14.8  Subject to paragraph 14.12, on and after 4 April 2005, and
                 in the absence  of  any  direction  to  the  contrary,  the
                 parties to any appeal  that  falls  to  be  dealt  with  as
                 described in paragraph 14.6 should assume that  the  issues
                 to be  considered  at  the  hearing  will  be  whether  the
                 adjudicator made a  material  error  of  law  and,  if  so,
                 whether, on the basis of  that  adjudicator's  findings  of
                 fact, the appeal should be allowed or dismissed.

           14.9  Where the Tribunal decides that  the  adjudicator  made  a
                 material error of law but that the Tribunal cannot  proceed
                 under rule 31(3) to substitute a fresh decision to allow or
                 dismiss the appeal because  findings  of  fact  are  needed
                 which the Tribunal is  not  in  a  position  to  make,  the
                 Tribunal will make arrangements for the adjournment of  the
                 hearing or  for  the  transfer  of  the  proceedings  under
                 paragraph 12.3 so as to enable evidence to be  adduced  for
                 that purpose.

           14.10 The provisions of paragraph 14.3 and 14.4 shall  apply  in
                 relation to paragraph 14.9 as they  apply  in  relation  to
                 paragraph  14.2  but  with  the   modification   that   the
                 references to the original Tribunal shall be interpreted as
                 referring to the adjudicator.

           14.11 Where, immediately before 4  April  2005,  an  appeal  was
                 pending before an adjudicator, having been remitted  to  an
                 adjudicator by a court or the IAT,  it  will  already  have
                 been decided that the original adjudicator's  determination
                 cannot stand.  The Tribunal will accordingly proceed to re-
                 hear the appeal.

           14.12 In the case of a reconsideration of a fast  track  appeal,
                 the Tribunal reconsidering the appeal is required  by  rule
                 23 of the Fast Track Rules to reconsider  its  decision  on
                 the appeal at the reconsideration hearing, subject  to  the
                 qualifications described in rule 23(1) of those Rules.  The
                 Tribunal's power  to  adjourn  a  fast  track  appeal  that
                 remains as such is governed by rule 28 of those Rules.

           14.13 The parties to  any  fast  track  appeal  which  is  being
                 reconsidered by the Tribunal on or after 4 April 2005  will
                 be expected to attend  with  all  necessary  witnesses  and
                 evidence that may be required if the Tribunal should decide
                 that it is necessary to re-hear the  appeal.   It  will  be
                 unusual for the Tribunal  to  adjourn  the  reconsideration
                 hearing but, if it does so, paragraph 14.4 will, so far  as
                 appropriate, apply.

           14.14 The preceding provisions of this paragraph  and  paragraph
                 13 are subject to article 9 of the  Commencement  Order  in
                 the case of certain "old" appeals, where the issue  is  not
                 restricted to whether the adjudicator made an error of law.


            15   Legal aid on reconsideration

           15.1  The relevant statutory provisions concerning the provision
                 of legal aid in respect of the reconsideration  of  appeals
                 (other than fast track  appeals)  decided  in  England  and
                 Wales are to be found in:

                 (a)   section 103D (as inserted by  section  26(6)  of  the
                      2004 Act);
                 (b)    rule  28A  (orders  for  funding  of  section   103A
                      applications)  (as  inserted  by   the   Asylum   and
                      Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  (Amendment)  Rules
                      2005)  and   rule   33   (orders   for   funding   on
                      reconsideration); the Community Legal Service (Asylum
                      and Immigration Appeals) Regulations 2005  ("the  CLS
                      Regulations").

           15.2  On an application under section 103A which is  dealt  with
                 by an immigration judge under the filter provision referred
                 to in paragraph 13.3, the immigration judge  has  power  to
                 make an order under section 103D for the appellant's  costs
                 to be paid out of the CLS fund ("a funding  order").   That
                 power  is,  however,  exercisable  only  in  the  following
                 circumstances:

                 (a)   where the immigration judge  dismisses  or  makes  no
                       order on the section 103A application, that judge may
                       make a funding order only  where  there  has  been  a
                       change in relevant circumstances or a change  in  the
                       law since the application was made and  at  the  time
                       the application was made,  there  was  a  significant
                       prospect  that  the  appeal  would  be  allowed  upon
                       reconsideration (regulation 5(4));
                 (b)   where  the  immigration  judge  makes  an  order  for
                       reconsideration but, in the event, no reconsideration
                       takes place (eg.  because  the  immigration  decision
                       appealed against is withdrawn) (regulation 5(5)).


           15.3  A funding order of the kind described in paragraph 15.2(b)
                 can be made only on application by a supplier  (as  defined
                 in the  CLS  Regulations)  or  counsel  instructed  by  the
                 supplier (regulation 5(5)).

           15.4  Rule 33 (orders for funding on  reconsideration)  requires
                 the Tribunal that has reconsidered  an  appeal  to  make  a
                 funding determination, where the appellant's representative
                 has specified in the application for  reconsideration  that
                 he is seeking a funding order.  The  funding  determination
                 is separate from the determination of the appeal itself.

           15.5  Unless it directs otherwise, the Tribunal shall  hear  any
                 submissions as to such an order at the  conclusion  of  the
                 proceedings on the reconsideration.

           15.6  If the Tribunal allows the appeal on  reconsideration,  it
                 is required by regulation 6(2) to make a funding order.  If
                 it does not allow the appeal, the Tribunal must not make  a
                 funding order unless it is satisfied that, at the time when
                 the appellant made the section 103A application, there  was
                 a significant prospect that the  appeal  would  be  allowed
                 upon reconsideration (regulation 6(3)).

           15.7  The Tribunal must give reasons where  it  decides  not  to
                 make a funding order, following  a  reconsideration  of  an
                 appeal  (regulation  6(4)).    A   supplier,   or   counsel
                 instructed by a supplier, may apply under regulation 7  for
                 a review of such a decision.  The review  will  be  carried
                 out by a senior immigration judge, who will decide  whether
                 to hold a hearing, if one is requested.

           15.8  It should be noted that the power to make a funding  order
                 in the circumstances described in paragraph 15.2(b)  covers
                 only the costs in respect of the  review  application;  not
                 any costs incurred  in  connection  with  preparing  for  a
                 reconsideration that does not, in the  event,  take  place.
                 In certain circumstances, it may  be  inappropriate  for  a
                 supplier or counsel to be  denied  a  funding  order  which
                 would cover the costs of preparing for the reconsideration.
                  In an  appropriate  case,  therefore,  the  Tribunal  will
                 consider representations as to whether  it  should  make  a
                 decision by consent on the appeal following reconsideration
                 (whether or not involving a hearing), so as to  enable  the
                 Tribunal to make a funding order under section  103D(3)  in
                 respect of the review application and the  reconsideration,
                 notwithstanding  that  it  may  not  otherwise  have   been
                 necessary to undertake the reconsideration.

           15.9  A funding order can only be made where there has  been  an
                 application for an order under section 103A(1) (see section
                 103D(2)(b)). Accordingly, a funding order may not  be  made
                 in a case described in paragraph 14.6 or  paragraph  14.11.
                 Nor can such an order  be  made  in  a  case  described  in
                 paragraph 14.1 where a pending application to  the  IAT  is
                 treated  as  an  application  under  section  103A(1)  (see
                 paragraph  14.5  and  article  6(5)  of  the   Commencement
                 Order)."

10.    The  Community  Legal  Service  (Asylum  and   Immigration   Appeals)
      Regulations 2005 provide;

      "General restrictions on power to make section 103D orders

      4.    (1)  The High Court or the Tribunal shall only  make  a  section
      103D order in immigration review proceedings  where  an  appellant  is
      represented by  a  supplier  acting  pursuant  to  a  grant  of  Legal
      Representation.

      (2)   The High Court or the Tribunal shall not  make  a  section  103D
      order in fast track proceedings.

      (3)   Regulations 5 to 8  apply  in  relation  to  immigration  review
      proceedings in which the High Court or the Tribunal has  power,  under
      section 103D(1)-(3) and this regulation, to make a section 103D order.

      Criteria for making orders under section 103D(1)


      5.    (1) The appropriate court must exercise the  power  to  make  an
      order under section 103D(1) in accordance with this regulation.


      (2)   If, upon a section 103A application, the appropriate court makes
      an order for reconsideration, subject to paragraph  (5)  it  must  not
      make an order under section 103D(1).


      (3)   If the High Court makes a reference under section  103C  of  the
      2002 Act, it must make an order under section 103D (1).


      (4)   If the appropriate court dismisses or  makes  no  order  on  the
      section 103A application, it may make an order under  section  103D(1)
      only if -


           (a)   there has been a change in any relevant circumstances or a
                 change in the law since the application was made; and


           (b)   at the time when the application was  made,  there  was  a
                 significant prospect that the appeal would be allowed  upon
                 reconsideration.


      (5)   The appropriate court may, on an  application  in  wiring  by  a
           supplier or counsel instructed by the supplier,  make  an  order
           under  section  103D(1)  where  it  has  made   an   order   for
           reconsideration, but no  reconsideration  of  the  appeal  takes
           place.


      (6)   In this regulation, "the appropriate court" means -


       (a)  the High Court; or


           (b)   a member of the Tribunal  who  considers  a  section  103A
                 application by virtue of paragraph 30 of Schedule 2 to  the
                 2004 Act."

11.   The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  provide,
      in Rule 33, as follows;

      "Criteria for making orders under section 103D(3)

      6.    (1)  the Tribunal must exercise  the  power  to  make  an  order
      under section 103D(3) in accordance with this regulation.

      (2)   If the Tribunal allows an appeal  on  reconsideration,  it  must
      make an order under section 103D(3).

      (3)   If the Tribunal does not allow an appeal, it must  not  make  an
      order under section 103D(3) unless it is satisfied that, at  the  time
      when the appellant made the section  103A  application,  there  was  a
      significant  prospect  that  the  appeal   would   be   allowed   upon
      reconsideration.

      (4)   If, where paragraph (3) applies, the  Tribunal  decides  not  to
      make an order under section 103D(3), it  must  give  reasons  for  its
      decisions.

      Review by Tribunal  of  decision  not  to  make  order  under  section
      103D(3)

      7.    (1)  A supplier, or counsel instructed by a supplier, may  apply
      to the Tribunal in writing for a review of a decision by the  Tribunal
      not to make an order under section 103D(3).

      (2)   An application under this regulation must  be  filed  within  10
      business days  after  the  supplier  is  served  with  the  Tribunal's
      decision not to make an order, or such longer period as  the  Tribunal
      may allow.

      (3)   A review shall be carried out by a Senior Immigration Judge  who
      was not the member of the Tribunal, or a member of the constitution of
      the Tribunal, which made the original decision.

      (4)   The Senior Immigration Judge may -

            (a)  carry out the review without a hearing; or

           (b)   hold an oral hearing, if one is requested by the  supplier
                 or counsel.

      (5)   The Senior Immigration Judge may -

            (a)  make an order under section 103D(3); or

            (b)  confirm the Tribunal's decision not to make an order.

      (6)   The Senior Immigration Judge must give reasons for his  decision
           on a review.


      Terms and effect of section 103D orders


      8.    (1)   Subject to paragraph (2), a section 103D order shall  have
      effect as an order for payment of all the costs incurred by a supplier
      representing the appellant in  the  proceedings  to  which  the  order
      relates, including the fees of counsel instructed by the supplier, for
      which payment is allowable under the terms of the contract between the
      Commission and the supplier.


      (2)   In relation to proceedings in which a  supplier  has  instructed
      counsel, the High Court or the Tribunal may in  special  circumstances
      make a section 103D order -


            (a)   in respect of counsel's fees only; or


           (b)   in respect of the costs incurred by the supplier excluding
                 Counsel's fees.


      (3)   A section 103D order must not specify -


            (a)   the amount to be paid by the Commission; or


            (b)   the person or persons to whom payment is to be made.


       And the Commission shall determine those matters in  accordance  with
      the terms of its contract with the supplier."

      Orders for funding on reconsideration

      33.  - (1) This rule applies where -

                (a)    the Tribunal has reconsidered an appeal  following  a
                 section 103A application made by the appellant in  relation
                 to an appeal decided in England, Wales or Northern Ireland;
                 and


             (b)       the appellant's representative has specified that he
                 seeks an order under section 103D of the 2002 Act for his
                 costs to be paid out of the relevant fund.

         (2)      The Tribunal must make a separate determination ("the
                 funding determination") stating whether it orders that the
                 appellant's costs -

                 (a) in respect of the application for reconsideration; and


                 (b) in respect of the reconsideration,

                 are to be paid out of the relevant fund.

      (3)        The Tribunal must send the funding determination to -

                 (a)   the appellant's representative; and


                 (b)   if the Tribunal has made an order under section 103D,
                       the relevant funding body.


      (4)         Where the determination of the reconsidered appeal ("the
           principal determination") is served in accordance with rule 23,
           the Tribunal must not send the funding determination to the
           appellant's representative until -

           (a)    the respondent has notified the Tribunal under rule
                 23(5)(b) that it has served the principal determination on
                 the appellant; or


           (b)   the Tribunal has served the principal determination on the
                 appellant under rule 23(6).

      (5)   In this Rule -

           (a) "relevant fund" means -

                 (i) in relation to an appeal decided in England  or  Wales,
                 the Community Legal Service Fund established under  section
                 5 of the Access to Justice Act 1999[7];


                 (ii) in relation to an appeal decided in Northern  Ireland,
                 the fund established under paragraph 4(2)(a) of Schedule  3
                 to the Access to Justice (Northern Ireland) Order  2003[8];
                 and

           (b) "relevant funding body" means -

                 (i) in relation to an appeal decided in England or Wales,
                 the Legal Services Commission;


                 (ii) in relation to an appeal decided in Northern Ireland,
                 the Northern Ireland Legal Services Commission."

12.   We find that at this stage in the proceedings  we  have  no  power  to
      make a funding order.   Where reconsideration has been ordered and the
      reconsideration hearing has commenced but has not been concluded by  a
      determination   either   upholding   or   overturning   the   original
      determination, the reconsideration has  not  been  completed  and  the
      application for a funding order should be made to and be considered by
      the Tribunal on the adjourned hearing at which the reconsideration  is
      completed.   It is significant that sub-section (2) of Section 103D of
      the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004
      states that sub-section 3 applies "where the Tribunal has  decided  an
      appeal following reconsideration" (our emphasis).  We draw support for
      this conclusion from paragraph 6(2) and (3)  of  the  Community  Legal
      Service (Asylum and Immigration Appeals) Regulations 2005 setting  out
      the criteria for making orders under Section 103D(3).   This refers to
      the Tribunal allowing or not  allowing  an  appeal.    This  does  not
      happen until the conclusion of the reconsideration proceedings.   Rule
      33(1)(a) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
      refers to a situation in  which  "the  Tribunal  has  reconsidered  an
      appeal" which reinforces our view that a decision as to whether or not
      to make  a  funding  order  needs  to  be  made  at  the  end  of  the
      reconsideration process.

13.   It is clear from paragraphs 14.1 to 14.4 of the  Practice  Directions,
      which deal with the procedure to be adopted where  reconsideration  is
      dealt with at more than one hearing, that the reconsideration  process
      is a single unified process even if there is more  than  one  hearing.
      If, on the first hearing, the Tribunal finds that there is a  material
      error of law but it is in no position to substitute a  fresh  decision
      to allow or dismiss the appeal because findings  of  fact  are  needed
      which the Tribunal is  not  at  that  stage  able  to  make  then,  as
      paragraph 14.2 provides, the Tribunal is to make arrangements for  the
      hearing and for the transfer of the proceedings.   Whilst at the first
      stage the Tribunal prepares a determination, this is  not  promulgated
      or shown to the parties but is incorporated in the final determination
      of the Tribunal at the end of the reconsideration process.  These  are
      often referred to as a first stage reconsideration and a second  stage
      reconsideration.

14.   We do not agree with paragraph 12 of  Mr  Collins'  submissions.    We
      have not "decided" the reconsideration.   We have found that there  is
      a material error of law, that we are in no position to  determine  the
      reconsideration without hearing evidence and have therefore  adjourned
      for another panel or Immigration Judge to continue  and  complete  the
      reconsideration.

15.   We do not consider that any useful guidance  can  be  drawn  from  the
      fact that the 2004  Act  does  not  contain  provisions  analogous  to
      section 103 of the 2002 Act.  As to paragraph 13 of the submissions we
      find that the reference in paragraph 15.5 of the  Practice  Directions
      to  "unless  it  directs  otherwise,  the  Tribunal  shall  hear   any
      submissions as to such an order at the conclusion of  the  proceedings
      on  the  reconsideration"  to  be  clear.    The  conclusion  of   the
      proceedings is the conclusion of the reconsideration proceedings.   An
      interim step in the reconsideration proceedings,  at  which  they  are
      adjourned, is not the conclusion of the proceedings.

16.   The fact  that  the  Tribunal  will  consider  representations  for  a
      funding order to be granted under section 103D(3) if a reconsideration
      hearing never takes place does not, as paragraph  15  of  the  grounds
      suggest, assist in  determining  what  happens  if  a  reconsideration
      hearing is adjourned.

17.   Contrary to the submission in paragraph 16 we do  not  agree  that  we
      have reconsidered the appeal, in the past tense.   We have dealt  with
      essential  points   in   the   reconsideration   process.   The   full
      reconsideration process has yet to be completed.

18.   Regulation 6 of the 2005 Regulations sets out two  pre-conditions  for
      making an order under section 103D(3).    The  first  is  allowing  an
      appeal on reconsideration.   The second is not allowing an  appeal  on
      reconsideration.   Neither of these decisions has been  taken.    They
      will not be taken until the adjourned hearing and  the  conclusion  of
      the reconsideration process.

19.   Section  103  D(3)  (b)  provides  that  the  order  is  one  for  the
      appellant's costs in respect of the reconsideration to be paid out  of
      the fund (our emphasis).  There is no power  to  make  an  order  that
      covers only a part of the reconsideration.  Thus, if Mr  Collins  were
      right, the Tribunal would have to order that the cost of  proceedings,
      part of which have not yet occurred, will be paid for  in  any  event,
      even though:-

           (a) it  may  emerge  at  the  second  stage  that  the  test  in
           regulation 6 (3) was not in fact met, perhaps because good faith
           issues arise; or


           (b) there are found to be special circumstances why counsel  but
           not the supplier should be paid, or vice versa.


  20.  That particular result would need to be supported by  clear  wording.
      It is not.


  21. We find that, at this stage in the proceedings, having  adjourned  the
      reconsideration hearing, we have no power to make a funding order.


  22. This determination is reported for what it  says  about  the  Tribunal
      having  no  power  to  make  a  funding  order  on   a   first   stage
      reconsideration where a second stage reconsideration is ordered.







P R Moulden
Senior Immigration Judge


