
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule  24:  scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT
00143(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EG
                                     NG
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Eicke QC instructed by Treasury Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Dubinsky, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT
1    No party to proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  entitled  to
withdraw  its  case  without  permission  under  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  A  case  may  be  withdrawn  with
permission but a case is not withdrawn until the Tribunal has  notified  the
parties in writing that permission to withdraw has been granted.
2     The  Tribunal  is  not  required  to  determine  an  appeal  when   an
appellant's case has been withdrawn and the respondent has  not  been  given
permission to appeal. For administrative purposes an appeal is  disposed  of
by recording that a party's case has been withdrawn.
3    A party that  seeks  to  persuade  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  replace  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with  a  decision  that  would  make  a
material difference to one of the parties needs permission  to  appeal.  The
Upper Tribunal cannot entertain an application purporting to be  made  under
rule 24 for permission to appeal until  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been
asked in writing for permission to appeal  and  has  either  refused  it  or
declined to admit the application.


 1. Hereinafter the appellant is described as "the Secretary of  State"  and
    the respondents are described as "the claimants".

 2. We have had the benefit  of  very  full  skeleton  arguments  from  both
    Counsel and a "speaking note" from  Ms  Dubinsky.  They  have  all  been
    helpful.

 3. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against decisions of
    the First-tier Tribunal in determinations  promulgated  on  13  December
    2011 allowing the  claimants'  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds  with
    reference solely to Article  3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. The claimants appealed against decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to  remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom.  They  are  "foreign
    criminals" as defined by section 32(1) of the UK Borders Act  2007  and,
    by reason of section 32(4) of the Act, their removal is conducive to the
    public good.   The claimants are citizens  of  Ethiopia  who  have  been
    convicted of serious criminal offences leading in each case to sentences
    of five years' imprisonment.

 4. We set out below the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  each  case.
    It said:

       "The certificate under Section 72 of the 2002 Act is upheld.
       The exclusion provisions of Article 1(F)(c) of the Refugee Convention
       and of Articles 12(2) and 12(3) of the Qualifying Directive apply.
       There is no effective appeal on asylum grounds.
       There is no effective appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.
       The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 only).
       Anonymity direction is continued."

 5. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  is  a
    statutory mechanism that gives effect in United Kingdom law  to  Article
    33 of the Refugee Convention. It permits the United Kingdom, even though
    it is a "contracting state", to return a refugee to a country  where  he
    is at risk when there are reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  the
    refugee is a danger to the security of  the  United  Kingdom.   Broadly,
    article 1(F)(c) of the Refugee Convention and articles 12(2)  and  12(3)
    of  the  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  (the  Qualification  Directive)
    disqualify a person from being a refugee if the person has  acted  in  a
    way inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

 6. The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  claimants  had  so
    conducted themselves that  they  were  not  entitled  to  protection  as
    refugees. Even if they were so entitled  then  the  United  Kingdom  was
    entitled to remove them under the terms of the Convention because  their
    presence in the United Kingdom created a  risk  to  security.   Further,
    although perhaps somewhat confusingly on an initial reading, the  First-
    tier Tribunal made clear that although the appeal was allowed  on  human
    rights grounds the appeal would not have been allowed with reference  to
    article 8 of the ECHR if it had been dismissed with reference to article
    3.  If  the  claimants  could  have  been  returned  safely   then   the
    interference with their private and family lives consequent  on  removal
    was proportionate. Neither did the First-tier Tribunal accept  that  the
    claimants were entitled to humanitarian protection.

 7. However the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that there was a real risk
    of the claimants being subjected to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment in the event of their return and therefore for that reason  it
    allowed their appeals.

 8. Thus although the claimants failed to establish  important  elements  of
    their claims their appeals were allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Each party had a right of appeal, exercisable only with permission,  "on
    any point of law arising" from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 section 11(1))  (hereinafter
    "the First-tier Tribunal Rules"). The rules do not  provide  for  cross-
    appeals but although it is uncommon it is by no means unknown  for  both
    parties to seek permission to appeal a  decision  without  either  party
    knowing that the other party has sought permission to  appeal.  In  this
    case the  Secretary  of  State  asked  for  permission  to  appeal.  The
    claimants did not.

10. The Secretary of State was given permission to appeal by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McKee acting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  30  January
    2012.  The grounds were widely but imprecisely drawn  (not  by  counsel)
    and Judge McKee's grant can only be  read  as  unlimited  permission  to
    challenge the decision to allow the appeal with reference to  article  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights. Notices that permission  had
    been granted and standard directions were sent out on 21 February  2012.



11. The Secretary of State could not meet the demands of the  timetable  and
    applied for further time.  By a letter dated  13  March  2012  Principal
    Resident Judge Southern extended the time for complying with  directions
    to 27 March 2012. This was extended again until 27  April  2012.   By  a
    letter dated 27 April 2012 the Secretary of State informed the Tribunal:

       "We write to confirm that the Secretary of State withdraws her appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal in the above matters, and requests  that  those
       proceedings therefore be discontinued."

12. Additionally the letter explained that the Secretary of  State  accepted
    that in the absence of assurances from  the  Ethiopian  authorities  the
    forcible return of the claimants to Ethiopia would expose them to a real
    risk of  ill-treatment  sufficiently  severe  for  their  return  to  be
    contrary to their rights under Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  It  was  the  intention  of  the
    Secretary of State to seek assurances from the Ethiopian authorities  to
    address that risk and then to make a fresh  deportation  order  in  each
    case and to certify that any appeal against such a decision would lie to
    the SIAC by reason of section 2(1) of the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
    Commission Act 1997. In short the Secretary of State accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the  appeal  was  right  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal but the Secretary of State intended to make
    arrangements to guarantee the claimants' safety and then to  make  fresh
    decisions to remove them.

13. This letter prompted further directions from  Principal  Resident  Judge
    Southern. They were dated and sent on 27 April 2012.  The material parts
    are paragraphs 3 and 4 which we reproduced below:

       "3.         Paragraph 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 provides for a party to withdraw its case before the Upper
       Tribunal, with the consent of the Tribunal, but there is no provision
       for a party  to  withdraw  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       Therefore, the letter referred to above can serve only as  notice  of
       withdrawal of the appellant's case before the Upper  Tribunal,  which
       takes effect because the Upper Tribunal now provides for the  consent
       required by paragraph 17(2).
       4.     Subject to any request  received  from  either  party  to  the
       contrary by 4.00 pm on 4 May 2012, the  Upper  Tribunal  proposes  to
       treat the determination of the First-tier Tribunal as unchallenged by
       the appellant so that the appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  will  be
       dismissed without a hearing and without consideration of the  grounds
       upon which permission to appeal was granted."

14. This produced a quick response from  the  claimants'  solicitors.   They
    asked that no decision be made in response to the Secretary  of  State's
    letter for a week so that they could take instructions.

15. By notice dated 3 May  2012  the  claimants  (the  respondents  to  this
    appeal) served a document entitled "Grounds  on  which  the  respondents
    rely".  This begins with an introduction explaining  that  it  was  made
    pursuant to rule 24(3)(e) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (herein after  "the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules").   Rule  24  is
    entitled "Response to the Notice of Appeal". Rule 24(3)(e) requires  the
    respondent to state in the response:

       "The grounds on which the respondent relies including (in the case of
       an appeal against the decision of another Tribunal)  any  grounds  on
       which the respondent was unsuccessful in the  proceedings  which  are
       the subject of the appeal, but intends to rely on in the appeal."

16. Until 27 April  2012  the  claimants  were  expecting  a  particularised
    skeleton argument or grounds from the Secretary of State to  which  they
    would make a response. It was now apparent that they were not  going  to
    receive either of these and the claimants used, or purported to use, the
    rule 24 Notice  to  raise  a  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination. They had not sought permission to appeal.  The  claimants
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal should not  have  concluded  that
    the  claimants  had  engaged  in  conduct  that  deprived  them  of  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention or the Qualification Directive,  or
    that by reason of their being a danger to security  the  United  Kingdom
    was entitled to  return  them  even  if  they  were  refugees.  Further,
    according to  the  claimants,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  perverse
    findings of fact, which the rule  24  Notice  identified,  including  in
    particular a finding that the  claimants  had  prior  knowledge  of  the
    criminal intentions of another. The claimants said that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should not have concluded that the claimants'  removal,  if  it
    could be achieved without  exposing  them  to  a  risk  of  serious  ill
    treatment, was a proportionate interference with their right  to  family
    life. Other points were made in a similar vein so that the Notice raised
    some twelve challenges  to  the  determination.  In  short  it  was  the
    claimants' case that the First-tier  Tribunal,  save  for  allowing  the
    appeal with reference to Article 3 of the Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    agreeing to make an anonymity order and (presumably) accepting that  the
    appellants did not need humanitarian protection, was about as  wrong  as
    it could be and the claimants wanted their challenges to the decision to
    be heard.

17. There was further correspondence and, in  due  course,  directions  were
    given by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane  on  7  September  2012.  Judge
    Lane's directions do not lend themselves to accurate summary and we  set
    them out below in their entirety.  He said:

       "1.         The parties shall prepare  for  the  forthcoming  hearing
       (on 30 October 2012) on the basis that (subject to paragraph 5 below)
       the scope of that hearing will be to consider (a) whether  the  Upper
       Tribunal should consent under  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to the Secretary of State's withdrawal of
       her  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal;  and  (b)  the   respondent's
       applications for the appeal to proceed on the basis of the challenges
       to the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  respondent's
       appeals on Refugee Convention grounds and Article 3 ECHR grounds.
       2      So far as these matters are concerned,  the  parties  will  be
       expected to address the effect, if any, of  the  Secretary  of  State
       withdrawing the immigration decisions, against which the  respondents
       appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  particular,  does  such  a
       withdrawal have the effect of bringing the proceedings in  the  Upper
       Tribunal to an end because, even if that Tribunal  were  to  find  an
       error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Refugee  Convention  and
       Article 8 findings and set aside the  determinations,  there  are  no
       longer any Section 82 appeals, so that no substantive remaking of any
       decisions in those appeals is possible?
       3      The parties should also be prepared to address the Tribunal on
       whether the effect of rule 24(3)(e) is to entitle a party, who  could
       have sought permission to appeal an adverse decision, to  wait  until
       the other party has been granted permission to  appeal  and  then  in
       effect put forward their own grounds of challenge by way of rule  24,
       without the necessity of obtaining permission to appeal.
       4       Notwithstanding  the  above,  the  parties  are  directed  to
       consider whether the substantive issue  is,  in  fact,  whether  SIAC
       would be invited to regard any findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal as having a bearing on any appeal to SIAC,  given  that  any
       SIAC appeal would appear capable being brought on both Article 8  and
       Refugee Convention grounds.  There appears to be no dispute that  the
       First-tier Tribunal's Article 3 findings should stand  (at  least  as
       regards the state of affairs as the date of  the  hearing).   On  the
       contrary, it seems to be accepted by the Secretary of State that  any
       SIAC  appeal  would  address  the  effectiveness  of  any   Ethiopian
       government assurances regarding the treatment of the  respondents  on
       return (see letters of 3 May (BP) and 4 May (TSol).
       5      In pursuance of their duty under rule 2(4)(b), in  furtherance
       of the overriding objective, the parties shall use  their  reasonable
       endeavours to reach agreed positions  regarding  paragraphs  1  to  4
       above, which for the avoidance of doubt may include  agreed  proposed
       changes to the scope  of  the  forthcoming  hearing  and  the  issues
       canvassed in paragraphs 2 to 4 above.  The parties shall  inform  the
       Tribunal in writing of any such agreed  positions  and  changes,  not
       later than 17 October 2012.
       6      No later than 24 September 2012 the parties shall serve on the
       Tribunal (2 copies) and each other skeleton arguments and authorities
       relied upon."

18. At first sight Judge Lane's direction that the  parties  should  prepare
    arguments  concerning  whether  the  Tribunal  should  consent  to   the
    Secretary of State's withdrawing her case might appear to  sit  uneasily
    with Judge Southern's  Directions.  However  rule  17(5)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules requires the Upper Tribunal to  send  a  Notice  to  each
    party in writing that a case or part of a case has been withdrawn and it
    is our view that the Tribunal's consent is  not  given  until  a  formal
    Notice of Withdrawal has been sent. No such Notice was sent here and  it
    is open to us to withhold the Tribunal's consent if we so choose.  Judge
    Southern's directions plainly provided for submissions and consideration
    before the disposal of the appeal and was no more than an indication  of
    a provisional view.

19. Contrary to the contention in the claimants' skeleton argument, and,  an
    impression that may have arisen from earlier directions, we find that if
    we consent to  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  being  withdrawn  then
    withdrawal,  confirmed  by  an  appropriate  notice,  will   bring   the
    proceedings to an end.

20. The right to appeal an "immigration  decision"  (which  is  defined  and
    does not include every decision that might  aggrieve  a  person  seeking
    permission to be in the United Kingdom) is set out in section 82 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. A person seeking to appeal
    a decision under the European  Economic  Area  Regulations  can  usually
    appeal it as if it were an immigration decision (see  regulation  26  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006). A person who
    wishes to appeal an immigration decision may appeal  "to  the  Tribunal"
    (section 82(1)).  The word "Tribunal" is defined  under  section  81  to
    mean the First-tier Tribunal. In this Chamber appeals against  decisions
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  come  before  the  Upper  Tribunal   with
    permission  pursuant  to  section  11  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007.  The  Upper  Tribunal's  initial  function  is  to
    decide if the First-tier Tribunal erred. It if does then it may  re-make
    the decision (see s12(2)(b)(ii)) and if it does that then it is deciding
    an appeal against a decision  (typically)  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    rather than a decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Rule 17A of the Upper
    Tribunal Rules 2008 provides that where an event occurs in a case before
    the Upper Tribunal that would cause  an  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be abandoned by operation  of  law  (for  example  where  in
    certain circumstances the claimant leaves the jurisdiction or is granted
    a permission to remain: s104(4) of the 2002 Act) then the Upper Tribunal
    shall send a notice telling the parties that "the appeal" is  abandoned.
    It follows that  although  the  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  is  not
    created by the 2002 Act its jurisdiction to decide  appeals  originating
    under that Act does not always continue if the appeal under the 2002 Act
    ends.

21. We understand that in other Chambers of the  Upper  Tribunal  an  appeal
    ends if it is withdrawn. Withdrawal disposes of  proceedings  in  a  way
    analogous to "discontinuance" in the Civil Procedure Rules  (see  Jacobs
    Tribunal Practice and Procedure LAG 12.52).

22. The procedural rules for First-tier Tribunal  Chambers  other  than  the
    First-tier Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, like rule 17  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules, provide for a party withdrawing its  "case  or  part  of
    it". Rule 17 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005 provides for an appellant withdrawing  an  appeal  (rather  than  a
    "case or part of it") suggesting that there is a distinction to be drawn
    concerning the effect of withdrawing an  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  where  withdrawing  an  appeal  brings  it  to  an  end,  and
    withdrawing a case, which would not necessarily have this effect.

23. We do not consider that this difference in wording demonstrates  such  a
    distinction. Rule 17 of the Upper Tribunal Rules has to accommodate  the
    Upper Tribunal dealing with cases that are not  appeals  (e.g.  judicial
    review work) and so the difference in the words of Rule 17 of the First-
    tier Tribunal Rules and the Upper Tribunal Rules can be explained  in  a
    way that  does  mean  that  there  needs  to  be  a  difference  in  the
    consequences of withdrawing an appeal and withdrawing a case. We see  no
    reason in principle for a case before the Upper Tribunal on appeal  from
    the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  being  treated
    any differently from appeals from other Chambers and we  find  that  the
    distinctive wording in the 2005 Rules is a result of the rules'  origins
    with an earlier Tribunal rather then in any policy to  make  distinctive
    provision for immigration and asylum cases.

24. Section 104 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states:

       104    Pending appeal.
       (1)         An appeal under  section  82(1)  is  pending  during  the
       period-
             (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and
             (b)  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                  abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).
       [(2)   An appeal under section 82(1) is not  finally  determined  for
             the purposes of subsection (1)(b) while -
             (a)   an application for permission to appeal under section 11
                  or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007
                  could be made or is awaiting determination,
             (b)     permission to appeal under either  of  those  sections
                  has been granted and the appeal is awaiting determination,
                  or
             (c)    an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or  14  of
                  that Act and is awaiting determination.]

25. Thus an appeal under section  82(1)  is  pending  until  it  is  finally
    determined, withdrawn or abandoned and, if permission to appeal has been
    granted, it is not "finally determined" if it is awaiting  determination
    (s104(2)(b) and (c)). Clearly when an appeal that has  been  brought  by
    the appellant before the Tribunal is withdrawn the s82(1) appeal  is  no
    longer pending and neither, we find, is the section  11  appeal  because
    section 11 appeals do not  exist  independently  of  the  section  82(1)
    appeals from which they arose. The Secretary of  State  has  no  section
    82(1) appeal  to  withdraw  or  abandon  but,  although  section  104(2)
    identifies circumstances in which an appeal is not "finally determined",
    it does not purport to define the circumstances in which  an  appeal  is
    finally determined. An appeal that has been withdrawn is  not  "awaiting
    determination" for the purpose of section 104.

26. Mindful that civil proceedings can usually be discontinued and  that  it
    is the practice of  other  Chambers  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  treat
    withdrawal as final disposal we are satisfied that withdrawing an appeal
    with consent when consent is needed is a final disposal for the purposes
    of section 104(1)(b). In  these  circumstances  an  appeal  is  "finally
    determined" even though no determination has been issued.

27. We are reinforced in this view by  rule  17(3)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules which  clearly  contemplates  the  reinstatement  of  a  withdrawn
    appeal.  This  rule  would  not  make  sense  if  withdrawal,   properly
    understood, was intended to  precipitate  a  determination  allowing  or
    dismissing the appeal.

28. It follows that if we permit the Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  her
    case  then  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  be  finally
    determined.

29. Ms Dubinsky argued that we should not permit the Secretary of  State  to
    withdraw her case because there are points that the  claimants  want  to
    argue.

30. There was common ground between the parties.  They agreed  that  if  the
    existing decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands then it will be  the
    starting point in any  future  proceedings  before  the  SIAC.  This  is
    because of the ruling in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  D
    (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702* (formerly known as Devaseelan). Although  it
    is for the SIAC to decide how it should conduct its affairs we must make
    our decision with regard to how we expect it to impact on other possible
    proceedings. Accordingly we make it clear that we decided  the  case  in
    the  expectation  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  (or   any
    different findings that we were persuaded to make) would be  a  starting
    point in any future appeal that the claimants  might  make  in  SIAC  or
    elsewhere if the Secretary of State makes a relevant decision.

31. Helpfully the parties  further  agree  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to withdraw her appeal does not deprive the Upper  Tribunal  of
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal unless consent is given and the case  is
    withdrawn. Any contrary view would nullify the need for the Tribunal  to
    consent to withdraw. This, however, does not deal with point 2 of  Judge
    Lane's directions. An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is withdrawn  if
    the decision that it challenges is withdrawn (rule 17(2) of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Rules).  However, unlike section 104 of the 2002 Act which
    provides circumstances in which appeals under section 82  are  abandoned
    by statute, the First-tier Tribunal Rules can only bind  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Thus an appeal before the Upper Tribunal is not  withdrawn  by
    reason of the decision to which the appeal relates being  withdrawn.  If
    the Upper Tribunal remitted such an appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    then it would be withdrawn because that is what the 2005 Rules require.

32. We now come to the central questions in this appeal. Can  the  claimants
    properly raise in a rule 24 Notice grounds contending  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was wrong not to allow the appeal for more reasons than it
    did and, if it can, should the Upper Tribunal deal with them?

33. Mr Eicke said that we have no power except that given us by statute  and
    so we have no power to hear an appeal  without  permission.   Parliament
    says unequivocally that a right may be exercised  only  with  permission
    (2007 Act section 13(3)). An application can only  be  made  in  writing
    (First-tier  Tribunal  Rules,  rule  24(1))  and  an   application   for
    permission cannot  be  entertained  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  unless  an
    application has been  made  first  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal Rules 21(2)(b)). Mr Eicke  said  that  it  made  no  sense  for
    provisions that required permission to be obtained before a  hearing  in
    writing from a First-tier Judge to be swept  aside  and  replaced  by  a
    system that enabled a respondent to an appeal  to  assert  as  of  right
    arguments that were raised by the respondent in a notice of appeal which
    could otherwise only be raised with permission given in  response  to  a
    written application.

34. Miss Dubinsky contended that appeal rights cannot be  lightly  displaced
    but we agree with Mr Eicke that we cannot give ourselves jurisdiction we
    do not have and it is not for us to create a  right  of  appeal  without
    permission. The claimants cannot appeal the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because they do not have permission to  appeal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal has no power to give permission to appeal unless the First-tier
    Tribunal has refused  permission  (rule  21(2)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules).

35. It does not follow from  this  that  there  are  no  circumstances  when
    claimants would be unable to argue that any of the findings  adverse  to
    the respondent are wrong or that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by
    not allowing the appeal for more reasons than it did but  the  claimants
    cannot rely on rule 24 notices as an alternative to  seeking  permission
    to appeal.

36.  Mr  Eicke  submitted  that  a  rule  24  Notice  was  analogous  to   a
    Respondent's Notice under rule 52 of the Civil Procedure Rules. There  a
    party that is seeking permission to appeal from the  appeal  court  must
    ask for permission and a party that (alternatively) wishes  to  ask  the
    appeal court to  uphold  the  order  of  the  lower  court  for  reasons
    different from or additional to those given by the lower court must give
    notice of that intention. His point was that the need for permission  to
    cross-appeal was well understood in civil proceedings and seeking it was
    not something that the respondent to an appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    could be expected to ignore.

37. In many ways the provisions of rule 52 of the CPR  are  analogous  to  a
    rule 24 Notice but they are not the same. Under rule 52.3(2) of the  CPR
    a party that does not have permission to appeal from  the  lower  courts
    can seek it from the higher court but in the civil courts the failure to
    secure permission  from  the  lower  court  (even  if  through  culpable
    neglect) can be remedied by the higher court but  the  failure  to  seek
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal cannot be  corrected  by  the
    Upper  Tribunal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  must   decide   a   written
    application for permission to appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  can  be
    involved (see rule 24(1) of the 2005 Rules and rule 21(2) of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules). This is a cumbersome procedure  once  proceedings  have
    begun before the Upper Tribunal. An application in writing can  be  made
    at any stage, and a judge deciding a case in the Upper Tribunal could no
    doubt withdraw and determine a written  application  for  permission  to
    appeal as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal. However if the  judge  did
    not extend time (for such an application would  almost  always  be  very
    late) or refused permission  to  appeal  there  would  no  doubt  be  an
    application for an adjournment so that the papers could be put before  a
    judge sitting the Upper Tribunal. This, we find, must be the  deliberate
    intention of the rules and rather underlines the importance of  a  party
    that needs permission to  appeal  seeking  it  in  accordance  with  the
    prescribe time scales and well before a rule 24 notice would  ordinarily
    be appropriate.

38. Against this background we look carefully at the terms  of  rule  24  of
    the Upper Tribunal Rules.  Although the rule prescribes a time scale for
    providing a respondent's notice and prescribes its  contents,  the  rule
    does not create a general obligation on a respondent to provide a notice
    at all. Rather if the respondent chooses to send a notice then  rule  24
    prescribes its content. In  this  case  directions  echo  the  rule  and
    specify the contents of a Notice rather than insist on one being served.

39. Certain of the requirements are informative rather  than  controversial,
    such  as  stating  the  respondent's  name  and  address,  whether   the
    respondent wants a hearing and, usefully, whether or not the  respondent
    opposes the appeal.     Rule 24(3)(e), it  was  submitted,  assists  the
    appellant. It requires the respondent to state in the response:

       "The grounds on which the respondent relies including (in the case of
       an appeal against the decision of another Tribunal)  any  grounds  on
       which the respondent was unsuccessful in the  proceedings  which  are
       the subject of the appeal, but intends to rely on in the appeal."

40. The 2002 Act provides statutory grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (see section 84(1)) but the Secretary of State can never appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal and so cannot rely strictly  on  the  grounds
    listed at section 84(1) which are  all  grounds  of  appeal  against  an
    immigration decision. It follows that "grounds" in rule 24 must  have  a
    wider meaning and include any reason  relied  upon  by  the  parties  to
    support the decision. It does not follow that a respondent can  raise  a
    point in a response that should have been raised in the respondent's own
    appeal.

41. Ms Dubinsky argued that the rule 24 response  permitted  her  to  argue,
    without seeking permission  to  appeal,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should have resolved  any  point  in  the  claimant's  favour  that  the
    claimant  relied  upon  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Dubinsky
    submitted that this rule is incapable of being interpreted in a way that
    does not assume that a respondent can challenge a First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision in  this  manner  without  permission  to  appeal  having  been
    granted. Ms Dubinsky argued that a respondent who opposes an appeal  can
    be expected, without need for express confirmation, to rely  on  grounds
    which were successful before the First-tier Tribunal. It would hardly be
    informative  for  an  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   who
    succeeded in persuading the First-tier Tribunal  (for  example)  that  a
    decision was not in  accordance  with  the  immigration  rules  (section
    84(1)(a)) to be required to state in a notice that it relied on the same
    successful ground when responding to an appeal brought by the  Secretary
    of State and the rule makes no such requirement. Rule 24(3)(e)  requires
    the respondent to state if it intends  to  rely  on  grounds  that  were
    unsuccessful "in the proceedings which are the subject  of  the  appeal"
    but intends to rely on  in  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.    Ms
    Dubinsky submitted that the rule  does  not  make  sense  unless  it  is
    interpreted to mean, without qualification, that there is a right to say
    that a ground that  was  unsuccessful  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should have succeeded.

42. When Mr Eicke addressed us on rule 24(3)(e) he tried  to  circumvent  Ms
    Dubinsky's submission by emphasising that the claimants were required to
    identify any grounds on which they intended to  rely  including  grounds
    "on which the respondent was unsuccessful in the proceedings  which  are
    the subject of the appeal".  He said  that  the  words  "which  are  the
    subject of the appeal"  are  crucial.  The  proceedings  which  are  the
    subject of the appeal were not, he submitted, all the  proceedings  that
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, but only the proceedings that  were
    before us and the proceedings before us, were identified by reference to
    the grant of permission to appeal. Clearly, if he is right,  the  points
    relied on by the claimants are excluded because they were  not  part  of
    that grant.

43. The bright line distinction between the  First-tier  section  85  appeal
    and the Upper Tier section 11 appeal suggested by Mr Eicke's argument is
    inconsistent with the continuum suggested by section 104(4) of the  2002
    Act and by rule 17A of the Upper Tribunal Rules.  A  section  11  appeal
    does not continue when a section 85 appeal has been abandoned. Similarly
    a section 11 appeal does not exist without  regard  to  the  section  85
    appeal that encapsulated the dispute between the parties. In  some  ways
    this is an unattractive line of argument. It  follows  that  we  do  not
    accept that the words "in the proceedings which are the subject  of  the
    appeal" are limited to the grounds on which  permission  to  appeal  has
    been given. The "proceedings" that are the "subject of the  appeal"  are
    those  that  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is  those
    "proceedings" that are the subject to further appeal.

44. Ms Dubinsky's contention that rule 24 is meaningless unless  it  permits
    raising any points that  failed  to  impress  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    including a point that should have been the subject  of  an  appeal,  is
    attractive but is, we find, wrong.

45. Although section 11 of the 2007 Act extends the right  of  appeal  (with
    permission and subject to excluded decisions) to an appeal "on any point
    of law" save for extraordinary cases, a party will not normally be given
    permission to appeal, and will not be expected  to  seek  permission  to
    appeal, a point that  would  not  make  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome. However that party  might  still  have  very  good  reasons  to
    respond to an appeal by arguing that the First-tier Tribunal should have
    dismissed or allowed the appeal for reasons other than  those  given  in
    the Determination or rather for grounds which were unsuccessful  in  the
    proceedings that are the subject of the appeal.

46. Suppose a man seeks entry clearance as a husband and  suppose  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer finds that he has  not  shown  that  he  can  be
    either accommodated or maintained in accordance with the rules. A First-
    tier Tribunal Judge may decide, arguably wrongly, that the  husband  can
    satisfy  the  accommodation  requirements  but   not   the   maintenance
    requirements. In that event the judge  would  dismiss  the  appeal.  The
    Entry Clearance Office would  have  no  interest  in  appealing.  He  is
    content with the decision to dismiss the appeal. The husband however may
    want to challenge the decision. He might want to argue that the decision
    that he did not satisfy the maintenance requirements was  wrong  in  law
    and he may be given permission  to  appeal.  In  that  event  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer may well want to argue not only that the decision that
    the husband did not meet the maintenance requirements was right but that
    the decision that he did meet the accommodation requirements was  wrong.
    In short, without wanting to appeal the decision,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer may want to rely on a ground that failed before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Rule 24 permits the Entry Clearance Office to give  notice  of
    his intention to raise such a point in a reply. In short  rule  24  does
    have a meaning that does not depend on  Ms  Dubinsky's  premise  and  we
    reject the construction that she urged on us. Rule 24 does not create  a
    right of appeal to a party who has not asked for permission  to  appeal.
    Rule 24 is not in any way to do with seeking permission to appeal and it
    is not an alternative to seeking permission where permission is  needed.
    It is to do with giving notice  about  how  the  respondent  intends  to
    respond to the appeal that the appellant has permission to pursue. If  a
    respondent wants to argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    reached a materially different  conclusion  then  the  respondent  needs
    permission to appeal.

47. This is probably more  significant  in  international  protection  cases
    than entry clearance cases because an appeal can be allowed on different
    grounds. An appellant may have shown, for example,  alternatively,  that
    he is a refugee, or entitled to humanitarian protection or that  removal
    is contrary to his rights under article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights. The beneficial consequences of success would be  different
    in each case. For example a person found to be entitled to  humanitarian
    protection may want to argue that he should have been  recognised  as  a
    refugee whilst the Secretary of State may want to argue that the  appeal
    should only have been allowed with reference to article 8. In such cases
    both parties would want a  result  materially  different  from  the  one
    decided by the Tribunal and both should seek permission to appeal.

48. In this case the Secretary of State  purported  to  have  withdrawn  her
    appeal and asked us to consent to her withdrawing her case. She did  not
    want to argue before the Upper Tribunal the  points  on  which  she  had
    permission to appeal. The claimants could have challenged  the  findings
    that they did not like by way of Notice of Appeal. They chose not to  do
    that but to wait until they knew exactly what the Secretary of State was
    saying in  order  to  consider  how  they  should  respond.   They  were
    perfectly entitled to do that but the consequences are that they are now
    far too late to make a timely application to appeal the  decision.  When
    considering the claimants' case we are not considering an appeal  but  a
    Notice showing how the claimants intend to respond to an appeal  brought
    by the Secretary of State that the Secretary of State no  longer  wishes
    to pursue.

49. We accept that if the Secretary of State makes a  further  decision  the
    existing decision of the Tribunal may well be  relevant  to  any  appeal
    against that decision. We can say no more than that because  we  do  not
    know if, or when, any further decision will be made and how similar  the
    claimants' circumstances will be. It may well be that the starting point
    for any further decision will include findings adverse to the appellants
    that they did not seek to challenge by way of appeal. We  are  confident
    that if, as may be the case, any future appeal is heard in the SIAC  the
    findings will be given no more weight than they merit.

50. In these circumstances we  see  no  desirable  purpose  in  putting  the
    parties and the public to the expense of a further appeal.

51. It follows that we consent to the Secretary  of  State  withdrawing  the
    appeal. In the circumstances we make no findings on the rule 24 Notice.

52. The claimants are therefore in precisely the  position  that  they  have
    been because the time for seeking permission to appeal has  lapsed.  The
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the  appeal  shall  stand.  The
    claimants have not appealed and the Upper Tribunal will make no  finding
    on their criticisms.

53. Although the claimants did not  apply  for  permission  to  appeal  they
    indicated that they were ready to make such an application. None  of  us
    would have given permission to appeal  because  we  do  not  think  that
    permission is appropriate at this late stage and especially not now that
    the Secretary of State wants to withdraw the decision. We see no  reason
    to refuse the Secretary of State permission to withdraw a  decision  she
    wishes to withdraw in order that the claimants can  seek  permission  to
    challenge a  finding  that  they  did  not  seek  to  challenge  when  a
    permission to appeal could have been sought in time.

54. We therefore answer specifically  the  points  raised  in  Judge  Lane's
    directions as indicated below.

55. The Tribunal consents to the Secretary of  State  withdrawing  its  case
    from the Upper Tribunal. This is a Notice  pursuant  to  rule  17(5)  to
    inform the parties that the Secretary of State's decision is withdrawn,

56. The effect of the case being withdrawn from the Upper Tribunal  is  that
    the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are at an  end.  There  is  no
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal to which the claimants can respond  and
    therefore there is no need to decide points raised by the  Secretary  of
    State's notice.

57. A party is not entitled to rely on points raised in a  rule  24  Notice.
    The notice merely records an intention. A party that wants to exercise a
    right to appeal a  decision  must  obtain  the  permission  required  by
    section 11(3) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

58. Accordingly with our consent and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".

59. At the start of the  hearing  Ms  Dubinsky  asked  us  to  continue  the
    anonymity order made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Eicke  neither
    opposed nor supported the application. The claimants have been convicted
    of serious criminal offences and we are satisfied that publishing  their
    identity could create a risk to their safety, especially if our decision
    was reported incompletely. We make an order with reference to rule 14 of
    the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  members  of  the
    public to identify the claimants. When we decided to make the  anonymity
    order we did not know what decision we would make but  either  we  would
    make a decision that disposed of the appeal, in  which  case  continuing
    the order would preserve the status quo, or we  would  make  a  decision
    that would lead to  another  hearing  in  which  case  the  question  of
    anonymity could be looked at again.  Any  restraint  on  publication  is
    always a serious matter and we are not suggesting that  withholding  the
    identity of the claimants in any further proceedings will necessarily be
    justified but the public do not need to know the names of the  claimants
    to understand the  highly  technical  procedural  points  that  are  the
    substance of the appeal before us at this  stage.   This  order  is  not
    intended to restrict any reporting on the arguments before  us  or  this
    Notice (including our reasons) or its substance.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 February 2012                |

