

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       Farquharson (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                           SIR JEFFREY JAMES KBE CMG

                                   Between

                             LINCOLN FARQUHARSON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



(1)  Where the respondent relies on allegations of  conduct  in  proceedings
for removal, the same principles apply  as  to  proof  of  conduct  and  the
assessment of risk to the public, as in deportation cases: Bah  [2012]  UKUT
196 (IAC) etc applicable.

(2)  A criminal charge that has not  resulted  in  a  conviction  is  not  a
criminal record; but the acts that led to the charge may be  established  as
conduct.

(3)  If the respondent seeks to establish the conduct by  reference  to  the
contents of police CRIS reports, the relevant documents should be  produced,
rather than a bare witness statement referring to them.

(4)  The material relied on must be supplied to the appellant in  good  time
to prepare for the appeal.

(5)  The judge has a duty to ensure a fair hearing is obtained by  affording
the appellant sufficient time to study the documents and respond.

(6)  Where the appellant is in detention and faces a serious  allegation  of
conduct, it  is  in  the  interests  of  justice  that  legal  aid  is  made
available.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Howard Cheng of Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Order: the names and identities of  any  of  the  complainants  referred  to
below are not to be  disclosed  in  connection  with  any  report  of  these
proceedings






         DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. On 22 January 2013  a  differently  constituted  panel  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal decided to adjourn this appeal from a decision of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Clayton in order for the appellant to  have  a  further
      opportunity to obtain legal representation, consider  the  documentary
      evidence provided by  the  respondent  and  submit  any  evidence  and
      witness statements on which he intended  to  rely.  We  refer  to  the
      Ruling and Directions on 23 January 2013 (attached as Annex A) for the
      history of this appeal and the error of law relied on.


   2. The Tribunal indicated (at [20] (a)) that it was  minded  to  conclude
      that Judge Clayton's decision of  22 March 2012 should  be  set  aside
      because the appellant had not had a fair opportunity to respond to the
      case of the Secretary of State.  A  strict  time  table  was  set  for
      filing  further  evidence  and  it  was  indicated  that   a   further
      adjournment of this appeal was highly improbable.

   3. At the hearing on 26 February the appellant  was  represented  by  new
      solicitors. We are indebted to them for preparing the  case  within  a
      constrained time scale. It is extremely important that  claimants  who
      are detained and facing removal from the United Kingdom  are  able  to
      access  legal  representation  to  present  an   Article   8   appeal,
      particularly,  as  in  the  present  case,  where  they  face  serious
      allegations relating to their  conduct  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In
      compliance  with  the  directions  previously  issued,  the  appellant
      produced a witness statement from himself, his mother, step-father and
      two half brothers, to which we will refer in due course.

   4. Mr Cheng also produced a short skeleton argument, most  of  which  was
      directed to whether there had been an error of law. We clarified  with
      Mr. Norton that no submission was to be made to us that the First-tier
      hearing  was  fair  and  accordingly  as  envisaged  in  the  previous
      directions we found  that  the  refusal  to  adjourn  the  hearing  in
      February 2012 was unfair and a  material  error  of  law.  As  further
      envisaged in the earlier directions, the Tribunal  indicated  that  it
      would re-make the decision on appeal for itself in the  light  of  the
      evidence that had now been tendered before us.

   5. At the outset of the appeal, Mr. Cheng sought a further adjournment in
      order to obtain medical reports on the appellant's mother. We  refused
      the application but received in evidence a helpful letter from her  GP
      dated 19 December 2011 outlining her extensive  medical  history  from
      1990.

   6. For the Secretary of State, Mr Norton relied on a 337 page  bundle  of
      edited CRIS reports (Crime Recording Information System) that had  not
      been tendered before Judge Clayton and the  witness  statement  of  DC
      Mahmood compiled from those  reports  that  had  been  served  on  the
      appellant on the same day of the hearing below.

   7. Mr Norton explained that the Secretary of State abandoned any reliance
      on allegations contained in the decision letter  of  28  October  2011
      paragraph 7 under the sub heading "Reports of Assaults" other than the
      first entry, relating to the appellant's arrest on suspicion of having
      committed assault occasioning grievous bodily harm on his then partner
      in 2004. The allegations abandoned were not supported  by  information
      in DC Mahmood's statement or entries in the CRIS reports.   Mr  Norton
      also abandoned the allegation at page one of  DC  Mahmood's  statement
      that "intelligence indicates FARQUHARSON is a  regular  class  A  drug
      user" as no supporting data from intelligence logs had been  provided.
      We entirely dismiss those matters from our consideration.  Further  Mr
      Norton submitted that  the  six  incidents  supported  by  documentary
      evidence on which reliance was placed by the Secretary of  State  were
      not adduced as evidence of "previous criminal record" as the  decision
      letter suggested but rather as material evidence under  limb  (iv)  of
      rule  395  C  "Personal  history,  including  character,  conduct  and
      employment record". DC Mahmood was tendered for cross examination.


   8. The  appellant  supplemented  his  recent  statement  and  was  cross-
      examined; the appellant's mother and step brother Stephen Bennett were
      tendered for examination. The material parts of their evidence will be
      considered further below. Mr Cheng then applied  to  call  a  witness,
      Yvonne Griffiths, who had not made a statement in accordance with  the
      directions we issued. Having seen a letter from her, identifying  what
      she could contribute to the appeal, we refused the  application.   She
      was the appellant's aunt. She had no new information to contribute  to
      the Article 8 appeal. In her letter she referred to the murder of  her
      son in Jamaica after his removal from the United Kingdom.  This  event
      was also mentioned by other witnesses. It has never formed  the  basis
      of a claim by the appellant to remain, and could not credibly do so in
      light of the fact that Jamaica is considered a safe country of  origin
      (Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002 s.  94(4)(n) ),  albeit
      prone to violence in a number of its urban areas.


   9. With these preliminary observations, we will set out our determination
      in the following way:
        a. The evidence relating to private and family life
        b. The evidence relating to the six incidents.
        c. Application of the  facts  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
           Article 8 issues
        d. Conclusions.

Private and family life

  10. The appellant is a national of Jamaica. His date of birth has now been
      clarified as being 7 July 1966 as opposed to 7 November or  any  other
      variations that have appeared from time to time in  the  documentation
      before us.  His mother was aged 15 at the time she gave birth to  him.
      She raised him as a single parent in Jamaica until  she  came  to  the
      United Kingdom in about 1984 when the appellant would have been  about
      18. The appellant lived  with  his  grandmother  in  her  property  in
      Jamaica until she came to the United Kingdom in  1986.  At  some  time
      thereafter, we were informed that the family property was sold.


  11. The appellant's mother  married  Kenneth  Bennett  (born  in  Jamaica,
      February 1941) and is now known as Joanne Bennett.  She  has  had  two
      children by Mr Bennett: Stephen born 1986 and Jonathan born 1987. They
      are all British nationals by birth or application.  This  family  unit
      live together at [address] in London  SW4,  although  Stephen  Bennett
      told us that having completed his university education he is  thinking
      of moving out of the family home shortly as is his younger brother.

  12. Other family members of the appellant in the  United  Kingdom  include
      his sisters, who are in employment and live in households of their own
      and who have not  made  statements;  his  great  uncle,  who  is  very
      elderly, frail and lives alone in a flat in Battersea; and two  aunts,
      including Yvonne Griffiths whose son was murdered in Jamaica in  2007.
      His grandmother lived in separate accommodation in the United  Kingdom
      until her death in April 2012.

  13. Little is known about the appellant's life in Jamaica from  1986  when
      his grandmother came to the United Kingdom and November 1999  when  he
      came aged 33.  His statement makes no mention of where he  was  living
      and what he was doing, other than to confirm  that  he  has  a  single
      conviction of possession of cannabis for which he was fined  in  1994.
      Mrs Bennett believed her son was living with friends after the  family
      home  was  sold.   Jonathan  Bennett's  witness  statement  refers  to
      "Lincoln has barely much family in Jamaica".  Mrs Bennett was not able
      to help about precisely  what  wider  family  there  was  in  Jamaica,
      although she acknowledged that there were 'lots of Hutchinsons', which
      we understand to be her maiden name, and the broader family  of  which
      she  formed  a  part.  She  does  not  maintain  relations  with   the
      appellant's father. She last visited  Jamaica  in  2011  to  take  her
      elderly mother back to her homeland  for  a  final  visit  before  her
      death.

  14. The appellant confirmed that his account given to Judge Clayton of his
      movements after his arrival in the United Kingdom was  accurate.  From
      this it appears that  after arrival in the United Kingdom as a visitor
      in November 1999, he lived with his mother and  the rest of her family
      at the address mentioned in [11] above for eight months before  moving
      out to start college in East London. He was given leave to  remain  to
      study until October 2002 but did not complete  his  studies.   He  has
      remained without leave thereafter. He told the judge that from October
      2002 to May 2010 he lived with his great uncle in Battersea and helped
      look after him. From the evidence relating to the allegations it seems
      more probable that he started living with his great uncle after  2004.
      He visited his other family members and helped out with  the  care  of
      his grandmother. His half brothers regard him as important personality
      in their family.


  15. Apart from some building work that he performed when  a  student,  and
      some pocket money given by  his  grandmother,  uncle  and  mother  for
      helping out in domestic tasks he claims never to have worked  and  has
      no known source of income.

  16. Between 2006 and 2011 he has been remanded in custody on suspicion  of
      a number of different offences of rape. Although precise dates are not
      available these periods appear to be:  March 2006 to  September  2006;
      December 2006 to October 2007; May 2010 to September  2010  and  April
      2011 to  October  2011.  Since  October  2011  he  has  been  held  in
      immigration detention at Dover and his mother  travels  to  visit  him
      weekly. There is frequent telephone contact between them.

  17. Mrs Bennett's medical letter tendered at the hearing demonstrates that
      since 1990 she has suffered  from  a  variety  of  medical  conditions
      including  type  2  diabetes,  hypertension,  osteoarthritis,  retinal
      lesions,  obesity,  ventricular  hypertrophy,  vitamin  D  deficiency,
      ischaemic heart disease,  abnormal  angio-cardiography  and  glaucoma.
      She is prescribed a wide variety of medication.  She used to  work  at
      St Thomas's Hospital until  December  2010.  As  she  gets  older  she
      requires increasing assistance with shopping, laundering,  and  taking
      her medication. Her husband is also not in the best of health and  has
      had a stroke recently.  We  note  that  Mr   Bennett's  letter  of  17
      February 2013 submitted to us states:

             "From time to time Lincoln would drop by the  house  to  assist
             his mother with daily duties and  support  her  with  mobility.
             Lincoln would also come to the house to visit my two sons...and
             spend quality time bonding with his  brothers.  Lincoln  should
             not be removed from the country as he is the only  help  to  my
             wife and I am not in the greatest of health  myself  to  assist
             her on day to day duties".

  18.  We accept that Mrs Bennett has close bonds with her eldest  son,  and
      wants him to remain in the United Kingdom during her retirement and to
      assist in the event of deterioration of her medical problems. We note,
      however, that on the remand dates set out at  [16]  above,   he  would
      only have been at liberty for four months since she ceased  employment
      at St Thomas's Hospital, and so the assistance he  has  been  able  to
      offer her over the past two years must have been very limited.


   The allegations of conduct arising from the six incidents


   Summary


  19. The Secretary of State relies on the fact that between March 2006  and
      April 2011 the  appellant  has  been  arrested  and  charged  on  five
      separate occasions for offences  of  rape.  Some  of  these  occasions
      involved multiple rapes, and on at least two occasions  involved  anal
      as well as vaginal penetration. According to  the  complainants  these
      offences were committed between May 2003 and April 2006. Only  two  of
      these complaints proceeded to trial.  Incident  1  was  tried  at  the
      Woolwich Crown Court but the jury were unable to agree  a  verdict  in
      February 2007 and the complainant was unwilling to give evidence for a
      second time.  Incident 3 was tried first at the Central Criminal Court
      in May 2007 and then at the Woolwich Crown Court in October 2007. Both
      juries were unable to reach a verdict. Consequently in both cases  the
      CPS offered no  further  evidence  and  acquittals  were  entered.  In
      Incidents 4 and 6  the  CPS  assessed  that  the  credibility  of  the
      complainant was significantly impaired and  the  test  for  proceeding
      with a prosecution was not met. In both cases no evidence was  offered
      in June  2007  and  October  2011  respectively.  In  Incident  5  the
      complainant herself withdrew the allegation  she  had  made  once  she
      became aware that her husband would have to attend the intended  trial
      to give evidence.


  20. Incident 2 concerned a different kind of crime. In  August  2004  (and
      not April as indicated in the decision letter relying what appears  to
      be a typographical  error  in  the  CRIS  report)  the  appellant  was
      arrested on suspicion of assault causing harm to his partner  after  a
      domestic argument between them. The officers witnessed injuries to the
      partner's eyes but she was adamant that she would not make a statement
      or go to court to prosecute the appellant. The CRIS  entries  indicate
      that the  appellant  was  bailed  to  attend  the  police  station  in
      September, when he apologised to his  partner  and  the  decision  was
      taken not to prosecute further.  The appellant disputes this.

  21. On the basis of the summary history outlined above, and the supporting
      data contained in the CRIS reports, DC Mahmood agreed with the opinion
      expressed in the  Home  Office  decision  letter  that  the  appellant
      represents a source of future danger to vulnerable women.  Taking  the
      available material as a whole including the opinion of DC Mahmood, the
      Secretary of State alleges that there are  positive  reasons  why  the
      personal circumstances of the appellant including  his  character  and
      conduct, make removal the appropriate course of  conduct  despite  his
      presence here  for 12 years up to the date of decision.

  22. The appellant disputes that he has ever raped  anybody.  Each  of  the
      five incidents relating to rape were occasions  where  consensual  sex
      occurred and for one reason or  another  the  complainants  then  made
      false allegations of coerced  sex.  The  complainants  either  had  no
      credibility to justify a prosecution or the jury remained un-persuaded
      by their  evidence.  In  either  event  there  was  no  basis  for  an
      evidential finding on a civil standard that  the  appellant  had  been
      guilty of conduct from which an inference of risk to  women  generally
      or vulnerable women in particular could be drawn.  The UT was not in a
      position to conduct a civil trial of the issue  on  the  limited  data
      available.  Further the appellant had never assaulted his  partner  or
      been violent to any woman with similar consequences.

Legal principles to assess disputed allegations of conduct

  23.  By the conclusion of the submissions  it  appeared  to  us  that  the
      parties were not far apart on the applicable legal principles. We  are
      concerned with an appeal against a decision to remove a person who has
      overstayed his leave to remain rather than a discretionary decision to
      deport on the grounds of conduct making such action conducive  to  the
      public good. Nevertheless, where  the  Secretary  of  State  makes  an
      allegation of conduct in the course of an overall  assessment  of  the
      merits of the claim to remain or the decision to remove in  the  light
      of Article 8 and the provisions of former immigration rule 395C, it is
      for the Secretary of State to substantiate the conduct  relied  on  to
      the standard of the civil balance of probabilities.

  24.  The Secretary of State relies on the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
      in Bah (liability to deportation) [2012] UKUT 196 (IAC). In that  case
      the  UT observed

         "30. We explored the matter in oral argument and in  the  light  of
         the observations in the SIAC  cases.  Mr.  Singh  agreed  that  the
         approach in EO (Turkey) should be amended. We are grateful for  his
         revised submissions to the effect that:

              i) The Secretary of State's decision to deport  an  individual
                 is taken when the factual foundation for it  is  such  that
                 she considers that the threshold for deportation action  on
                 conducive to public good grounds is reached.


             ii) On appeal, the Tribunal decides for itself whether  on  the
                 facts found that deportation is conducive  to  public  good
                 and that, in reaching its decision,  the  Tribunal  is  not
                 bound by the Secretary of State's view of  the  seriousness
                 of the offences in question.

           iii)   Where any assertion of fact by  the  Secretary  of  State
                 material  to  the  assessment  of  whether  deportation  is
                 conducive to the public good is  in  dispute,  it  must  be
                 established by her on the civil standard of the balance  of
                 probabilities.


          31.  We agree with these three propositions. A decision to deport
         a person who is not a British  citizen  is  founded  on  a  certain
         assessment of facts and a view taken  that  conduct  character  and
         associations revealed by that factual assessment reach  a  standard
         that makes deportation appropriate subject to a human rights  claim
         or other relevant considerations in opposition to the decision.  It
         is clear that the Secretary of State may be called  on  to  justify
         her assessment of the  factual  foundation  for  the  decision,  if
         disputed. It therefore  follows  that  the  Tribunal  can  reach  a
         different  decision  as  to  whether  a   person   is   liable   to
         deportation."


        The Tribunal returned to the issue in the following passage:


          "46. In the instant case, the Secretary of State wishes  to  rely
        upon  information  about  the  individual's  actual  or  potential
        activities and connections which fall short of criminal conduct or
        which have not resulted in any criminal convictions but which  the
        Secretary  of  State  considers  makes  an  individual  liable  to
        deportation and justifies the exercise of the discretion to make a
        deportation  order.  In  other  words,  the  Secretary  of   State
        considers that,  in  the  light  of  the  individual's  character,
        conduct and/or associations, his deportation is conducive  to  the
        public good. It is possible that this may  arise  even  where  the
        intended deportee does not have any criminal convictions at all.

      47.  The question  then  arises  whether,  in  an  appeal  before  the
        Tribunal,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  permitted  to  rely  upon
        allegations of criminal conduct which have not resulted in criminal
        proceedings even if this involves the admission of hearsay evidence
        and evidence from  unnamed  or  undisclosed  sources  or  anonymous
        sources. Here, the panel permitted the Secretary of State  to  rely
        upon the evidence of police officers who, in turn, relied upon  the
        evidence of sources which  the  officers  refused  to  disclose  in
        evidence, thus diminishing the  appellant's  ability  to  test  the
        evidence. If such evidence is admissible, what is the approach  the
        Tribunal should adopt in assessing the evidence and the standard of
        proof to be applied  in  determining  whether  any  allegations  of
        criminal conduct are proven? We turn to consider these questions in
        turn."

     As to the standard of proof, the Tribunal concluded:

          "63. We  consider  that  any  specific  acts  that  have  already
        occurred in the past must be proven by the Secretary of State, and
        proven to the civil standard of  a  balance  of  probability.  The
        civil  standard  is  flexible  according  to  the  nature  of  the
        allegations made, see House of Lords in Re B [2008] UKHL 35, and a
        Tribunal judge  should  be  astute  to  ensure  that  proof  of  a
        proposition is not degraded into speculation of the possibility of
        its accuracy.

          64. As to the assessment of future risk based on past conduct, we
        conclude the panel was right to apply  a  standard  of  reasonable
        degree of likelihood. The judgment in Rehman suggests that,  where
        an assessment of the future risk is  being  made,  something  less
        than the civil standard of  the  balance  of  probability  applies
        (see, in particular, para 22). We say  this  because  it  suggests
        that deportation will be conducive  to  the  public  good  if  the
        cumulative effect of the material  before  the  Tribunal  is  such
        that,   after   considering   the   individual's   own    personal
        circumstances,  the  Tribunal   proportionately   and   reasonably
        concludes, on the whole of the material before it as to  the  past
        and the future, that the individual's deportation is conducive  to
        the public good.

          65. We summarise our conclusions as  follows.  We  are  satisfied
        that where the Secretary of State seeks to exercise the  power  to
        make a deportation decision against a person who is not a  British
        citizen or otherwise exempt under the Immigration Acts,  she  must
        first identify the factual basis for the exercise of the power  in
        the decision letter or amplified reasons for the decision; second,
        where the factual basis is contested she must satisfy the Tribunal
        of the factual basis on the balance of probabilities.  Third,  any
        material relevant to meet that standard may  be  received  by  the
        Tribunal whether it is hearsay or a summary of information held by
        others, if it is supplied in time  and  in  accordance  with  case
        management directions but  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  such
        material will depend on its nature, the circumstances in which  it
        was collected or recorded, the susceptibility of the informant  or
        original informant to error, and the extent to which the appellant
        is able to comment or rebut it."

  25.  The provisions of the Immigration Rules  relating  to  administrative
      removal were in similar  terms  to  those  relating  to  discretionary
      deportation. The above reasoning applies  to  allegations  of  conduct
      relied on by the Secretary of State in removal as well as  deportation
      cases.


  26.  Mr Cheng points out that the nature of the material  in  the  present
      case is different than that relied on in the decision  in  Bah.  There
      have been no material  convictions  or  proven  facts  in  the  United
      Kingdom at  all.  The  CRIS  data  relating  to  the  rape  complaints
      essentially is  no  more  than  a  recitation  of  the  terms  of  the
      complainants' witness  statements  and  the  appellant's  response  to
      questioning. If the credibility of the complainants is  undermined  or
      their testimony unconvincing there is really nothing else to go on  to
      establish whether the sexual activity in question  was  consensual  or
      not.  Unless that is established, then there  can  be  no  finding  of
      conduct established to the civil standard.  The  mere  fact  that  the
      appellant has had casual sexual relations with a number of  women  who
      have proved to be fragile or vulnerable in a number of ways  does  not
      amount to relevant conduct. The Tribunal is not acting as a  court  of
      morals.

  27.  We acknowledge the task we face in assessing the material  before  us
      is a challenging one, but we propose to review  the  material  to  the
      standard set out above to determine if we are satisfied on balance  of
      probabilities as to any conduct relevant to the  application  of  rule
      395C. We are astute to the need to avoid speculation. If the  material
      renders itself capable of more than one interpretation we should  only
      draw one adverse to the appellant if on the balance  of  probabilities
      there is no other reasonable explanation on the material before us.

CRIS reports

  28.  Before we embark on this task, we  can  indicate  that  we  find  the
      information loaded on to the CRIS reports by and large accurate as  to
      the data it purports to  contain:  details  of  a  complaint,  arrest,
      response, actions taken and conclusions.  The  CRIS  system  does  not
      permit amendment or deletion and thus cannot be  manipulated  by  some
      dishonest police officer with an animus against  the  appellant.  This
      does not mean that what a  witness  is  recorded  as  saying  will  be
      accurate. Typographical or similar errors may be made in  loading  the
      data. In general, however, this is a rigorous system where the  upload
      of data is supervised by senior officers. We observe that police  need
      accurate data when conducting further inquiries.  Further, we find  DC
      Mahmood to be an honest witness. He has had no previous dealings  with
      the appellant, and only came into the case as an officer on  the  UKBA
      Police liaison team  to  search  the  computer  and  produce  relevant
      extracts of the material downloaded.

Incident 2

  29. We propose to start with Incident 2.  This was the first occasion that
      the appellant was interviewed by the  British  police  about  criminal
      conduct.  It was as a result of this  arrest  and  interview  and  the
      personal samples then taken that he was linked back to Incident 1 that
      occurred the previous year.


  30.  On 7 August 2004, the CRIS report  (p.72)  indicates  that  at  01.37
      hours officers   attended at Marine Tower 16th Floor where a woman had
      previously made an emergency call and  stated  that  her  partner  had
      assaulted her and she had locked herself in the room.  She told police
      that her partner wouldn't give her the keys to the flat  in  her  name
      and had left before the police arrived.  The  police  noted  that  the
      complainant had a swollen right eye which was shut and asked her  what
      had happened. She is recorded as saying:-

          "...her partner had hit her twice, once in the mouth and the other
          in the eye. The assault had taken place  of  05/08/2004  at  about
          10.30pm. I asked the victim if she  report  this  to  police,  she
          didn't, all she wanted was to  get  her  keys  back  and  get  the
          partner out of her life".


         The police action continues:


          "There are no witnesses. The victim was very reluctant  to  pursue
          any allegation  against  the  suspect,  as  he  had  in  the  past
          threatened her, also starting that  she  (sic)  had  friends  that
          would harm her ...she stated that she would no give any statements
          nor go to court...the suspects resides at the address and has done
          so for approximately 2 years".


  31. The police next visited the premises on 8 August after the complainant
      spoke of verbal threats from the suspect in the vicinity of  her  home
      to the effect "I'll kill you". At 08.10 the same day the  police  were
      called to the flat by the complainant and found the suspect talking to
      the complainant on the intercom. He was arrested on suspicion of  GBH.
      The next entry reveals that Mr Farquaharson (sic) was  interviewed  at
      Lewisham Police Station and gave  a  no  comment  interview.   He  was
      bailed to return to the police station  on  7  September.  The  police
      obtained authority to  charge  him  with  assault  but  the  complaint
      remained adamant that:


          "...nothing could make her stand up in court when the  suspect  is
          there. She would be too scared."


  32. The complainant subsequently told the police  that  her  injuries  had
      healed and her relationship  improved.  It  was  decided  to  take  no
      further action against Mr. Farquharson.  The  entry  for  7  September
      notes:

          "He returned on bail with the victim and made an apology to her in
          front of officers for the assault. I have noted the details of the
          report. The victim has sustained injuries that have been seen  and
          recorded by the officers. The victim gives a full account  of  the
          incident but is adamant that all no (sic) further action should be
          taken. She has given a full withdraw statement.  The  suspect  has
          admitted the offence in front officers".


      A note by DI Briant the same day states that he was satisfied from the
      report the guilt of the suspect is clear.


  33. In his witness statement  for these proceedings  the appellant states:


          "The police are alleging that I hit my girlfriend...I  have  never
          hit her, and I do not know what this allegation is  all  about.  I
          have never hit anyone. In  the  police  records  it  said  that  I
          apologised to her in front of officers, however, I did not do this
          at all. I cannot apologise for something which I have not done".


  34. When questioned about this, the appellant stated  that  he  was  aware
      that his partner at the time had injuries to her eyes after  she  went
      out with a friend. He understood that her ex-husband had done this  to
      her and he was phoned by the police to ask whether he  could  pay  for
      the taxi cab fare to bring her  home.  He  had  never  been  arrested,
      interviewed or bailed about this matter. He had made no apology.  When
      asked further about this, he stated that there was a lot going  on  in
      his head at the  time  and  his  final  answer  was  that  he  had  no
      recollection of any of these things.


  35.  We  do  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of  this  matter.  He
      acknowledged that he was living with a girlfriend at the time and that
      she received injuries to her eyes, but said this  was  nothing  to  do
      with an argument with him and an assault for which he was arrested and
      questioned.  Despite  the  variation  in  the  spelling  of  the  name
      Farquharson we do not regard as plausible that  this  was  a  case  of
      mistaken identity. Tellingly, the subsequent history reveals that  DNA
      samples taken from the suspect when he  attended  the  police  station
      related to the appellant and connected him to other incidents. He must
      have attended the police station for the  samples  to  be  taken.  The
      appellant is not being frank with us about his arrest,  interview  and
      apology. It is incomprehensible that he could have forgotten all this,
      despite the fact that he has made a number  of  other  visits  to  the
      police station subsequently. It  is  equally  inconceivable  that  the
      police fabricated allegations of an arrest, police bail, interview and
      admission but then took no action against the appellant. We  note  the
      report was reviewed by a Detective Inspector at the time.

  36. The only  sensible  explanation  is  that  the  appellant  had  indeed
      assaulted his then partner, was arrested and questioned about  it  but
      by the time he was bailed to return he had agreed to apologise to  his
      partner in the hope no criminal prosecution would follow.  He  was  by
      then unlawfully present in the country and if the matter had  gone  to
      court his immigration status might well have been discovered.

  37. In the light of the above, we  further  conclude  that  his  partner's
      expressed fear of the appellant  if  she  made  a  statement  or  gave
      evidence against him accurately records her state of mind at the time.
       Although she was consistently unwilling to go to court  against  him,
      the police assessment was that the crime  was  established  and  there
      were no concerns about her credibility. We note that the appellant has
      not given any  explanation  as  to  why  she  would  have  made  false
      allegations against him, although he has had ample opportunity  to  do
      so.

Incident 1

  38.  At 07.15 on 8 May 2003, an incident report was loaded on the CRIS  to
      the effect that on the previous day the police had attended a location
      at Rushey Green London SE6 where a female complainant stated  she  had
      been raped by an unknown male.  The complainant had been spoken to  by
      this male and had agreed to drive him to the upper level car  park  of
      Milford Towers, Catford. The male left the car (apparently to  see  if
      his girlfriend was at home) and returned two minutes later. There  was
      then  some  light  kissing  and  touching  that  proceeded  to  sexual
      intercourse in the front seats of the car that was uncomfortable.  The
      male then took the complainant's mobile phone and a sleeping bag  from
      the back of the car and placed it on the ground in  part  of  the  car
      park sealed off with plastic sheets. Sexual intercourse resumed  until
      the complainant asked the male to stop although she could not be  sure
      when this was. The male then left. An unused but unsealed  condom  and
      wrapper were recovered at the  scene.  Subsequent  inquiries  revealed
      that the complainant was suffering from depression  and  had  learning
      difficulties that meant she had to be interviewed with an  appropriate
      adult present.

  39. By October 2004 the police  had  associated  this  incident  with  the
      appellant. Attempts to arrest him were made at  his  mother's  address
      but a man claiming to be his father said he had not been  seen  for  a
      fortnight and he did not know where the appellant was living  but  the
      appellant's mother might have a number for him.   Attempts  were  also
      made to  trace  him  at  Marine  Tower,  the  address  of  his  former
      girlfriend but without success. In May 2005 there is an entry that the
      appellant's mother stated that she  had  last  seen  him  a  fortnight
      previously; she believed he was living  in  the  Catford  or  Deptford
      areas with a partner but did not have a contact address for him.

  40. On 14 March 2006, the appellant was arrested on suspicion of the  rape
      described as incident 3 below. Semen found on the swabs at the time of
      Incident 1 matched the DNA of  the  appellant  provided  when  he  was
      arrested for assault on 8 August 2004 (Incident 2).  When  interviewed
      about Incident 1 he denied all knowledge of being in  Catford  at  the
      time of the offence in 2003, all knowledge of Milford  Towers  or  the
      car park and persisted in that account even though it was put  to  him
      his semen had been identified inside the complainant.

  41.  The complainant was willing  to  give  evidence  in  this  case  that
      proceeded to trial at Woolwich Crown Court where the  jury  could  not
      agree on 6 February 2007.  The  complainant  then  made  a  withdrawal
      statement as she was unwilling to attend court again.

  42. The appellant explained in his witness statement that this was a  case
      of being solicited for sex by a woman who drove to a car park for this
      purpose. Sex was consensual and the mobile phone was taken so that the
      appellant could sell it on her behalf but she  was  dissatisfied  with
      the price obtained.

  43.  We are unable to reach any conclusions on the appellant's conduct  in
      this case. We accept that the account above indicates that the CPS and
      the trial judge must have been satisfied that  there  was  a  case  to
      answer of sexual  penetration  without  consent.  The  record  of  the
      complainant's account available to us does not make it  at  all  clear
      when consent ceased, or whether the Crown case was that the victim had
      such a fragile mental functioning that she was incapable  of  consent.
      There  is  no  record  of  evidence  outside  the  narrative  of   the
      complainant to indicate what the conduct was. There  is  a  reasonable
      suspicion that the  appellant  had  sexually  exploited  and  raped  a
      vulnerable woman, but we cannot be satisfied that  other  explanations
      can be excluded.

Incident 3

  44. At 01.22 on 14 March 2006, an entry was made about  police  attendance
      at the 15th  floor of a tower block in Lewisham the previous  evening.
      From the appellant's account of the incident he states he  was  living
      on another floor of this block at the time, and this may therefore  be
      Marine Tower where Incident 2  occurred.   In  any  event  the  female
      occupant of a flat on the 15th floor  had  returned  to  find  herself
      locked out after a visit out of London. The appellant offered to force
      the door and having done so entered the  flat  with  the  complainant.
      There was conversation and they sat together on a  single  bed.  There
      was some tickling and then he became forceful pulled down her  panties
      entered her and had sex even though she told him she did not  want  to
      have sex with him.  The suspect left  the  flat  and  the  complainant
      spent some time crying before phoning the police. When  they  attended
      her flat the appellant returned saying, "where's my girl friend?" when
      he was arrested at 20.40 and taken to Lewisham Police station.


  45. Subsequent interview of the complainant revealed that  she  complained
      of digital then vaginal and anal penetration:

        "she describes the intercourse as being painful and says  when  the
        suspect put his penis into her anus, it was excruciating.  Forensic
        examination showed four abrasions to the anus, one of which  showed
        fresh bleeding"


  46. The police entry describes the complainant as having  psychiatric  and
      mental disorder and was intimidated. This case proceeded  to  a  trial
      and re -rial without the jury being able to reach a verdict.  The  CPS
      and the judge must therefore have been  satisfied  that  there  was  a
      credible case to go before the jury.


  47.  In  his  witness  statement  before  us  and  his  answers  in  cross
      examination the appellant explained that this was an opportunistic but
      consensual sexual encounter with a neighbour when  the  locks  to  her
      flat had been changed after it had been ransacked in her absence.   He
      believed that the rape allegation was  made  because  the  complainant
      wanted a transfer  of  housing  away  from  Deptford.   In  answer  to
      questions from the Tribunal he denied anal penetration as part of  the
      sexual activity and had no observations to make  on  the  injury.   In
      closing submissions Mr Cheng reminded  us  we  had  not  seen  a  full
      medical report as to when or how the injuries were caused and  whether
      they were consistent with any other cause.

  48.  We accept that we have not seen the full medical statements  in  this
      case and there remains room for debate as to how far there was consent
      or  apparent  consent  to  some  sexual  intimacy  in  this  incident.
      However, this was a prompt complaint of rape  leading  to  a  detailed
      interview and medical  examination  within  24  hours.  The  complaint
      included anal rape and there were four abrasions to the anus that  are
      consistent with forcible penetration of  the  anus.  Furthermore,  the
      finding of recent bleeding is consistent  with  recent  forcible  anal
      penetration. Such penetration without lubrication is highly likely  to
      be very painful or excruciating as  the  complainant  is  recorded  as
      saying.

  49. Mr Cheng alerted us to the possibility of  a  woman  consenting  to  a
      painful sexual experience, but this was not the appellant's  case;  he
      denied anally penetrating this or any other woman he had had sex with.

  50. We do not accept the appellant's  evidence  about  this  incident.  We
      conclude that it more probable than not  that  the  incident  included
      painful sexual penetration that the complainant did  not  consent  to,
      and in particular it included anal penetration. We are satisfied  that
      the appellant was indifferent to the consent of the  complainant  when
      gratifying his sexual urges,  and continued to penetrate her,  causing
      her pain and injury.

Incident 4

  51. Incident 3 led to the appellant's  remand  in  custody  for  a  period
      before he was released on bail pending his trial, we understand around
      September 2006. On 11 December 2006 he was  arrested  again  that  was
      alleged to have happened in the early hours of the morning of Saturday
      9 December 2006.

  52. At 06.00 on 9 December police were called to a  house  occupied  by  a
      friend of the complainant.  The complainant gave a brief account of  a
      visit to a pub with the suspect and a friend,  and  a  return  to  the
      complainant's home address where non  consensual  sex  took  place  in
      different rooms. The complainant was a methadone  user  who  had  been
      drinking three cans of cider the previous evening.  The  police  found
      drugs paraphernalia in the front room: burnt tin  foil  and  cigarette
      stubs and a condom wrapper and a used  condom  were  also  found.  The
      complainant's fuller account indicated that the suspect had some crack
      cocaine that he took and  encouraged  the  complainant  to  take  some
      before stating that he  wanted  to  have  sex  with  her  despite  her
      professed unwillingness. He left her some Nigerian currency  that  was
      subsequently found.

  53.  The account recorded on 11 December includes the following:

           "The victim said she was very scared  and  did  what  he  wanted
           because she was frightened that he would hit her if she  didn't.
           This took place on the floor in the  bedroom  in  front  of  the
           door. Victim continued to scream. She pretended again  that  she
           needed to go to the toilet to get away from the suspect.  Victim
           got up and ran out of the flat naked, she said she  was  running
           for her life. Victim knocked on the caretaker's door in Vanguard
           Street and told him what had happened. ......the caretaker  then
           called the police and gave  the  victim  a  coat  to  put  round
           her...she was forced to have sex for two hours  ...it  was  just
           after 2.00 when she knocked on the caretakers door".

  54. This complainant was considered unreliable by the CPS and  the  matter
      was  dismissed  on  1  June  2007.  Part  of  the  weakness   of   the
      complainant's credibility was that she had made  three  previous  rape
      allegations that she either did not pursue or had  accepted  that  she
      had fabricated material.

  55.  The appellant's account to us was that the complainant was  a  friend
      of his former girlfriend (the complainant in Incident 2), and that  he
      had consensual sex with her after drinking alcohol.  He states:

           "at no point did (the complainant) suggest we stop  having  sex.
           After we finished having  sex,  I  wanted  to  leave,  but  (the
           complainant) wanted me to stay. There was consent all the time"

  56. We  do  not  accept  the  appellant's  account.  Despite  the  evident
      difficulty with the unsupported  testimony  of  a  drug  user  with  a
      history of unreliable  complaints,  there  are  two  features  of  the
      evidence recorded in the  CRIS  documents  that  together  support  an
      account of forced sex.

  57. First, the medical findings recorded at 18.01 9 December 2006  (Bundle
      92) state:


           "multiple genital injuries found as below...periurethral  oedema
           with  petechial  haemorrhages-red  bruising  and   tender.   Two
           lacerations and multiple fine abrasions in the genital area".


      We accept, of course, that non-consensual sex may  not  leave  genital
      injuries and consensual sex may in certain circumstances leave  traces
      of injury.

  58. Second, and more significantly, the  complainant's  account  that  she
      fled the flat naked  is  supported  by  a  statement  taken  from  the
      caretaker on 13 December 2006 (Bundle p 99):


           "A statement has now been taken from the caretaker who  was  the
           first complainant. He describes the victim banging on  his  door
           and that when he opened it she was shouting that  she  had  been
           raped by a black male. She was naked apart from a bra and  socks
           that she was wearing. The first complainant gave her his  wife's
           coat to put on. He telephoned the police".


  59. What we take from this is that there was a prompt  complaint  of  rape
      that caused  the  caretaker  to  call  the  police  and  that  at  the
      conclusion  of  a  supposedly  consensual  sexual  episode  with   the
      appellant, the complainant was running naked through a  public  space,
      shouting and banging on the caretaker's door for help.


  60. We heard nothing from the appellant to explain  this  conduct  by  the
      complainant. We had raised with Mr Cheng when he was asking  questions
      of DC Mahmood our particular interest in parts of  the  evidence  that
      could be  said  to  give  independent  support  to  the  complainant's
      account, amongst  which  we  mentioned  both  this  evidence  and  the
      neighbour's evidence in Incident 6 (below).


  61. The combination of  factors relating to this  evidence,  leads  us  to
      conclude that,  on balance, the only reasonable explanation is that by
      the end of the  sexual  encounter  between  the  complainant  and  the
      appellant, she had been submitting through fear to sexual acts she did
      not want to happen, and was desperate to get away from him.


 Incident 5


  62. From October 2007 to May 2010 the appellant was not  facing  trial  on
      criminal charges. In early May 2010 he was arrested  on  suspicion  of
      another rape, said to have occurred in the flat where  he  was  living
      with his elderly uncle.


  63. On the morning of 15 May  2010,  police  attended  a  complainant  who
      alleged that the previous evening she had met a man at a pub and after
      some drinking returned to his flat when she went to the  bathroom  and
      after she came out she was dragged to the bedroom when  the  man  said
      "I'm going to hurt you" and "I'm going to make love to you".  She  was
      raped both anally and vaginally over a period of time before she could
      get away. In the course of this assault she was hit repeatedly with  a
      brown shoe. The only previous sexual contact  between  them  had  been
      some kissing in the pub beforehand. The complainant  stated  that  she
      believed the man was an illegal immigrant.

  64. The appellant was arrested on 15 May  and  immigration  officers  were
      alerted for the first time. This  led  to  the  service  of  a  notice
      explaining that the appellant was liable to removal as someone who had
      remained in breach of his leave.

  65. The appellant's account in interview and before ourselves, was that he
      had been having an affair with the complainant for  some  days  before
      the 14 May. They had consensual sex on a number of occasions.  On  the
      night in question after consensual sexual intercourse the  complainant
      had received a text from her husband on her mobile phone. This led  to
      a change in attitude as the complainant wanted to get away in a hurry.
      The appellant points out this complainant  subsequently  withdrew  the
      complaint when she became aware that her husband would have to  attend
      the trial.

  66. There is  support  for  the  appellant's  account  in  the  subsequent
      inquiries. We accept that this  complainant  did  not  first  give  an
      accurate account to the police  of  her  sexual  encounters  with  the
      appellant. When his interview account was put to her she  acknowledged
      that there had been  earlier  consensual  sexual  activity.   She  was
      clearly very anxious to avoid her husband learning about this  affair,
      and this might provide a motive for claiming that the  last  encounter
      was the only one and a forced one.

  67. Nevertheless there are two features of the evidence that appear to  be
      inconsistent with a consensual affair.  First,  the  complainant  says
      that in order to get away from the appellant she had to  stun  him  by
      smashing a decorative plate over his head, causing him injury.  Broken
      pieces of a ceramic plate  were  recovered  at  the  scene.  When  the
      complainant's version of events was put to him the appellant told  the
      police that she hit him with the plate because she was angry after she
      received the text.

  68. Second, the complainant told the police:

           "I was so scared and had to get out of the house, so I left  all
           my stuff there. Black sequinned bag with make up, phone charger,
           bank cards x 2, 60/70 and house keys. Black Nokia phone.  Black
           knickers. Black and white high heeled shoes. Dark purple coat."


      These items of property (save there is no mention of  the  cash)  were
      all recovered from the appellant's house the following day. We do  not
      believe that a woman would willingly have left such property behind.


  69. We note as relevant to his family circumstances that in the course  of
      this investigation the police interviewed  his  great  uncle  who  was
      found to suffer from memory loss and could not assist as a witness.

  70. On 20 August 2010 having been informed that her husband was a relevant
      witnesses with respect to a text he sent, the  complainant  sent  this
      withdrawal statement to the police:

           "Lincoln did not rape me on 15/5/10 I have time to  think  about
           this what I said the police is not in fact true. Lincoln did not
           touch me on May 15 2010. I will  not  go  to  court  or  make  a
           statement against Lincoln also I will like  withdraw  (sic)  any
           statement which I may have told you anything."


      She describes being in a low mood  and  having  relationship  problems
      with her husband and wanting to move on with her life.

  71. In the absence of any evidence external to the complainant's  account,
      it is difficult for us to  reach  any  conclusions  on  what  happened
      between the appellant and this complainant on 15 May. The broken plate
      and the abandoned personal property and clothing, do strongly  suggest
      that the complainant was very anxious to get away from  the  appellant
      by any means possible.


 Incident 6


  72. At 04.36 on Saturday 30 April 2011,  the  police  were  alerted  to  a
      complaint  of  rape  said  to  have  occurred  3  hours  earlier.  The
      complainant was assessed to be a vulnerable young  woman  who  suffers
      from paranoid schizophrenia and is on  medication  and  who  had  been
      drinking vodka before the incident. She describes being lured  from  a
      public house to the appellant's home by the promise that he had  cheap
      DVDs to offer her she  was  then  subject  to  violence  and  forcible
      vaginal intercourse.


  73.  She subsequently changed  her  account  and  admitted  to  misleading
      police about the original crime scene. The  changed  account  included
      being threatened with a firearm (imitation or real) that the appellant
      produced, of which no trace was subsequently found. In due course, the
      inconsistencies in her account led the CPS to conclude that she  could
      not be regarded as a credible witness and so once more the  charge  of
      rape was not pursued to trial.

  74. However, the complainant's account of her post-rape  flight  from  the
      appellant's flat mentioned the intervention of neighbours.  On  2  May
      2011 a police officer  spoke  to  the  neighbours  and  recorded  this
      account:

           "Friday the 29th  April  2011  at  around  midnight  going  into
           Saturday (blank) was out in the rear garden taking  the  washing
           in when heard a female voice from next door saying  get  it  out
           get it out. The female was quite loud, not shouting just raising
           her voice from 87. Then heard female speaking to someone on  the
           phone saying Okay, I will be there in a minute or  I  am  coming
           soon. Then heard female say Linc, I have got to go, I  have  got
           to go. Then heard, No Lincoln no. (blank) then opened  the  door
           and called (blank) who was in the living room,  telling  him  to
           come outside. Both heard No Lincoln no stop it I have  got  kids
           no, no. She was pleading with him....


           (blank) then shouted Lincoln come to the window-the  window  was
           open. He then heard Lincoln say I am turning  it  down.  Lincoln
           did not come to  the  window,  it  went  silent....(blank)  told
           Lincoln that he wanted to see him at the window or he would make
           a phone call (the police). He told Lincoln to let her out of his
           house now and he was coming to the front door. He heard  Lincoln
           say all right all right.


           (deleted) then went to Lincoln's front door and banged it for  a
           good 30 seconds to a minute. No one came so he went to the  rear
           again and shouted up again. He then heard a knock at  the  front
           door. (blank) opened the door and saw Lincoln in  front  of  him
           with a female behind him. Lincoln was  very  apologetic,  saying
           sorry for the noise and everything was cool. .....  (blank)  was
           still speaking to Lincoln saying what the fuck was he doing  and
           you cant be doing things like  that.  Lincoln  was  non-plussed,
           everything was cool. (Brain seems it does not  process  when  it
           comes to females).


           (blank) asked the female if everything was  alight,  the  female
           did not respond, seemed in shock,  said  she  had  to  meet  her
           sister at the pub. Kept saying she was ok. (blank) said  Did  he
           try to rape you? To which the female said, Yes. She again  asked
           if the female was ok was she sure...the female said  I  will  be
           okay..can you do me a favour and make sure  he does  not  follow
           me".


          The account concludes with a conversation the neighbour had  with
      Lincoln outside the flat. He explained that he had had a drink  and  a
      dance with the woman at the pub; she had become  flirtatious  and  had
      returned to his flat.  She took her clothes off, and then she said 'no
      I don't want to do it anymore'. The note ends with the following:


           "(blank) told  Lincoln  if  a  girl  tells  you  no  it  is  No.
           Conversation was focussed on this point. Lincoln was  saying  it
           is hard man"

  75. We  have  quoted  this  passage  extensively  because  it  is  a  rare
      contemporaneous account of how the appellant was behaving and what  he
      was saying. At the hearing before us, the appellant did  not  disagree
      with any of it in so as it related to things he  heard  or  said.  The
      neighbours had previous experience of  the  appellant's  conduct  with
      women. The  information  in  the  account  suggests  to  us  that  the
      appellant has difficulty desisting with his  sexual  acts  when  faced
      with objections by the woman concerned.


  76. It was shortly after the CPS decision not to proceed to  trial,   that
      the  UKBA  took  the  decision  on  28  October  2011  to  refuse  the
      appellant's application for discretionary leave to remain made a  year
      earlier, and after serving a one stop notice, decided to remove him in
      accordance with the notice served in April 2010.

Application of the facts to the Rules

  77. Paragraph 395C sets out the list of factors that have  for  long  been
      used to assess whether the discretion to remove or  deport  should  be
      exercised. Although they no  longer  form  part  of  the  rules,  they
      necessarily reflect facts that will  need  to  be  considered  by  the
      decision maker and on appeal the judge before  a  proper  exercise  of
      discretion can be made. In substance they reflect most of the  factors
      that the body of Article 8 case law indicates  should  be  taken  into
      account. We will consider each factor in turn.


  78. Age:  The appellant is now 45. He came to the UK when already an adult
      aged 33.  This means first that from the time of his arrival he  never
      had a claim to enter the United Kingdom as a dependent of his  mother,
      and he has not lived in the  United  Kingdom  most  of  his  life.  In
      particular he has not grown up here and this is not the class of  case
      to which the guidance of the European Court of Human Rights in  Maslov
      v Austria [2008] ECHR 546 was directed.

  79.  Length of residence in the United Kingdom:  Up to  the  date  of  the
      decision he had been present in the UK for  12  years  only  three  of
      which were with leave. The immigration rules at the time  required  10
      years lawful residence or 14 years  unlawful  or  mixed  residence  to
      qualify for  a  presumptive  grant  of  indefinite  leave  subject  to
      countervailing factors. None of the  residence  from  2002  was  as  a
      result of delay by the Home Office in decision  making  (contrast  the
      observations of Lord Bingham in EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41).   Two
      years of the unlawful residence up to October 2011 had been  spent  in
      custody on remand. He had been investigated for six  serious  offences
      between 2004 and 2011 when the last matter was concluded  and  he  had
      been served with a liability to  removal  notice  for  the  18  months
      before the decision was taken.

  80. Strength of connections with the United  Kingdom:  His  connection  is
      principally his mother who is now a British citizen. He has  developed
      ties with his half-brothers since being here.    He was 18 by the time
      his mother came to the UK and so was never eligible for admission as a
      dependent.

  81. Personal history, including character, conduct and employment  record:
      He has had no history of employment, extensive study or  other  factor
      integrating him to UK society or enabling a positive  contribution  to
      be made. We have extensively reviewed his personal conduct  above.  We
      are satisfied to the  appropriate  civil  balance  that  he  has  used
      violence and inflicted injury on women when his wishes are frustrated.
      We are further satisfied that he is  forceful  in  making  his  sexual
      demands and his conduct  leaves  many  partners  very  frightened  and
      anxious to get away from him. We note the persistence of  his  conduct
      despite a number of arrests, charges and criminal trials. We note  the
      opinions expressed by  his  neighbours  in  the  2011  incident.  This
      occurred at a time when his application for  discretionary  leave  was
      outstanding. Taken together, we are entirely satisfied that  his  past
      treatment of women  strongly supports an assessment that he presents a
      real risk of future harm to women, in particular  women  are  who  are
      vulnerable  by reason  of  addiction,  mental  capacity  or   personal
      circumstances.

  82. Domestic circumstances: He has no spouse, partner of  minor  child  or
      other dependants in the UK.  This is not therefore a  case  where  the
      interests of any minor child have to be taken into account  and  given
      weight.

  83. Previous criminal record: his conviction in Jamaica is of no  enduring
      relevance. He has no record of a British conviction.

  84. Compassionate circumstances:  His appeal  was  largely  based  on  his
      private life with his  mother,  siblings  and  other  relatives.   His
      central contention was that if he were to be removed he would  not  be
      able to support his mother with her  multiple  medical  needs  in  the
      future. No evidence of unusual dependence between mother and adult son
      has been adduced to suggest that this is  one  of  the  unusual  cases
      where this relationship should be seen as a continuing part of  family
      life. We do not cite the relevant authorities but have  them  well  in
      mind. In particular, we note that the appellant and  his  mother  only
      lived together in a  common  household  for  eight  months  since  her
      departure for the UK in 1984.  His removal to Jamaica will not lead to
      separation of family members who have  been  interdependent  for  some
      time. We accept that the immigration  consequences  of  this  decision
      will be a lengthy and indefinite prohibition  on  his  being  able  to
      return lawfully to the United Kingdom.  We  further  accept  that  his
      mother will not be able to visit Jamaica as often as she  has  visited
      Dover. She returned to Jamaica in 2011 but her future state of  health
      may reduce her mobility  and  restrict  her  ability  to  travel  long
      distance. His siblings and aunt will be able to visit him  in  Jamaica
      if they wish. All family members have the ability to keep  in  contact
      through Skype and electronic means of communication. We note that  the
      appellant and his  mother  originated  from  a  part  of  the  Greater
      Kingston area where there has been violence and a nephew was  murdered
      on return to Jamaica in 2007. There is no reason to believe  that  the
      appellant was not able to look after himself between  1984  and  1999,
      and he is a fit strong healthy male who should be able to do so in the
      future, particularly if his family were willing  to  support  him  re-
      establish himself. We do not accept that all those returned to Jamaica
      are a vulnerable social group because they are perceived to  be  rich.
      We have no doubt that the appellant will be able to disabuse others of
      any misconceptions they may have had.


      Representations received:  We  have  addressed  the  contents  of  the
      letters and witness statements before us in the previous  section.  We
      recognise that the appellant will be missed by his family members  but
      in our judgement that need not lead to all  severance  of  connections
      between them.

Article 8

  85. We have  considered  the  factors  that  have  proved  to  be  weighty
      consideration in the Article 8 balance above and have not found any in
      the appellant's case.  He has a private life with his mother and other
      family members that will  undoubtedly  be  interfered  with  when  the
      removal decision is implemented. It falls to the respondent to justify
      that interference as a necessary and proportionate measure in  support
      of a legitimate aim.


  86. There are at least two legitimate aims. The first is the economic  and
      social  well  being  of  the  nation  that  is  promoted  by   orderly
      immigration control by removing those who do not quality for leave  to
      remain when applying discretionary considerations set out in rule  395
      C.  The protection of the public from harm is another. This is engaged
      in the light of our  conclusions  on  the  appellant's  character  and
      conduct and or assessment of the risk he presents to vulnerable women.
      Combined,  those  represent  very  weighty  reasons  to  justify   his
      expulsion. As against that is his private life and the likely loss  to
      his mother of his society. Whilst that is a compassionate  factor,  in
      our judgment it is not one that outweighs the weighty public  interest
      in his removal.

  87. In our judgement, therefore, the decision is in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration Rules, the  law  and  is  a  justified  and  proportionate
      response to his Article 8 rights. We re-make the decision under appeal
      by dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

  88. We regret the passage of sixteen months between the UKBA decision  and
      the final determination  of  this  appeal  by  the  Tribunal,  as  the
      appellant has been in immigration detention throughout this  time.  We
      hope that there may be some lessons to be learned from this case  that
      will make effective and fair decision making possible  in  the  future
      within a significantly shortened time scale.

  89. First, the UKBA must consider carefully what allegations of conduct it
      wishes  to  rely  on  in  the  absence  of  a  conviction   or   other
      authoritative finding of fact. In our judgement the agency should  not
      allege conduct that it is not prepared to  prove  to  the  appropriate
      civil standard. The decision in Bah demonstrates that conduct based on
      intelligence and crime reports can be relied on in immigration appeals
      provided that there is some  decree  of  transparency  about  how  the
      material is accumulated and what it consists of. If intelligence is so
      sensitive that a sufficient gist of it cannot be  disclosed,  then  it
      should not be raised in the appeal. Mere assertion will not be enough.

  90.  Second,  where  deportation  or  removal  proceedings  are  based  on
      information derived from police sources, a  police  witness  statement
      should be made available enclosing the relevant documentary  material.
      That material must fairly reflect the strengths and weaknesses of  any
      assessment and should not be cherry picked to present one side only if
      there is material that exculpates as well as inculpates.  The  witness
      statement should reveal that this  exercise  has  been  undertaken  to
      obviate the need for third party disclosure requests under  the  Upper
      Tribunal Rules. The judge must ensure that the hearing is fair.

  91. Third, material is likely  to  be  considered  the  more  cogent,  the
      greater the  extent  to  which  it  is  supported  by  other  relevant
      documents. In the present case we have searched for data  relating  to
      the incidents independent of the  complainant's  narrative.  The  CRIS
      extracts might have been  supported  by  witness  statements  made  by
      forensic medical examiners or eye-witnesses. This will not  always  be
      necessary, and the Tribunal is not conducting a re-trial, but  it  may
      well prove helpful. We anticipate that  the  CPS  should  be  able  to
      assist the UKBA  and  indeed  the  Tribunal  and,  where  material  is
      sensitive, appropriate directions as to its return and use can be made
      if requested in advance.

  92. Fourth, the material relied on should be served  on  an  appellant  in
      good time so he can read it, understand it and prepare  such  response
      to it as is considered appropriate.   Thus,  service  of  the  witness
      statement of DC Mahmood on the day of the adjourned First-tier hearing
      was far too late to give such  a  fair  opportunity.  Further  as  the
      grounds of appeal stated and we agree, this statement was in any event
      insufficient to enable the  judge  to  reach  independent  conclusions
      without the supporting documentary material. The first tranche of such
      material was only served on the appellant at the adjourned date of the
      hearing before the Upper Tribunal; again that was  far  too  late  for
      this appellant to be able to absorb and respond  to  although  he  had
      been aware of  DC Mahmood's witness statement for nearly  a  year.  If
      there has been a significant shift in the way a case is put  from  the
      original decision letter, a brief skeleton  argument  identifying  the
      real issues would be helpful to the Tribunal and opposing party.

  93. Fifth, it is important that legal representation should  be  available
      in such cases. The appellant told us that his reading ability  is  not
      great. He was able to read back parts of his statement to  us  to  our
      satisfaction, but absorbing the  detail  in  the  CRIS  reports  would
      undoubtedly have been a  challenge  without  professional  assistance.
      The appellant will also have been disadvantaged by a  long  period  of
      pre-appeal detention. We hope that legal aid  is  granted  readily  in
      such cases whatever the apparent  weight  of  the  case  against  him.
      Without it there is a very real risk that his common law  right  to  a
      fair hearing will be undermined.

  94. In the  event,  we  are  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  the
      assistance they have given us and the way the appeal was conducted.

  95.  For the reasons we have explained:

                  i) The decision of the First-tier tribunal  contained  an
                     error of law
                 ii) We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.

           All members of the panel have contributed to this decision.











     The Hon Mr Justice Blake
     Chamber President


     7 March 2013


                                   ANNEX A


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 January 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                           UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             LINCOLN FARQUHARSON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


              RULING AND DIRECTIONS

   1.   The appellant is a Jamaican national born in November 1966  and  now
      aged 46. He had limited leave  to  enter  and  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom as a visitor and then  a  student  from  November  1999  until
      October 2002. He has remained without leave since then.


   2.   On 16 May 2010 he was arrested on suspicion of having committed  the
      crime of rape. On the following day he was charged  with  rape  and  a
      notice of his liability to removal served on him. On 3 September 2010,
      the CPS offered no evidence against him.  On 25 November 2010 his then
      solicitors A-Z Law submitted an application  for  him  to  be  granted
      leave to remain by reason of private/family  life.   That  application
      was decided on 28 October 2011. On  25  May  2011  the  appellant  was
      charged with another count of rape of which he  was  acquitted  on  14
      October. It is possible that the UKBA deferred  determination  of  the
      leave application until this charge had been resolved.


   3.    On 28 October 2011  his  application  was  refused.   The  decision
      letter noted five occasions between 2003 and 2011 when he was  charged
      with rape, although no charge resulted in a  conviction.   There  were
      further occasions between 2004 and 2010  when  complaints  of  assault
      were made against him but again none of these  complaints  or  charges
      resulted in a conviction. The decision letter quoted the opinion of  a
      Detective Constable that the appellant was considered to be threat  to
      vulnerable women, but did not include the  statement  it  was  quoting
      from. It  was  concluded  that  the  appellant's  removal  promoted  a
      legitimate aim of prevention of disorder and crime and the maintenance
      of effective immigration control and in the light of  what  was  known
      about him, including his "criminal conduct" it was proportionate.

   4.    Grounds of  appeal  were  filed  in  early  November  against  this
      decision by A-Z Law. The grounds were general in nature;  they  assert
      that the decision was not in accordance with the immigration rules and
      the law and was an interference with the appellant's family  life.  No
      response  was  made  to   the   allegations   of   criminal   conduct,
      notwithstanding the absence of a conviction. At some point  thereafter
      A-Z Law disappear from the scene.

   5.    The appellant's appeal was due to be heard in January 2012. He  had
      been detained pursuant to immigration powers since November  2011.  On
      the 21 December 2011  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  Resident  Judge
      seeking an adjournment in order to obtain a witness statement from the
      police and obtain a print out of the police CRIS reports.  It  is  not
      clear whether this letter was sent to the  appellant  personally.   It
      was stated that a copy would be sent to his representatives but it  is
      unclear whether this was done or who his representatives were at  this
      stage. The hearing date was adjourned to 15 February 2012.

   6.    The appellant was produced  on  that  date.  He  was  unrepresented
      although he produced a letter of authority for Charles Ette and Co  to
      act  on  his  behalf.   He  asked  for  an   adjournment   for   legal
      representation at his appeal. This  application  was  refused  by  the
      judge.

   7.    It further transpires that on that date a witness statement  by  DC
      Mahmood (not the Detective Constable mentioned in the decision letter)
      was both signed and served on  the  appellant  in  person.  This  gave
      considerably more  information  about  the  allegations  of  rape  and
      assault and  the  contention  that  the  appellant  was  a  danger  to
      vulnerable women as alleged in the Home Office letter.  The  statement
      made reference to information the officer  had  obtained  through  the
      Crime Reporting Information System (CRIS) but did not have documentary
      exhibits attached.

   8.   DC Mahmood gave evidence at the hearing about the contents  of  CRIS
      reports. It appears that  he  did  not  then  produce  copies  of  the
      documents that he relied on. He was not personally concerned with  the
      appellant's arrest and charge but acted as a liaison officer with  the
      UKBA.

   9.    Having been refused an adjournment the appellant appeared  to  take
      little active role in the appeal although he gave evidence.

  10.  Judge Clayton dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  20
      March 2012. She stated at [37]  that the burden of proof  was  on  the
      appellant. She was satisfied that the appellant was a  serious  threat
      to women and had been implicated as being the perpetrator  on  several
      occasions of serious  offences.  She  found  the  decision  to  refuse
      discretionary leave and remove the appellant was  in  accordance  with
      the rules and relevant policy, justified, proportionate and lawful.

  11. A third firm of solicitors, Gans and Co, helped the  appellant  submit
      an application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
      Permission to appeal was granted  on  29  March  2012.   The  decision
      identifies the core issue as to whether there had been a fair  hearing
      because Judge Clayton had decided to admit DC  Mahmood's  late  served
      evidence but had not re-considered the question of an  adjournment  in
      the light of this.  This was something that the appellant needed  time
      to consider and respond to. Directions were made in May 2012 that  the
      CROS reports be produced and that  DC  Mahmood  be  available  at  the
      further appeal.  Unfortunately the  matter  was  not  listed  promptly
      thereafter.

  12.  When the case was listed before us, once again the appellant  had  no
      legal  representation.  He  remained  in  detention  and   sought   an
      adjournment in order to obtain representation to promote his case  and
      probe that of the Secretary of State.

  13.  We spent time exploring why the appellant had no  representation  and
      what efforts he had made to obtain it. We heard from the appellant and
      his mother.  All he could produce was a letter from  Duncan  Lewis  in
      August 2012 indicating  that  they  were  seeking  disclosure  of  the
      documents from the UKBA.  The appellant  told  us  that  subsequently,
      shortly before Christmas 2012, his solicitor informed  him  that  they
      were unable to continue to act for him. He was unclear why this was.

  14. It appears that representatives had been privately instructed  by  the
      appellant's mother in 2011 and there were no further funds to pay  for
      them. As far as we are aware, the claimant was  and  possibly  remains
      eligible for legal aid as a  person  in  detention  who  is  resisting
      removal on human rights grounds. The appellant authorised the Tribunal
      to make inquires of the solicitor at Duncan Lewis as to why they  were
      unable to act for him but these  were  inconclusive  by  the  time  we
      resumed the hearing.

  15.  The appellant renewed his request for an adjournment when the hearing
      resumed. Mr. Norton had been able to obtain  DC  Mahmood's  attendance
      today and had supplied a bundle of the CRIS reports to  the  appellant
      and ourselves on the day of the hearing.

  16. We pointed out to the appellant that even without the criminal conduct
      allegations, his Article 8 claim faced difficulties in that he was  an
      able bodied non-dependent adult who had lived in  the  United  Kingdom
      for 11 years, 8 of which were without authority and for  some  of  the
      time he faced serious criminal charges. The case fell to be considered
      under private rather than family life, despite the presence in the  UK
      of his elderly mother. At the time of  the  decision  the  Immigration
      Rules required 14 years residence (unlawful or mixed legality)  before
      discretionary leave to remain was granted and this was subject  to  an
      absence of countervailing factors.

  17. Nevertheless, the claimant was insistent that he had  points  to  make
      and  wanted  to  make,  even  though  the  consequence  would   be   a
      prolongation of his administrative detention.

  18. After anxious consideration we decided that the interests  of  justice
      required us to give one final opportunity to the appellant to  prepare
      his case and seek representation if possible.

  19. We concluded that we should adjourn this appeal to  26  February  2013
      10.00 when it will  be  heard  by  a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      including the President.  There will be no further adjournment of this
      appeal and if the appellant cannot obtain a legal  representative  who
      is able to act for him on that day he will have to represent himself.

  20.  We reach these conclusions because:-

      First, as to fairness:
        a. There is a strong argument that the FtT judge did not act fairly
           in refusing the appellant a short  adjournment  to  prepare  his
           case in response to the DC Mahmood statement  or  requiring  the
           CDRIS reports to be produced.


        b. The judge was wrong to conclude that the burden of proof was  on
           the appellant  in  respect  of  the  criminal  allegations  made
           against him. Mr.  Norton  accepts  that  as  the  allegation  of
           criminal conduct was raised by the Secretary of State it was for
           her to prove them to  the  judge's  satisfaction  to  the  civil
           balance of probabilities.  We accept that the burden of  showing
           an arguable claim that private life was interfered  with  rested
           on the appellant but justification was for the respondent.

        c. It is a duty of the judge to secure that  the  appellant  has  a
           fair hearing even if the case against him appears to be strong.

      Second, as to the absence of legal representation:


         a.  The  appellant  has  had  an  opportunity   to   obtain   legal
            representation and we are not satisfied that  he  has  exhausted
            every available channel for legal assistance.


         b. The Tribunal does not award legal aid and has no power to  grant
            it. It  cannot  indefinitely  adjourn  an  appeal  until  it  is
            obtained although we can indicate and so without hesitation that
            it is highly desirable in the  interests  of  justice  that  the
            appellant should be represented, given appropriate advice as  to
            the issues in the appeal and how they should be  explored.  That
            remains the case whatever the assessment  of  the  prospects  of
            overall success.

         c. We hope that the prison authorities will assist  him  to  obtain
            representation if at  all  possible,  whether  by  reviving  the
            connection with Duncan Lewis, or another legal aid firm  or  pro
            bono representation from the Free Representation  Unit  or  from
            the schemes run by the Bar  Council,  the  Law  Society  or  the
            Attorney General.


       Third, as to the need for preparation:


          a. Whether he obtains legal representation or not,  the  appellant
             will need time to think about his  response  to  the  materials
             relied on and prepare his case.


          b. We have today provided him with a copy of the UT's summary core
             bundle  of  materials  that  contains  the  essential   matters
             including DC Mahmood's statement.

          c. Mr Norton has supplied him  today  with  a  copy  of  the  CRIS
             report. Another document will be sent to him by the end of this
             week to supplement those reports. Late service of this material
             has  caused  prejudice  to  an   unrepresented   and   detained
             appellant.

          d. The appellant disputes his guilt of the charges brought against
             him. He will, however, need to consider whether  he  challenges
             DC Mahmood's evidence drawn as it is from the police  computer.
             This evidence is admissible and  is  capable  of  satisfying  a
             Tribunal on the civil standard despite its hearsay nature:  see
             Bah (EO (Turkey)  [2012] UKUT 196 (IAC)  a  copy  of  which  Mr
             Norton has provided to him in the bundle.

          e. The appellant may want to rely on other documents including any
             assessment by the CPS why the complainants were  not  satisfied
             satisfactory witnesses (if this was the case).


            Fourth, as to the future conduct of the appeal:

            a. In the event that the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  fairness
               requires us to set aside the First-tier decision  and  remake
               it for ourselves, as we are minded to  conclude  at  present,
               we will remake the case for ourselves on  the  next  occasion
               rather than remitting the matter to start again at the  First
               tier Tribunal.


            b. There has already been unacceptable delay in this  case,  and
               the  appeal  must  be   concluded   as   soon   as   possible
               commensurate with the requirements of fairness.

            c. The fact that the appellant is detained and it is not in  his
               interest or the public interest that  this  continues  for  a
               day longer than necessary.

            d. This Tribunal has already given thought to the issues in  the
               case, and will be in a better position to reach its  decision
               on the next occasion in the light of the material  served  on
               it today and the directions it has given.  The  determination
               of this appeal will be reserved to  the  President,  although
               Judge Dawson will not be available to sit on the panel.

  21. The issues for determination in the event of re-making as they  appear
      to us are as follows:-


              i. Can the appellant establish that his  length  of  residence
                 and ties to the UK means that removal would  have  such  an
                 impact as to be  an  interference  with  his  private  life
                 including his relations with his mother?


             ii. If so, can the  respondent  justify  such  interference  as
                 proportionate means of promoting a  legitimate  aim  within
                 Article 8(2) ECHR?

            iii. In particular, can the respondent satisfy the  Tribunal  on
                 the balance of probabilities that the  appellant  has  been
                 guilty of conduct that makes him a risk to  the  public  in
                 general and vulnerable women in particular?



  22. To date the appellant has not  made  a  substantive  response  to  the
      decision letter, the statement of DC Mahmood and the CRIS material. He
      does not appear to  have  been  asked  questions  about  his  criminal
      conduct by Judge Clayton: see [8] to [10].


                      DIRECTIONS


  23.  To assist preparation of the case and to promote a fair  hearing,  we
      direct the appellant must  provide the following information   by  the
      following dates (with or without legal assistance):-

              i. By the 12 February he inform the Tribunal and the Secretary
                 of State of his written  response  (whether  by  a  witness
                 statement or  a  commentary)  to  the  allegation  that  he
                 represents a danger to women by reason of his past  conduct
                 as set out in the UKBA decision letter, the statement of DC
                 Mahmood and the documents he refers to,  now  contained  in
                 the supplementary bundle.


             ii. By the 19 February he must serve any  further  document  or
                 statement of any witness he intends to rely at the  appeal.
                 Such witnesses must be available to give evidence on the 26
                 February unless the respondent indicates in writing  before
                 hand that this is not necessary.

            iii. The appellant must indicate by the 19 February  whether  he
                 requires DC Mahmood to attend the hearing.

  24. The appeal will be listed at 10.00 on 26 February before  a  panel  to
      include the President.  Time estimate  a day.






