
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   DSG &  Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT
                                 00148 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 January 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DSG AND OTHERS

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Times
                    Immigration Consultants Limited

1.   A judge may depart from existing country guidance in the  circumstances
    described in Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and the UT (IAC) Guidance
    Note 2011, no. 2, paragraphs 11 and 12.

2.   The evidence before  the  judge  in  the  present  case  justified  his
    departure from the country guidance in SL  &  Others  (Afghanistan)  CG
    (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) [2005] UKIAT 00137.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondents (hereafter referred to as the appellants, as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge:  the  Secretary  of  State  will
    hereafter be referred to as the respondent) appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the Secretary of State's  decision of 1 February  2012
    refusing leave to enter the United Kingdom. The appellants are  husband
    and wife and their two children. Their appeal was heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oakley at Hatton Cross on 18 April 2012.

2.   The appellants claimed to be at  risk  in  Afghanistan  on  account  of
    their Sikh faith.   The   judge  noted  the  relevant  aspects  of  the
    appellants' history. The first appellant lived in Kabul from around the
    age of 8 (he was born on 22 February 1971).  He said that the situation
    for Sikhs in Afghanistan deteriorated during the time of the Mujahedeen
    and became even worse after the Taliban came to power.  In around  2001
    he and his brother were  kidnapped  by  people  who  he  believed  were
    strongly connected with the Afghan government and  they  were  tortured
    and deprived of food during the time of detention.   Subsequently   his
    father's house and shop were seized by force and he fled to the  United
    Kingdom and claimed asylum in mid-2002. During that time  he  travelled
    to India in order to be married to his wife and he remained with her in
    India for three months and then she  returned  to  Afghanistan  and  he
    retuned to the United Kingdom.

3.   The first appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom for a period and applied for leave to remain  for
    a further period but this was refused by an Immigration Judge in  April
    2004.  His appeal against that decision was dismissed  by  a  panel  in
    December 2005.  His appeal rights were exhausted in January 2006 and on
    14 January he returned to Kabul and remained in hiding with  his  wife.
    His brother-in-law arranged for them to go  to  Russia  and  they  went
    there for three months in late January 2006  and  overstayed.   He  was
    unable to survive without a job and he  and  his  wife  and  their  two
    children and his brother-in-law travelled to the United  Kingdom  where
    they subsequently claimed asylum.

4.   The judge observed that in  the  determination  of  6  April  2004  the
    previous judge had noted that credibility was not in issue and accepted
    everything the first appellant said had happened to him with regard  to
    his past experiences in Afghanistan.   He also accepted that the  first
    appellant had remained in Afghanistan in the  hope  that  things  would
    improve and that he felt he had no choice but to  leave  following  his
    kidnap and torture by  men  who  arrived  in  government  vehicles.  He
    accepted past persecution for a Convention reason  but  concluded  that
    although the first appellant would  experience difficulties in adapting
    to his life in Afghanistan and would share the undoubted discrimination
    suffered by the minority  of  religions  at  the  hands  of  the  local
    population he did not believe that there was a serious possibility that
    he would face harm rising to the level of persecution on return.

5.   The judge in the instant appeal was referred by the Secretary of  State
    to the current  country  guidance  of  SL  &  Others  (Afghanistan)  CG
    (returning Sikhs and Hindus) [2005] UKIAT 00137, where it was held that
    Afghan Sikhs were not at risk of either persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason or treatment contrary to  their  protected  human  rights.   The
    judge noted that it was said by the respondent that the fact  that  the
    appellant  had  returned  to  Kabul  and  remained  for  ten  days  was
    inconsistent with the actions of a genuine refugee or a person in  need
    of humanitarian protection.

6.   The judge had before him an expert report written  for  the  appellants
    by Dr Antonio Giustozzi, and he also gave consideration to the decision
    in SL.  He also had before him a decision of Collins J  in  R  (On  the
    application of Luthra) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWHC 3629 (Admin).  He also had before him  and  referred  to  a
    report by Dr Roger Ballard entitled "The History and  Current  Position
    of Afghanistan's Hindu and Sikh Population".

7.   The judge noted the respondent's argument that if the  first  appellant
    had had any fear at all he would not have returned to Afghanistan.  The
    reality was, as the judge considered, he had  little  choice.  All  his
    appeal rights had become exhausted by 11 January 2006 and it  was  some
    three days later when he had no right to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    and had no other country to which he could  return legally that he  had
    returned to Kabul.  The judge also found  credible  the  evidence  that
    during the very short time he was in Afghanistan  the  first  appellant
    was in  hiding and therefore did not suffer any specific  problems  and
    it was during that time that his brother-in-law made  the  arrangements
    for him, the first appellant and his wife  to  leave  Afghanistan.   He
    considered  therefore  that  this  did  not  affect   the   appellant's
    credibility adversely.

8.   He went on to remind  himself that as SL was a  country  guidance  case
    he was bound to consider it as it had not been overturned  although  he
    had the ability to depart from  its  findings  if  he  decided  it  was
    wrongly decided in some way and/or that events had  now  moved  on  and
    were very different from the position considered in SL.  He noted  that
    in SL the Tribunal had relied on figures from an UNHCR estimate of  the
    number of Sikhs and Hindu families in Afghanistan which in that  report
    were stated to be 3,500.  This led the Tribunal to  conclude  that  the
    Sikh and Hindu communities were in total in the region of  some  20,000
    persons of whom a substantial proportion were in Kabul and that against
    those numbers the specific cases cited to it did not support a risk  of
    persecution in general to the entire community but  rather  pointed  to
    the conclusion that they were simply victims  of  random  opportunistic
    acts.

9.   The judge noted that the Tribunal was relying upon  a  report  of  2003
    when considering the matter at the end of 2005, but he also  identified
    background  evidence in Dr Ballard's report that a  UNHCR  paper  dated
    June 2005 (which was  not  before  the  Tribunal  in  SL)  stated  that
    "according to available information there are an estimated 600 Sikh and
    Hindu families (3,700 persons) living in Afghanistan today  with  small
    but steady numbers of individuals and families  returning  particularly
    from India". This led the judge to conclude that the Tribunal in SL had
    got its figures wrong at the time of promulgation of the  decision  and
    he  commented  that  this  would  make  a  considerable  difference  in
    considering the proportionality of the attacks on Sikhs and  Hindus  in
    terms of the small number of the population  encountering  quite  large
    numbers of  attacks  and  that  therefore  the  attacks  would  not  be
    considered to be merely  random  but  targeted  at  this  much  smaller
    community.

10.  He then went on to note what was said by Collins  J  in  Luthra  noting
    among things the remark that the fact that there  had  been  a  drastic
    reduction in the number of  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan,  coupled  with  the
    discrimination extending to violence, which meant that there was indeed
    fresh material which was significantly different and which  meant  that
    the claimant in that case had a realistic prospect of success.

11.  He then went on  to  consider  Dr  Giustozzi's  report.   Dr  Giustozzi
    commented on the  numbers, stating that there were no  certain  figures
    of the make up of the Afghan population, but it was estimated  that  by
    2001 the Sikh community of Afghanistan had dwindled and was  as  little
    as a few hundred members and not more than a few thousand.  In Kabul it
    was estimated that by the end of 2001 only 50 to 100 families were left
    of the approximately 2,000 who  lived  there  in  1992.   Although  the
    numbers of reports of attacks and harassments of Sikhs were not  great,
    it should be considered that the population  was  now  very  small  and
    estimates of its size today corresponded to no more than a  size  of  a
    single village.  Dr Giustozzi went on to say that if the known episodes
    of harassment and violence (which represented only a proportion of  the
    actual incidents which occurred) were  compared  to  the  size  of  the
    population it should be considered that there was rampant hostility and
    discrimination against Sikhs in Afghanistan.  He  also  commented  that
    the Sikhs were targeted  with  impunity  because  they  did  not  enjoy
    protection from any of Afghanistan's various factions because they were
    too small numerically to matter politically.

12.  Dr Ballard in his article commented that it was common  knowledge  that
    members of the Sikh and  Hindu community had found themselves subjected
    to steadily rising levels of hostility during the course  of  the  past
    four decades and had  consequently  had  more  reason  to  seek  refuge
    overseas then their Muslim counterparts and that  the  scale  of  their
    presence in Afghanistan had been  shrinking steadily, the number  being
    only a small fraction of their former size, and that as numbers  shrank
    its remaining members were finding themselves even more  vulnerable  to
    aggressive exaction against which they had no  meaningful defence.

13.  All these matters taken together led the judge to conclude that he  was
    entitled in the circumstances to depart from the country guidance  case
    of SL and as a consequence he allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

14.  The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision, arguing first that  the  reasoning  advanced  to  enable  the
    extant country guidance to be disregarded was  not  adequate  and  that
    indeed the reasoning was wholly inadequate to support  a  finding  that
    the mere presence of a Sikh in Afghanistan would invariably lead  to  a
    reasonable likelihood of persecution.  Secondly,  it  was  argued  that
    there was no consideration of the facts of the claim in light of either
    the extant country guidance or the expert reports relied on to supplant
    it and no assessments of the appellant's ability  to  relocate  or  the
    possibility of sufficiency of protection.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  A Rule 24 reply was put in on behalf of the appellants in which it  was
    argued inter alia that the judge had correctly directed himself  as  to
    his ability to depart from a country guidance case  and  had  therefore
    given compelling and cogent reasons as to why the country guidance case
    was to be departed from and that in any  event  the  circumstances  had
    changed considerably from when that decision was made.  It  was  argued
    that the vital figure of 20,000 on which the Tribunal relied in SL  was
    hugely wrong in that the UNHCR's position had changed and  as  of  June
    2005 it was estimated that there  were  only  around  3,700  Sikhs  and
    Hindus in Afghanistan.  Reference was made to  the  growing  number  of
    adverse incidents against Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan which it  was
    said had to be measured against the numbers  remaining.   Reliance  was
    also placed on what was said by Collins J in Luthra, and it was  argued
    also that internal  relocation  would  not  assist  and  there  was  no
    sufficiency of protection.  It was also argued that the  appeal  should
    have been allowed under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  in
    that the best interests of the children militated in favour of  such  a
    result.

16.  In his submissions Mr Deller noted that SL was a comparatively  elderly
    authority albeit still country  guidance,  and  he  was  aware  of  the
    controversy over numbers even at that  time.   It  was  the  case  that
    country guidance cases were not set in  stone  but  good  reasons  were
    needed to depart from a country guidance case.  It  was  true,  as  was
    elaborated in the reply, that just because there was a country guidance
    decision did not mean that the outcome would  necessarily  follow  what
    was said in the country guidance case.  It could  properly be said that
    quite a lot had happened in  Afghanistan  since  2004.   There  was  an
    expert report which was specific to the case.  The size  of  the  group
    was of relevance.  The judge had given his reasons  and  these  reasons
    were clearly sound.  On the point of why he would return if  he  feared
    ill-treatment,  whatever  the  point   might   be   about   the   legal
    requirements, it could be said to be contrary to experience although it
    did not make a significant difference warranting interference with  the
    judge's decision.  There were a number of reasons  to  go  against  the
    country guidance in this case and Mr Deller accepted  that  he  was  in
    some difficulty in resisting the decision.  There was also the previous
    finding of past persecution.

17.  In his submissions Mr Bazini relied on and  amplified  points  made  in
    the reply.  The judge had set out what his task was and followed  that.
    He had set out the evidence and  had  given  reasons  for  why  he  was
    departing from the country guidance. There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    material relied on by the judge. There was no suggestion that either Dr
    Giustozzi or Dr Ballard was wrong.  Reference was made to paragraphs 66
    and 67 of SL and what was said there about  the  numbers  and  risk  on
    return.  There was a very significant difference  between  the  numbers
    relied  on  there  and  the  more  accurate  figures  which  were  very
    significantly lower. There was also reference in SL to the evidence  of
    returns, so one would expect an increase in that number  but  that  was
    not the case and in fact  the  numbers  were  diminishing.   There  was
    reference in the document Mr Bazini handed up from the  UNHCR  in  July
    2011 to 1,000 remaining Afghan Sikhs  and  Hindus.   The  figures  were
    dropping every year.

18.  As to whether all Afghan Sikhs were at risk it had to be accepted  that
    potentially there might be rare exceptions to the general  position  on
    risk, but it could properly be said that the generality of Afghan Sikhs
    and Hindus were at risk on return.

19.  We stated that we found no error of law in the determination  in  light
    of the very helpful submissions from both representatives, giving brief
    reasons which we now amplify.

Discussion

20.  It is relevant  at  the  outset  to  set  out  the  terms  of  Practice
    Direction 12.2 and 12.4 which are of clear  importance  to  this  case.
    They state as follows:

         "12.2 A reported determination of the  Tribunal,  the  AIT  or  IAT
             bearing the letters 'CG' shall be treated as an  authoritative
             finding on  the  country  guidance  issue  identified  in  the
             determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of
             the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that  determine  the  appeal.
             As a result,  unless  it  has  been  expressly  superseded  or
             replaced by any later 'CG' determination, or  is  inconsistent
             with other authority that is binding on the Tribunal,  such  a
             country guidance case is authority in any subsequent appeal so
             far as that appeal:-


             (a)  relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


             (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence.


         12.4 Because of the principle that like cases should be treated  in
             like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently
             applicable country guidance case or to show why  it  does  not
             apply to the case in question is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
             grounds for appeal on a point of law."

21.  In the Upper Tribunal Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  Guidance  Note
    2011 No 2, at paragraph 11, it is stated:

         '"If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to  the  issue  that
         has not been considered in the  country  guidance  case  or,  if  a
         subsequent  case  includes  further  issues  that  have  not   been
         considered in the CG case, the judge  will  reach  the  appropriate
         conclusion on the evidence, taking into account the  conclusion  in
         the CG case so far as it remains relevant."

    And at paragraph 12:

         "Where  country  guidance  has  become  outdated   by   reason   of
         developments in the country in question, it is anticipated  that  a
         judge of the First-tier Tribunal  will  have  such  credible  fresh
         evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above."

 22. In our view the judge in this case directed himself  entirely  properly
    albeit by way of paraphrase, at paragraph 30 of his determination.   He
    went on to note what was decided by the Tribunal in SL,  including  the
    fact that it was of clear significance to the  decision  in  that  case
    that the numbers of remaining Sikhs  and  Hindus  in  Afghanistan  were
    considered to be in the region of 20,000 persons, in respect  of  which
    it was said "Against those numbers, the specific  cases  cited  do  not
    support a risk of persecution which is general to the entire  community
    but rather point to the conclusion that they  were  simply  victims  of
    random and opportunistic attacks."

23.  He noted that the Tribunal was relying upon a report of 2003, but  that
    it could be seen from Dr Ballard's report that in a UNHCR paper of June
    2005, several months before the date of SL, it was said that  according
    to available information there were an estimated  600  Sikh  and  Hindu
    families (3,700 persons) living in Afghanistan today with a  small  but
    steady number of individuals and families returning  particularly  from
    India.

24.  We consider it was open to the  judge  in  the  light  of  the  glaring
    difference in the figures (3,700 as opposed to 20,000) to consider that
    the Tribunal's figures in SL were significantly wrong and that  at  the
    date of the hearing before him that remained the case.  He went  on  to
    note, as we have set out above, what was said by Collins  J  in  Luthra
    and what was said in the report of Dr Giustozzi which was  specifically
    prepared for this appeal.  He also noted and bore in mind what was said
    by Dr Ballard. Of clear relevance also were  the  positive  credibility
    findings and the adoption of the earlier finding by the judge in  April
    2004 that the appellant had experienced  persecution  in  the  past  in
    Afghanistan.

25.  In the circumstances it seems to us entirely clear that the  judge  was
    entitled to depart from the country guidance in this case.   Inevitably
    the remaining numbers of Sikhs and Hindus in  Afghanistan  must  be  to
    some extent a matter of speculation, but it is clear if  one  looks  at
    the evidence as a whole in such documents as Dr  Ballard's  report,  Dr
    Giustozzi's report, the earlier UNHCR report and a  more  recent  UNHCR
    report of July 2011 handed up by Mr Bazini that the  remaining  numbers
    are in the region of  a  thousand  or  two.   Indeed  the  respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note  on  Afghanistan  of  April  2012  states  at
    paragraph 3.9.2 that there are an  estimated  2,200  Sikhs  and  Hindus
    remaining in Afghanistan.  This, together with the evidence set out  in
    Dr Giustozzi's and Dr Ballard's reports, clearly justified the judge in
    departing from the existing country guidance.

26.  This has clear implications for other cases involving claimed  risk  on
    return to Afghanistan for Hindus or Sikhs, in the  period  between  now
    and such time as further country guidance on the subject can be issued.
     A country guidance case retains its status until either overturned  by
    a higher court or replaced by subsequent country guidance.  However, as
    this case shows, country guidance cases are not set in stone (see  also
    HS (Burma) [2013] EWCA Civ 67), and a judge may  depart  from  existing
    country  guidance  in  the  circumstances  described  in  the  Practice
    Direction and the Chamber Guidance Note.  That does not amount to carte
    blanche for judges to depart from country guidance as it is  necessary,
    in the wording of the Practice Direction to show why it does not  apply
    to the case in question.  In SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940,  the  Court
    of Appeal made it clear, at paragraph  47,  that  decision  makers  and
    tribunal judges are required to take  country  guidance  determinations
    into account, and to follow them unless very strong  grounds  supported
    by cogent evidence, are adduced, justifying their not doing so.  To  do
    otherwise will amount to an error of law.

27.  For the reasons set out above therefore we consider that the  judge  in
    this case did not err in law and his decision allowing the appeal under
    the Refugee  Convention  and  under  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention is maintained. Mr Bazini did not press an argument today  on
    the Article 8 issue, and in light of our findings it is  not  a  matter
    with which we propose to deal.

28.  We make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

29.  On the basis set out above, the appellants' appeal is allowed.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

