
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ved and another (appealable  decisions;  permission  applications;  Basnet)
[2014] UKUT 00150 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 19 February 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE


                                   Between

                            Bhupendra Makanji Ved
                           Harshada Bhupendra Ved

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr J. Chhotu, Counsel, instructed by Ved & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) A jurisdictional decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber, contained in a  determination  made  after  the  appeal  has
passed the  duty  judge  "screening"  stage,  is  appealable  to  the  Upper
Tribunal: Practice Statement 3.4; Abiyat & others (Rights of appeal)  [2011]
UKUT 00314 (IAC).

(2)  Where the First-tier Tribunal has refused to entertain  an  application
made to it for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Upper
Tribunal has discretion under  rule  7  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 to consider an application for permission made to  that
Tribunal, notwithstanding that the requirements of rule  21(2)(b)  have  not
been met, in that the First-tier Tribunal has not refused (or not  admitted)
a permission application. It is, however, unlikely that the  Upper  Tribunal
would apply rule 7 so as to entertain a permission application in  the  case
of a party who  has  not  made  any  prior  application  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal. Likewise, the Upper Tribunal can be expected summarily  to  reject
an application for permission to appeal a decision that has been made  under
rule 9 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  in
accordance with Practice Statement 3.1-3.3.

(3)  The findings of the Upper Tribunal in Basnet (Validity  of  application
-  respondent)  [2012]  UKUT  00113  (IAC)  depended  upon  there  being  an
appealable immigration decision, which in that case can  only  have  been  a
refusal to vary leave to remain within section 82(2)(d) of the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Secretary of State's  rejection  of  an
application for leave as invalid  is  not  an  immigration  decision  within
section 82 of the 2002 Act and cannot as such be appealed to the  First-tier
Tribunal.



 DECISION ON APPLICATION TO UPPER TRIBUNAL FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL AGAINST
                       DECISION OF First-tier Tribunal


1. The questions

1.   Two questions arise in these proceedings:-

    (1)   Where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  refused  to  entertain  an
         application made to it  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal, can the  Upper  Tribunal  entertain  an  application  for
         permission made directly to it?


    (2)  Does an appeal lie to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision
         by the Secretary of State to refuse to  accept  an  application  to
         vary leave to remain, on the ground that the legal requirements for
         making a valid application were  not  met?   In  support  of  their
         contention that the answer to this question is yes, the  appellants
         seek to rely upon the determination of the Upper Tribunal in Basnet
         (Validity of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC).



2. The background

3.   The appellants,  husband  and  wife,  are  citizens  of  Tanzania  born
    respectively on 8 February 1937 and 14 October 1941. They most recently
    entered the United Kingdom on 17 March 2012,  in  possession  of  visit
    visas.  During the currency of their leave, the appellants submitted on
    21 June 2012 application forms for indefinite leave to  remain  as  the
    dependent relatives of their daughter, a person present and settled  in
    the United Kingdom.  On 8 August 2012, the respondent wrote letters  to
    each of the appellants, acknowledging "Your attempted  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom" and stating that

        "Your application is invalid and we are returning  the  application
        form and documents received from you.  Please read this  letter  to
        ensure that you understand what you need to do in order to  make  a
        valid application."


         In each case the respondent's  reason  for  refusal  was  that  the
    necessary payment had not been made in connection with the application.
     Having gone on to explain that making a valid application, even if  on
    the correct form and in compliance with the  above  requirements,  does
    not guarantee the application will be successful", the letter ended  by
    saying that if "You still wish to make an application, you must  return
    your fully completed application form with the appropriate fee  to  the
    address given on the application form".

4.   Both appellants  submitted  new  applications.   On  27  October  2012,
    however, the respondent wrote to the appellants  to  state  that,  once
    again, their applications were regarded as  invalid.   As  before,  the
    respondent considered that the correct payment had not been made.

5.   The appellants purported to appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the decisions articulated in the respondent's  letters  of  August  and
    October 2013.  The appellants also launched judicial review proceedings
    in the  High  Court  against  those  decisions.   The  judicial  review
    proceedings were, according to Mr Chhotu, brought on a  "precautionary"
    basis, in case the First-tier Tribunal  proved  unable  to  afford  the
    appellants the relief they sought.

6.    The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  relied  heavily  on
    the determination in Basnet.  The notices of appeal passed through  the
    hands of a Duty Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  appellants'
    appeals were listed for hearing on 22 March  2013  in  Birmingham.   By
    means of a decision entitled "Determination and Reasons" promulgated on
    28 March 2013, Immigration Judge Hawden-Beal decided that there were no
    valid appeals before the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   We shall come in due  course  to  the  detail  of  Judge  Hawden-Beal's
    reasons for finding that there was no valid appeal before her.  For the
    present, however, it is sufficient to note that she heard oral evidence
    from Mr Vijay Ved (the appellants' solicitor) and from the  husband  of
    the sponsor, concerning the circumstances in  which  the  two  sets  of
    applications had been made.  The judge  received  detailed  submissions
    from Mr Chhotu, for the appellants, and from Ms Khan, the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The judge made findings of fact and of  law,  both
    of which were set out in her determination.


3. A jurisdictional decision in a determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (IAC) can be appealed.

8.   Rule 9 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    reads as follows:-

         "9   Where the Tribunal may not accept a notice of appeal


             (1)  Where a person has  given  a  notice  of  appeal  to  the
                  Tribunal and the circumstances in  paragraph  (1A)  apply,
                  the Tribunal may not accept the notice of appeal.


             (1A)     The circumstances referred to in  paragraph  (1)  are
                  that-


                  (a)  there is no relevant decision;


                  (b)  the notice of  appeal  concerns  the  refusal  of  an
                      application for entry clearance which  was  not  made
                      for a purpose falling within section 88A(1)(a) or (b)
                      of the 2002 Act, and the notice of  appeal  does  not
                      rely on either of the grounds  specified  in  section
                      88A(3)(a) of the 2002 Act; or


                  (c)   the  Lord  Chancellor  has  refused   to   issue   a
                      certificate of fee satisfaction.
             (2)  Where the Tribunal does not accept a notice of appeal, it
                  must-


                  (a)  notify the person giving the notice of appeal and the
                      respondent; and


                  (b)  take no further action on that notice of appeal."

9.   The Senior President's  Practice  Statements  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (2010, as amended) contain the following:-

         "3   Where the Tribunal may not accept a notice of appeal


         3.1  First-tier rule 9 (where the Tribunal may not accept a  notice
             of appeal) imposes a duty on the Tribunal  not  to  accept  an
             invalid notice of appeal (in the  circumstances  described  in
             rule 9(1A)) and to serve notice to this effect on  the  person
             who gave the notice of appeal and on the respondent.


         3.2  The Tribunal will scrutinise a notice of  appeal  as  soon  as
             practicable after it has been given.  First-tier rule 9  makes
             no provision for the issue of validity  to  be  determined  by
             means of a hearing or by reference to any  representations  of
             the parties.


         3.3  Once the Tribunal has served the notice described in paragraph
             3.1, First-tier rule 9 provides that the Tribunal must take no
             further action in relation  to  the  notice  of  appeal.   The
             decision under First-tier rule 9 is, accordingly, a procedural
             or preliminary decision.


         3.4  The fact that a hearing  date  may  have  been  given  to  the
             parties does not mean that  the  appeal  must  be  treated  as
             valid.  Accordingly, if at a hearing (including a CMR hearing)
             it transpires that the notice of appeal does not relate  to  a
             decision against which there  is,  in  the  circumstances,  an
             exercisable right of appeal, the Tribunal must so find; but it
             will do so in the form of  a  determination,  rather  than  by
             means of a notice under First-tier rule 9."

10.  Certain decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    are "excluded decisions" for the purposes of sections 11 and 13 of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, which govern  appeals  from
    respectively the First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal and from the
    Upper Tribunal to the relevant Appellate Court.  Amongst  the  excluded
    decisions, which may not be appealed under those sections are:-

         "any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in relation
         to an appeal against a decision under section 40A  of  the  British
         Nationality Act 1981, section 82, 83 or  83A  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  or  regulation  26   of   the
         Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006"  (Article
         3(m) of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order  2009  (SI  2009/275
         (as amended)).

11.  In JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 78, the Court of Appeal construed the appellate  scheme  which
    applied to the  former  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal,  which  for
    present purposes is not materially different from that under  the  2007
    Act. The effect of the Court's judgment is  that,  once  the  time  for
    applying rule 9 of the 2005 Rules has passed, a jurisdictional decision
    is appealable, rather than only being susceptible to  judicial  review.
    In order to reflect this important principle,  Practice  Statement  3.4
    provides that, although the holding of a hearing of an appeal does  not
    prevent the judge from finding  there  is,  in  the  circumstances,  no
    exercisable right of appeal, the  proper  means  of  recording  such  a
    decision is in the form of a determination, rather than a notice  under
    rule 9 of the 2005 Rules. The  result  of  this  is  that  the  rule  9
    procedure applies only to the preliminary "screening" stage at which  a
    Duty Judge of the First-tier Tribunal scrutinises notices of appeal.

12.  Practice Statement 3.4 was considered  in  some  detail  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Abiyat & Others (Rights of appeal) [2011] UKUT 00314 (IAC).
     Mr C M  G  Ockelton,  Vice-President,  held  that  a  decision  as  to
    jurisdiction  was  not  a  "procedural"   decision.    Furthermore,   a
    jurisdictional decision made otherwise than pursuant to rule 9  at  the
    "screening" stage, cannot be categorised as a "preliminary" decision:-

         "I conclude that JH (Zimbabwe) essentially decides that a  decision
         as to jurisdiction made after the Tribunal has begun to consider an
         appeal, including a case where its consideration is limited to  the
         issue of whether there is jurisdiction, is not procedural,  and  is
         not preliminary in the sense intended by the legislation  governing
         the asylum and immigration tribunals." [21]

13.  Notwithstanding the judgment in JH  (Zimbabwe),  the  determination  in
    Abiyat and the provisions of  Practice  Statement  3.4,  Judge  Hawden-
    Beal's  determination  was  sent  to  the  parties  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's administration in Birmingham under cover  of  the  following
    document:-

         "Notice of Appeal where there is no Relevant Decision


         You have given a notice of  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
         Respondent.


         The decision against which you are seeking to  appeal  is  not  one
         against which there is an exercisable right of appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal or is one where the notice  of  appeal  falls  within
         rule 9(1A)(b) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
         Rules 2005.  Accordingly the notice of appeal you  have  lodged  is
         invalid and the Tribunal will take no further action in relation to
         it."

14.  It was plainly wrong for  such  a  notice  to  have  accompanied  Judge
    Hawden-Beal's determination.  The only proper time to use  that  notice
    is at what we have termed the "screening"  stage,  where  a  notice  of
    appeal is scrutinised by a  Duty  Judge,  who  considers  that  rule  9
    applies.  In the present case, what the parties  should  have  received
    from the First-tier Tribunal was a notice stating that a  determination
    was  enclosed  and  explaining  how  a  party  dissatisfied  with  that
    determination could challenge it by applying to the First-tier Tribunal
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, pursuant to section  11
    of the 2007 Act.


4.  The First-tier Tribunal's  refusal  to  entertain  the  application  for
    permission to appeal

15.  Undaunted by the misleading notice, those  acting  for  the  appellants
    filed an application with the First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal.  On 12 April 2013 the First-tier Tribunal, from its  office  in
    Leicester, wrote to the appellants' solicitors as follows:-

         "Your application for permission to appeal cannot be entertained by
         the Upper Tribunal (sic).  This is  because  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal you seek to challenge is an  excluded  decision
         and therefore no appeal against it lies to the Upper Tribunal:  see
         section 11 of the Courts, Tribunals and Enforcement  Act 2007 (sic)
         and, in particular, the order made pursuant  to  section  11(5)(f):
         the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009 (as amended)."

16.  It is unclear whether the letter of  12  April  followed  any  judicial
    scrutiny of the appellants' application.  In any event, it was not only
    ineptly drafted but, in the circumstances, wrong in law.

17.   In so finding, we are not to  be  taken  as  saying  that  a  (better-
    drafted) version of the 12 April letter should not be sent  whenever  a
    notice of appeal has been rejected by a Duty Judge, acting pursuant  to
    rule 9. On the contrary, where the rule 9 procedure has  been  followed
    by that Judge and a person seeks to  appeal  the  outcome,  he  or  she
    should be told that the rule 9 decision is an excluded decision,  which
    cannot be appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  But,  as  the  present  case
    bears witness, such  letters  must  not  be  used  in  connection  with
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal that are  given  in  the  form  of
    determinations.


5.  The Upper Tribunal's response  to  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal

18.  Following their rebuff  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellants
    filed completed form IAUT-1, seeking  permission  to  appeal  from  the
    Upper Tribunal itself.  On 6 August 2013 the Upper  Tribunal  at  Field
    House wrote to the appellants as follows:-

         "You have submitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  an  application  for
         permission to appeal against the determination  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  This,  however,  cannot  be  entertained  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal because  Rule  21(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides that a person may apply to the  Upper
         Tribunal for permission to appeal only if an application  has  been
         made to the First-tier Tribunal and has been refused.   It  is  not
         apparent that this is the case and no further action can  be  taken
         in respect of the application you have made to the Upper Tribunal."

19.  Rule 21(2) of the Upper Tribunal Rules reads as follows:-

         "(2) A person may apply to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  of  another
             tribunal only if:-


             (a)  they have made an application for permission to appeal to
                  the tribunal which made the decision challenged; and


             (b)  that  application  has  been  refused  or  has  not  been
                  admitted."

20.  As can immediately be seen, the letter of 6 August  is  inaccurate,  in
    so far as it refers only to an application to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having "been  refused".   No  reference  is  made  to  the  alternative
    possibility, whereby the application "has not been admitted".


6.  Answering the first question

21.  Rule 24(4) of the 2005 Rules provides that, where  an  application  for
    permission is made outside the  relevant  time  limit,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal may extend time  "if  satisfied  that  by  reason  of  special
    circumstances it would be unjust not to do so".  Rule  24(4)(b)  states
    that, unless time is so extended, the  First-tier  Tribunal  "must  not
    admit the application". The concept of non-admission of an  application
    finds expression in the 2005 Rules only in rule 24(4)(b).

22.  We have come to the conclusion that the words "has not  been  admitted"
    in Upper Tribunal rule 21(2)(b) are to be read as applying only to  the
    situation  where  the  relevant  First-tier  Tribunal  rules  expressly
    provide for  an  application  to  be  not  admitted,  rather  than  any
    circumstance in which an application is in  practice  not  entertained.
    We accept that provisions which have the effect of  restricting  access
    to judicial remedies are  not,  in  general,  to  be  given  any  wider
    interpretation than is strictly warranted by their language or context.
    But the effect of reading Upper  Tribunal  rule  21(2)(b)  more  widely
    would be to afford (or, at least, suggest) a right  of  application  to
    the Upper Tribunal where the decision under challenge  is  an  excluded
    decision and has been correctly identified as such  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   On the other hand, as the present case  illustrates,  there
    ought  to  be  some  mechanism  whereby  a  person   whose   permission
    application is not entertained by the First-tier Tribunal can  seek  to
    persuade the Upper Tribunal that the First-tier Tribunal's response was
    wrong and that the matter is appealable.

23.  Such a mechanism exists in the shape of Upper Tribunal rule 7  (failure
    to comply with rules etc).  Rule 7(2) states:-

         "(2) If a party has failed to comply with a  requirement  in  these
             rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Upper Tribunal
             may take such action as it considers just, which may include:-


             (a)  waiving the requirement;


             ..."

24.  On the particular facts of the present case, the  requirement  in  rule
    21(2), that the appellant should have applied  for  permission  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and been  refused  or  had  their  application  not
    admitted, clearly should not be a reason  to  preclude  the  appellants
    from applying for permission to the Upper Tribunal.  We would, however,
    emphasise the following important points.

25.  First, the existence of rule 7(2)(a) is not in any way to  be  regarded
    as excusing appellants from first applying to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for permission  to  appeal,  before  approaching  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Indeed, we cannot readily envisage a situation where the Upper Tribunal
    would be likely to accept an application for permission from a party to
    proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal who has chosen not to  make  any
    prior application to that Tribunal, whether or not such an  application
    would be out of time. The same is likely to be true where no such prior
    application is made, as a result of inadvertence.

26.   Secondly, a person who seeks permission to appeal a  rule  9  decision
    of a Duty Judge, which  has  been  made  in  accordance  with  Practice
    Statement 3.1-3.3 and the associated case law, will need to show highly
    compelling reasons why the Upper Tribunal should apply rule 7(2) in his
    or her favour, so as even to have the application considered. Those who
    cannot do so must expect to have their applications summarily rejected.



7. The second question: the scope of Basnet

27.   In  the  circumstances  of  the  present  case,   it   is   manifestly
    appropriate, in pursuance of the overriding objective  in  rule  2,  to
    apply rule 7(2) in order to  admit  the  appellants'  applications  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Those   applications
    accordingly fall to be decided pursuant to rule 22.  We can, therefore,
    now address the second of the questions posed  in  paragraph  1  above;
    namely, whether the appellants had a right of appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decisions articulated in the respondent's  letters
    of 8 August and 27 October 2012.  Judge Hawden-Beal found they did not.



28.  We remarked at the outset that  the  appellants'  case  relies  heavily
    upon the Upper Tribunal's determination in Basnet.  It is, accordingly,
    necessary to examine that decision, in some detail.


8.  The determination in Basnet

29.  Mr Basnet applied for a variation of his leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This was on 13 May  2011.   His
    existing leave to remain expired on 28 May 2011.  On 16 June 2011,  the
    respondent wrote to tell him that his application was  invalid  because
    the specified fee had not been paid.  He was given  information  as  to
    how make a fresh application, which he did on 22 June 2011.

30.  What happened next is recorded by the Upper Tribunal as follows:-

         "7.  The respondent refused that  application  by  letter  dated  3
             August 2011.  The letter states that because  the  application
             was made when the appellant  no  longer  had  valid  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom, he did not have 'an  established
             presence studying in the  United  Kingdom',  and  so  did  not
             qualify for the reduced  level  of  maintenance  funds  to  be
             shown.   The  bank  statements  submitted   to   support   the
             application did not meet the maintenance requirements.


         8.   It is  common  ground  that  throughout  the  period  of  both
             applications the appellant had funds in his bank account  such
             that if he had made an  'in  time'  application  based  on  an
             'established presence', the application would have  succeeded.




         9.   The respondent's letter also advised the appellant:


                  There is no right of appeal against this decision.


         10.  If the appellant had not made a valid application  within  his
             period of leave, that would be  a  correct  statement  of  the
             law."

31.  Although the Upper Tribunal did not expressly say so, it is plain  that
    the respondent's decision contained in the letter of 3 August 2011  was
    a decision to refuse to grant leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    It could not have been a decision to  refuse  to  vary  existing  leave
    because, as we can see, Mr Basnet's existing leave expired  on  28  May
    2011.

32.  Paragraph 11 records that Mr Basnet filed a notice of appeal in  August
    2011, in which he contended that his leave had, in  reality,  continued
    beyond 28 May 2011 by operation of section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  That contention depended upon the original application, made  on
    13 May 2011, being valid.  This is because section 3C(1)(b) has, as one
    of the requirements for extending leave under subsection (2), that "the
    application for variation is made before the  leave  expires".   Unless
    the 13 May application had the effect  of  extending  leave,  then,  of
    course, the 22 June application could not satisfy  the  requirement  of
    section 3C(1)(b).


9. Identifying an immigration decision

33.  It is necessary at this point to  recollect  that  the  only  means  by
    which an appeal of the kind with which we are concerned may be  brought
    to the First-tier Tribunal is under  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This provides that:-

         "(1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person
             he may appeal to the Tribunal."

34.  Section 82(2) contains a comprehensive definition of what is  meant  by
    an "immigration decision".  One such decision is a:-

         "(d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person
             has no leave to enter or remain."

35.  That "refusal to vary" decision  is  the  only  "immigration  decision"
    within section 82(2) that could conceivably be relevant in the case  of
    the present appellants.  The same would appear to be  true  in  Basnet,
    although paragraph 11 of the Upper Tribunal's determination records  Mr
    Basnet's notice of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  contending
    "that he had  a  right  of  appeal  under  section  82(2)(g).   Section
    82(2)(g) comprises:-

         "(g) a decision that a person is to  be  removed  from  the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba)
             or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c.33)  (removal
             of person unlawfully in the United Kingdom)."

36.  The Upper Tribunal in Basnet says no more about  section  82(2)(g).  It
    is nevertheless clear the Tribunal's determination did  not  involve  a
    finding that Mr Basnet had been served with a removal  decision  giving
    rise to an in-country right of appeal.  Indeed,  it  is  apparent  from
    paragraph 9 of the determination, set out above, that Mr Basnet was not
    given a removal decision, for,  if he  had  been,  the  decision  of  3
    August 2011 would have had to tell him he had a right of appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the removal  decision,  albeit  exercisable
    only once he had left the United Kingdom (if he had not  made  a  prior
    asylum or human rights claim): see  regulation  4  of  the  Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003 (SI2003/658).

37.  The Upper Tribunal in  Basnet  concluded  that,  where  the  respondent
    asserts an application was not accompanied by a  fee  and  so  was  not
    valid, the respondent bears the  burden  of  proving  that  fact.   The
    Tribunal concluded on the facts of that case that  the  respondent  had
    failed to discharge that burden.  This led  the  Tribunal  to  conclude
    that the First-tier Tribunal had been wrong to find that Mr Basnet  did
    not have a right of appeal to that Tribunal.  The determination ends as
    follows:-

         "35. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law, by  applying  the  wrong
             test to whether there was  a  valid  appeal.   We  remake  the
             decision by finding that the onus was  on  the  respondent  to
             satisfy us that the application was  not  accompanied  by  the
             specified fee.  The respondent has  offered  no  evidence,  or
             insufficient evidence,  to  that  effect.   On  the  available
             evidence, the application was  accompanied  by  the  specified
             fee, and was validly made.  There was consequently a right  of
             appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is not disputed that on
             the merits, the application for an extension  of  stay  should
             have been granted, so the appeal, as originally brought to the
             First-tier  Tribunal,  is  allowed.   It  will  be   for   the
             respondent to decide what period of leave should  be  granted,
             in light of the appellant's current circumstances."

     The fate of the present appeals turns on what  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Basnet intended by saying  "the  application  was  accompanied  by  the
    specified fee, and was validly made.  There was consequently a right of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal."


10. The scope of Basnet

38.   Mr Chhotu's detailed grounds and skeleton argument in  essence  amount
    to the following submission; namely, that Basnet holds there is a right
    of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  decisions  of   the
    respondent, such as those contained in the letters of 8 August  and  27
    October 2012, returning as allegedly invalid applications which are not
    considered by the respondent to comply with the requirements  specified
    in the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 34-35E)  and  related  legislation
    (such as the Immigration and Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011).

39.  This submission faces fundamental difficulties.   First,  there  is  no
    indication in the Basnet determination that the Upper Tribunal  treated
    the contents of the letter sent by the  respondent  on  16  June  2011,
    returning the application as invalid, as constituting  an  "immigration
    decision" within the definition in  section  82(2)  of  the  2002  Act.
    Although the Upper Tribunal did not say so, the key element  in  Basnet
    which, crucially, is missing in the case of the present appellants,  is
    that the respondent had refused the application in her  decision  of  3
    August 2011, in response to the fresh application made by Mr Basnet  on
    22 June.

40.  As we have already observed, the Basnet decision of 3 August 2011  must
    have been expressed as a decision to refuse to grant leave  to  remain.
    As we  can  see  from  section  82(2),  such  a  decision  is  not  "an
    immigration decision" and so, on its  face,  cannot  give  rise  to  an
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under section 82(1).  But because the
    respondent in Basnet failed  to  show  on  balance  that  the  original
    application made on 13 May 2011 was invalid, section 3C of the 1971 Act
    applied so as to extend Mr Basnet's leave until the decision taken on 3
    August 2011

41.  Accordingly, the result  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    application of 13 May was validly made  was  that  the  decision  of  3
    August 2011, which the respondent categorised as  a  refusal  to  grant
    leave to remain, (and so not carrying a right of appeal because it  was
    not an immigration decision), was, in reality, a  refusal  to  vary  Mr
    Basnet's leave to remain (where the result of the refusal was  that  he
    had no leave to enter or remain).  That  was  an  immigration  decision
    carrying a right of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  see  section
    82(2)(d).  Despite Mr Chhotu's  submissions,  we  do  not  consider  it
    arguable that the Basnet determination can be read in any other way.

42.  Sections 1 to 4 of the Immigration Act 1971 provide for the  regulation
    and control of persons subject to that Act to be  carried  out  by  the
    respondent and her Immigration Officers. Section 3 (general  provisions
    for regulation and control) makes provision for such control  by  means
    of the granting and refusal of leave to  enter  or  remain  the  United
    Kingdom, either for a limited or an indefinite period. Section  3(3)(a)
    enables a person's leave to be varied. Thus, a decision  to  refuse  to
    grant leave and a decision to refuse to vary leave are  both  decisions
    within section 3.

43.   In Basnet, it was  common  ground  that  the  respondent  had  made  a
    decision, pursuant to section 3, refusing leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom.  The fact that the respondent mistakenly thought that decision
    was one which did  not  fall  within  the  definition  of  "immigration
    decision" in section 82(2) of the 2002 Act  did  not  affect  the  fact
    that the decision was still a decision within the ambit of section 3.

44.  In the case of the present appellants, however, there has never been  a
    decision under section 3, refusing them leave to  remain.   Instead  of
    waiting for such a decision, the appellants decided to launch  parallel
    judicial review and appellate challenges to the letters of 8 August and
    27 October 2012.

45.  That point of difference with Basnet was identified  by  Ms  Khan,  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer who appeared before  Judge  Hawden-Beal.
    As recorded at paragraph 13 of the determination, Ms Khan:-

         "submitted that there was no valid appeal before  me  to  determine
         because there  had  been  no  immigration  decision  taken  by  the
         respondent and that the most appropriate venue for the validity  of
         these applications to be determined was in the Administrative Court
         where the appellant(s)  had  an  application  for  Judicial  Review
         pending...   She  submitted  that  the  case  of  BASNET  could  be
         distinguished from this case because in that case  the  application
         had been rejected and then refused  when  resubmitted  because  the
         appellant had not got leave at the time the second application  was
         made..."

46.  Judge Hawden-Beal effectively accepted that submission:-

         "15. Having considered all of the  submissions,  the  evidence  and
             having read  both Bundles relied upon, on the face of it, I am
             satisfied that the applications initially made  on  June  20th
             2012 were valid.  BUT this does not avail  the  appellants  in
             this matter because an immigration decision has not been  made
             which distinguishes this hearing from BASNET.   In  BASNET  an
             application was rejected and then when it was  re-submitted  a
             decision was taken to refuse it  without  a  right  of  appeal
             because, having no extant leave to remain  the  appellant  did
             not  have  an  established  presence  in  the  UK  and  as   a
             consequence did not have sufficient funds to maintain himself.
              There was therefore an immigration decision made  in  BASNET,
             against which to appeal but there is none in this case."

47.  Although, as we can see from our analysis,  the  thought  expressed  in
    the last sentence of paragraph 15 is somewhat compressed, Judge Hawden-
    Beal was unarguably right.  In Basnet there was a decision as to leave,
    taken pursuant to section 3 of the 1971 Act, which because it  was  not
    proved to have been taken after the  expiry  of  Mr  Basnet's  original
    leave, could only be a refusal to vary that leave.


11. Were the letters of 6 August  and  27  October  2011  refusal  of  leave
    decisions?

48.  Before us, Mr Chhotu submitted that the letters  of  6  August  and  27
    October 2011 fell to be treated as refusals of  leave.   He  said  that
    those  letters  were,  in  effect,  "rejections"  of  the   appellants'
    applications.   Since  the  Oxford  Dictionary  (3rd  Edition)  defines
    "rejection" as "dismissing or refusing", Mr Chhotu contended  that  the
    letters fell to be treated as refusals of  leave.   As  a  result,  the
    present appeals fell to be treated in precisely the same way as Basnet.
     Given that Judge Hawden-Beal had stated in her determination that  she
    was satisfied the respondent had not discharged the burden  of  showing
    the appellants' applications were not accompanied by the specified fee,
    the same ultimate result in Basnet should follow.  At least, permission
    to appeal Judge Hawden-Beal's determination should be granted.

49.  We reject those submissions.  They amount to an unwarranted attempt  to
    expand the ratio of Basnet.  In effectively treating a refusal of leave
    to remain as a variation refusal within the ambit of  section  82(2)(d)
    of the 2002 Act, the Tribunal in Basnet took what might be said to be a
    somewhat bold  approach.   There  is,  however,  an  unbridgeable  gulf
    between (a) treating one kind of section 3 decision as another kind  of
    section 3 decision;  and  (b)  treating  as  a  section  3  decision  a
    preliminary action or response of the respondent, such as rejecting  or
    returning an application as invalid. Resort to  dictionary  definitions
    are, with respect, beside the point. The Immigration Rules, as approved
    by Parliament, permit the respondent to require applications for  leave
    under the 1971 Act to comply with certain requirements (not  least  the
    payment of fees) before the respondent is required to make  a  decision
    under section 3 etc. The appellants'  submissions,  if  correct,  would
    effectively  destroy  that  distinction,  with  the  result  that   the
    appellate jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal would  expand  beyond
    what Parliament contemplated, when passing the 2002 Act.

50.  By rejecting the appellants' submissions, there is no  danger  of  them
    or persons in their  position  being  denied  an  effective  remedy  to
    challenge such preliminary actions or responses. In the  present  case,
    the appellants have commenced judicial review  proceedings,  which  are
    currently adjourned awaiting the outcome of the appellate  proceedings.
    In the light of our decision, the appellants may well wish to return to
    the Administrative Court. At this stage, they cannot be criticised  for
    declining to submit a third  application,  given  their  position  that
    their previous applications were valid. Likewise, the respondent cannot
    at this stage be criticised for not  making  a  decision  as  to  leave
    since, according to her, a valid application has  not  been  made.  Any
    legal resolution of that impasse lies in judicial review.


12.  Decision

51.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is hereby refused.







                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
