

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|MY (Country Guidance cases - no fresh evidence ) Eritrea [2005]   |
|UKAIT 00158                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2005             |On 14 November 2005             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Mr  S L Batiste (Senior Immigration Judge)                        |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation
For the appellant: Miss V Quinn, Counsel, instructed by White Ryland
For the respondent : Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

The AIT Practice Directions 2005  mean that a  Country  Guideline  case  is
authoritative in any subsequent appeal so far as that appeal relates to the
 country guidance  in  question  and  depends  upon  the  same  or  similar
evidence:  see also R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982.   In a case depending, as
did this,  on the  same or similar evidence, a party will not be  permitted
to challenge the  country guidance findings except by the production of new
evidence. Attempts to contest the findings in a CG case without such  fresh
evidence are not permissible.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Eritrea. By a determination notified on
      3 June 2005 the Immigration Judge Mr  T.  Ward  dismissed  her  appeal
      against a decision refusing to grant  asylum  and  refusing  to  grant
      leave to enter.   It is salient to mention at  this  point  that  Miss
      Quinn was also the representative before Mr Ward.

   2. The Immigration Judge set out the basis of the  appellant's  claim  as
      follows:

           '9.   The appellant claims  to  be  a  member  of  the  Eritrean
                Liberation Front (ELF).  She claims to have  fled  to  Addis
                Ababa when she heard that the Eritrean  Government  were  to
                call her up for military service.   She  left  Ethiopia  and
                went to Bahrain in  March 1998 to work as a domestic worker.
                 She travelled there under a false name ... She returned  to
                Bahrain and married  her   husband  in  January  2001.   The
                appellant claims that  her  father,  two  brothers  and  her
                husband were members of   the  ELF.   She  claims  that  the
                Eritrean  government   supporters  were  harassing  her   to
                contribute financial assistance to the  Eritrean  government
                while she was in  Bahrain.  According to the  appellant  her
                father was arrested on 1 August 2004.   He was  killed.   On
                15 October 2004 the appellant went back to Eritrea to  visit
                her mother. Whilst there her brother  Y  was  arrested.   He
                does not know what had happened to him. On 12 November  2004
                she went back to Bahrain. Her employer arranged a  visa  for
                her in the UK.   However, thereafter her employer  cancelled
                her leave in  Bahrain and  terminated  her  work.  She  left
                Bahrain and went back to Eritrea on 7 January  2005.   On  7
                February 2005 while she  was  out  with  a  friend  Eritrean
                security went to  her  house  and  searched  it.  They  were
                looking for the appellant and her brother.   Her  brother  T
                was  arrested.   The  security  forces   asked   about   the
                appellant's whereabouts.  As a result of all   of  this  the
                appellant decided to leave Eritrea and came to the UK.

3.    The Immigration Judge did not  believe  this  account:  he  found  her
      whole account "a tissue of lies". It is not necessary to set  out  his
      reasons, since the grounds of appeal did  not  challenge  his  adverse
      credibility findings. Miss Quinn confirmed that the appellant's appeal
      was brought solely on the basis that the Immigration Judge  was  wrong
      not to allow the appeal simply on the basis that  she was  a  national
      of Eritrea who had applied for asylum in another country and  who  was
      still of military service age. It is not in dispute that the appellant
      is 29 years old.

4.    The  grounds  of  appeal  raised  four  main  points.    Firstly  they
      challenged the reliance the Immigration Judge placed  on  the  Country
      Guidance case of SE (Deportation  -  Malta  -  2002  -  General  Risk)
      Eritrea CG [2004] 00295.   They pointed out that it had  been  put  to
      the Immigration  Judge  at  the  hearing  that  the  Tribunal  in   SE
      overlooked that the  Maltese returnees were not all draft evaders  and
      deserters;  40% (95 out of 233) were civilians. It had also  been  put
      to the Immigration Judge that despite  noting  that  all  233  of  the
      Maltese returnees were detained for some weeks, the Tribunal in SE had
      failed to determine whether  the  detention  involved  (in  Adi  Abeto
      prison) arose in conditions that  were  persecutory  and  contrary  to
      Article 3.

5.     Miss  Quinn's  second  challenge  was  to  the  Immigration   Judge's
      assessment of the  facts  concerning  the  111  Libyan  returnees  who
      arrived in Eritrea on 21 July 2004.  Contrary to the significance  the
      Immigration Judge appeared to attach at paragraph 38 to the fact  that
      'most' if not all of the  Libyan returnees had deserted from  military
      service or evaded conscription, the  evidence was that to date none of
      them has been released.

6.     Miss  Quinn's  third  challenge  centred  on  the  comments  of   the
      Immigration Judge at paragraph 39, which again relied on SE.

             'In the case of SA it was stated that  the  Tribunal  did  not
             think that the contents of the  May 2004 Amnesty International
             Report justified the conclusion that returnees generally  were
             at risk. I was referred to  that  report  by  the  appellant's
             representative since it stated that even the act  of  applying
             for asylum abroad would be regarded as evidence of  disloyalty
             and reasons to detain and torture a person returned to Eritrea
             after rejection of asylum.  For the reasons contained  in  the
             case of SA I do not accept that to be the case.   I  do  adopt
             the Tribunal decision in that case to the effect that the mere
              fact of being a returnee  to   Eritrea  does  not  mean  that
             someone will face a real risk of serious harm.

      [It is accepted on both sides that by SA the Immigration  Judge  meant
      here to refer to SE].

7.    Since SE in fact nowhere dealt  with  the   relevant  passage  of  the
      Amnesty International  report mentioning treatment of persons known to
      have claimed asylum abroad, the Immigration Judge was wrong, said Miss
      Quinn, to reject the  argument she raised concerning it  by  reference
      to SE.

8.    Miss Quinn's grounds also attacked the  Immigration  Judge's  reliance
      on the  most recent Tribunal Country  Guideline case  on  Eritrea,  IN
      (Draft evaders - evidence of risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00106.
      That reliance was misplaced, she said, because she had  identified  to
      the Immigration Judge issues concerning the  Maltese returnees and the
       Libyan returnees which IN had before it but failed to address.

9.    We are not persuaded by  Miss  Quinn's  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
      Adjudicator materially erred in law. We remind ourselves that  we  are
      not deciding whether the  Immigration  Judge's  conclusions  were  the
      right  ones,  but  only  whether  they  were  conclusions  which  were
      reasonably open to her on the evidence: see CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.

10.   At the time the Immigration Judge determined this appeal, viz  3  June
      2005, the principal and only Tribunal Country Guideline  case  dealing
      with military service issues was  IN,  which  had  been  notified  and
      placed on the  AIT website on  24 May 2005.   MA and SE  were  removed
      from the IAT website on the same day.

11.   This state of affairs has considerable significance for  Miss  Quinn's
      grounds of appeal since much of their focus is on  SE,  which  by  the
      time the Immigration Judge  determined this appeal  was  no  longer  a
      Country  Guideline case.

12.   This state of affairs also  has importance for our reconsideration  of
      this appeal, since it is clear that the Immigration Judge, although he
      did refer to SE and other earlier Country Guidance  cases,  sought  to
      reach his conclusions in the light of the latest Country Guidance case
      on Eritrea, i.e. IN.

13.   We first of all need  to  establish  whether,  on  the  basis  of  the
      Immigration Judge's findings of fact, he was entitled to  conclude, in
      the  light of the guidance given in IN, that the appellant  would  not
      be at risk.

14.    As  we  have  already  noted,  the  Immigration  Judge  made  adverse
      credibility findings which Miss Quinn does not dispute.  At  paragraph
      38 he found:

             'In my opinion  the appellant  is  not  being  sought  by  the
             government for evading military service nor had she  deserted.
             It is clear also in my opinion that she left the country on  a
             genuine passport. If the authorities were  interested  in  her
             she would not have been able to do so with such ease.'

15.   As such the appellant's only relevant characteristics  were  that  she
      was (1) a woman, and (2) of draft age.

The guidance given by IN on persons of draft age
16.   Miss Quinn initially appeared to argue that the Immigration Judge  was
      wrong to consider that a woman of draft age could  not  succeed  under
      current  Tribunal country guidance because IN had not  heard  argument
      on the risks faced by individuals of draft age on return  to   Eritrea
      and issued no guidance on this category.   This  argument  is  plainly
      misconceived.   IN did hear arguments relating to those of draft  age,
      male and female, and did give relevant  guidance. At paragraph  44(ii)
      it stated:
            'There is no material distinction to be drawn between deserters
            and draft evaders. The issue is  simply  whether  the  Eritrean
            authorities  will regard a returnee as someone who  has  sought
            to evade military service or as a deserter.  The  fact  that  a
            returnee is of draft age is not determinative.   The  issue  is
            whether on the facts a returnee would be  perceived  as  having
            sought to  evade  the  draft  by  his  or  her  departure  from
            Eritrea. If someone falls within an exemption  from  the  draft
            there would be no perception of draft evasion. If a person  has
            yet to reach the age for military  service,  he  would  not  be
            regarded as a draft evader:   see  paragraph   15  of  AT.   If
            someone has been  eligible  for   call-up  over  a  significant
            period but has not been  called  up,   then  again  there  will
            normally be no basis for finding   that  he  or  she  would  be
            regarded as a draft  evader.  Those  at  risk  on  the  present
            evidence are those suspected of having left to avoid the draft.
            Those who received call up papers or who  were  approaching  or
            had recently passed draft age at the  time  they  left  Eritrea
            may, depending on their own particular  circumstances,  on  the
            present evidence be regarded  by  the  authorities  as    draft
            evaders.'

17.   Given the terms in which IN had given guidance on the  issue  of  risk
      to persons of draft age who were not reasonably likely to be perceived
      as draft evaders or deserters, the Immigration Judge cannot be said to
      have erred in reaching a like-minded conclusion, on the basis  of  the
      primary findings of fact he had made.

18.   Indeed, had the Immigration Judge chosen to allow the appeal based  on
      his primary findings of fact,  he  would,  in  the  absence  of  fresh
      evidence, have materially erred  in  law  in  failing  to  follow  the
      applicable country guidance: see R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982;  AIT
      Practice Directions April 2005, paragraph 18.2.

The  challenge to IN
19.   Miss Quinn's  view of this matter was that it was wrong to  treat  the
      proper framework for deciding this reconsideration as being limited to
      the issue of whether the Immigration Judge's  principal findings  were
      in line with applicable country guidance. We put to her that  she  was
      thereby effectively seeking, in most of her grounds of appeal, to  re-
      litigate arguments pursued without success in IN.

20.   With that in mind we asked her to clarify whether she was  seeking  to
      challenge IN on the basis of any new evidence. She confirmed that  she
      was not. Of course, had she sought to rely on new evidence, that would
       have been of no assistance in  this  reconsideration,  since  we  are
      prevented from having regard to such evidence  unless  satisfied  that
      the Immigration Judge  has perpetrated a  material error of  law:   CA
      [2004] EWCA Civ  1165; R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

21.   Her point was different. It was that IN  was  unreliable,  and  should
      have been seen by the Immigration Judge as unreliable because  it  had
      failed to take  into account highly relevant  factors  when  assessing
      risk for those  of draft military age and those who were failed asylum
      seekers.

22.   Firstly, she said,  IN had  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  evidence
      before it on  the   Maltese  and  the  Libyan  returnees  furnished  a
      different picture  as  regards  risk  on  return,  in  particular  the
      evidence indicating that  40% of the 233 returnees were civilians  and
      that none of the  Libyan returnees, including those who were civilian,
      has yet been released.  These  points  of  oversight   were  of  great
      importance, she said,  because  of  the   strong  indications  in  the
      background materials that any  detention  of  returnees  would  be  in
      conditions which were persecutory and  contrary to Article 3.

23.   It is not clear to us that  Miss  Quinn  has  appreciated  the  formal
      status given to Country  Guidance  cases  by  the  2005  AIT  Practice
      Directions:

           'The relevant paragraphs state:


           "18.2:   A reported determination of the Tribunal or of the  IAT
           bearing letters  'CG'  shall  be  treated  as  an  authoritative
           finding  on  the  country  guidance  issue  identified  in   the
           determination, based upon the evidence before the members of the
           Tribunal or the IAT that determined the  appeal.  As  a  result,
           unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by any later
           'CG' determination, or is inconsistent with other authority that
           is binding on the Tribunal, such  a  country  guidance  case  is
           authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:


        a) relates to the country guidance issue in question;  and


        b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence


           18.3    A list of current CG cases will  be  maintained  on  the
           Tribunal website. Both the respondent and any representative  of
           the appellant in an appeal concerning a particular country  will
           be expected to be conversant with the current 'CG' determination
           relating to that country.


           18.4   Because of  the  principle  that  like  cases  should  be
           treated  in  like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a   clear,
           apparently applicable country guidance case or to  show  why  it
           does not apply to the case in question is likely to be  regarded
           as grounds for review or appeal on a point of law.'

24.   These Practice Directions have applied since  4  April  2005,  and  so
      applied to the Immigration Judge dealing with this case.

25.   We would for completeness note that even prior to  4  April  2005,  in
      our view similar considerations applied.  The only exceptions  to  the
      rule that country guidance cases should be followed, as identified  by
      the Tribunal in NM & Others (Lone woman - Ashraf)  Somalia  CG  [2005]
      UKIAT 00076 at    paragraphs 140 and  141,   concerned:  (i)  evidence
      that circumstances have changed; (ii) significant new  evidence  which
      shows that the views originally expressed  require  consideration  for
      revision  or  refinement,  even  without  any   national   change   in
      circumstances; and (iii)  the  passage  of  time  or  substantial  new
      evidence which warrants  a re-examination of the position.

26.   Accordingly we reject Miss Quinn's principal submissions. They  amount
      to an impermissible  attempt  to  relitigate  country  guidance.    To
      permit submissions of this type would be to allow parties to challenge
      country guidance by the back door in every case. The country  guidance
      system allows for challenge, but it must be through the front door, on
      the basis, that is, of fresh evidence having  a  material  bearing  on
      the findings of fact   which comprise existing guidance.

27.   It is quite clear in this case that Miss Quinn's submissions  did  not
      rely on new or fresh evidence. The evidence she  identified  regarding
      the Maltese returnees was before the Tribunal in IN, a case which,  as
      we have seen, the Immigration Judge relied on in  this  case.   It  is
      quite clear in this case that Miss Quinn could not invoke the  passage
      of time:  IN was only notified on 24 May 2005, just  under  two  weeks
      before the Immigration Judge  notified  his  decision  in  this  case.
      Miss Quinn told us that the same arguments directed against IN and  SE
      which comprised her grounds of appeal in this case, recently persuaded
      the Court of Appeal to remit an appeal to the  AIT. It is  unfortunate
      that she did not see fit to furnish us with any particulars beyond the
        name of the case. Be that as it may, we cannot see any error of  law
      on the part of the Immigration Judge  in the case  before  us  and  we
      would observe that the   same AIT Practice Directions on which we have
      relied were cited with approval  by the  Court of Appeal in  R  (Iran)
      [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

28.   What we  say  above  is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  this  case.  The
      Immigration Judge  based  his  analysis  and  assessment   on  current
      country guidance. The evidence  before him was the  same or similar to
      that  which was before the Tribunal in IN.  For completeness, however,
      we shall proceed to explain  why  we  do  not  consider  Miss  Quinn's
      submissions based on criticisms of IN  and  SE  to  possess  any  real
      cogency or merit.

29.   Turning first to her challenge to IN then, it is true that  this  case
      does not contain any specific re-examination of the facts relating  to
      Maltese returnees. But we  fail  to  see  that  this  is  of  decisive
      importance since IN was attempting to assess risk  on  return  in  May
      2005  to  individual  returnees,  based  on  a  considerable  body  of
      background evidence, including further information  now to hand  about
      the mass return in 2002 of Maltese returnees. We bear in mind that for
      the purposes of this case, Miss Quinn would  have  to  establish   not
      only that the Tribunal in IN formed the wrong view but that the   view
      taken by that  Tribunal was beyond the range of reasonable  responses.
      Her arguments come nowhere near establishing as much.

30.   As regards the treatment by the Tribunal in  IN  of  the  implications
      for risk on return of the fate of the 2004 mass return of  the  Libyan
      returnees, similar considerations apply. This was a piece of  evidence
      which the Tribunal had to weigh, alongside many other pieces  and  had
      to  consider  as  to  its   implications   for   returnees   returning
      individually or in families. It  obviously  saw  it  as  justifying  a
      different view being taken of those who would be  perceived  as  draft
      evaders  or  deserters,  but  not  as  justifying  a  conclusion  that
      returnees generally would be at risk.  Once again we consider that  on
      the evidence that was a view reasonably open to the Tribunal in IN.

31.   Insofar as Miss Quinn relied on flaws in the  former Country  Guidance
      case of SE rather than focussing on  IN,  we  would  agree   that  the
      Immigration Judge did give her some encouragement, since  he  appeared
      to think in paragraphs 37  that in respect of the  issue  of  risk  to
      failed asylum seekers IN had  simply  'confirmed'  SE.   If  what  the
      Immigration  Judge  meant  by   'confirmed'  was  'reached  the   same
      conclusion based on the same evidence', that was obviously  a  mistake
      since IN had further evidence before it which  SE  had  not  had.  If,
      however, he meant 'reached the same conclusion based  on  the   latest
      evidence' then what he concluded was reasonably open  to  him.  Either
      way, however, IN was the only applicable  Country Guidance  case   and
      its guidance was the only current guidance on the  issue  of  risk  to
      failed asylum seekers.

32.   As for Miss Quinn's argument that the Tribunal in SE  overlooked  that
      the  Maltese returnees were not all draft evaders and deserters,  even
      assuming that there was such an oversight, which we doubt,  that was a
      flaw in a case that was no longer applicable country guidance.

33.   Miss Quinn complains that  neither  in  IN  nor  in  previous  country
      guidance cases on Eritrea has there  been  any  consideration  of  the
      important piece of evidence  furnished  by  Amnesty  International  in
      respect of failed asylum seekers,  to  the  effect  that  the  act  of
      applying for asylum abroad would be regarded as evidence of disloyalty
      and reason to detain and torture a person returned  to  Eritrea  after
      rejection of asylum.

34.   Miss Quinn is simply wrong about this.  Paragraph  26  of  SE  clearly
      did    take    this     item     of     evidence     into     account.



35.   Nor did IN overlook this issue.   At  paragraph  18,  summarising  the
      same 19 May 2004 Amnesty International report, it noted  reference  in
      it to failed asylum seekers.

             'This report  identifies  the  categories  of  people  Amnesty
             International  regards as particularly  at risk  of  arbitrary
             detention.  These  include   people   evading   and   refusing
             conscription on account  of  their  opinions  or  beliefs  and
             anyone suspected of disloyalty to the government  even the act
             of applying for  asylum  from  abroad  would  be  regarded  as
             evidence  of disloyalty and reason to  detain  and  torture  a
             person on return to Eritrea after rejection of asylum.'

36.   Furthermore, even if IN had overlooked it, we  do  not  consider  that
      its principal conclusions are undermined as a result. We  return  here
      to the point that the Amnesty International  reference was unsupported
      by any
 evidence relating to individual returnees and in any  event  was  just  one
      piece of a large  body  of  background  dealing  with  the  issues  of
      Eritrean returnees.  The Tribunal in  IN  gave  adequate  reasons  for
      concluding that the evidence as a whole did not establish a real  risk
      to returnees generally.

37.   Finally, we would point out that  even  had  we  seen  force  in  Miss
      Quinn's submission concerning  failed  asylum  seekers  known  to  the
      authorities as such, we would not have seen it of assistance  in  this
      case since on the  Immigration Judge's  findings  this  appellant  had
      left Eritrea on a genuine passport and it  was  reasonable  to  assume
      that a replacement passport could be obtained.  There  was  no  proper
      evidential basis for assuming she  would  be  known  to  have  claimed
      asylum abroad.

38.   For the above reasons we conclude that the Immigration Judge did   not
      materially err in law.  Accordingly his decision to dismiss the appeal
      must stand.



                                DR H H STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE




