


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


   AH (Returning students - Validation of UK qualifications - Gozinesh) Iran
                                                          [2005] UKAIT 00154

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Hatton Cross
On 14 and 28 September 2005
                                                   Determination Promulgated
                                                             7 November 2005
                                      ......................................

                                   Before:

                 Mr Andrew Jordan, Senior Immigration Judge
                    Mr A. R. F. Sharp, Immigration Judge


Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:           Ms C. Kilroy, counsel, instructed by
                       Paddington Law Centre
For the Respondent:          Ms A. Gill, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Students returning to Iran at the conclusion of their studies  will  require
their United Kingdom qualifications to be recertified or  validated  by  the
Ministry of Science before they are allowed to practice making use of  those
qualifications.  This will  involve  the  authorities  in  Iran  seeing  the
contents of some of  their  written  work  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Those
admitted to universities or other institutions of  higher  learning  and  to
other state/public sector employment as well as some others will be  subject
to the selection or evaluation process known as Gozinesh which will  examine
their moral suitability.  The  risks  attendant  upon  these  procedures  is
examined.


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, was born on 22 November 1971.  He is
      34 years old.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 2  September  1999,
      then aged 27, and was granted 6 months leave to enter  as  a  student.
      Shortly thereafter, his  leave  was  extended  to  2  September  2000.
      Subsequently, permission was extended until 31 January 2005.  On  that
      day, an application for asylum was submitted.


   2. The Secretary of State made a decision on 17 May 2005  to  refuse  his
      asylum application.  A second decision was made  on  23  May  2005  to
      refuse to vary his leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
      decision gave rise to a right  of  appeal  under  section  82  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  the  appellant
      exercised on 9 June 2005.


   3. The hearing before the panel is the first substantive hearing  of  the
      appellant's asylum and human rights  appeal.   It  involved  both  the
      finding of facts and an evaluation of expert and  background  evidence
      based upon them.


   The Screening Interview


   4. At his screening interview, the  appellant  describes  himself  as  an
      atheist and an only child.  The appellant's father died  in  2004  but
      his mother continues to live in  Iran.  Between  1993  and  1997,  the
      appellant studied the  History  of  Art  at  the  School  of  Art  and
      Architecture in Azad University,  Teheran  Central  Unit.   His  first
      course of studies in the United Kingdom was a Diploma  course  at  the
      Kent Institute of Art and Design, part of the University  of  Kent  at
      Canterbury. In answer to question 9.5 in which he was asked the reason
      for coming to the United Kingdom, the appellant replied that  he  came
      here in  1999  to  study  but  that,  were  he  now  to  practice  his
      qualification in Iran, he would be persecuted.  (Although he uses  the
      word "prosecuted", it seems clear that he intended to say  he  was  at
      risk of persecution.) In addition, he says that, since  the  death  of
      his father, his financial position had changed.


   The Interview


   5. At interview, he stated that  he  had  not  himself  been  politically
      active but many members of his family had been imprisoned and tortured
      both before and after the revolution.  He said his father was a middle-
      ranking leader of the Communist Party in northern Iran for five  years
      before the revolution.  His father was also a  deputy  director  of  a
      tobacco company who had supported the rights of tobacco farmers before
      the revolution which resulted in his being sacked from his job as well
      as facing prosecution.  Fortunately, he was acquitted.  He also stated
      that he had two uncles, one of whom was imprisoned and the other  sent
      into exile.


   6. After the revolution, the appellant stated his father was appointed  a
      director of a company but was forced to resign.   The  appellant  said
      his father was always suspected of having an anti-religious  point  of
      view and lost his job as a result of pressure  by  the  fundamentalist
      element in Iran.  During his latter years, his  father  ceased  to  be
      politically active. He died on 29 April 2004, whilst the appellant was
      continuing his studies in the United Kingdom.  In answer  to  question
      15 in  his  interview,  the  appellant  referred  to  the  arrest  and
      imprisonment of 3 cousins, one of whom now lives in America.


   The basis of the claim


   7. The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is that when he came  to
      the  United  Kingdom,  he  intended  to  study  here   and   use   his
      qualifications to advance his career prospects in Iran.  His education
      in the United  Kingdom  has  been  in  the  field  of  humanities  and
      especially  cultural  theories  and  philosophy.   He  describes   his
      education as being research-based.  It is  apparent  that,  after  his
      father's death, the money that had been used to finance his  education
      in the United Kingdom became much scarcer.  He realised he  no  longer
      had the resources to continue his studies and so decided to find  work
      in Iran as an academic.  He sent his research papers to his mother  as
      well as some friends of his father  but  they  advised  him  that  his
      qualifications  and  research,  rather  than  advancing   his   career
      prospects in Iran, would put his life at risk.  In answer to  question
      23, he stated that the risk arose because his research has been "post-
      structuralist", and that as it is  rooted  in  Jewish  and  homosexual
      philosophers, it would be regarded as blasphemous.  In  addition,  his
      own atheist and broadly socialist  views  would  be  inimical  to  the
      authorities in Iran.


   8. More specifically, he stated that on return, he  would  be  questioned
      about the subjects he has studied in the United Kingdom and  that  his
      UK-based qualifications would require recertification.   This  process
      would result in examination of the contents of his  education  in  the
      United  Kingdom.   Although  his  education  included  a  postgraduate
      diploma in 3-dimensional  design,  this  was  research-based  and  its
      content  was  largely  theoretical,  concerned  with  philosophy   and
      cultural theories. He claimed that he would be  accused  of  blasphemy
      and corrupting the minds of young people by importing corrupt  western
      ideas into Iran.  This perception would be reinforced  by  the  family
      background.  He stated that his research  work  involved  a  political
      element because it would be perceived to be critical of Iran  and  its
      Islamic values or, at least, contrary to them.


   The refusal letter


   9. The Secretary of State, in refusing his application, accepted that the
      government in Iran restricted academic  freedom  and  that  government
      informers  were  common  on   university   campuses.    Admission   to
      universities was politicised and all students were screened to  ensure
      none was  critical  of  the  government's  broadly  Islamic  ideology.
      Accordingly, he considered the fact that the appellant had studied  at
      Azad University indicated that the appellant had been deemed suitable,
      notwithstanding the claim that his  family  were  politically  active.
      During his time within the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State took
      into account that his  passport  showed  his  student  visa  had  been
      validated by the Iranian Embassy in May 2002 for a further five  years
      and this was  an  indication  the  Iranian  authorities  were  neither
      monitoring his studies nor restricting the appellant in the course  he
      followed.


   The appellant's response


  10. The appellant who, not surprisingly, is highly articulate, has written
      a detailed critique of the Home Office decision  letter  running  into
      some  18  pages  of  closely-typed  text  and  incorporated  into  his
      statement, consisting of 45 pages of text.  It would be  invidious  to
      select any  specific  passage  or  indeed  to  do  more  than  briefly
      summarise its contents.  One of the complaints made by  the  appellant
      is that the interviewer was seeking  to  pigeon-hole  the  appellant's
      case into a conventional asylum claim and was,  therefore,  unable  to
      grasp the nature of the appellant's claim which was  quite  different.
      This rather presupposes that there is such a thing  as  a  run-of-the-
      mill asylum claim.  Furthermore, it is  apparent  that  the  appellant
      enjoys demonstrating the extent  of  his  knowledge  of  philosophical
      concepts, notwithstanding the inability of the listener to  understand
      them.  He suggests, therefore, that the interviewer did not understand
      the nature  of  his  claim.   Importantly,  in  paragraph  19  of  his
      response, (adopting the same paragraphs as the  refusal  letter),  the
      appellant emphasises that the risk does not arise  on  examination  at
      the airport but as a result of the re-certification process  which  he
      would be required to undergo  which  would  reveal  the  contents  and
      details of his education in the United Kingdom and which would, in due
      course, reveal his liberal views.  Secondly, (and independently of re-
      certification) there are  the  difficulties  caused  by  the  Gozinesh
      system.  This is the selection process by which persons  are  selected
      for employment in Iran. Once those difficulties are revealed, he would
      be at risk of detention and torture.


  11. The centrepiece of the appellant's case is the claim that, rather than
      advancing his prospects in Iran, his  English  education  has  gravely
      prejudiced them to the point that he is at risk  of  persecution.   He
      accepted in evidence that, whilst it was his intention  to  return  to
      Iran during the period 1999 to 2004, it was  only  after  showing  his
      writings to his mother and his late father's friends that he  realised
      his studies in the United Kingdom had not simply been a  waste  but  a
      positively harmful experience that he claimed asylum.

The appellant's academic progress.

  12. The appellant has provided a Curriculum Vitae in  which  he  describes
      his academic progress.  Between 1993 and 1997, he studied for  his  BA
      in Painting studying the history of art, including art  criticism  and
      technical skills in visual arts at Azad University.  He told us  that,
      in order to obtain his degree, he was required to submit a  thesis  or
      dissertation and he did not  do  this.   He  has  not,  he  explained,
      obtained a bachelor's or first degree in Iran.   The  course  required
      the submission of the written dissertation and practical  works.   The
      appellant only completed the practical works.  He said that it  was  a
      requirement that you wait two years  before  formal  graduation  takes
      place but that the grades he received  for  the  work  completed  were
      sufficient for him to commence his studies in Europe.  On  arrival  in
      the United Kingdom, between  1999  and  2001  he  describes  his  post
      graduate diploma in three-dimensional design (research based) in these
      terms :


           "Theory and Philosophy of Space and Spatial Design - the Case of
           Quantum Theory, Psychoanalysis, Mysticism and Linguistics  -  by
           Research Thesis:  Psychosynthesized  Fluidity  in  Architecture,
           Cerebral and Phenomenal plus Interior Design  Projects:  Concept
           for Dulwich Picture Gallery by Sir John Soane  and  Concept  for
           Human Dwelling."


  13. Between September 2001 in January 2002 (a period of four  months)  the
      appellant studied for an MA in three-dimensional design.  He  told  us
      that this was research-based.  The Diploma was a principal first stage
      in his Master's degree.  In September 2002, he commenced an MSc at UCL
      in Built Environment, Advanced Architectural Studies but  he  withdrew
      from this course as a result of events in 2003 including the death  of
      his father and his inability to fund the continuation of his  studies.
      As he has no means to continue their  studies,  it  is  not  presently
      foreseeable that these can  be  resumed.   Accordingly,  there  is  no
      reasonable likelihood of the appellant achieving a PhD in  the  United
      Kingdom.  We know that the appellant has  not  obtained  a  Degree  in
      Iran.  He told us that he could not resume his studies but would  have
      to commence afresh.  We also know that the appellant did  not  achieve
      his MSc at UCL.  We are satisfied that he has obtained  a  Diploma  in
      three-dimensional design at Kent University and that he  commenced  an
      MA at Kent which continued for a single term  between  September  2001
      and January 2002.  We are uncertain how he managed to complete  an  MA
      in such a short period, even if  studying  full-time  and  even  if  a
      Diploma course was treated as part of the qualifying  work.   This  is
      all the more surprising since he accepts he has not achieved  a  first
      degree. The appellant has  not  provided  written  material  from  the
      College establishing he graduated with his Master's  Degree  and  such
      material was  plainly  available  either  in  the  form  of  a  formal
      certificate from the Registry  or  a  letter  written  by  his  course
      director.  Nevertheless, we do not consider that, in the course of the
      hearing, there was any sufficient challenge made by the  Secretary  of
      State to his ever having obtained an MA to enable  us  to  reject  his
      claim to have successfully completed an MA in three-dimensional design
      at the University of Kent.  Were this matter to go further,  it  is  a
      simple matter for the appellant to establish this  part  of  his  case
      without any room for doubt by seeking confirmation from the University
      about this qualification.  Were he not able to do  this,  the  failure
      would cast a formidable shadow over the basis of his claim.


  14. None  of  the  material  that  the  appellant  has  written  has  been
      published.  The CV lists essays that the appellant says he would  like
      to publish.  One, for example, is entitled "The Aesthetics  of  Gothic
      Cathedrals, 'Complexity' and 'Reductionism' a Comparative Study of the
      Semantics and Syntax of Visual Representation, and Verbal and Literary
      Structure"  (In one version of his CV the words - "The Defeat  of  the
      Christian Centrality" are added to the title of this piece.   They  do
      not appear in the version the Tribunal was first  referred  to  on  14
      September 2005 and we have no information as to when and why the title
      was changed, if it was.)  He was asked whether this would be  regarded
      as containing material that would be perceived as antithetical to  the
      Iranian  authorities.   He  positively  asserted  that  it  would   be
      considered political in nature because it would  be  perceived  as  an
      attack on religion.  At the first hearing he did not produce a copy of
      the essay, nor did he explain why  it  would  be  perceived  as  anti-
      religious.  In particular, he did  not  provide  any  reasons  why  it
      should be considered anti-Islamic, given it was  an  essay  on  Gothic
      Cathedrals.  It is, of course, for the appellant to establish his case
      and it is insufficient for him to make the unsupported assertion  that
      others would perceive this material  in  the  way  he  suggests.   The
      appellant himself  does  not  suggest  that  this  material  would  be
      submitted by him to  the  Iranian  authorities.   We  were  unable  to
      speculate whether it would be published and the appellant provided  no
      evidence that it was reasonably likely to be published.  Were it to be
      published in the United Kingdom, there is no  material  before  us  to
      establish it is likely to be translated or  that  its  contents  would
      otherwise fall into the hands  of  the  Iranian  authorities.   Having
      heard the evidence of the appellant we were left unpersuaded that this
      document represents any risk to  the  appellant  on  return  to  Iran.
      Furthermore, we are sure that the appellant  knew  it  represented  no
      such risk and that the appellant's evidence was calculated to offer  a
      misleading impression of the risk he faces.


   Anna Enayat's reports


  15. In support of this claim, the appellant relies upon three  reports  by
      Anna Enayat; one dated 6 September 2005 and an addendum  report  dated
      12 September 2005.  After the first day of the hearing she produced  a
      further, supplementary, report dated 26  September  2005.   The  first
      report is in 7 sections:


           1. A consideration of whether  the  appellant  would  have  been
              admitted to university in 1993 given his  family  background:
              the Gozinesh ("selection") system and university entry.
           2. The validation of academic qualifications issued  by  foreign
              universities-recertification.
           3. Gozinesh  and  employment  within  the  Institute  of  Higher
              Education and other Professional spheres.
           4. The renewal of his visa.
           5. The subject and content of the appellant's "thesis".
           6. The effect of the appellant's family background.
           7. Current conditions in Iran


   Recertification or Validation


  16. Recertification is a long-standing process  where  Iranians  who  have
      obtained academic qualifications abroad must have those qualifications
      validated by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education before those
      qualifications are accepted by Iranian  institutions.  This  may  have
      similarities  to  the  process  by  which  those  with  qualifications
      obtained abroad are scrutinised  by  the  authorities  in  the  United
      Kingdom before a non-national is allowed to practise here  making  use
      of his qualification.  Ms Enayat had  sight  of  the  guide  from  the
      Ministry of Science taken from its website.  One of  the  stipulations
      for the validation of MA/MSc qualifications is the deposit of  a  copy
      of the thesis and the completion of a questionnaire requiring  details
      of field of  study,  the  name  of  the  applicant's  supervisor,  the
      contents of the thesis and a summary of it.  Importantly, she says:


           "One - legitimate - purpose of this process is to weed out those
           who have obtained degrees from poor quality  universities.   But
           another is to establish, through their  work,  whether  a  young
           scholar has ideas viewed by the powers that be as non-conformist
           and may render him or her "unsuitable" for academic  employment.


           The inspection of theses is always an anxious matter  for  those
           who have written in the social sciences, philosophy, history  or
           literature."


  17. The appellant submitted a substantial amount of information  extracted
      from various websites about the process.  See pages 41 to  49  of  the
      second bundle.  The information includes the forms  that  have  to  be
      completed and submitted to  the  Ministry  of  Science,  Research  and
      Technology.  The process  governs  both  grant-assisted  students  and
      those, like the appellant, who were  self-financed.   The  information
      provided includes the exact  title  of  the  thesis  in  the  original
      language and one form requires a summary of the thesis to be  provided
      in Persian by way  of  a  separate  page.   The  translation  of  this
      evidence was not provided by a  professional  translator  but  by  the
      appellant  himself,  although  attempts  had   been   made   to   find
      professional assistance.  In the event, we were content to  admit  the
      appellant's translations as Ms Enayat had seen them  and  stated  that
      they were broadly accurate.  We did, however, raise what  appeared  to
      be a difference in Ms Enayat's use of language when compared with  the
      appellant.  She appears to use  the  term  "supervision"  of  students
      abroad, whereas the appellant preferred  the  phrase  "monitoring"  of
      students.  In the absence  of  a  professional  translation,  we  were
      unable to resolve whether the difference, if any, was significant.


  18. Most helpfully, the information submitted by the appellant  refers  to
      the Validation Committee and the Commissions  of  Re-certification  of
      the Qualification obtained Abroad.   This is clearly  and  properly  a
      highly structured process and includes specialised committees who  are
      required to study and analyse information relating to the  educational
      systems of foreign countries.

  19. The documentary evidence about recertification is consistent  with  Ms
      Enayat's view that the appellant will be required to submit a copy  of
      his thesis and provide in Persian the main titles of  the  summary  of
      contents.

  20. The process of recertification must be seen in the context of the high
      degree of supervision or monitoring that foreign students are  subject
      to in the United Kingdom.  There is a specific section in the Ministry
      that deals with  students  who  study  abroad.   Each  country  has  a
      Guardian of Students whose function,  amongst  others,  is  to  gather
      information as to the activities of Iranian students  whilst  studying
      abroad.  Information obtained is channelled to the  Undersecretary  of
      Student Affairs whose function is to make decisions on the  activities
      of students studying abroad.  It is  apparent  that  his  jurisdiction
      involves "student's educational affairs, ethical affairs  and  faith."
      (See page 43.)   It is in the nature  of  such  functions  within  the
      Islamic  Republic  of  Iran  that  student  discipline  is   conducted
      centrally by the Central  Disciplinary  Committee  of  Students  whose
      members include a representative of the Spiritual  Leader  taken  from
      his representatives in each of the universities in Iran.  Disciplinary
      matters include matters such as  plagiarism  and  cheating  but  also,
      importantly, moral offences including sexual misconduct and failing to
      comply with Islamic codes of dress and conduct.  We  think  that  this
      information is a valuable tool in assessing how much wider the Iranian
      State sees  its  role  in  the  supervision  of  student  activity  in
      comparison with western counterparts.  Further, this activity  is  not
      limited to students studying  within  Iran  but  encroaches  upon  the
      activities of students studying abroad.


  21. In her third report, Ms Enayat makes it clear that, if  the  appellant
      seeks to make use of his United Kingdom qualification, he will need to
      have his qualification re-certified in Iran for the  purposes  of  any
      kind of institutional employment, government or  private,  which  will
      requires a post-graduate  qualification.   Institutions  in  Iran  are
      pedantic about the need for the Ministry of Higher  Education  to  re-
      certify the qualification.



The effect of re-certification in the appellant's case

  22. We now turn to consider whether  the  effect  of  the  recertification
      process.  In section 4 of her second report, Ms Enayat concludes  that
      the appellant would  without  doubt  be  perceived  as  an  actual  or
      potential opponent of the Islamic  Republic  if  the  content  of  his
      thesis became known.  He would then be perceived as an "apostate" or a
      "blasphemer".  Whether prosecution would follow  immediately  is,  she
      says, hard to tell but there is a chance that this would  be  so.   In
      considering this aspect of the appeal, we bear  in  mind  the  complex
      situation in Iran described in  the  2001  UNHCR/ACCORD  report.   The
      interpretation of the law and the application of  the  rules  are  not
      clear-cut and consistent.  There  is  a  level  of  arbitrariness  and
      inconsistency that permeates society, doubtless  caused  by  differing
      strictness  with  which  individuals  apply  them.   The  problem   is
      exacerbated by the extreme breadth of charges that  may  follow,  such
      as, "insulting the sanctities of Islam" or "spreading lies".


  23. It thus becomes necessary to consider the material that Ms Enayat  had
      before her and upon which she based her conclusion.  In her first  and
      second reports, Ms Enayat does not list the "thesis"  as  one  of  the
      documents that she had received.  Nevertheless, she refers  to  it  in
      section 5 of her principal report in these terms:


           "A thesis that draws heavily, and in a positive fashion, on  the
           work of the Marxist  cultural  theorist  Walter  Benjamin  would
           definitely mark its author as a "deviant". "


  24. She goes on to consider that the appellant fears he would be viewed as
      an apostate.  She cites a contemporary example of a professor at Cairo
      University who applied modern linguistic  analysis  to  the  study  of
      Islamic texts, including the Koran, and who then applied for promotion
      at the university.  A campaign ensued against him which resulted in  a
      court ruling he was an apostate.  She conceded, however, it is  fairly
      rare for the Iranian authorities to bring formal charges  of  apostasy
      or blasphemy against individuals, although such cases do arise against
      individuals who hold or propagate beliefs not in accordance  with  the
      official view of religious orthodoxy.  Indeed, it is the  practise  of
      fundamentalist  elements  in  the  country  to  label  individuals  as
      "apostates".  We readily accept that the process of academic  biblical
      criticism that commenced in Europe in the 19th century  and  continues
      to the present would  not  be  tolerated  in  Iran  today  if  similar
      academic criticism were levelled at the Koran.  Caution must, however,
      be applied to drawing analogies between a  high-profile  academic  who
      wished to apply literary criticism to the  Koran  and  an  MA  student
      studying three-dimensional art and design.[1]


  25. In his evidence to us, the appellant described  the  material  he  had
      submitted to gain his academic qualifications in the  United  Kingdom.
      None of these essays, however, were placed before Ms  Enayat  for  the
      purposes of her first two reports.  Instead, he submitted a 7000  word
      "pilot essay" that he had prepared more recently after he had  stopped
      his course of studies.  In  addition,  he  spoke  of  sending  her  an
      introduction which he described as  an  explanation  of  some  of  the
      foundations of his philosophical ideas.  The material he submitted  to
      the expert was not a thesis that formed or  forms  the  basis  for  an
      academic qualification.  It will not, therefore, be submitted  to  the
      Iranian  authorities  for  the  purpose   of   recertification.    The
      circumstances in which it was produced are unclear save  that  it  was
      not prepared as part of either his MA or his MSC (from  which  he  has
      withdrawn).


  26. At the conclusion of the first day of the hearing, we  were  concerned
      that the expert's report was based upon material  that  did  not  form
      part of any academic qualification.  Nor  were  the  materials  placed
      before us.  We, therefore, directed that the relevant materials should
      be filed and Ms Enayat asked to confirm the material she used to reach
      her conclusions.  It is now accepted that her first two  reports  were
      based on the pilot essay and the appellant's  personal  statement  and
      that these were selected by the appellant to be placed before her.

  27. We have read all of the material.  It is accepted that the pilot essay
      and the document describing the appellant's  underlying  philosophical
      point of view will not be  placed  before  the  authorities  in  Iran.
      Taken together, they are in marked contrast to the other material that
      we have read and to which we will later refer.   The  pilot  essay  is
      described as a pilot for a six-month period of private research on the
      "Interrelation between Language Philosophy and Belief".   It  did  not
      form part of either the MA in three-dimensional design or the  MSC  in
      Advanced Architectural Studies.  Its contents are a far-cry from these
      matters.  The pilot refers  to  Kant  and  Witttgentein  and  contains
      passages, by way of example only, such as:

           "On the one hand, it can be argued that the  question,  "do  you
           believe in god? is  meaningless  (in  Wittgenstein's  sense)  as
           there is not any universal   consensus  on  an  explanation  for
           god...What does god in here refer to, an entity,  an  object,  a
           concept, a state of affair,  a  form  of  energy,  or  generally
           speaking a  category?   How  is  god  described?  ...The  former
           question about the nature of god's existence has been falsified,
           though not in Wittgenstein's sense that it can be regarded as  a
           completely irrelevant (meaningless) question, but in  the  sense
           that the metaphysical  proposition  (i.e.  epistemic  criterion)
           adapted to address  the  supposedly  innate   and  psychological
           nature of man's obsession with god is inconvenient."


  28. The other document,  a personal credo, described by the appellant as a
      description of his underlying philosophical point of  view  begins  in
      these terms:


           "Generally speaking I hold that man is the centre of  the  man's
           world, believes, knowledge and  creations  (though  not  as  the
           centre of the universe).  I regard man as prior  to  God  rather
           than vice versa...As man is prior to language, man is  prior  to
           God, to the very linguistic propositions that 'God exists'."
           "The questions of the existence of God is neither a problem  nor
           a puzzle, but simply the by-product of language.   There  is  no
           word of God, but only of man and the only way to know a religion
           is in man's action.  There is no lie without a liar, no  fascism
           without a fascist and no Islam without a Muslim."


  29. Having read this material, it is inevitable that Ms Enayat would  have
      concluded that, if the same material came  to  the  attention  of  the
      Iranian  authorities,  he  would  be  considered  an  apostate  or   a
      blasphemer.  Importantly, we are  sure  that  the  appellant,  who  is
      articulate and intelligent, knew that this would be  the  effect.   In
      essence, he created the conditions by which the conclusions  in  these
      reports became inevitable.


  30. When the Tribunal reconvened, Ms Enayat  had  by  then  seen  a  great
      volume of additional material but it is clear that she was  not  asked
      to distinguish between  the  material  that  the  appellant  would  be
      required to produce for the purposes of recertification and those that
      would not need to be produced.  For the reasons we  have  give  above,
      she viewed the  documents  as  a  whole  and  cumulatively,  and  this
      included the pilot essay and his "underlying  philosophical  point  of
      view".  She says:


           "I repeat that, on the basis of the material  I  have  seen  and
           read, the client's positions would be viewed in Iran as those of
           a "materialist", an "atheist" and a "Marxist."
           I am competent to understand the epistemology  of  the  client's
           work, its philosophical bases and its sources and could supply a
           more detailed explanation if required.  I am  not  competent  to
           explain  the  application  of  these  matters  to  the  client's
           specific field of study, or to write a detailed explanation  and
           assessment of the content of his thesis and its  and  arguments.
           Nor was it part of my instructions that I should do so  (such  a
           task would in any event take many hours.)  Should an  assessment
           of  this  kind  be  required  the  court  needs  to  approach  a
           specialist in cultural theory and its application to  the  study
           of architecture and design."


  31. We take the view that the expert's assessment on the  material  placed
      before her has been compromised by reason of the submission to her  of
      the pilot essay and the appellant's underlying philosophical point  of
      view.  As long as  these  documents  formed  part  of  the  corpus  of
      material upon which she was required to make her assessment, she could
      not reasonably  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  documentary
      evidence taken as a whole would not be prejudicial if it came into the
      hands of the authorities in  Iran.   She  was  not  asked  to  comment
      specifically on the material required to recertify his  MA  in  three-
      dimensional design.


  32. It is necessary for us to consider this material.  In his evidence  to
      us, the appellant  stated  that  items  H  and  L  in  the  bundle  of
      additional written material, compiled  after  the  first  day  of  the
      hearing, were submitted for his Master's course September 2001 to July
      2002.  Item K was for  the  appellant's  'post-graduate'  Diploma  and
      items J and I were submitted after the first term: item I is a revised
      project proposal.


  33. The essay entitled "Depthesized Complexity" is concerned  "to  explore
      the  complexity  of  spatial  events  through   the   probability   of
      conditional states of existence."  (See page 3.)  There is a reference
      to Andrew Benjamin (not Walter Benjamin) on pages 7 and 8.  There  is,
      however, nothing within the essay  itself  which  could  lead  a  non-
      specialist to the conclusion that this could be read as  anti-Islamic.
      There are certainly references to individuals known to  be  Jews.   We
      note, for example, a reference to  Daniel  Liebeskind,  probably  best
      known as the architect of the Jewish Museum in Berlin.  Thus the essay
      considers the works of western architects and thinkers, some (or many)
      of whom may be Jewish.   In addition,  the  essay  refers  to  Russian
      writers some (or many) of whom may be Marxist or Communist.


  34.  We  have  also  considered  the  appellant's   essay   "Fluidity   to
      Depthesization, From  Construction  to  Site."   Much  of  this  essay
      considers an extension to the  Dulwich  Picture  Gallery,  a  building
      designed by Sir John Soane.   On page 35, we note, there is a  passing
      reference in a footnote to Walter Benjamin but the  substance  of  the
      essay, as the essay suggests, considers a design for the extension  to
      an Art Gallery.


  35. We have also considered  the  appellant's  "Revised  Project  Proposal
      Brief" entitled "Psychosynthesized Fluidity  in  Architecture."   This
      document is not, of course, part of the appellant's thesis.  It barely
      touches upon the Islamic world but we note, for  example,  on  page  3
      that there is a reference to mosques.  It speaks of the  polished  and
      symmetrical static body being covered with rigid geometrical patterns.
       This is both accurate and descriptive.  There is  a  marked  emphasis
      upon Buddhist thinkers but also reference to  the  concepts  of  Post-
      Modernism and Post-Structuralism, concepts  we  would  associate  with
      western  thinkers.   Another   essay   somewhat   similarly   entitled
      "Psychosynthesized Fluidity: The Third Method of Architecture"  spends
      much time in a  consideration  of  the  Sir  John  Soane's  Museum  in
      Lincoln's Inn Fields as a key element  of  the  appellant's  research.
      Once again, however, the appellant's working  milieu  is  wide-ranging
      and there are numerous references  to  other  architects  artists  and
      writers, including, for example, Daniel Liebeskind  Freud  and  Hadid.
      "The Unseen Path" a Research Paper prepared for his MA  uses  concepts
      familiar to the other material  and  refers  to  many  of  the  people
      mentioned in the other texts.  Once again, it  is  not  apparently  an
      essay on which the appellant's MA was based in the sense  that  it  is
      not formally classified as part of the appellant's thesis.


  36. It is for the appellant to establish his case.  We are not experts  in
      the academic field that the appellant has adopted.  We  are  satisfied
      that, as laymen, the material he has produced that will be  considered
      as his thesis for the purposes of recertification of his MA cannot  be
      construed as demonstrating deviant principles that will result in  his
      being questioned on return to  Iran  or  will  lead  to  the  risk  of
      prosecution or persecution.  There will be cases  where  it  does  not
      need an expert to determine this  issue.   For  example,  it  did  not
      require an expert to determine that the contents of  the  pilot  essay
      and the personal statement were likely  to  result  in  the  appellant
      being accused of blasphemy or apostasy (as more widely defined on page
      2 of Ms Enayat's first report).  We emphasise that the matter does not
      rest with our inexpert view.  In a case where  the  issue  is  not  so
      clear-cut and cannot be determined by the  inexpert,  it  is  for  the
      appellant to adduce expert evidence that the material that  will  come
      into the hands of the authorities is  likely  to  be  viewed  in  such
      terms.


  37. We are satisfied  that  this  was  the  purpose  (amongst  others)  of
      instructing Ms Enayat.  Her first two  reports,  however,  were  based
      upon  material  that  the  appellant  knew  would  be  viewed  by  the
      authorities as anti-Islamic and blasphemous.  He also  knew  that  the
      material he withheld was the material upon which he was likely  to  be
      judged on return.  By compromising the sample, the  appellant  himself
      was responsible for compromising the expert  evidence  that  has  been
      adduced on his behalf.  This failure has not been  properly  addressed
      in Ms Enayat's third and final report because by continuing  to  place
      reliance on the pilot essay and the  personal  statement,  the  result
      remains a foregone conclusion.  In our judgment, the  expert  evidence
      fails to establish that  the  material  that  the  appellant  will  be
      required to submit in order to seek recertification of his MA in three-
      dimensional design will result in adverse consequences  for  him.   In
      reaching this conclusion, we would wish to emphasise that we  are  not
      seeking to stand as experts, far less to 'out-expert' the expert.  Our
      approach is clear: if the Tribunal is unable to make a  judgment  that
      the material will be treated as heretical, it is for the appellant  to
      provide expert evidence to that effect and, for the  reasons  we  have
      given, the expert evidence adduced by the  appellant  is  compromised.




  38. For these reasons we are not satisfied that the appellant is  at  risk
      in the process of recertification.


Does  the  appellant  need  to  have  his   United   Kingdom   qualification
recertified in order to avoid a violation of his Convention Rights?

  39. Recertification means that the appellant is  able  to  be  treated  as
      having obtained a Master's Degree in Iran.  This may  be  particularly
      useful to him as he will not be recognised as having received a  First
      Degree.  We accept that an additional qualification  will  assist  the
      appellant finding work in  Iran.   We  are  also  satisfied  that  the
      appellant does not wish to continue his academic studies in Iran where
      the restrictions on academic freedom are greater than  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Neither  Convention,  however,  is  designed  to  afford  an
      appellant with an opportunity to  work  in  the  academic  environment
      which he feels is more congenial to him.   Nor  is  either  Convention
      designed to permit an appellant to work in the field  of  his  choice.
      The appellant would like to continue  academic  work  but  his  chosen
      subject has, he now claims,  proven  useless  in  Iran.   Although  he
      states that he was not equipped to deal with  the  technical  side  of
      three-dimensional design, and therefore moved into the  more  academic
      or philosophical branch of the subject, this is no different from  any
      other student choosing a field of activity  which  does  not,  in  the
      event, equip him for his future work in the way he had hoped.   If  he
      cannot make use of his academic qualifications in Iran, that does  not
      amount to persecution or a violation of his human rights.


  40. We note that in his CV he has experience as a translator and  that  he
      has worked as a member of a design team.  He is not unemployable  with
      or without a United Kingdom qualification.  He is both intelligent and
      resourceful.


  41. Ms Enayat deals with this aspect of his claim in her second report and
      the section which seeks to answer the question: If he applied for jobs
      based on his Iranian qualification can he do that and  state  that  he
      does not want  to  rely  on  UK  qualifications?   Ms  Enayat  clearly
      believed that the appellant had already obtained  his  BA  degree  but
      considered this meant very little in the Iranian context and  that  by
      itself it would open few professional doors.  We now know, of  course,
      that he did not graduate in Iran.  Her response is that the process of
      Gozinesh would include an investigation of his period spent abroad  as
      a student and this would include the question of why, if  he  obtained
      an  MA  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  did  not  submit  it  for   re-
      certification.  The appellant,  of  course,  has  an  answer  for  his
      failure to pursue his MSc.  This aspect of  the  appeal  falls  to  be
      determined in the context of our assessment of Gozinesh.

   Credibility


  42. The consideration of the appellant's case  so  far  has  been  largely
      independent of any findings of credibility.  It is convenient at  this
      stage to consider credibility before addressing the  implications  for
      the appellant of the process of Gozinesh.


  43. It is a central part of his claim that he did not know the material he
      was producing would be perceived as  anti-Islamic  until  he  supplied
      copies of this material to his mother or to friends of his father  who
      then told him the material was dangerous.  To this extent,  his  claim
      to be at risk of persecution does not  arise  by  reason  of  his  own
      assessment of the material but rather from what others have told  him.
      We have already given detailed consideration to  the  material  itself
      and to the expert evidence  that  has  commented  upon  it.   For  the
      reasons we have given, the material to be submitted to  recertify  his
      MA does not, on its face, contain anti-Islamic sentiment or is readily
      seen by an inexpert eye to lead to a charge that  it  is  blasphemous.
      Nor does the expert evidence establish this.  It was  the  appellant's
      case that he, himself, did not know  that  it  was  likely  to  be  so
      perceived.  This only occurred when he sent the material to his mother
      and friends of his  father  in  Iran.   Yet,  the  appellant  has  not
      produced evidence from  these  persons  in  the  form  of  a  detailed
      statement as to why the material would  be  so  perceived.   The  only
      evidence is contained in his mother's letter of 8  February  2005  and
      one letter from a family friend  now  working  in  Washington,  Hassan
      Mojitahedi of the Vegetable Crop Research Centre in the  Prosser  area
      of that city.  Mr Mojtahedi does not appear to have any  philosophical
      qualifications and makes no more than general comments and  hence  can
      carry little weight. As to the three persons mentioned in the mother's
      letter we are told little of their identity apart from the  fact  that
      they are professors at recognised universities so we are unable to say
      whether they are able to speak  from  positions of authority as to how
      these documents will be  perceived  and  why.   If  they  are  neither
      philosophers nor experts in the philosophical  concepts  discussed  in
      the material before them, it is not clear to us how they were able  to
      speak authoritatively on the  risk  of  harm  they  represent  to  the
      appellant. In this context we have already set out the reticence shown
      by Ms Enayat on the content of the thesis and its  argument.   In  the
      absence of credible material establishing the weight  that  should  be
      attached to their views, we cannot be satisfied that the appellant has
      made out his claim that it was  their  comments  upon  his  work  that
      caused him to experience the Damascene conversion from believing  that
      his studies were promoting his return to Iran  when,  in  truth,  they
      were doing the reverse.

  44. Further, in the absence of material form these persons, we are  unable
      to accept the appellant's account that it was only as a result of  the
      word of these unidentified persons that lead him to  believe  that  he
      was at risk.  We do not find that it is credible  that  the  appellant
      genuinely believed he was advancing his  career  by  studying  in  the
      United Kingdom in the mistaken belief that nothing he  was  doing  was
      prejudicing his return to Iran and was rudely awakened by the  opinion
      of those in Iran capable of understanding the  finer  meaning  of  his
      written work.  Ms Enayat indicated that if a  detailed  assessment  of
      his written work had to be performed, it would require the  assessment
      provide by a specialist in cultural theory and its application to  the
      study or architecture and design.  We accept the  proposition  that  a
      judgment of this kind could only be made by such a  person.   Had  the
      appellant received such advice we have no doubt at all he  would  have
      revealed it to us as well as explaining its contents to us in  detail.
      Knowing, as he does, the centrality of this part of his claim  to  his
      claim to be genuinely at risk, we are sure he would have pursued  this
      element of the claim to the fullest extent, had it been true.  We  are
      satisfied that it is not and that this core element of his  claim  was
      made in an effort to explain his late application for asylum.

  45. This finding does not dispose of his claim because, whether or not  it
      is true, the Tribunal has to assess  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
      return to Iran.  It does, however, give rise to a subsidiary  finding.
      Whilst we cannot rule out the possibility that  it  was  the  original
      intention of the appellant to study in the United Kingdom in order  to
      advance his career prospects  in  Iran,  the  appellant  decided  will
      before his asylum claim that he would  rather  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom and follow his studies here.  When he made that  decision,  he
      was not a genuine refugee.  It also seems clear, and we so find,  that
      his resolution to remain in the United Kingdom was part of  a  growing
      estrangement with Iran.

Current conditions in Iran


  46. Further, our overall assessment must be made against the  backdrop  of
      current conditions  in  Iran.   We  are  satisfied  that  there  is  a
      continuing  decline  in  human  rights  in  Iran.    The   June   2005
      presidential elections have resulted in  a  new  President  who  is  a
      representative of the fundamentalist right and has close links to  the
      Revolutionary Guard.  This is part of  the  process,  which  began  in
      2003, that has resulted in the fundamentalist faction of  the  Iranian
      ruling establishment extending its control of  key  institutions,  the
      security services, the judiciary as well as  the  Revolutionary  Guard
      and now the legislature and the  executive.   The  Cabinet  is  mainly
      composed  of  hardliners.   The  Ministries  of  Culture  and  Science
      Research and Technology (Higher  Education)  are  both  controlled  by
      ultra-conservative religious hardliners.  At the same time,  there  is
      growing anti-western feeling and  this  is  focused  upon  the  United
      States and the United Kingdom in particular.


   Gozinesh (tr. "selection", sometimes "evaluation")


  47. Ms Enayat, who was not called to give oral evidence, explains  in  her
      first report that Gozinesh is the process of selection  instituted  in
      Iran after the Islamic Revolution to ensure that those admitted to the
      universities and other institutions of higher learning  and  to  state
      employment conform ideologically.  The process  has  both  ideological
      and security components. The process is to test the "moral competence"
      or "moral suitability" of the applicant.  This involves a  process  of
      identifying that the aspirant is loyal to the regime and has no  links
      with opposition movements or with western ideologies  opposed  to  the
      Islamic Republic.  Thus, the process has a  political  element  within
      it.


  48. The Secretary of  State  accepted  that  vetting  took  place  in  the
      appointment and promotion of academics in universities  in  Iran.   Ms
      Enayat makes it clear that it is seen in  every  Institute  of  Higher
      Education, each of which maintains a Gozinesh unit whose  function  is
      to examine the political and moral suitability of all  staff  members.
      In one school, this was described as  involving  the  examination  and
      establishment of the ideological, political and  moral  qualifications
      of all those apply for admission  to  the  university  and  throughout
      their engagement with the university.  The unit preserves,  as  secret
      material, all information gathered in the  course  of  the  evaluation
      (gozinesh) of individuals.  Amnesty International in a report  on  the
      ILO Conference of June 2003 set out the criteria that are applied  and
      noted, importantly, that Gozinesh extends  beyond  academic  or  state
      institutions and affects the labour market more broadly.  The  Amnesty
      report states:


           "Today, the Gozinesh is executed to differing degrees, depending
           on the job in question and the nature  of  the  organisation  or
           field in which the placed is found.   There  appears  to  be  no
           standard accepted procedure for carrying out  the  Gozinesh  and
           differing  public  sector  employers  appear  to  use  different
           approaches."

      Ms Enayat is in no doubt that Gozinesh criteria are strictly  observed
      where universities and colleges of  higher  education  are  concerned.
      For those who are themselves non-political, or who work in  scientific
      and technical fields, this may not be a large issue.   She  considers,
      however, that "the ideas  and  approach  of  candidates  applying  for
      positions in the social sciences, the arts  or  modern  history  would
      definitely be a sensitive issue."


  49. The law on the  selection  (Gozinesh)  of  teachers  contains  general
      guidelines for the moral, belief and political selection of applicants
      in accordance with the following criteria:
           1. belief in Islam or one of the official religions set  out  in
              the Constitution;
           2. practical engagement in the course of Islam;
           3.  belief  and  engagement  in  leadership   by   a   religious
              jurisprudent, the state order and the Constitution;
           4. absence of a reputation  of  moral  corruption  and  tendency
              towards sin;
           5. absence of a record  of  membership  or  support  of  illegal
              organisations  (in  the  absence   of   any   expression   of
              repentance);
           6. absence of a current criminal convictions;
           7. absence of addiction to narcotic substances.


The appellants past experience of Gozinesh


  50. In order to study for his first-degree, the  appellant  underwent  the
      process of  Gozinesh.   He  would  not  have  been  admitted  to  Azad
      university unless he had successfully undergone the selection  process
      and  that  he  is  background   demonstrated   moral   and   political
      suitability. This fact is commented upon in Ms Enayat's first report:


           "It is therefore plausible that the client was admitted  to  the
           as a university internal and in  1990  even  though  there  were
           political  prisoners  and  ex-political  prisoners   among   his
           relatives and family friends.  Like every  many  (sic)  secular-
           minded students in Iran he would have bluffed  his  way  through
           the ideological tests."


  51. The fact  remains  that  the  appellant  was  able  satisfactorily  to
      complete the selection process.  This was either because his attitudes
      were suitably conformist or, as he suggests, he was able to bluff  his
      way into appearing to be conformist.  Either way, the process did  not
      act as a bar to his going to university.


  52. It would, however, be unrealistic to approach the  appellant's  appeal
      on the basis that he can repeat now, aged 33, what he was able  to  do
      in 1993 when, aged 21, he entered the University of Azad.   Apart from
      being an older man, the time that he has spent in the  United  Kingdom
      has left him disaffected by his prospects  of  success  in  Iran.   It
      seems to us  that  the  process  of  Gozinesh,  when  applied  to  the
      appellant, is likely to reveal that the appellant does  not  have  the
      positive qualities required in Iran in order to obtain employment in a
      university or an  Institute  of  Higher  Education.   In  making  this
      finding, we are unable to make a specific finding  about  whether  the
      appellant is an atheist because no evidence was directed towards  this
      but we have no reason to doubt his claim that he lacks the  particular
      commitment to Islam or the state order in Iran.  We are satisfied that
      he would not be refused because of moral corruption or his support  of
      any  illegal  organisations  or  his  criminal  or  social  behaviour.
      Furthermore, his genuine espousal of western life and,  with  it,  the
      preference he shows to non-Islamic society satisfies us that it is not
      reasonably likely he would find work as an academic in Iran or that he
      would find it congenial to do so.


  53. In this regard, the family  background  of  this  appellant  will  not
      assist him.  As Ms Enayat notes, the family background would not  give
      rise to the risk of persecution per se but, were he  to  come  to  the
      attention of the authorities for other reasons, it would count against
      him.  (See first report, page 6.)


  54. This finding is, of course, independent of an assessment of whether he
      is likely to find work in Iran pursuing the course of studies  he  has
      espoused in the United Kingdom.   It  may  be  that,  on  return,  his
      failure to have obtained his BA will prevent him pursuing a course  in
      Higher Education.  It may be that his degree in research-based studies
      involving the  philosophy  of  spatial  design  will  not  be  readily
      transferable to  an  equivalent  institution  in  Iran.   We  have  no
      information about the competition for such  places.   Thus,  the  fact
      that the process of Gozinesh is likely to result in his being deprived
      of the opportunity of teaching in a place of Higher Education in  Iran
      does not mean that he would have  been  offered  such  an  opportunity
      without it; far less that he would have been  guaranteed  an  academic
      placement.  An MA  in  three-dimensional  design  may  simply  not  be
      capable of offering the appellant the job he would like.

  55. This then raises the issue of whether the process  of  Gozinesh  is  a
      selection process that the appellant is obliged to undergo, albeit  in
      the knowledge that it is likely to be unsuccessful, (in the sense that
      he is not likely to be selected) or whether the appellant  is  capable
      of finding a home and the means to support himself without it.  It  is
      common ground that the process of selection operates in full vigour in
      the academic world.  To all intents and purposes,  academic  life  for
      the appellant in Iran is ruled out.   It  is  plain  that  it  is  not
      confined to places in Higher Education but also covers  public  sector
      workers in general.  It is, however, apparent from the Amnesty  report
      to which we have earlier referred that its implementation is  executed
      in differing degrees depending on  the  job  in  question.   This  is,
      perhaps, little more than common sense.  The need for  conformity  and
      upholding Islamic values is bound to be treated differently  depending
      upon the post that is to be filled.  The position of a senior hospital
      manager in an Iranian hospital, for example, is bound to be  perceived
      in a different way compared with the position of a ward orderly.  This
      is not speculation but a process of simple  reasoning.   Nevertheless,
      the background material falls short of revealing that all jobs in  the
      public sector will be closed to the appellant.


  56. There still remains the private sector.  Here, there will be some jobs
      that require the appellant to obtain permission.  A private school  or
      college will require permission from the local authority before it  is
      permitted to operate.  As Ms Enayat reports, the process of  assessing
      the suitability  of  an  applicant  will  require  the  same  Gozinesh
      evaluation.  Thus, it cannot be said  that  all  private  institutions
      will be free of Gozinesh.  It may be that some  private  organisations
      particularly linked with the  State  will  also  adopt  a  process  of
      Gozinesh.  We reject, however, the appellant's blanket assertion  that
      all work of whatever nature, be it employed or self-employed,  require
      each Iranian worker to undergo a Gozinesh selection procedure.  Such a
      wide application of the process is not  supported  by  the  background
      material to which we have been referred.

  57. For these reasons, we are satisfied that:

                    a) the appellant is unlikely to find work in  the  field
                       of education;
                    b) the background material does not, however,  establish
                       that all public sector workers are subjected to  such
                       close examination as those  in  Higher  Education  or
                       that the appellant will be excluded from  all  public
                       sector work, although he will be from some  jobs  and
                       perhaps many;
                    c) there are opportunities for private sector work which
                       will not be subject to Gozinesh.


  58.  In reaching this conclusion,  we  make  it  clear  that  we  are  not
      condemning the appellant to perform only menial work or work performed
      by those at the very fringes of society.  Nothing can take  away  from
      the appellant his obvious abilities.   His  education  in  the  United
      Kingdom and in Iran will not  be  wasted  because,  in  our  judgment,
      education is rarely if ever wasted. There may well be  an  element  of
      education for education's sake in the appellant's academic record  and
      there is nothing wrong in  that.   The  appellant  will  therefore  be
      returning to Iran a better-educated person with  which  to  deal  with
      challenges of return.  Those challenges  will  not,  however,  in  our
      judgment, amount to a violation of his Convention Rights.

Does the failure to be selected in the course of the Gozinesh process  gives
rise to the real likelihood of prosecution?

  59. In section 4 of her second report, Ms Enayat gave her opinion that  it
      was hard to tell if the appellant would be prosecuted if, as a  result
      of the Gozinesh selection process, he was likely to be perceived as an
      "apostate" or a "blasphemer".  She concluded that there was  a  chance
      of this happening.  We do not consider that this establishes that  the
      event is  reasonably  likely  to  occur,  even  though  it  remains  a
      possibility.


  60. In  any  event,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  evidence  reduces  the
      likelihood well below that  necessary  to  engage  either  Convention.
      First, for the reasons we have given, we do not consider the appellant
      has established that the material that  the  appellant  is  likely  to
      produce will establish apostasy.   Second,  the  process  of  Gozinesh
      involves examination of an individual's commitment to  Islam.   We  do
      not consider the appellant  is  committed  to  Islam  in  the  way  an
      interviewer would expect from a successful candidate.  That is a  long
      way from saying that the appellant is reasonably likely to reveal such
      an antipathy to Islam, to the  State,  to  the  President  or  to  the
      Spiritual Leader as would result in his being charged  with  blasphemy
      or worse.  It is, of course, essentially a matter for  him  to  decide
      how he  will  express  himself  and  he  is,  of  course,  capable  of
      condemning himself to the most serious of consequences but we  do  not
      consider it is reasonably likely he will  do  so.   In  reaching  this
      conclusion, we are not suggesting that the appellant will be  required
      to do more than moderate his language and views so as to avoid adverse
      consequences.  In the context of his being accepted for  a  University
      place in Iran, the expert evidence talks of a candidate  bluffing  his
      way through parts of the interview.  Such a common-sense approach does
      not require him to violate his human rights or offend his  conscience.
      He will, no doubt, be shown to be luke-warm in his commitment  to  the
      principles governing the Iranian state and this will lose him his  job
      but it will not jeopardise his freedom.


   On passports and visas


  61. The Secretary of State has relied upon the fact that  the  appellant's
      passport has been renewed  as  evidence  as  the  Iranian  authorities
      endorsement of the appellant as a student in the United  Kingdom.   It
      does not seem to us that this factor carries any evidential weight  in
      the assessment of risk on return.  The risk  arises  independently  of
      the renewal of his passport.


   Conclusions


  62.  We find
              i. The appellant left Iran to pursue post-graduate studies  in
                 three-dimensional design after he failed  to  complete  his
                 studies for a Bachelor  degree  at  Azad  University.   The
                 implication of his being accepted on  a  degree  course  is
                 that he satisfied the authorities of his good standing.
             ii. He left using his own passport and has  maintained  contact
                 with the Consulate in order to renew his student visa until
                 2005.  This is a neutral  factor  when  assessing  risk  on
                 return.
            iii. He completed his Diploma course and his MA course.
             iv. He was unable to complete his MSc because his  father  died
                 and funding ceased.
              v. Investigation will reveal he has no political involvement.
             vi. We were not addressed by Ms Kilroy on the any specific risk
                 faced  by  the  appellant  as  a  result  of  his  family's
                 political history in  the  pre-revolutionary  period.   The
                 expert evidence suggests that the  family  background  will
                 only come in to play to aggravate risk if and  when  he  is
                 arrested for other reasons.
            vii. The re-certification of his  United  Kingdom  qualification
                 will not require him to  reveal  his  pilot  essay  or  his
                 personal statement.
           viii. The appellant has failed to establish  by  expert  evidence
                 that those essays he has written  that  constitute  his  MA
                 thesis will be viewed adversely by the Iranian authorities.


             ix. Even if they would be perceived as anti-Islam, apostasy  or
                 blasphemous, the appellant is  not  required  to  seek  re-
                 certification since it is not a requirement that  he  makes
                 use of his United Kingdom qualification in Iran and it may,
                 in any event, be useless to him.
              x. The inability of the appellant to make use  of  his  United
                 Kingdom  qualification  does  not  violate  his  Convention
                 rights.
             xi. It is unlikely that his commitment to Iran is  sufficiently
                 great to enable him to complete successfully  the  Gozinesh
                 selection process for a job in Higher Education.
            xii. His inability to find work in Education does not amount  to
                 persecution or a violation of his human rights.
           xiii. Whilst the Gozinesh selection process applies to all public
                 sector  jobs  and  some  within  the  private  sector,  the
                 evidence does not suggest that the  system  is  applied  as
                 rigorously  to  all  such  jobs  outside  education.    The
                 appellant has failed to establish that there is no job open
                 to him, (notwithstanding his lack of  commitment),  in  the
                 public sector.
            xiv. There are opportunities  for  him  to  avoid  the  Gozinesh
                 selection process by finding work in the private sector  in
                 either an employed or self-employed capacity.  Accordingly,
                 we are  not  satisfied  that  Gozinesh  would  prevent  his
                 finding employment anywhere in Iran or prevent his  working
                 for himself.
             xv.  These  findings  are  made  against  a  background  of   a
                 deteriorating human rights situation in Iran.

  63. On the basis of these findings, we do not consider that the  appellant
      will suffer adverse treatment, notwithstanding the enquiries that  are
      likely to be made of him on his return to Iran.    The  appellant  has
      failed to establish that it is  reasonably  likely  that  he  will  be
      persecuted or suffer  treatment  sufficient  serious  to  violate  his
      Article 3 rights.


  64. No separate submissions were made to us in relation to a violation  of
      his Article 8 rights  to  a  private  life  were  he  to  be  removed.
      Although the appellant has studied in the United Kingdom in the period
      1999 to 2005 under the umbrella of a series of permissions,  it  is  a
      proportionate response on the part of the Secretary of State to remove
      him now that his studies have ceased and he has no  other  substantive
      right to remain.   His  right  to  remain  as  a  student  was  always
      predicated upon an obligation to  return  at  the  conclusion  of  his
      studies.

DECISION

                  1) The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
               2) The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
                                                     -----------------------
[1] In this context the word "criticism" is, of course, used in the sense
of literary criticism; not in the popular sense of criticising or attacking
the literary work being examined.

