
                   SH (Assessment of age) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 00156 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 9 November 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                          07th February 2005


                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)

Between:



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr B Hussain, instructed by White Ryland
For the Respondent:          Mr T Greig, Home Office Presenting Officer

If the evidence does not establish the claimant's age,  the  Adjudicator  is
entitled simply to say so.  If  age  is  disputed,  it  is  unlikely  to  be
appropriate for an Adjudicator to assess the claimant's age on the basis  of
his appearance in the courtroom.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Afghanistan,  appeals,  with  permission,
     against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr A W  Khan,  dismissing
     his appeal on asylum and human rights grounds against the decision  of
     the Respondent on 6 April 2003 refusing him  leave  to  enter,  having
     refused asylum.

  2. In the course of his determination, the Adjudicator said,  in  respect
     of the Appellant's own evidence, this:

           "Quite frankly, I found the Appellant's evidence to  be  totally
           implausible and incredible."

  3. He then went on to consider an issue relating to the  Appellant's  age
     which had throughout been disputed by the Respondent.  The Adjudicator
     reached  his  conclusions  in   the   following   paragraph   of   his
     determination which, although it is somewhat infelicitously  expressed
     and in particular we suspect that the Adjudicator may  have  been  let
     down by his typist, appears to us to be perfectly clear:

           "13.  In relation to the Appellant's age, the Respondent  claims
                 that he is not a minor  and  produced  a  letter  from  the
                 London Borough of Hillingdon  Social  Services  Department.
                 An approved Social  Worker  apparently  saw  the  Appellant
                 without an interpreter and in her opinion claimed  that  he
                 was not a minor and did not fall within the  remit  of  the
                 Children Act 1989.  I attach little weight to that document
                 as it is only the opinion of the author and in my  view  is
                 an improper age assessment.  Whether the Appellant  is  16,
                 17,  18  years  of  age  or  over,  we  cannot  safely  and
                 accurately assess.  He could be in the range  of  somewhere
                 between 16 to 18 years old but I form no opinion as to  the
                 Appellant's age in the absence of any satisfactory evidence
                 to show how old he is.  He claimed he was born in 1987  and
                 the document he produced claims to show that he was born in
                 April of that year.  That would make him 16 years  of  age.
                 On the available evidence before me, it  is  impossible  to
                 state with any degree  of  accuracy  exactly  how  old  the
                 Appellant is."

  4. The grounds of appeal to the  Tribunal  assert  that  the  Adjudicator
     erred in making that finding and that in an appeal such  as  this,  an
     Adjudicator is obliged to make an assessment of age.  It is  submitted
     that the finding as to the age of the Appellant was a prerequisite  to
     assessing  whether  the  United  Kingdom  would   be   breaching   its
     obligations under the Human Rights Convention.

  5. That submission has been expanded before us by Mr Hussain.  We have to
     say that we have some difficulty in grasping his point.  The Appellant
     has the burden of proof.  The burden of proof has the effect that  the
     party with the burden of proof loses  on  an  issue  if  the  evidence
     adduced by that party is not such as to persuade the  trier  of  fact.
     That  is  why  some  American  writers  call  it  the  "risk  of  non-
     persuasion".

  6. The position in this appeal could not have been set out  with  greater
     clarity by the Adjudicator.  He considered  all  the  evidence  before
     him.  It did not  persuade  him  as  to  any  particular  age  of  the
     Appellant. He therefore recorded, entirely correctly, that the  burden
     of proof had not been discharged.  In those circumstances and  despite
     Mr Hussein's earnest attempts to persuade us to the contrary, it would
     have been quite wrong for the Adjudicator to make any finding of  fact
     on the age.  The  position  was  simply  that  the  evidence  was  not
     sufficient to enable him to do so.

  7. Mr Hussein has also suggested that in the absence of any  evidence  on
     age, the Adjudicator should have made an assessment of  age  based  on
     what he saw and heard in court.  In our view,  that  is  a  suggestion
     which is full of danger.  We first of all emphasise that of course  it
     did not apply here, because this was not a case  where  there  was  an
     absence of other evidence.  Secondly, the Adjudicator had specifically
     rejected that which he heard in  court  in  the  terms  that  we  have
     already indicated.  But, thirdly, we think that it is not  in  general
     terms appropriate to expect an Adjudicator to make an assessment of  a
     person's age having merely seen him or her in the formal  surroundings
     of a court room.  We venture to suggest that an Adjudicator who  based
     an assessment of age,  particularly  when  the  matter  was  disputed,
     merely on what he saw across a court room would indeed err in law.

  8. For the reasons we have given, we reject Mr Hussein's submissions  and
     dismiss this appeal.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
