
TA ( draft evasion - citizenship - evidence required ) Eritrea [2005] UKAIT
00155


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                  |                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 30 September 2005                    |                         |
|                                        |                         |
|                                        |6th October 2005         |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Senior Immigration Judge)                    |
|Mr D R Bremmer, JP                                                |
|Mr M E A Innes                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Bazini, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Hammersmith & Fulham Commnity Law Centre

For the Respondent:    Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer


Where an appellant has never lived in Eritrea but is  of  second-generation
eritrean origin, evidence required that she  is  entitled  to  an  Eritrean
passport.  Draft evasion requires citizenship during period of call-up age.
 Absent cogent evidence to the contrary, a claimant who has never lived  in
Eritrea cannot be considered to have evaded the draft.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the  reconsideration  of  the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  an
      Eritrean national, who has been granted a review of the decision of an
      Immigration Judge, Mrs D M Head, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's refusal to recognise her as  a  refugee  and  the
      setting of removal directions to Eritrea of which she is potentially a
      national.  This decision is reported for what it says  about  Eritrean
      nationality and its effect upon perceived draft evasion.

   2. The appellant was raised in Ethiopia and has never spent any  time  in
      Eritrea.  She  fled  Ethiopia  on  6  March  1999  ahead  of  possible
      deportation from Ethiopia to Eritrea at the  hands  of  the  Ethiopian
      authorities.

   3. The Immigration Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
      Refugee Convention and also under Articles 3 and 8 of the  ECHR.   The
      grounds of appeal relate only to Article 3 ECHR and contend  that  the
      Immigration Judge acted irrationally in distinguishing  the  facts  of
      this appellant's core claim from the factual nexus in MA (Female draft
      evader) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00098 with reference to  paragraph  28
      of the Immigration  Judge's  determination.   Paragraph  28  reads  as
      follows:

            "26. The appellant is 26 years of age.  She was born and  lived
                 in Ethiopia until she left that country in March 1999.  She
                 has never lived in Eritrea or  even  visited  the  country.
                 There are various references in the appellant's  bundle  to
                 the fact that the appellant would be required to  undertake
                 military service in Eritrea and the consequences for her if
                 she tried to evade military  service  or  indeed  deserted.
                 There is nothing in the appellant's own evidence to suggest
                 she is a conscientious  objector  or  that  she  would  not
                 undertake her military service if so required.  I have been
                 asked to consider  MA  (Female  Draft  Evader)  Eritrea  CG
                 [2004] UKIAT 00098.


                 However,  in  my  opinion,  the   present   case   can   be
                 distinguished from MA  because  this  appellant  has  never
                 lived in Eritrea and therefore has never been  served  with
                 call up papers.  Thus the appellant cannot  be  seen  as  a
                 draft evader or deserter and would not be subjected to  the
                 actions of the Military Police who it is  reported  in  the
                 CIPU report searched the country using road  block,  street
                 sweeps and house to house searches to  find  deserters  and
                 draft evaders.


                 It is not clear from the objective material whether the age
                 of conscription for women is 18 to 27 years of age or 18 to
                 40 years of age.  It would seem that earlier  CIPU  reports
                 have stated the age is 18 to 40 years whereas  the  current
                 CIPU report April 2004 quotes the US  Human  Rights  Report
                 2003 stating military service for women between the ages of
                 18 and 27 is compulsory.  The appellant will be 27 years of
                 age in five months time.  It may well be that when  she  is
                 removed to Eritrea she will be over  the  conscription  age
                 and therefore not required to do military  service  in  any
                 event.  However, even if the  appellant  were  required  to
                 undertake military service I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
                 conditions of her service, although harsh, would reach  the
                 very high threshold set for a breach of Article 3."

   4. Mr Bazini asked the Tribunal to look at paragraph 3  of  MA;  although
      the appellant in MA contended that she had been served  with  call  up
      papers, the Immigration Judge did not believe her.    He  argued  that
      these two appellants should therefore be treated as being in the  same
      position.

   5. Miss Brown, for the Secretary of State, argued  that  the  distinction
      drawn by the Immigration Judge at  paragraph  28  of  the  Immigration
      Judge's decision was not that the appellant had been served with  call
      up papers, but that she had never lived in Eritrea and therefore would
      not have come to the attention of the Eritrean authorities  as  liable
      to perform military service for that country.   She  argued  that  the
      Immigration Judge's decision and reasoning was perfectly clear and the
      two cases were indeed distinguishable.   Again we turn to the guidance
      in R (Iran) at paragraph 90(3)-

       "90(3)     ...a decision should  not  be  set  aside  for  inadequate
      reasons unless the Immigration Judge fails to identify and record  the
      appeals which were critical to the decision on the materials issues in
      such a way that the IAT was unable to understand why he  reached  that
      decision".

      At paragraph 91, the decision makes it  clear  that  the  observations
      continued to apply to the AIT.

   6. Mr Bazini accepted that there was no clear  evidence  whether  in  the
      context of a nationality or travel document application, the  Eritrean
      authorities would check whether the  appellant  had  been  called  for
      military service or was eligible to serve,  or  indeed,  whether  they
      would accept her at all as a citizen.  Mr Bazini asked the Tribunal to
      direct that an Immigration Judge consider  that  question  by  way  of
      further reconsideration.   If the appeal were to be further  reviewed,
      he would seek to introduce up to date evidence as to how Ethiopians in
      general were treated in Eritrea  which  was  in  his  bundle  for  the
      hearing, but was not relevant to the question of error of law.

   7. Mr Bazini relied upon a finding of fact by the Immigration Judge  that
      this appellant would be  able  to  obtain  Eritrean  nationality,  but
      pointed to a document in the  appellant's  bundle  which  contradicted
      that submission.    The evidence consists of  a  letter  from  Refugee
      Action in the following terms -

           "Dear Ms Baghabani

           Further to our conversation on the phone today,  I  can  confirm
           that I have contacted Eritrean Embassy in London  on  8/3/05  on
           behalf of the above clients [names and personal details  blanked
           out] and enquired about the procedure for obtaining passport  or
           travel documentation for these clients.   I  was  informed  that
           Eritrean Authority would not be able to issue  travel  documents
           for individuals born in Ethopia."

      If that were right, then there would be no risk to this appellant,  as
      she  would  not  be  returned  to  Eritrea  at  all  if  the  Eritrean
      authorities were not prepared to accept her  as  a  national  of  that
      country.   The appellant has not tested that  point  by  applying  for
      citizenship or travel documents as yet.

   8. The Tribunal reserved its determination for postal delivery, which  we
      now give.  The question for this Tribunal is set out in the  grant  of
      leave:  the Senior Immigration Judge considered that  the  Immigration
      Judge may have  erred  in  distinguishing  MA.    The  reconsideration
      jurisdiction of this Tribunal does not extend to errors of  fact,  and
      is limited to consideration of errors of law, which may in appropriate
      cases include errors of fact of such gravity as to amount to errors of
      law.

   9. In effect, an Immigration Judge's finding of fact must be perverse for
      the Tribunal's error of law jurisdiction to be engaged.   In  R  (Iran
      and Others v SSHD) [2005] EWCA Civ 982  Brooke  LJ  in  the  Court  of
      Appeal set out the test for perversity  as follows  -

      "11.  ... It is well known that "perversity" represents a very high
      hurdle. In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 481, the whole court agreed
      that the word meant what it said: it was a demanding concept. The
      majority of the court (Keene and Maurice Kay LJJ) said that it
      embraced decisions that were irrational or unreasonable in the
      Wednesbury sense (even if there was no wilful or conscious departure
      from the rational), but it also included a finding of fact that was
      wholly unsupported by the evidence, provided always that this was a
      finding as to a material matter.. "

  10. There was a sharp division of opinion between Mr Bazini and Miss Brown
      as to how the sentence in paragraph 28 relating to  distinguishing  MA
      should be read.  We have considered for ourselves whether we are  able
      to understand the Immigration Judge's reasoning in paragraph 28.   The
      relevant phrase is

      " However, in my opinion, the present case can be  distinguished  from
      MA because this appellant has never lived in Eritrea and therefore has
      never been served with call up papers.  "

      We have no difficulty  in  understanding  the  distinction  which  the
      Immigration Judge drew between the appellant in MA (who had  lived  in
      Eritrea before coming to the United Kingdom) and this  appellant  (who
      had never lived in, or  even  visited,  Eritrea).   That  is  a  valid
      distinction:  this appellant is not, yet, an Eritrean citizen  in  any
      sense and has not yet acquired any liability to call-up.  MA,  on  the
      other hand, had spent time in  Eritrea  and  could  be  considered  as
      having assumed her responsibility  as  a  citizen  of  that  state  to
      undertake military service, which she had failed to do.  That  is  the
      definition of a draft evader.  In the present case, as a  non-citizen,
      there is no evidence before us to suggest this appellant  risks  being
      perceived  as  a  draft  evader.   There  is  no  error  of   law   in
      distinguishing MA on that basis.

  11. Further, even had we found an error of law as  alleged  and  that  the
      appellant was in the same position  as  MA,  we  would  then  have  to
      consider the background  material  filed  by  the  appellant  herself.
      The Immigration Judge noted (paragraph 26) that the appellant  had  no
      conscientious objection to service in the Eritrean military.   She has
      never even visited Eritrea and to consider that a national of  another
      country has evaded service in Eritrea  is  a  bizarre  concept,  which
      would have required specific evidence that  the  Eritrean  authorities
      would regard 'new Eritreans' as having  nevertheless  evaded  military
      service at a time when they were not Eritrean nationals.

  12. We recalled that the appellant came to the UK when she was about to be
      deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea and in order to return  to  Eritrea,
      of which she is currently not a national, she would have to apply  for
      nationality  from  the  United  Kingdom.  If  nationality  or   travel
      documents were granted to this appellant, there was no evidence before
      us to help us in assessing how the Eritrean authorities would treat  a
      person who had only just acquired Eritrean travel  documents  and  had
      not performed military service.

  13. The burden of proof is always on the appellant; in order to succeed in
      persuading us that any error in relation to  the  Immigration  Judge's
      consideration of MA was material, she  would  have  to  show  that  on
      return a new Eritrean national nevertheless  be  treated  as  a  draft
      evader, not simply as a person  upon  whom  call-up  papers  could  be
      served in due course now that she had  adopted  Eritrean  nationality.
      The appellant has not done so and thus her alternative argument cannot
      succeed.

  14. For all of the above reasons, we consider that there  is  no  material
      error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination.

Decision

  15. The original Tribunal did not make a material error  of  law  and  the
      original determination of the appeal shall stand.





                                                         Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge

                                                            11 November 2005



