

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                      |
|DM (Majority Clan Entities Can Protect) Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00150   |
|                                   |                                |
|                                                                     |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                 |
|                                                                     |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated:         |
|On: 24 May 2005                 |                                   |
|                                |27th July 2005                     |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|Before:                                                              |
|                                                                     |
|The Honourable Mr Justice Hodge OBE (President)                      |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                             |
|Between                                                              |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|Appellant                                                            |
|                                                                     |
|and                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                           |
|                           |        |Respondent                     |
|                           |        |                               |

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr F Omere of counsel, instructed by  Wilson &
Co
For the Respondent:          Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Somalia.   She  appeals  against  a
     determination of the Adjudicator, Ms Sarvanjan Kaler, notified  on  27
     January 2005 dismissing her appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  to
     grant asylum and to refuse to grant leave to enter.  There had been  a
     previous determination of this appeal by Adjudicator Mr A L  McGeachy,
     but that pre-4 April 2005 history does not affect how  we  treat  this
     type of case.  By virtue of Article 5 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
     (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004  (Commencement  No  5   and
     Transitional Provisions) Order 2005, this appeal now takes effect as a
      reconsideration pursuant to  an  order  under  section  103A  of  the
     Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, limited to  the  grounds
     on which permission to appeal was  granted  and  initially  to  decide
     whether the Adjudicator materially erred in law.

  2. The grounds of appeal submitted in this case challenge  wholesale  the
     complete determination of the Adjudicator.  There was no  clear  focus
     on the main  issue;   had  the  Adjudicator  made  an  error  of  law.
     However, the decision on the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
     concluded as follows:

           "Insofar as the grounds challenge  the  [Adjudicator's]  adverse
           credibility findings, I consider  that  the  [Adjudicator]  gave
           sound reasons for concluding that the [Claimant] had  failed  to
           give a credible account of her past experiences or  of  being  a
           member  of  a  minority  clan.   The   [Adjudicator's]   limited
           acceptance at para 29 that the [Claimant] may have suffered from
           violence in Somalia and her father killed as described  was  not
           sufficient to show that she had experienced past persecution  or
           ill-treatment  personal  to  her.   Plainly,  the  [Adjudicator]
           considered that what she had  suffered  from  in  the  past  was
           generalised, as distinct from  targeted  violence  and  had  not
           suffered it by virtue of any minority clan identity.


           Insofar as the grounds contend that the  [Adjudicator]  was  not
           entitled to consider that the [Claimant] would not be at risk on
           return simply by virtue of  being  a  female  returnee  (from  a
           majority clan) firstly the [Adjudicator] in this case found that
           the [Claimant] would be  able  to  look  to  family  members  in
           Somalia for support and would be returning to a town  where  she
           would not be alone and vulnerable, and  secondly,  the  Tribunal
           and Country  Guideline  cases  [has]  not  accepted  that  women
           returnees constitute a risk category per  se.   The  grounds  of
           appeal do not refer to any background materials  that  have  not
           been considered by the Tribunal."

  3. We entirely agree  with  these  views.   The  Adjudicator,  for  sound
     reasons given in her determination, had not believed the  core  claims
     of the Appellant.

  4. However, permission to appeal was given on what are described  as  the
     "quality of protection" issue or, as the Vice President  put  it  when
     granting permission "the issue of whether majority clan protection  in
     the context of present day Somalia is capable of affording  protection
     within the meaning of the Refugee Convention and the ECHR".   By  para
     62(7) Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  (SI  No
     230), where, as here, an Appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to
     appeal to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  against  an  Adjduicator's
     determination before 4 April 2005 (this grant was 7  March  2005)  but
     the appeal has not been determined by that date and (as also here) the
     grant of permission to appeal is treated as an Order for the  Tribunal
     to reconsider the Adjudicator's  determination  as  a  result  of  the
     Transitional Provisions Order, then  this  reconsideration  "shall  be
     limited to the grounds upon  which  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
     granted permission to appeal".   Hence  this  Tribunal  which  is  now
     carrying  out  a  reconsideration  must  first  decide   whether   the
     Adjudicator made a material error of law solely  in  relation  to  the
     quality of protection issue,  that  being  the  only  basis  on  which
     permission to appeal was granted.

  5. At paragraph 35 of her determination, under a  heading  "Human  Rights
     Appeal", the Adjudicator quoted "This Appellant has the protection  of
     family and clan members and it [sic]  has  not  established  that  her
     rights will be completely denied or nullified, or that the decision is
     disproportionate".  It is on those rather shaky foundations  that  the
     application for permission to appeal  on  the  quality  of  protection
     issue was based.  The argument in support of the contentions on behalf
     of the  Appellant  run  to  some  7�  pages  in  the  application  for
     permission to appeal.  They do not clearly highlight an alleged  error
     of law.  But the question is most clearly stated at para  2.1  in  the
     application:

           "... the Tribunal is requested to consider the point  raised  at
           appeal as to whether protection from a majority  clan  which  is
           intrinsically linked with the  protection  of  a  majority  clan
           milita is a suitable form of protection for the purposes of  the
           Refugee Convention  and/or  the  European  Convention  on  Human
           Rights."

      We heard argument on this, but note that the Appellant who had claimed
      to come from a minority not a majority clan, had, for  sound  reasons,
      not been believed.

The Quality of Protection Issue

  6. We remind ourselves of the formula approved by the House of  Lords  in
     Horvath [2000] 3 WLR 379: persecution = serious harm + lack  of  state
     protection.  The Appellant in this case had not met the "serious harm"
     test, ie she had not established that on return she faces a real  risk
     of serious harm or treatment contrary to Article 3.

  7. However, we agree with Mr Omere  that  in  the  context  of  countries
     affected by armed conflict or civil war  there  may  be  a  degree  of
     artificiality  in  seeking  to  treat  the  "serious  harm"  and   the
     "protection" tests as entirely  separate.   As  the  Court  of  Appeal
     recognised in Bagdanvicius [2004] INLR  163,  there  is  a  degree  of
     interdependence between the two tests:  see  paras  42,  55(12).   The
     extent to which there exists a threat to a vulnerable group of serious
     harm at the hands of an armed group may vary depending on  the  extent
     to which it is known that the vulnerable group can obtain  protection.
     A holistic approach is called for.  (Since we  heard  this  case,  the
     House of Lords has given its judgment in Bagdanvicius [2005] UKHL  38.
     In view of what is said by Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-Heywood  at  para
     13, it seems to us that their  Lordships  left  undisturbed  what  the
     Court of  Appeal  said  concerning  the  interdependency  between  the
     "serious harm" and the "protection" tests, choosing rather to  address
     and determine the differently formulated issue posed by Ms Carss-Frisk
     QC.  Largely for this reason we saw no necessity to invite the parties
     to address us on the implications for our decision  in  this  case  of
     that judgment.)  We also recognise  that  the  quality  of  protection
     issue is one which arises to a greater or lesser extent in the  course
     of submissions made  in  Somali  cases.   For  that  reason  also,  we
     consider it right to examine it further.

  8. Mr Omere advanced three main submissions on the quality of  protection
     issue.

  9. First, he submitted that the protection said to be effective  in  this
     case arose in the context of a country in which there was  an  absence
     of state structures as a result of which one could not  properly  talk
     about protection under either the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human
     Rights Convention  since  both  instruments  were  predicated  on  the
     existence of "state" protection.

 10. Second, he maintained that  neither  state  nor  quasi-state  entities
     could afford protection under either Convention  unless  they  met  or
     sought to meet their obligations under international human rights  and
     international humanitarian law.  Majority clan protection  in  Somalia
     was intrinsically and heavily reliant on protection by  clan  militias
     who are armed groups systematically flouting international  law.   For
     persons to qualify as providers of protection it  was  necessary  that
     they value core human rights and "demonstrate a general and consistent
     respect for the rules of international human rights  and  humanitarian
     law".

 11. Mr Omere averred that not to accept his  principal  submissions  would
     entail having, for  instance,  to  accept  as  suitable  providers  of
     protection wealthy/powerful drug barons who flout basic human  rights/
     humanitarian law in Colombia.

 12. In support of these two arguments, Mr Omere cited the Court of  Appeal
     judgment in  Gardi [2002] 1 WLR 2755 in which   Keane  LJ  stated  the
     following in relation to state protection in the context of Iraq prior
     to the fall of the Ba'athist regime under  Saddam Hussein:

           "The reference in Article 1A (2) is to an  asylum  seeker  being
           unable or unwilling to avail himself 'of the protection of  that
           country', a reference to the  earlier  phrase  'the  country  of
           nationality'.  That does seem to imply that the  protection  has
           to be that of an entity which is capable of granting nationality
           to a person in a form recognised internationally.   That  indeed
           was a point made in the Tjhi Kwet Kue case at page 11.  The  KAR
           does not meet that criteria.  I see force also in the point made
           by  Hathaway  and  Foster  in  their  paper  at  page  46,  that
           protection can only be provided by an entity  capable  of  being
           held responsible under  international  law.   That  decision  in
           Vallaj is not inconsistent with that proposition since the UNMIK
           regime in Kosovo had the authority of the  United  Nations  plus
           the consent of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.   Yet  no-one
           suggests that the KAR or any part of it is such an entity  under
           international law."

 13. If relatively well-organised entities such as the KAR  authorities  in
     Iraq were not considered to be capable of providing state  protection,
     then, a fortiori, argued Mr Omere, a majority clan  in  Somalia  would
     also be incapable.

 14. Mr Omere also prayed in aid the judgment of the Inn er  House  of  the
     Court of Session in Saber [2004] INLR 232, which  approved  the  above
     passage in Gardi.

 15. Mr Omere's third submission was developed in response to the reference
     in the grant of permission to the possible relevance of Article  7  of
     EU  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  on  minimum  standards   for   the
     qualification and status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
     persons as refugees or as persons  who  otherwise  need  international
     protection and the content of the protection  granted  (hereafter  the
     "Refugee Qualifications Directive").

Our Conclusions on the Quality of Protection Issue

 16. Mr Omere did not place before the Tribunal previous reported decisions
     which have addressed the issue of to what extent the remarks  made  by
     Keane LJ in Gardi (see the quotation from SF below) or  the  reasoning
     of the Court of Session in Saber should be considered  as  persuasive.
     Gardi was a case decided without the court having any jurisdiction  to
     hear it.  But, in any event,  had Mr Omere done so he would have  seen
     that the Tribunal has  held  that  they  are  not  persuasive.  In  SF
     (Sufficiency of Protection-KAA-Michigan  Guidelines)  Iraq  CG  [2002]
     UKIAT 07376, it was stated:


           "13.  Mr Vokes secondly asked the Tribunal to take the same view
                 as Lord Justice Keene in Gardi and the Tribunal in  Magdeed
                 and conclude that the de facto authorities  in  control  in
                 the KAA were not entities capable of furnishing  protection
                 within the meaning of Art 1A(2) of the Refugee  Convention.
                 As we explained to Mr  Vokes,  we  consider  that  on  this
                 question we should follow the starred determination of  the
                 Tribunal  in  the  case  of  Dyli  [2002]  INLR  372  whose
                 reasoning was not contradicted by either Mr  Justice  Dyson
                 (as he then was) in Vallaj [2001] INLR 455 or the Court  of
                 Appeal in Canaj and Vallaj [2001] INLR 342.   The  judgment
                 of Gardi [2002] 1 WLR  2755  was  now  a  nullity  and  the
                 remarks of  Lord  Justice  Keene  were  obiter  [sic].   It
                 remains, of course, that the views of a senior judge should
                 carry weight.  However, despite being asked to  follow  the
                 views of Professor Hathaway, it does not  appear  that  his
                 lordship's attention was drawn to the fact that  the  paper
                 written by Professor Hathaway and Ms Foster was  of  recent
                 origin and did not reflect the position the same  Professor
                 together with several refugee law experts took in  the  far
                 more widely accepted Michigan Guidelines  at  paragraph  10
                 where it was stated  that  return  on  internal  protection
                 grounds to a region controlled by a non-state entity  could
                 be contemplated, albeit only  where  there  was  compelling
                 evidence  of  that  entity's  ability  to  deliver  durable
                 protection.  Nor does it  appear  that  his  attention  was
                 drawn to the fact that UNHCR`s position is  that  de  facto
                 entities are at least in  principle  capable  of  affording
                 protection under the Refugee Convention.  Moreover,  taking
                 a line through the House of Lords judgment in Adan [1997] 2
                 All ER 723, we consider there are cogent reasons for taking
                 a pragmatic or functional approach according to  which  the
                 issue of whether a de facto  entity  could  afford  Refugee
                 Convention protection is essentially a  question  of  fact.
                 Such an  approach  also  best  reflects  the  principle  of
                 surrogacy  according  to  which  international   protection
                 should only be granted when there is in fact  a  denial  of
                 domestic protection."

 17. In a subsequent Tribunal  case,  GH  (Former  KAZ-Country  Conditions-
     Effect) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00248, the Tribunal further addressed the
     issue of to what extent regard should be had to Saber.  At paras  102-
     103 it stated:

           "102. Moreover, the paper relied on does not, as was pointed out
                 in Faraj, represent a settled and accepted view of the  law
                 applicable to internal relocation and does not  purport  to
                 deal as such with protection issues in  a  claimant's  home
                 area. As noted in Dyli at paragraphs 17-18 in Thje Kwet Koe
                 v MIEE [1997] FCA 912, cited in Gardi  (no  1)  and  Saber,
                 Tamberlin J had made it clear that  his  interpretation  of
                 Article 1A(2) was  confined  to  the  situation  where  the
                 claimant was stateless.  Further, the decision of Decary  J
                 in Ahmed Ali Zatzoli v MEI [1991] 3 CF 605 does not  appear
                 to have been considered in any of  the  cases  referred  to
                 above.  In that case the Canadian Court had  accepted  that
                 it was practical protection that was  relevant  to  refugee
                 status  rather  than  the  protection   of   the   official
                 government in circumstances of civil war and the passage we
                 quote must be considered in the context that nothing in the
                 judgment suggested that there  might  be  various  entities
                 capable  of  granting  nationality.    He   expressed   the
                 proposition more widely in the following terms:


                       'The  'country',  the  'national   government',   the
                       'legitimate  government',  the  'nominal  government'
                       will probably vary depending on the circumstances and
                       the evidence and it would be presumptuous to  attempt
                       to give a general definition.   I  will  simply  note
                       here that I do not  rule  out  the  possibility  that
                       there may be several established authorities  in  the
                       same  country  which  are  each   able   to   provide
                       protection in the part of the territory controlled by
                       them, protection which may  be  adequate  though  not
                       necessarily perfect.'

           103.  It seems to us therefore  that  not  only  are  the  views
                 expressed in Saber arguably obiter but that  the  issue  in
                 relation to protection  has  never  been  fully  argued  in
                 respect of the home area of the claimant or of a  situation
                 where internal relocation is in point.  It is an area where
                 there  remain  potentially  conflicting  views   from   the
                 international jurisprudence point of view.  The decision in
                 Saber is persuasive only so far as the English divisions of
                 the Immigration Appeal Tribunal and  Immigration  Appellate
                 Authority at least are concerned.  In  those  circumstances
                 the Tribunal and Adjudicators should regard  themselves  as
                 still bound by the starred decision of Dyli on  this  issue
                 until such time as there is an  authoritative  decision  to
                 the contrary following full argument."

 18. Mr  Omere's  arguments  overlook  the  fact  that  under  the  Refugee
     Convention there is no reference in the text of Article 1A(2)  to  the
     state being the entity which must provide protection.  The phrase used
     is "country of nationality".  To echo the words of Keane LJ in  Gardi,
     the only protection-related reference in Article 1A(2) is to a  person
     being unable or unwilling to avail himself "of the protection of  that
     country", which links with the earlier use of the phrase  "country  of
     nationality".

 19. Mr Omere is wrong to assert that  protection  under  the  Refugee  and
     Human Rights Convention can only be afforded when the state  concerned
     has a functioning national government.  We accept that  Somalia,  even
     now that it has in formal terms a federal government structure,  might
     merit descriptions such as a "failed state" or  a  "collapsed  state".
     However, it is not in dispute that Somalia has for some time been  and
     is still a state at international  law.   One  must  not  confuse  the
     question of statehood  or  a  territory  being  a   country  with  the
     question of whether that state or country has  a  functioning  central
     government.  We remind ourselves at this point that Article 1  of  the
     Montevideo Convention on Rights and Duties of States which  is  widely
     seen as  having  become  part  of  customary  international  law.   It
     provides:

           "The State as a person of international law should  possess  the
           following qualifications:  (a) a permanent  population;   (b)  a
           defined territory;  (c) government;  and (d) capacity  to  enter
           into relations with the other States. "

 20. Whilst this definition is not accepted wholly without qualification by
     international jurists, it is notable that there  has  been  widespread
     rejection of the view that requirement  (c) - government- can only  be
     met if there exists an effective or  functioning  or  orderly  central
     government.

 21. We are quite satisfied that at international law Somalia is a state in
     that it has:  (a) a permanent population, (b) a defined territory  and
     (d) capacity to enter  into  relations  with  the  other  States.   As
     regards (c), government, since Somalia was established as a  state  on
     the basis of its current territory on 1 July 1960, there have  plainly
     been periods when there was effective government.  Thus, subsequent or
     intervening periods of civil strife and breakdowns of law and order do
     not per se affect the fact that Somalia is and remains a state.

 22. All  that  is  essential  for  Refugee  Convention  and  Human  Rights
     Convention purposes, therefore, is that as a matter of fact an  entity
     within a country or state affords effective protection.   Plainly,  an
     entity which relies for its law and order functions on drug barons  or
     armed militias may be less able to provide effective  protection  than
     one which can rely on those  functions  being  performed  by  properly
     trained, properly resourced and accountable police or  army  personnel
     whose standards of human conduct are  exemplary.   But  variations  of
     this type simply go to the factual question, "Is protection afforded?"
     not the legal question of "is there an entity or  are  there  entities
     qualified to afford protection?"

Article 7 of the Refugee Qualifications Directive

 23. Mr Omere's third submission was developed in response to the reference
     in the grant of permission to the possible relevance of Article  7  of
     EU  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  on  minimum  standards   for   the
     qualification and status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
     persons as refugees or as persons  who  otherwise  need  international
     protection and the content of the protection  granted  (hereafter  the
     "Refugee Qualifications Directive").

 24. Mr Omere contended that the text  of  the  EU  Refugee  Qualifications
     Directive reinforced his other arguments.  We cannot agree.  The  text
     of Article 7 reads:

                  "Actors of protection
           1. Protection can be provided by:
                 (a)   the State;  or
             (b)   parties   or   organisations,   including   international
                 organisations, controlling the State or a substantial  part
                 of the territory of the State.


           2.    Protection is generally provided when the actors mentioned
              in  paragraph  1  take  reasonable  steps  to   prevent   the
              persecution or suffering of  serious  harm,  inter  alia,  by
              operating  an  effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,
              prosecution and punishment of acts  constituting  persecution
              or serious  harm,  and  the  applicant  has  access  to  such
              protection.

           3. When assessing whether an international organisation controls
              a State or a substantial part of its territory  and  provides
              protection as described in paragraph 2, Member  States  shall
              take into account any  guidance  which  may  be  provided  in
              relevant Council acts."

 25. This Article has to be read in the light of recital (19) which states:

           "Protection can be provided not only by the State  but  also  by
           parties or organisations, including international organisations,
           meeting the conditions of this Directive, which control a region
           or a larger area within the territory of the State".


 26. We bear in mind that this Directive has not yet been  transposed  into
     national law, although it is now part of  EU  law,  having  come  into
     force in October 2004.  We do not need here to examine the question of
     whether there is already, in respect of this  untransposed  directive,
     an "interpretive obligation" on the part of  national  authorities  to
     act in conformity with its provisions, including national judiciaries.
      It will suffice for our purposes to proceed  on  the  uncontroversial
     basis that, even when (as in the case of the 1997 EU  Joint  Position)
     the European Community text concerned has  no  legal  effect,  it  can
     still  be  considered  as  a  relevant  and  persuasive   source   for
     interpreting the meaning of  the  Refugee  Convention:   see  Robinson
     [1997] Imm AR 568;  R v Special Adjudicator [2005] 1 WLR 1003.

 27. However, as we pointed out at the hearing, the text of this  Directive
     weakens rather than aids one  of  Mr  Omere's  principal  submissions,
     since it expressly rejects the view that only a state in the sense  of
     a  country  with  an  official  and   functioning   (and   legitimate)
     government, can provide protection.

 28. Mr Omere contended that the Directive  did  nevertheless  support  his
     contentions since its text clearly presupposed  the  existence  of  an
     "...  effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and
     punishment of acts constituting persecution or serious  harm  ...",  a
     system which Somalia patently lacked.

 29. We consider Mr Omere's gloss  on  Article  7(2)  goes  too  far.   The
     subsection does not  seek  to  furnish  an  exhaustive  definition  of
     protection:  it only sets out what is "generally"  required.   Second,
     it does not set out an exhaustive list  of  the  type  of  "reasonable
     steps" necessary to prevent  persecution  or  suffering  from  serious
     harm.  We also think that there is real danger in viewing  Somalia  as
     wholly devoid of state-like institutions;   indeed  much  of  what  is
     contained in the background materials is to opposite effect:   see  eg
     sections 1 and 4.1 of the  Joint Report 2004 and paras 5.1-5.79 of the
     April 2005 CIPU Report.

 30. There was, however, one separate aspect of  the  Directive  which  did
     initially trouble us.  There is reference in  both  recital  (19)  and
     Article 7 to the need for the providers of  protection  to  control  a
     region or larger area within the territory  of  the  State  or  to  be
     "parties or organisations ... controlling the State or  a  substantial
     part of the territory of the State".


 31. However, on reflection, we  do  not  consider  that  these  provisions
     assist Mr Omere's submissions, since in the Somalia context and in the
     particular circumstances of this case, there is no  dispute  that  (i)
     there are three major clans in Somalia who each control a  substantial
     part of its territory;  (ii) on the Appellant's own account she  lived
     in Mogadishu, where one  of  these  three  noble  clans,  the  Hawiye,
     controls a major part of the territory.  Moreover, we see  no  logical
     difficulty with clan militiamen  and  other  majority  clan  personnel
     performing quasi-governmental  functions  being  considered  as  state
     actors (as opposed to non-state actors).  As suggested by the Court of
     Appeal in Svazas [2002]  1  WLR  1891  and  approved  by  Auld  LJ  in
     Bagdanvicius at paras 47 and 55(11), there  will  be  a  continuum  of
     circumstances spanning the state agency/non-state actor divide.

Summary of Conclusions


 32. On the issues raised by Mr Omere, we summarise our main conclusions as
     follows:

           (1)   The Tribunal remains of the view that protection under the
                 Refugee and Human Rights Conventions can be afforded by  de
                 facto or quasi-state entities.  That view is now reinforced
                 by Article 7 of the EU Refugee Qualifications Directive.


           (2)   Whether majority clans in Somalia are willing and able  to
                 protect is a factual question.


 33. For the above reasons, we conclude that the Appellant  has  failed  to
     identify any material error of law.

 34.  Accordingly,  the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator  to   dismiss   the
     Appellant's appeal stands.







                                         THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HODGE OBE
                                                                   PRESIDENT
