



       [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Thakur (PBS decision - common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 24 February 2011                  |On 23 March 2011            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before


                              MR JUSTICE SIMON
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER



                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ata uddin thakur

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:      Mr A Rahman of AK, Solicitors
1.  A decision by the Secretary of State to refuse further leave to  remain
as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant was not in  accordance  with  the  law
because of a failure to comply with the common law duty  to  act  fairly  in
the decision making process when  an  applicant  had  not  had  an  adequate
opportunity of enrolling at another college following the withdrawal of  his
sponsor's licence or of making further representations before  the  decision
was made.

2.  The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote: what  fairness
demands is dependent on the context  of  the  decision  and  the  particular
circumstances of the applicant.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.      This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against   the
    determination of Immigration Judge Youngerwood who allowed an appeal by
    the respondent against a decision made on 15  July  2010  refusing  him
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  on  the
    grounds that the decision was not in accordance with the law.  In  this
    determination we will refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Mr Thakur as the appellant and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

Background

2.      The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 23  January  1973.
    He arrived in the UK on 20 March 2008 with entry clearance as a student
    giving him leave to remain until 31 December 2009.  On 29 December 2009
    he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant to continue his studies.  At the time  of  application  he  was
    enrolled with the London  Commonwealth  College  of  Law  and  Business
    Studies on a diploma and higher  diploma  in  tourism  and  hospitality
    management.  His application was refused on 15 July 2010 because as  at
    the date of decision the college was no longer on the register of  Tier
    4 sponsors.  In  his  grounds  of  appeal  against  this  decision  the
    appellant accepted that the college's licence was suspended in  January
    2010  and  then  subsequently  revoked  and  that  the  college  ceased
    operating in July 2010.

3.       In his witness statement of 25 October 2010 the appellant said:

         "4.    The London Commonwealth College of Law and Business  Studies
             was an A rated sponsor college at the time of application  and
             in the middle of January 2010 they had their licence suspended
             and their licence was subsequently revoked.  But  the  college
             did not inform us when the college's licence was revoked.


         5.      I  started  the  course  on  25/01/2010  and  the  expected
             completion date was 30/01/2011.  I attended the college  until
             the end of June 2010.  Since July  2010  the  college  is  not
             operating any more.


         6.      Since July 2010 I have been trying to get  enrolled  for  a
             course with another college. I approached a few  colleges  but
             none of the colleges agreed to enrol me to  start  the  course
             immediately, as I don't  now  have  a  leave  endorsed  on  my
             passport.  At last on 25 October 2010 I was  able  to  find  a
             conditional offer on PG diploma in management from London West
             Valley College which is also a UKBA  Tier  4  sponsor  college
             (sponsor licence: 07D46KMYX).  Their course is due to start on
             January [2011]."


4.      The appeal before the immigration judge proceeded on the basis that
    as there were no factual matters in issue, the appeal should proceed by
    way of submissions.  The judge  was  referred  to  the  Tier  4  Policy
    Guidance on the course the respondent would take if a college's licence
    was withdrawn and in substance it was argued that the appellant  should
    have been granted 60 days  further  leave  to  remain  if  he  was  not
    involved in the reasons why the licence was withdrawn to enable him  to
    apply for permission to study with another Tier 4 sponsor.  It was also
    argued that he could now comply with the Rules as  he  had  obtained  a
    conditional offer from a licensed sponsor.

5.       The judge set out his findings as follows:

         "10.   Although  different  policy  guidance  has  been  issued  in
             relation to Tier 4 applications, there has been  a  consistent
             policy in relation to the position where a  Tier  4  sponsor's
             licence is withdrawn or they are taken over.  In  relation  to
             the policy guidance  for  applications  made  on  or  after  5
             October 2009, which appears to govern the current application,
             page 52 of the guidance makes it clear that,  if  the  Tier  4
             sponsor licence is withdrawn then, where a student is  already
             in the UK studying, the normal position would be that he would
             be granted 60 days further leave if he was not  involved  with
             the reasons why the licence was withdrawn.  This  enables  the
             student to apply for permission to study with another  Tier  4
             sponsor.


         11.    The above policy guidance  does  not  appear  to  have  been
             considered in any way by the respondent  and  it  is,  frankly
             puzzling that I, and no doubt many other immigration  judge's,
             have had many examples of similar appeals where the respondent
             appears to be totally ignorant of their own policy.


         12.    It follows that, on my findings, the decision  cannot  stand
             as not being in accordance with the law.  I was  urged  by  Mr
             Rahman to substantially allow the appeal because the appellant
             now has a conditional offer from a college  which  is  on  the
             register, relying on Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act.   However,
             the offer concerned is a conditional one and is  specified  as
             such, depending on the appellant passing an English  placement
             test in the future.  In these circumstances I do not  consider
             that this conditional offer complies with the requirements  in
             the rules and, therefore, the appeal can only be  allowed  for
             the limited extent indicated above.


         My Decision


         The appeal is allowed as the decision is not in accordance with the
             law."


The Grounds and Submissions

6.      In the grounds the  respondent  argued  that  the  policy  guidance
    referred to by the judge did not mandate a grant of 60  days  leave  to
    remain in the appellant's circumstances.  In the event  the  judge  had
    failed properly to identify the guidance he was referring  to  and  had
    failed properly to apply it.  In a response filed by the  appellant  he
    maintained his argument that the respondent had failed to consider  and
    apply the appropriate Tier 4 policy guidance which should have  led  to
    him being granted 60 days' leave.  It is also argued that the appellant
    could meet the requirements of the Rules in the light of the fact  that
    he now had a conditional offer at a licensed college.

Submissions

7.      Mr  Bramble  adopted  his  grounds  and  relied  on  the  Tribunal
    determination in JA (Revocation of Registration - Secretary of  State's
    policy) India [2011] UKUT 52 (IAC) arguing that the  policy  could  not
    apply to the appellant as he did not have existing leave which could be
    limited to 60 days or  an  extant  period  of  six  months  leave.   He
    accepted that there could be hard cases where an  appellant  might  not
    have had an adequate opportunity of finding an alternative college  but
    nonetheless the provisions  of  the  policy  could  not  apply  to  the
    appellant for the reasons given in JA.  Mr  Rahman  submitted  that  on
    this issue JA was wrongly decided and in any event  the  appellant  was
    entitled to rely on s.85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 to show that he could now meet the requirements of the Rules.

The Policy Guidance

8.      We were referred to the policy guidance for Tier 4 to be  used  for
    applications made on or after 5 October 2009.  The relevant guidance in
    circumstances where the sponsor's licence is withdrawn is  set  out  at
    page 51.  This sets out  in  tabular  form  what  will  happen  when  a
    sponsor's Tier 4 licence is  withdrawn.   In  circumstances  where  the
    student is already in the United Kingdom studying, the position  is  as
    follows:

         "We will limit the student's permission to stay:


          . to 60 days if the student was not involved in  the  reasons  why
            the Tier 4 sponsor had their  licence  withdrawn  (we  will  not
            limit the student's permission to stay if he/she has  less  than
            six months left.  The student may want to apply  for  permission
            to stay with another Tier 4 sponsor during this time).


          . Immediately if we think the student was involved in the reasons
            why the Tier 4 sponsor's licence was withdrawn."

          In JA, the Tribunal (Irwin J and SIJ Gill) considered the
    interpretation of this policy and said:

         "16.   However,  the  straightforward  position  adopted   by   the
             Secretary of State in the application of the  policy  to  this
             appellant is that, when one looked at  the  situation  at  the
             time of withdrawal of the licence  of  the  London  School  of
             Business and Computing or at the date of decision on 12 March,
             or at any subsequent date, Mr Anthony had no continuing  leave
             save that derived from Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971,
             which of course  continues  only  until  his  application  for
             further leave to remain is decided and any appeal against  the
             decision is finally determined.  The appellant  did  not  have
             leave to remain of more than six months to be  limited  to  60
             days or less than  six  months  which  would  not  be  further
             limited.  Mr Tufan  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
             therefore says that Mr Anthony is not covered by  the  policy
             and can found no legitimate expectation upon it.


         17.    The way the matter was put to us on Mr Anthony's behalf  was
             very simple.  Mr Miah suggested that there should be a  grace
             period of 60 days whatever the circumstances,  beginning  from
             the point when the student was aware of the revocation of  the
             licence.  In our judgment this submission cannot be  sustained
             in law.  It does not arise  from  the  clear  wording  of  the
             policy stated in the guidance at para 27.  Furthermore  it  is
             not irrational or unreasonable for the Secretary of  State  to
             distinguish between applicants who  lodge  their  applications
             for extension of their leave at a time when there is still six
             months or more extant leave to remain and those who do not.


         18.    In any event the argument advanced on  Mr  Anthony's  behalf
             would not avail him.  Mr Antony must  be  taken  to  be  fully
             aware  that  his  first  educational  provider,   the   London
             Institute of Technical Education, had had its licence  removed
             before he switched his application by letter so as to found it
             upon his promised place at the London School of  Business  and
             Computing.  That switch took place by  October  2009  and  was
             notified to the Home Office by letter  of  17  December  2009.
             There was of course no extant or continuing leave to remain at
             either of  the  latter  dates,  leaving  aside  the  statutory
             extension of leave under Section 3C  of  the  Immigration  Act
             1971.  Paragraph 27 of the guidance cannot have been  intended
             to apply to leave extended under  Section  3C.   Even  if  the
             policy did require some form of  extension  or  further  grace
             period of 60 days from the date of knowledge of the withdrawal
             of the licence of the institution concerned (which we  do  not
             accept, as stated above), the 60 day period  in  Mr Anthony's
             case would have expired well before the date of decision on 12
             March 2010."


9.      It is clear that on the facts of JA the  Tribunal  found  not  only
    that the policy did not entitle the appellant to a  60  day  period  of
    leave but that in any event he had had an even longer period before the
    date of decision when he could have attempted to find another  college.
    It is equally  clear  that  the  Tribunal  were  well  aware  that  the
    application of the policy could in other cases lead to unfairness.   In
    para 13 it said,

         "We pause to remark that the guidance seems to us to be capable  of
         giving rise to arbitrary results"


          and in para 15,


         "however, if the imposition of the limit of leave to remain  arises
         only when a positive decision is taken by the Secretary of State in
         a given case, it follows that the delay by the Secretary  of  State
         before taking a decision is capable of  altering  the  position  of
         the student concerned.  We are concerned that the policy  therefore
         may give rise to arbitrary outcomes in different  circumstances  to
         those arising here."


Discussion

10.    In this appeal we are concerned with  a  case  where  on  the  facts
    accepted at the hearing before the judge, it can properly be said  that
    the appellant had no adequate opportunity  of  finding  an  alternative
    college.  This  appeal  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    evidence that he was not aware that his college's sponsor  licence  had
    been suspended, that he continued to  attend  the  college  during  the
    period of suspension, the college did not inform him that  the  licence
    was revoked and that he only became aware of this fact at about the end
    of June 2010 when the college ceased to operate.   It  was  only  after
    July 2010 he attempted to obtain a place at another college.


11.    We will deal firstly with the submission that JA  was  not  properly
    decided and should not be followed.  We do not accept that this is  the
    case.  The policy was clearly drafted on the basis that if a licence is
    withdrawn permission to remain will be limited  to  60  days  save  for
    cases where a student's permission has less than  six  months  to  run.
    The appellant's leave to remain had expired on 31 December 2009 and  he
    had no continuing leave save that derived from s.3C of the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  Leave granted under s.3C  is  to  permit  the  appellant  to
    remain lawfully during the period  of  his  appeal  but  restricts  any
    further application for a variation of  leave  to  remain  during  that
    period.  We are satisfied that the Tribunal in JA was right to find  an
    appellant in such circumstances was not entitled to  the  grant  of  60
    days leave under a policy which is framed in terms of limiting  current
    leave to that period.

12.     However, that is not an end of the matter as in  this  case,  unlike
    in JA, we are dealing with  a  situation  where  an  appellant  in  his
    particular circumstances has been  deprived  as  at  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision of an adequate  opportunity  of  finding  another
    college.  This brings into play the common law duty of acting fairly in
    the decision making process. In R (on the application of Q and  others)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ  364  the
    Court of Appeal dealt with the principle of fairness as follows:

         "69.  ...It is further common ground that in deciding  whether  the
             applicant has so satisfied him the Secretary of State must act
             fairly, which means both that he must set up a fair system  to
             enable the decision to be made and that he  must  operate  the
             system fairly: see e.g. Gaima v Secretary  of  State  for  the
             Home Department [1989] Imm AR 205,  applying  Re  HA  (Infant)
             [1967] 1QB 617 at 630.


         70.     What  fairness  requires  of  course   depends   upon   the
             circumstances of the case.   The  underlying  principles  were
             stated thus in a well known passage  in  the  speech  of  Lord
             Mustill in R v Home Secretary ex Doody [1994] 1AC 531 at 560:


                  'What does fairness  require  in  the  present  case?   My
                  Lords, I think it unnecessary to refer by name or to quote
                  from, any of the other  cited  authorities  in  which  the
                  court have explained  what  is  essentially  an  intuitive
                  judgement.  They are far too well  known.   From  them,  I
                  derive that (1) where an  Act  of  Parliament  confers  an
                  administrative power there is a presumption that  it  will
                  be exercised  in  a  manner  which  is  fair  in  all  the
                  circumstances.  (2) The  standards  of  fairness  are  not
                  immutable.  They may change with the passage of time, both
                  in the general and in their application to decisions of  a
                  particular type.  (3) The principles of fairness  are  not
                  to be applied by  rote  identically  in  every  situation.
                  What fairness demands is dependent on the context  of  the
                  decision and this is to be taken into account in  all  its
                  aspects.  (4)  An essential feature of the context is  the
                  statute which creates the discretion, as regards both  its
                  language and the shape of the legal administrative  system
                  within which the decision is  taken.   (5)  Fairness  will
                  very often require that a  person  who  may  be  adversely
                  affected by the decision will have an opportunity to  make
                  representations  on  his  own  behalf  either  before  the
                  decision is taken with a view to  producing  a  favourable
                  result; or after it is taken, with a view to procuring its
                  modification; or both.  (6)   Since  the  person  affected
                  cannot usually  make  worthwhile  representations  without
                  knowing what  factors  may  weigh  against  his  interests
                  fairness will very often require that he  is  informed  of
                  the gist of the case which he has to answer.'


13.    We must consider whether the decision  relating  to  the  appellant'
    application in his particular circumstances has met the requirements of
    fairness as set out in the speech  of  Lord  Mustill.   In  the  policy
    guidance the respondent has clearly sought to  provide  protection  for
    Tier 4 students in circumstances where the sponsor's licence  of  their
    college is suspended or withdrawn.  We have  already  referred  to  the
    provision when a licence is withdrawn and the student is already in the
    United Kingdom but in the context of the present appeal it  would  also
    be helpful to set out the position where the licence is suspended (page
    50 of the policy guidance).  Where the student is already in the United
    Kingdom studying the guidance is:


         "If the student is already in the United Kingdom and studying  with
         the Tier 4 sponsor, we will not tell him/or her if we suspend their
         licence.  However if the result of the suspension is that the  Tier
         4 sponsor loses their licence, we will tell the student and his/her
         permission to stay will be limited."


14.    Any such limitation will be in accordance with the  policy  guidance
    already referred to in paragraph 8 above as interpreted by the Tribunal
    in JA.  The general principle behind  this  published  policy  is  that
    students studying at a college where the sponsor licence  is  suspended
    or withdrawn will have an adequate opportunity of finding  a  place  at
    another college.  The appellant, however, is unable  to  bring  himself
    within the policy because as he is transferring from studying under the
    previous student rules into the points-based system and as  he  applied
    shortly before his leave expired does not have extant leave  which  can
    be limited as envisaged by the policy.

15.     But this does not mean that the principle  set  out  in  the  policy
    guidance that the appellant should have a proper opportunity of finding
    another college when his own college loses its sponsor  licence  should
    not taken into account when the decision is made  on  his  application.
    This is a case where, on the facts not disputed at the  hearing  before
    the judge, the appellant continued to study at  his  college  when  its
    licence had been suspended.  He was not aware of the  suspension  since
    he was not notified either by the respondent or his  own  college.   He
    continued to study until the end of June 2010 and it was only when  the
    college closed that he discovered there that was a problem.

16.    The decision in his case was made on 15 July 2010. It is not  argued
    that the respondent notified the appellant that his  college  had  lost
    its licence as envisaged in the policy guidance.  We are not  satisfied
    that this is a case where  the  appellant  either  knew  or  should  be
    treated as having known of any problems until his  college  was  closed
    down at the end of June  2010.   In  these  circumstances  we  are  not
    satisfied that the appellant had an adequate opportunity  of  enrolling
    at another college or of making representations following his discovery
    that his college had lost its licence and had closed.  The respondent's
    decision, made without  the  appellant  having  had  that  opportunity,
    contravened the principle of fairness set out by Lord Mustill in ex  p.
    Doody.

17.    We are therefore satisfied that the judge was right to find that the
    decision was not in accordance with the law, not  for  the  reasons  he
    gave that there was a right to a grant of 60 days further  leave  under
    the policy, but because the appellant did not have a proper opportunity
    either of making representations following the closure of  his  college
    or of finding an alternative course with a licensed college before  the
    decision was made on his application.

18.    We emphasise the guidance given by Lord Mustill that the  principles
    of fairness are  not  to  be  applied  by  rote  identically  in  every
    situation and that what fairness demands is dependent on the context of
    the decision and the  appellant's  particular  circumstances.   On  the
    facts in JA the Tribunal found on the  chronology  of  events  in  that
    appeal that a 60 day period would have expired well before the decision
    and in consequence in the circumstances of that appellant there was  no
    unfairness.

19.    In the present  case  the  appellant  had  neither  60  days  nor  a
    reasonable period  to  find  an  alternative  course  by  the  date  of
    decision.   We were told at the  hearing  that  the  practical  problem
    which appellants are faced with when seeking further  leave  to  remain
    under the points-based scheme when they were previously  granted  leave
    to remain under the student rules  is  that  they  have  difficulty  in
    persuading colleges to offer them places  as  there  is  concern  about
    whether they have extant leave to remain, colleges not being aware that
    appellants in these circumstances have leave under s.3C  It was  argued
    that the appellant was entitled to rely on s.85(4) but  the  course  he
    subsequently obtained was conditional and the judge found that  it  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rules.  However, in the light  of  our
    decision the appellant will  now  have  the  opportunity  of  producing
    evidence to the respondent to show that he can meet the requirements of
    the points based system.

20.    In summary we are satisfied that the respondent's decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law because of a  failure  to  comply  with  the
    common law requirements of  fairness  so  far  as  this  appellant  was
    concerned.  Accordingly, this appeal by the respondent is dismissed.




Signed
       Date:


Senior Immigration Judge Latter,
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


