

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      US and MV (PBS - applicants from same family) Malaysia [2010] UKUT 167
                                                                       (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|On 17 November 2009                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Nichols


                                   Between

                                     US
                                     MV

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Physsas, instructed by Joseph Thaliyan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

There is no proper basis for the Secretary of State to treat a valid
application as invalidated by the presence in the same envelope of an
invalid application by a member of the same family.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellants are nationals  of  Malaysia,  husband  and  wife.  They
      appealed to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal against  the  decision
      of the Respondent on 8 June 2009 refusing the first Appellant leave as
      a Tier 1 (post-study work) migrant, and the second Appellant leave  as
      his dependent wife. Immigration Judge Jhirad dismissed their  appeals.
      The Appellants sought and obtained an order  for  reconsideration.  By
      virtue of the provisions of paragraph 4 of Schedule 4 to the  Transfer
      of Functions of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  Order  2010,  the
      reconsideration continues as an appeal to this Tribunal.

   2. The Appellants' difficulty arises from the detailed provisions of  the
      points-based scheme and the way in which the Respondent applies  them.
      We can, however, set out  the  history  and  substance  of  this  case
      without any detailed reference to those provisions.

   3. The Appellants came to the United Kingdom in 2003. At  that  time  the
      second Appellant was a  student,  and  the  first  Appellant  was  her
      dependant. Their daughter was also a dependant. They  have  been  here
      with leave ever since.  The  first  Appellant  began  his  studies  in
      November 2004 and  in  due  course  the  second  Appellant  and  their
      daughter obtained leave as his  dependants.  That  leave  was  due  to
      continue until 31 May 2009. On 26 March 2009 the first Appellant  made
      applications for himself, his wife and his daughter to remain  in  the
      United Kingdom under the points-based scheme.  The  applications  were
      rejected  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  accompanied  by  the
      appropriate payment. The first Appellant re-submitted his applications
      immediately, but by then the rules had changed.

   4. There is no doubt that the Appellants cannot meet the requirements  of
      the rules as changed. There appears to be no doubt that their  earlier
      applications would have been granted if they had been  accompanied  by
      the correct payment.

   5. It is fair to  say  that  there  is  considerable  doubt  whether  the
      applications  were  accompanied  by  the  correct  payment,  for   the
      following reason. As we have said,  the  Appellants  applied  together
      with their daughter. The forms of application were as required by  the
      Respondent:  the  applications  by  the  Appellants  had  to  be  made
      together, because the fee regime is more beneficial for  spouses  than
      for other independent adults. But the application for the  Appellants'
      daughter had to be made, and paid for,  separately.  The  applications
      made to the Secretary of State in the present case were accompanied by
      a fee which was correct for the first and second applicants,  but  was
      not sufficient to cover the application by their daughter.

   6. An application not accompanied by the  correct  fee  is  invalid.  The
      Secretary of State treated all three applications as invalid, because,
      taken together, they were not accompanied by the correct payment.  The
      Appellants' case is that their  application  was  accompanied  by  the
      correct payment: it was their daughter's application which was not.

   7. The Appellants' daughter put in a Notice of Appeal to the  Asylum  and
      Immigration  Tribunal,  but  then  left  the   United   Kingdom.   The
      Immigration Judge recognised that that caused her appeal to be treated
      as abandoned, but decided nevertheless that the applications had to be
      considered together and dismissed the appeal on the  ground  that  the
      Appellants' first application was invalid, whilst the second could not
      succeed.

   8. The same arguments were raised before us.  Mr  Gulvin  told  us  that,
      after taking legal advice, but without giving any  indication  to  the
      public, the Secretary of State has a practice of treating as a  whole,
      applications by members of the same family that are made at  the  same
      time. After taking instructions, he said that "it  is  a  practice  we
      feel is rational and appropriate".

   9. We disagree.

  10. There is no reason why a practice of that sort cannot be published  in
      the apparently comprehensive guidance which applicants are expected to
      follow to the letter. There is no reason why the  Secretary  of  State
      should treat a properly  funded  application  as  invalidated  by  the
      existence of an invalid application in the same envelope. There is  no
      reason why the Secretary of State, on receiving together  applications
      only  some  of  which  are  valid,  should  not  enquire  whether  the
      applicants wish to have only some of them processed  or  whether  they
      wish to have them all treated as invalid.

  11.  The  Appellants'  application  was  accompanied  by  the  appropriate
      payment, and there appears to us to have  been  no  proper  reason  to
      treat it as invalid. If the  Appellants'  daughter's  application  was
      invalid, so be it: but the Appellants were  entitled  to  their  leave
      and, given that they had made their  application  in  such  good  time
      before their original leave expired, their daughter  might  have  been
      able to make a separate application afterwards. Whether or not that is
      so, it appears to us that the Appellants' application should have been
      granted, and the Immigration Judge erred in concluding that it  should
      not.

  12. We allow the Appellants' appeal.



   Signed






   Mr C M G Ockelton
   Vice President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber



