

                                    [pic]

Capparrelli (EEA Nationals - British Nationality) [2017] UKUT 00162 (IAC)

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |                 Decision           |
|Centre                                 |Promulgated                         |
|On 02 November 2016                    |On 20 January 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             GUISEPPE CAPPARELLI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer


For the Respondent:    Mr M Schwenk,  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Parkview
             Solicitors


 i) An EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  is  not
    "settled" within the compass of section 1(1) of the British Nationality
    Act 1981 since such  person's  lawful  residence  is  conditional  upon
    remaining economically active: Gal affirmed.

ii) The statutory phrase "the immigration laws" does not encompass  the  EU
    rules on free movement: Gal modified.


iii) Being ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom  does  not  confer  the
    status of British nationality.


iv) The dichotomy of persons lawfully present in the United  Kingdom  under
    (a) the EEA Regulations 2006 and (b) the Immigration Rules is reflected
    in paragraph 5 of the latter.


 v) The question of whether a person is ordinarily resident in  the  United
    Kingdom is one of fact and degree.

                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. For  convenience  I  shall  employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"  and
    "Respondent" as at first instance.

 2. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the Secretary  of  State")
    dated 20 August 2015, to make a deportation order  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant.  The central question of law which  arises  is  whether  the
    Appellant is a British citizen.  If  the  answer  is  affirmative,  the
    decision must be adjudged unlawful as it was  not  made  in  accordance
    with  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006  (the  "EEA  Regulations")  whereunder  the  Appellant
    enjoys certain protections against deportation.


The EEA Regulations

 3. In  the  context  of  this  appeal,  the  following  are  the  material
    provisions of the EEA Regulations:


    Regulation 19(1B):


         "If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national  is  justified  on
         the grounds of public policy, public security or public  health  in
         accordance with Regulation 21 the Secretary of State  may  make  an
         order for the purpose of these Regulations prohibiting that  person
         from entering the United Kingdom."

    Regulation 19(3):


         "Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who has entered
         the United Kingdom or the family member of such a national who  has
         entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-


         ...


             (b)   the Secretary of State has  decided  that  the  person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public  policy,  public
                  security or public health in  accordance  with  Regulation
                  21; ..."


    Regulation 21:


         "(1) In this Regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.


         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


        (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15  except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


             (b)   is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision  is
                  necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in  the
                  Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
                  General Assembly of the United Nations  on  20th  November
                  1989


         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  Regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;


             (d)   matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;


             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."


The British Nationality Act 1981


 4. Section 1 of the British Nationality Act 1981  (the  "1981  Act"),  the
    subject matter whereof is "Acquisition by birth or adoption", provides:




         "(1) A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement, or  in
             a qualifying territory on or after the appointed day, shall be
             a British citizen if at the time of the birth  his  father  or
             mother is-


             (a)  a British citizen; or


             (b)  settled in the United Kingdom or that territory."


    Section 1 came into operation  on  01  January  1983.   In  section  50
    "settlement" is defined as follows:


         "(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-


         ...


         "settled" shall be construed in accordance with subsections (2)  to
         (4) ...


         (2)   Subject to subsection (3), references in this Act to a person
             being settled in the United Kingdom or in a  British  overseas
             territory are references to his being ordinarily  resident  in
             the United Kingdom or, as the case may be, in  that  territory
             without being  subject  under  the  immigration  laws  to  any
             restriction on the period for which he may remain."


The Secretary of State's Decision

 5. The Appellant is aged 30 years.  He was born in the United  Kingdom  on
    18 March 1986.  The impugned decision recites  that  between  2004  and
    2012 he was convicted of a series of criminal offences, mainly offences
    against the person and breaches of community orders.   It  suffices  to
    focus on his two most recent convictions.  On  01  March  2011  he  was
    sentenced to two years imprisonment having been  convicted  of  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm, criminal damage  and  harassment.   The
    index conviction - of rape - was made on 29 February 2012 generating  a
    punishment of 6 � years' imprisonment and a three year licence period.


 6. The decision maker, in giving consideration to the question of how  the
    2006 Regulations applied to the Appellant, stated:


         "It is not accepted that you have been resident in the United
         Kingdom in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous
         period of five years."


      The  reason  proffered  for  this  conclusion  was  the   absence   of
      documentary evidence demonstrating that at the time of the Appellant's
      birth, his parents were settled and exercising Treaty  rights  in  the
      United Kingdom.  The decision continues:


         "It is understood at aged 2 or 3, in  1989,  you  and  your  family
         relocated to Germany for approximately 7 years, not returning until
         September 1997.  Although evidence submitted in the form of  school
         and medical documents indicates your presence in the United Kingdom
         from 1997 to 1999, there follows a gap of  approximately  12  years
         until your employment time sheet dated August 2009 and  weekly  pay
         slip dated 24 June 2010 ....
         It is asserted [that] during this period you  were  in  the  United
         Kingdom in constant employment but no evidence has  been  submitted
         or received to substantiate these claims ...


         Furthermore, prior to your  indicated  conviction  of  29  February
         2012, you were convicted on 01 March 2011 and received a  custodial
         sentence of 2 years ...  thus  breaking  any  continuous  residence
         accrued from August 2009 and 24 June 2010."




 7. The decision maker next posed the question of whether  the  deportation
    of the Appellant would be justified on the grounds of public policy  or
    public security.  In the lengthy recitation of the evidence of risk  of
    reoffending and  commentary  which  follow,  one  finds  these  salient
    passages:


         "In completing your OASYS assessment  the  Offender  Manager  found
         that you pose a medium risk of harm ...  to the community, but high
         risk of harm to non - adults, any partners due to  the  pattern  of
         serious domestic abuse ....


         In assessing you as high risk, it has been  considered  that  there
         are identifiable indicators of a risk of serious harm  which  could
         happen at any time and cause a serious impact ....


         The Offender Manager has assessed  [that]  your  risk  of  harm  is
         greatest when you are in a relationship with a partner (given  your
         history of  domestic  abuse)  failure  to  address  your  offending
         behaviour, increased  use  of  alcohol,  the  perception  of  being
         disrespected  or  humiliated  and  failure  to  comply   with   the
         indefinite  Restraining  Order  with  regards   to   your   current
         victim....


         There is no evidence that  you  have  addressed  the  issues  which
         caused you to behave in  this  appalling  manner  ...  you  pose  a
         significant and unacceptable risk of harm to women  in  the  United
         Kingdom.   Furthermore,  there  is   clearly   an   escalation   in
         seriousness of the offences you have committed."




    This assessment culminates in the omnibus conclusion:


         "All the available evidence indicates that you have a propensity to
         reoffend and that you represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat to the public to justify  your  deportation  on  the
         grounds of public policy."








    The decision continues:


         "Given the nature of the offence you have committed and the  threat
         that you pose to society, it is considered that, even  if  you  had
         permanent residence as a result of 5 years continuous residence  in
         the United Kingdom or for a continuous period of at least 10 years,
         the requirement  for serious  grounds  of  security  or  imperative
         grounds of public security respectively would be satisfied."


    Finally, the decision maker  pronounced  himself  satisfied  about  the
    proportionality of  deportation  and  concluded  that  this  would  not
    infringe Article 8 ECHR.


Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

 8. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), having considered the testimony of the
    Appellant and both of his parents made the following specific findings:




      a) When the Appellant was born (in 1986), his mother  and  father  had
         lived in the United  Kingdom,  having  emigrated  from  Italy,  for
         periods of 7 and 4 years respectively.  They were married following
         the birth.


      b) At the time of the Appellant's birth, his mother  was  on  a  Youth
         Training Scheme and his father was actively employed.


      c) The family lived in Germany from 1989 to 1997.


      d) The Appellant had lived continuously in  the  United  Kingdom  from
         1997, beginning work in 2003 (having left school) and holding  down
         some seven or eight short lived, cash paid, jobs between  2003  and
         2006.


      e) The Appellant was again in employment from mid-2007 to mid-2008 and
         he made national insurance contributions of varying amounts between
         2003 and 2011.


      f) "The totality  of  the  evidence  .....  supports  the  Appellant's
         [assertion] that he  was  essentially  working  at  short  term  or
         temporary jobs within the period after he left school".


      g) The Appellant "....  was continuously resident in the UK  from  his
         return from Germany in 1997 without any unlawful break until 2010".


    Finally, the  Judge  found  that  both  the  Appellant's  parents  were
    "ordinarily resident" in the United Kingdom at the time of his birth.










 9. In a key passage the Judge continues:


         "I find the evidence discloses on balance that  the  Appellant  was
         continuously resident in the UK from his  return  from  Germany  in
         1997 without any unlawful break until 2010.  During  that  time  he
         was a student at school until 2002 [then aged 16] and thereafter on
         balance I find from the totality of the evidence  he  was  engaged,
         albeit perhaps sporadically, in employment.   He  would  also  have
         been a family member under Regulation 7  of  the  2006  Regulations
         until the age of 21 years in 2007. I find therefore that he appears
         to have acquired 10 years  continuous  residence  from  1997  until
         2011.  Thereafter his continuous time in the UK has been broken  by
         periods spent in prison which does [sic] not as lawful residence."


    The Tribunal then raised the question of whether the Appellant  had  10
    years continuous residence during the  period  preceding  August  2005,
    when the impugned decision was  made.   The  Judge  did  not,  however,
    answer this question.  Rather, the determination states:


         "As noted above the Appellant on balance appears to  have  acquired
         such residence from 1997 until 01 March 2011 ..."


    This is followed by:


         "It follows therefore that any removal of the Appellant can only be
         in accordance with Regulation 21(4) namely on imperative grounds of
         public security."


         [My emphasis.]




10. In the penultimate paragraph of its  decision  the  FtT  concludes  and
    reasons as follows:


      i) The Appellant is a British citizen under section 1(1)(b) under  the
         1981 Act.


    (ii) Accordingly, he cannot be deported under the 2006 Regulations.


    (iii)    If conclusions (i) and (ii) are incorrect, the Appellant is an
         EEA national who, by virtue of 10 years continuous residence in the
         United Kingdom, can be deported  only  on  grounds  of  "imperative
         public security", under Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations.


    (iv)  While  the  Appellant  has  undoubtedly   engaged   in   "serious
         criminality", the threshold of "imperative public security" is  not
         overcome.


    The FtT allowed the appeal accordingly.





Permission to Appeal

11. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted  on  the  basis  that
    there is arguable merit in the contention that the FtT erred in law  in
    the following respects:


      i) In holding that the Appellant's mother had,  at  the  time  of  his
         birth, acquired a permanent  right  of  residence,  and  hence  the
         status of settlement, in the United Kingdom.


    (ii) In failing to consider whether the Appellant's  integration  links
         with the United Kingdom had been severed.


    So much is clear from the grant of permission to appeal.




  12. The reference in the grant of permission to appeal to the Secretary of
      State's "third ground" is opaque, having regard to the terms in  which
      the application for permission to appeal is couched.  In  one  section
      of the grounds there appears  to  be  an  indirect  challenge  to  the
      correctness of the decision in MG  and  VC  [2006]  UKAIT  00053.   In
      another part there is a  contention,  based  on  the  decision  in  LG
      (Italy) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  190,  that  the  FtT  failed  to  take
      account of "an evolution in the SSHD's policy".  Two observations  are
      appropriate:


      a) The suggestion that MG and VC  was  wrongly  decided  is  bare  and
         unparticularised.


      b) There is no attempt to explain how the FtT's  asserted  failure  to
         take into account the "evolution in the SSHD's policy"  constitutes
         an error of law.

    To this I would add that, in any event, government policies relating to
    how legislation is to be implemented or operated,  a  paradigm  example
    being how discretionary statutory powers will normally be exercised and
    the criteria which will dictate their exercise, have no bearing on  the
    construction  of  the  legislation  concerned.   The  construction   of
    legislation is a pure question of law.


13. The conclusion that the Secretary of State's application for permission
    to appeal is non-compliant with the decision of this Tribunal in  Nixon
    (permission  to  appeal:  grounds)  [2014]  UKUT  368   (IAC)   follows
    inexorably.  It should never be necessary for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    invest  its  limited  resources  in  protracted  attempts  to  construe
    applications for permission  to  appeal  or  grants  of  permission  to
    appeal.  This is  manifestly  inimical  to  the  overriding  objective.
    Applications for permission to appeal should  be  crisp,  succinct  and
    clear.  The application in the present case takes the form of a diffuse
    and unparticularised essay. Having conducted this unwelcome exercise, I
    conclude that the scope of this appeal is confined to  the  two  issues
    set forth in [11] above.



The British Citizenship Issue

14. The first limb of the Appellant's case is that he is a British  Citizen
    by birth.  The submission developed by  Mr  Schenk  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant was that section 50(2) of the 1981 Act applies to any  person
    exercising Treaty rights by virtue of Home Office policy.   The  policy
    in question took the form of  a  Home  Office  Nationality  Instruction
    entitled "European Economic Area and Swiss Nationals".   Paragraph  8.1
    of this policy stated that as regards the period prior  to  02  October
    2000 -


         "Evidence that the person concerned was exercising any  description
         of EEA free movement right in the UK on the relevant date should be
         accepted as evidence that he or she was not, then,  'subject  under
         the immigration laws to any restriction on  the  period  for  which
         [they] might remain in the United Kingdom'."

    In Fransman's British Nationality Law (3rd Edition)  it  is  stated  at
    paragraph 13.2.2 (page 337):


         "To be settled in the UK or an overseas territory, a person must be
         'ordinarily resident' and, simultaneously, not 'subject  under  the
         immigration laws to any restriction on the period for which he  may
         remain' (i.e. he must be without time restrictions)."


15. Fransman also addresses the phrase  "without  time  restrictions".   He
    suggests, at paragraph 13.2.5:


         "'Without being subject to time restrictions' is mainly a matter of
         fact, whether or not the status involves a time restriction."

    With regard to the first element of this proposition, I confine  myself
    to the observation that, in the abstract at least, a  time  restriction
    could arise by operation of law, via  legislation  whether  primary  or
    secondary and could also arise by virtue of Government policy,  whether
    through the medium of the Immigration Rules or otherwise.   Thus  there
    is scope for debate about whether "being subject to time  restrictions"
    is, as Fransman advocates, mainly a matter of fact.  Having said  that,
    the terms in which a  residence  authorisation  are  couched  would  be
    primarily a matter of fact, though construction of the  document  would
    be a matter of law. The second element of the proposition  is  probably
    not designed to add in substance to the first and does not in  my  view
    do so.


16. The status under the 1981 Act of EC nationals (as they then  were)  was
    addressed specifically by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  (the  "IAT")
    in the case of Gal [TH/25885/92 10620].   The  argument  developed,  in
    substance, was that the EU national concerned, a  French  citizen,  was
    settled in the United Kingdom because, as an employee, he had  a  right
    of residence not limited  by  any  time  restriction.   The  Tribunal's
    rejection of this  argument  was  unequivocal.   It  held  that  an  EC
    national residing in the  United  Kingdom  equipped  with  a  residence
    permit is not "settled" within the compass of section 1(1) of the  1981
    Act.  The rationale for thus holding  was  simple:  the  period  during
    which such a person may remain in the  United  Kingdom  is  conditional
    upon remaining economically  active.   The  operative  passage  of  the
    decision is at page 10:

         "We accept that  so  long  as  Mr.  Zilberberg**  qualified  for  a
         residence permit he had a right of residence but to be "settled"  a
         person must have no restriction "for  the  period  which  he  could
         remain".  Mr. Zilberberg could remain under his European Law  right
         only for a period during which he qualified under European Law  for
         residence i.e. he met the terms  of  any  particular  European  Law
         category on which he relied.  So as an employee he had to remain  a
         "worker" within the meaning of European  Law.   Even  the  residual
         residence category requires non-recourse to public funds.


         The period for which Mr. Zilberberg could remain was not restricted
         directly by time but so  long  as  qualifications  are  needed  the
         period is restricted and, more, is restricted as to  its  duration.
         The need for continued  qualification  is  to  be  contrasted  with
         indefinite  leave  to  remain  which  may  only  be  terminated  by
         deportation.  It follows that Mr. Zilberberg was never  settled  in
         this country and it was not open to Mrs. Gal  to  claim  any  right
         under paragraph 132."


    [** The EU national in the equation]


    One of the distinctive features of the Appellant's  arguments  is  that
    they do not mention, much less acknowledge, this  decision.   The  same
    observation applies to the grounds of appeal  and  submissions  of  the
    Secretary of State.




17. It would appear that in Gal an  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    initiated, but not pursued.  It seems surprising, at this remove,  that
    the issue  which  Gal  decided  does  not  feature  in  other  reported
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal (or its predecessors) and has not  been
    authoritatively determined by the Court of Appeal.   Fransman  suggests
    that the decision generated some controversy.   While  the  benefit  of
    comprehensive adversarial argument would obviously have been welcome, I
    am satisfied that Gal was correctly decided. However, for  the  reasons
    explained below, my analysis is that  while  the  outcome  in  Gal  was
    correct the underlying reasoning was flawed.


18. Although in Gal the IAT accepted that  the  phrase  "immigration  laws"
    encompasses the EU  rules  on  free  movement,  I  would  question  the
    correctness of this.  Since 1971, via Section 33(1) of the  Immigration
    Act of that year, the definition of "immigration laws" has been:


         "'Immigration laws' means this Act and any law for purposes similar
         to this Act which is for the time being or has (before or after the
         passing of this Act) been in  force  in  any  part  of  the  United
         Kingdom and Islands."


    I consider that the ordinary and natural meaning of  these  words  does
    not encompass the EU rules on free movement.  The definition  makes  no
    mention of EU laws, primary or secondary.  Furthermore,  the  1971  Act
    pre-dated the accession of the  United  Kingdom  to  the  EU  and  this
    definition was not amended subsequently.  Notably, this definition  was
    repeated when the 1981 Act was introduced: see section  50(1).   In  my
    judgement "immigration laws" are confined to laws made  by  the  United
    Kingdom Parliament.  If this phrase were  designed  to  extend  to  any
    provisions of EU law, one would expect  clear  words  to  this  effect:
    there are none.  To complete this discrete analysis, paragraph 5 of the
    Immigration Rules makes clear that  they  have  no  application  to  EU
    citizens exercising Treaty rights:


         "Safe where expressly indicated, these Rules do not apply to  those
         persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue of the provisions of the 2006 EEA  Regulations.  But  any
         person who is not entitled to  rely  on  the  provisions  of  those
         Regulations is covered by these Rules."

19. I consider that the FtT  fell  into  error  in  its  consideration  and
    application of the definition of "settled" in section 50(2) of the 1981
    Act.  This error arose from its concentration on the phrase "ordinarily
    resident" only, at the expense of and neglecting the second part of the
    definition namely "without being subject under the immigration laws  to
    any restriction on the period  for  which  he  may  remain".   For  the
    reasons explained in [18] I consider that  the  reasoning  in  Gal  was
    incorrect.  The IAT should have held  that  this  second  part  of  the
    definition of "settled" cannot sensibly be  applied  to  a  EU  citizen
    exercising  Treaty  rights  since  the  "immigration  laws",  correctly
    defined and understood, do not apply to such persons.  In other  words,
    in the case of EU citizens, no question of a time restriction under the
    immigration laws can arise.  It follows  that  EU  citizens  can  never
    satisfy the second part of the definition.  Approached in this way, the
    FtT's error was to conclude that the Appellant's parents were,  at  the
    material time, viz when he was born, British citizens simply on account
    of being ordinarily resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  finding
    failed to address the second limb of the definition  of  "settled".  If
    addressed correctly, the FtT would in my judgement have been  bound  to
    conclude that it was not satisfied, for the reasons explained above.

20. In short, there is no merger of United Kingdom immigration laws and  EU
    Treaty free movement rules.  The view expressed in Gal that the  latter
    are immersed within the former  is,  in  my  estimation,  misconceived.
    These are two  quite  separate  legal  regimes  in  the  context  under
    scrutiny.

21. Given the definition of "settled" in section 50(2) of the 1981 Act, the
    separate question to be addressed is whether the FtT erred  in  law  in
    its approach to the "ordinarily resident" rubric of  section  50(2)  of
    the 1981 Act.  The concrete question for the FtT was whether either  of
    the Appellant's parents was "ordinarily resident" in the United Kingdom
    on the date of his birth, 18 March  1986.   The  first  requirement  of
    "ordinary residence" is that it denotes lawful residence,  per  section
    50(5) of the 1981 Act.  This is not disputed in the present case, given
    the EU national status (now EU citizenship) of both parents  and  their
    exercise of Treaty rights at all material times.

22. It has long been settled that ordinary residence is a question of  fact
    and degree.  Lord Scarman addressed this topic in  extenso  in  Shah  v
    Barnet LBC [1983] 2 AC 309 at, firstly, page 343:


         "Unless, therefore, it can be shown that the statutory framework or
         the legal context in which the words are used requires a  different
         meaning, I unhesitatingly subscribe to the  view  that  "ordinarily
         resident" refers to a man's abode in a particular place or  country
         which he has adopted voluntarily and for settled purposes  as  part
         of the regular order of his life for the  time  being,  whether  of
         short or of long duration."

    Elaborating, at page 344:

         "There are two, and no more than two, respects in which the mind of
         the "propositus" is important in  determining  ordinary  residence.
         The residence must be voluntarily  adopted.  Enforced  presence  by
         reason  of  kidnapping  or  imprisonment,  or  a  Robinson   Crusoe
         existence on a desert island with no opportunity of escape, may  be
         so overwhelming a factor as to negative the will to  be  where  one
         is.


         And there must be a degree of settled purpose. The purpose  may  be
         one; or there may be several. It may be specific or  general.   All
         that the law requires is that there is a settled purpose.  This  is
         not to say that the  "propositus"  intends  to  stay  where  he  is
         indefinitely; indeed his purpose,  while  settled,  may  be  for  a
         limited period.  Education,  business  or  profession,  employment,
         health, family, or merely love of  the  place  spring  to  mind  as
         common reasons for a choice of regular abode and there may well  be
         many others.  All that is necessary is that the purpose  of  living
         where one does has a sufficient degree of continuity to be properly
         described as settled."

    These principles fall to be applied to this  appeal  in  the  following
    way.


23. At [21] of its decision the FtT unambiguously found that in  1986  both
    of the Appellant's parents  were  ordinarily  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the time of his birth.  In thus finding, the  Tribunal  gave
    express  consideration  to  the  decision  in  Shah,  directed   itself
    correctly in law, and provided adequate and rational reasons  for  thus
    finding.  This  discrete  aspect  of  its  decision  is,  in  my  view,
    unimpeachable.

24. It is almost otiose to add that the Home Office policy  noted  in  [14]
    above cannot alter or modify primary legislation.  Nor can it have  the
    effect of altering paragraph 5 of the Rules, given their status in law.
     Furthermore, the policy is not a legitimate  aid  to  construction  of
    either primary legislation or the Rules.  Insofar  as  it  purports  to
    state the law I consider it flawed.  The brusque riposte to  the  first
    element of the Appellant's case - see [14] above -  is  that  the  Home
    Office  policy  in  question  is  incapable   of   conferring   British
    citizenship on the Appellant or contributing to his ability to  satisfy
    the relevant statutory requirements and definitions.

25. It follows that the first ground of appeal is made  out.   However,  as
    appears from what follows, this does not suffice to rescue the impugned
    decision of the Secretary of State.


    Second ground of appeal: the EEA Regulations issue


26. In my judgement, this aspect of the appeal travels nowhere by virtue of
    the unambiguous - and repeated - findings of the FtT  relating  to  the
    Appellant's continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom.   These  are
    rehearsed in [8] - [10] above.  It is appropriate to observe that  this
    is the issue which the FtT addressed most  insistently.   The  critical
    finding (repeated) was that the Appellant was continuously resident  in
    the United Kingdom from 1997 to 2010.  This was a finding of fact, pure
    and simple.  It is unassailable.  Moreover, there is no suggestion that
    this period of 13 years was punctuated by (in the language of the  FtT)
    any "unlawful break".  The second of the permitted  grounds  of  appeal
    dissolves and thaws to nothing accordingly.  In passing, I consider  it
    highly  probable  that  the  second  ground  of  appeal  overcame   the
    permission  threshold  by  reason  of  the  multiple  defects  in   the
    application for permission: see [11] - [12] above.


27.  Accordingly,  the  Appellant  qualifies  for  the  highest  level   of
    protection  against  deportation  under  the   regime   of   the   2006
    Regulations.  Thus, per Regulation 21(4), the  precondition  of  lawful
    deportation  action  against  him  is  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security".  In making the impugned  decision  the  Secretary  of  State
    failed to recognise this, as is clear from [6]  -  [7]  above  and,  in
    consequence, erred in law.  The decision of the FtT on  this  issue  is
    unimpeachable.  As a result, the FtT's error of law diagnosed  in  [19]
    above does not operate to redeem the Secretary of State's decision  and
    is immaterial.


    Decision


  28. This appeal is dismissed accordingly.












                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                    Date:   31 December 2016
