

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                              HH (medical evidence; effect of Mibanga)
Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 November 2005                              |25 November 2005           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                  Mr A R Mackey (Senior Immigration Judge)
                    Mr P R Lane (Senior Immigration Judge

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by
     Messrs Hanne & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

This determination is reported for what is said  at paragraph 21  about  the
case of Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia born on 18 February  1985,  claims
      to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 March 2005.   She  claimed
      asylum on 17 March 2005 and on 6  April  2005  her  asylum  claim  was
      refused and a decision was  made  by  the  respondent  to  remove  the
      appellant as an illegal entrant.

2.   The appellant appealed against that decision to an  Immigration  Judge,
      Mr N Froom, sitting at Hatton  Cross,  who  by  a  determination  that
      followed a hearing on 5 July 2005 dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
      asylum and human rights grounds.   On 28 July 2005 an order  was  made
      under section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
      for the reconsideration  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  determination.
      The appellant's application  to  the  High  Court  for  an  order  for
      reconsideration asserts that the Immigration Judge  erred  in  law  in
      coming to his adverse credibility findings regarding  the  appellant's
      account of her experiences in  Ethiopia.     Given  that  the  grounds
      consist of a series of criticisms of almost  all  of  the  Immigration
      Judge's credibility findings, it will be convenient for  the  Tribunal
      to deal with those grounds, and Mr Bazini's submissions in support  of
      them, as we describe the Judge's findings.

3.   At paragraph 21 of the determination, the  Immigration  Judge  recorded
      that the appellant's alleged fear of the Ethiopian  authorities  arose
      from the activities of her uncle and of  her  father  with  the  Oromo
      Liberation Front ("OLF").  At her Home Office interview, the appellant
      had been unable to say what "OLF" stood for, who  was  its  leader  or
      what its aims and objectives were.   She  claimed,  however,  to  know
      that her father and uncle were not involved in violent activities with
      the organisation but that they were "collecting money to buy weapons".
         She knew that the uncle and father held meetings every week but did
      not know what these  meetings  were  about.    In  her  later  written
      statement, the appellant sought to explain her lack  of  knowledge  by
      saying that she did not attend the meetings, but just carried  in  the
      drinks.   It did not occur to her to ask her  uncle  or  father  about
      their positions.

4.    At  paragraph  22,  the  Immigration  Judge,  having  noted  that  the
      appellant's residence in Addis Ababa, as  opposed  to  Oromiya,  might
      have accounted "in part for her lack of interest in Oromo issues"  and
      that she "may have been deliberately kept apart from what  would  have
      been illegal meetings",  nevertheless  found  "it  very  difficult  to
      reconcile the appellant's account  that  her  closest  relatives  were
      involved with OLF and hosted regular meetings with  her  almost  total
      lack of knowledge about the movement".    The Immigration Judge  found
      it "hard to imagine how an Oromo living  with  OLF  activists  over  a
      period of years in early adulthood could fail to pick  up  the  basics
      about the organisation".

5.   Mr Bazini submitted that those last two  findings  of  the  Immigration
      Judge did not sit comfortably with his earlier  observation  regarding
      the appellant who, it is common ground, lived at  all  material  times
      with her uncle.   The Tribunal does not agree.   The Immigration Judge
      was fully entitled as a matter of law to find it incredible  that  the
      appellant could have lived with someone who was  hosting  regular  OLF
      meetings, and  yet  not  know  anything  of  significance  about  that
      organisation.   Mr Bazini submitted that it was speculation  to  infer
      that the appellant and her uncle must have spoken about such  matters,
      if  the  appellant  were  telling  the   truth.     No   impermissible
      speculation was, however, involved.   The Immigration  Judge  had  the
      benefit of hearing and seeing the appellant give her evidence.   There
      is nothing perverse or otherwise unlawful in his  conclusion  that  it
      was simply not believable that a person in the  appellant's  position,
      who knew that her father  and  uncle  were  collecting  money  to  buy
      weapons but were nevertheless not involved  "in  violent  activities",
      would simply not know anything of significance about the  organisation
      in whose name  her  father  and  uncle  allegedly  carried  out  these
      activities.

6.   At paragraph 23,  the  Immigration  Judge  explained  why  he  did  not
      consider certain alleged discrepancies in the appellant's evidence  to
      be of significance.   At paragraph 24, however, he  set  out  what  he
      regarded as significant "confusion" in the appellant's evidence  about
      where people  were  when  they  were  arrested.    At  interview,  the
      appellant had said that her father and uncle were arrested in  January
      2005 and that her father was "in the house" and she did not know where
      her uncle was arrested.   In her statement, however, she had said that
      her father had gone out at the time that he was arrested and her uncle
      was arrested at his home.    When the point was put to  the  appellant
      in cross-examination, she said that she had said at interview that her
      uncle was at home.  The Immigration Judge, however, noted  that  "that
      is not what was recorded at  her  interview  and  the  error  was  not
      corrected in the  letter"  (that  is  to  say,  the  letter  from  the
      appellant's solicitors to the respondent, commenting on the  interview
      record - see paragraph 9 below).

7.   The grounds accompanying the application for reconsideration sought  to
      show that the Immigration Judge was incorrect in  inferring  that  the
      relevant passage in the appellant's interview record  related  to  her
      father's second arrest.   Before the Tribunal, Mr Bazini did not  seek
      to advance that assertion, which we in any event  find  to  be  false.
      On any proper reading of questions 31 to 39 of the  interview  record,
      the appellant was describing the father's second arrest.

8.   Before the Tribunal, Mr Bazini's  criticism  of  paragraph  24  of  the
      determination was advanced on a different basis.  At paragraph 23, the
      Immigration Judge, referring to the Court of Appeal judgment in Dirshe
      [2005] EWCA Civ 421, had chosen to disregard certain discrepancies  in
      the appellant's evidence, on the ground that  the  appellant  was  not
      accompanied by a solicitor at her interview  and  that  the  interview
      record had not been read back to her at the time.  It  was  in  effect
      illogical of the Immigration Judge, Mr Bazini contended,  to  adopt  a
      different approach in paragraph 24, in relation to  the  location  and
      timing of the arrest of family  members,  given  the  Judge's  implied
      acceptance that there had been problems with the interview.

9.   The Tribunal does not accept this submission.   The  Immigration  Judge
      has given a legally  coherent  reason  why  he  found  as  he  did  at
      paragraph 24: namely, that the undated  letter  from  the  appellant's
      solicitors, which appears to have been sent within 5 working  days  of
      the interview on 24 March 2005, dealt with certain corrections to what
      was recorded in the interview record, but that these did  not  include
      the issue of where and when people had been arrested.  That issue  was
      not dealt with until the appellant's written  statement  of  25  April
      2005, where differences  with  the  interview  record  were  apparent.
      The Immigration Judge was, in effect,  entitled  to  find  that  these
      belated changes damaged the appellant's credibility.    The weight  to
      be placed upon the various aspects of the appellant's overall evidence
      was one for the Judge to determine (R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982).

10.  Mr Bazini's second criticism of paragraph 24 was that  the  Immigration
      Judge chose to give the appellant no credit  for  the  fact  that  the
      discrepancies arose only because the appellant chose to set the record
      straight in her statement of 25 April.    The Immigration Judge had no
      legal duty to give the appellant any such credit.   The fact was  that
      discrepant evidence had been  placed  before  the  Immigration  Judge.
      Plainly, there might be several reasons for this.     The  Immigration
      judge was under no legal duty to find himself  compelled  to  conclude
      that the one now advanced by Mr Bazini - namely,  that  the  appellant
      was seeking to put the record straight  -  was  the  only  reason  the
      Immigration Judge could accept.

11.   There  is  nothing  of  significance  in  the  criticism  levelled  at
      paragraph 25 of the determination.    Here, the Immigration Judge gave
      weight to the fact that the appellant had not mentioned  at  interview
      that she was made to sign a piece of paper on  leaving  the  detention
      centre.   Rather, she had  told  how  she  secured  her  release  from
      detention (following the arrests of her  father  and  uncle)  "on  the
      condition that for me (sic) to think about it and go back to them  and
      give them the details about people that were having meetings  with  my
      father and  uncle"  (question  65).   Mr  Bazini  submitted  that  the
      reference to being released "on condition" was not  incompatible  with
      the appellant's signing a piece of paper relating to her acceptance of
      bail  conditions.    Again,  however,  the  point   is   whether   the
      Immigration Judge was entitled as a matter of  law  to  regard  it  as
      significant that the  appellant  had  not  at  interview  referred  to
      signing anything.   We find that he was so entitled.  The  Immigration
      Judge noted at paragraph 25 that this too was a matter which could and
      should have been dealt with in the solicitor's  letter  that  followed
      the reading back to the appellant of the interview record  (presumably
      at the solicitor's).  Likewise, the Immigration was entitled  to  find
      that the appellant had, in effect, belatedly tried to  introduce  into
      her account the allegation that she had been released on bail.

12.  At paragraph 26 of the determination, the  Immigration  Judge  recorded
      that he found the appellant's oral evidence vague as to what the paper
      (which she signed) was supposed to have said.   The Immigration  Judge
      then noted that he had pointed out to the  appellant  at  the  hearing
      that, by her account, her father and uncle were already in  detention.
        This was in response to her assertion that she  had  been  told  "to
      come back with information about her father and  uncle's  activities".
      Paragraph 26 then records that the appellant responded  by  indicating
      that the authorities "probably wanted to know whether there  were  any
      documents  in  the  house".      The  Immigration   Judge   found   it
      significant that the  appellant  had,  in  so  saying,  "enlarged  her
      account further".  Mr Bazini so criticised that finding on  the  basis
      that the appellant had in effect been forced by the Immigration  Judge
      into the position of speculating on the motivation of the  authorities
      in requiring her to return  with  information.   Again,  however,  the
      Tribunal does not find that any material error of law has been exposed
      here.  What happened was that the Immigration Judge asked (as  he  was
      entitled to do) about what seemed on  the  face  of  it  an  illogical
      stance on the part of the  Ethiopian  authorities.      The  most  the
      appellant could do in response was to suggest that  those  authorities
      may have wished her to ascertain whether there were documents  in  the
      house.    However, as the Immigration  Judge  said,  "the  authorities
      could reasonably be expected to search  the  house  themselves  rather
      than rely on the appellant to do it for them".

13.  At paragraph 27, the Immigration Judge noted  that,  when  asked  about
      her  addresses,  the  appellant  "became  very  evasive   during   her
      examination  and  even  Mr  Nicholls  [her  Counsel]  had   difficulty
      obtaining clear answers".    The grounds of appeal make  no  criticism
      of this finding.   Plainly it was, once again, one that  was  open  to
      the Immigration Judge.    So too was  the  related  finding  that  the
      appellant actually gave contradictory evidence  regarding  an  address
      for her parents in Ethiopia.

14.  At paragraph 28, the Immigration Judge turned to a  medical  report  of
      Dr Hiley that had been submitted on  behalf  of  the  appellant.    Dr
      Hiley is a general practitioner (but  not  the  appellant's  own  GP).
      She heard  the  appellant  give  an  account  of  her  experiences  in
      Ethiopia.    This included a description of  the  appellant's  alleged
      ill-treatment whilst in detention following the arrest of  her  father
      and uncle.   Dr Hiley observed that "the types of  injuries  described
      by  [the  appellant]  do  not  typically  leave  permanent   scarring"
      (paragraph  16).     Dr  Hiley  found  it  "therefore  unlikely   that
      significant diagnostic scars would be seen".   She was, however,  able
      to observe "a small  circular  irregular  and  pale  scar  of  unknown
      origin" on the inside the appellant's right thigh.   On her back there
      were "two patterns of scarring, firstly on the left upper  spine  over
      the shoulder blade there is a circular pattern of  well  healed  scars
      which  could  be  consistent  with  being  beaten  across  this   bony
      prominence.   On the right side of the spine there was "a  pattern  of
      four smaller circular but irregular scars, it is possible  that  these
      patterns of scarring were caused by  being  beaten".    Lower  on  the
      spine there was "an oval shaped irregular scar near the mid  line  but
      this is non specific, there are also multiple non  specific  scars  on
      the arms and legs but it is not possible to draw any conclusions about
      the aetiology of these" (paragraph 17).

15.  At paragraph 20 of her report, Dr Hiley had this to say:

        "20. I believe that [the appellant] is suffering  with  (sic)  some
              elements of post traumatic stress and I have  encouraged  her
              to discuss these further with her GP.    I  have  attached  a
              copy of the diagnostic criteria for post traumatic stress for
              your information; I believe she meets criteria A1 and A2,  B1
              and B4.  In addition she has many symptoms of depression  and
              is also grieving for her family losses."


16.  At paragraph 21, Dr Hiley said:

         "21. There is little physical evidence which can absolutely confirm
              this lady's history; however the types  of  injury  described
              would not be expected to leave diagnostic  scars.    I  would
              therefore not recommend any conclusion drawn from any lack of
              scarring".

17.   At  paragraph  28,  the  Immigration  Judge  found  that  Dr   Hiley's
      conclusion, that the appellant had been the victim of imprisonment and
      beatings in the way described, was not one that he could  share  since
      it was the Judge's "function to make an assessment based  on  all  the
      evidence I have heard".     Dr  Hiley,  by  contrast,  had  based  her
      conclusions in part on her view that the appellant's account had  been
      consistent.    Plainly, the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  otherwise.
      As for scarring, the Immigration Judge was "not  able  to  place  much
      weight on her conclusions  in  this  particular  case.    There  is  a
      tension between her  statements  that  the  appellant  has  consistent
      scarring and that there is little physical  evidence  to  confirm  the
      appellant's claim".   Mr Bazini took issue with this  finding  of  the
      Immigration Judge.   Whether another Judge would have  used  precisely
      the terminology employed by the Immigration Judge  in  this  case  is,
      however, beside the point.  What emerges from the  medical  report  is
      that the evidence of physical  scarring,  such  as  it  was,  did  not
      advance the appellant's case to any significant  extent  and  that  Dr
      Hiley in effect  acknowledged  this.   As  regards  the  psychological
      aspects, paragraph 20 of the report is somewhat curious.   There is no
      express finding of post traumatic stress disorder by Dr Hiley.    This
      is notwithstanding that she says that she believes the appellant meets
      criteria A1 and A2, B1 and B4, set out in Appendix D  to  the  report.
      According to Appendix D, such a finding would appear to have permitted
      an actual diagnosis of PTSD.  The explanation for Dr Hiley's reticence
      (if such it be) may well be that, as the Immigration Judge  found,  Dr
      Hiley claims no  expertise  or  specialism  in  psychiatric  medicine.
      But whether or not Dr Hiley was, or was intending to, make a  specific
      finding of post  traumatic  stress  disorder  in  the  appellant,  the
      Immigration Judge was entitled as a matter of law to limit the  weight
      placed upon her conclusions by reason of the fact that she  lacks  the
      qualifications that one would expect to see in the curriculum vitae of
      a person making a diagnosis of PTSD. Dr Hiley is not a psychiatrist or
      someone with other specialist psychiatric training.

18.  At the end of paragraph 28, the Immigration Judge noted that  Dr  Hiley
      did not seem "to have considered that [the  appellant's  psychological
      symptoms] could have other causes, such as the anxiety and  loneliness
      felt by all asylum seekers particularly those who  have  already  been
      refused by the Home Office."  The  Tribunal  does  not  find  anything
      wrong in law with that conclusion.    Very  many  appellants  fail  in
      their appeals because they are  not  found  credible,  notwithstanding
      that they have been diagnosed by appropriate specialists as  suffering
      from PTSD.   The Immigration Judge was doing no more than draw on  his
      judicial experience in order to ascribe an explanation for this in the
      appellant's case.

19.  Finally, the grounds assert that the Immigration Judge erred in law  in
      failing to treat the medical report as part of the overall evidence in
      this case, to be considered  "in  the  round"  before  coming  to  any
      conclusion as to the appellant's credibility.  Reference  is  made  to
      the Court of Appeal judgments in  Mibanga  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367,  in
      particular paragraph 24 of the judgment of Wilson J:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must not  reach
          his or her conclusion before surveying all the evidence  relevant
          thereto.  Just as, if I may take a banal if alliterative example,
          one cannot  make  a  cake  with  only  one  ingredient,  so  also
          frequently one cannot make a case, in the sense  of  establishing
          its truth, otherwise than by combination of a number of pieces of
          evidence".


20.  In the present case, it is manifest  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
      arrived at his  conclusions  as  to  credibility  by  looking  at  the
      evidence in the round.   At paragraph  16  of  the  determination,  he
      reminded himself that "I must look at the case in the round  in  light
      of all the relevant circumstances".   At paragraph 20, the Immigration
      Judge confirmed that he had "considered the  appellant's  evidence  in
      the round together with the  background  evidence  and  her  interview
      record".   Plainly, the medical report was  part  of  the  appellant's
      evidence.

21.  The Tribunal  considers  that  there  is  a  danger  of  Mibanga  being
      misunderstood.    The judgments in that case are not intended to place
      judicial fact-finders  in  a  form  of  forensic  straightjacket.   In
      particular, the Court of Appeal is not to be regarded as  laying  down
      any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders are  to
      approach the evidential materials before them.   To  take  Wilson  J's
      "cake" analogy, all its ingredients cannot be thrown together into the
      bowl simultaneously.   One has to start somewhere.   There was nothing
      illogical about the process by which  the  Immigration  Judge  in  the
      present case chose to approach his analytical task.

22.  The Tribunal finds that the Immigration Judge's determination  contains
      no  material  error  of  law  and  we  accordingly  order   that   his
      determination, dismissing the appellant's appeal on  both  asylum  and
      human rights grounds, shall stand.






Signed                                  Date




P R Lane
Senior Immigration Judge

Approved for electronic distribution






