

|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Asylum and Immigration Tribunal                                   |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|Heard at Field House                                              |
|Heard on: 9 November 2005  |        |Determination issued:       |
|Prepared : 11 November 2005|        |                            |
|Before:                                                           |
|Mr R Chalkley                                                     |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|Ms C Jarvis                                                       |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|Respondent                                                        |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Adler of Counsel instructed by Gupta and
                 Partners. Solicitors

Costs orders: This case is reported for what we say about  the  restrictions
on the power of the Tribunal to make section 103D orders. No  order  may  be
made unless an appellant is represented by a supplier acting pursuant  to  a
grant of Legal Representation.  It is the duty of a legal representative  to
ensure that an appellant has the benefit of all public funding to  which  he
may be entitled.

              DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION FOR A FUNDING ORDER

   1. The Appellant applies for a funding order pursuant to Rule 33  of  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  (Amendment)  Rules  2005,
      and Regulation  6(3)  of  the  Community  Legal  Service  (Asylum  and
      Immigration Appeals) Regulations 2005 (the CLS Regulations).


   2.  The Appellant, who is from Kosovo, applied for asylum as a  separated
      child. He was not recognized as a refugee but was granted  exceptional
      leave to remain until the  day  before  his  eighteenth  birthday.  He
      applied, in time, for further leave which was refused.  The  Appellant
      appealed against the decision of an Immigration Judge (Mr P  A  Grant-
      Hutchison), who in a determination issued on 27 July  2005,  dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  made  on  26
      May 2005 to refuse to vary leave to enter as a  refugee  or  on  other
      human rights grounds.


   3. The Senior Immigration Judge, when making an order for reconsideration
      on 8 August 2005, stated that it was  arguable  that  the  Immigration
      Judge had materially erred in law in that he had  misdirected  himself
      in law in relation to the question whether there is a  sufficiency  of
      protection available to the Appellant following the  guidance  of  the
      House of Lords in Horvath v SSHD [2000] INLR 239  HL.  In  particular,
      there was before the Tribunal, at all material  times,  evidence  from
      UNHCR  which  appeared  to  place  those  similarly  situated  to  the
      Appellant into categories of persons considered to be at real risk  in
      Serbia and Montenegro.


   4. At the hearing, after receiving argument from both parties,  we  found
      that the Immigration Judge had fallen into material error of  law.  We
      went on to fully reconsider the matter and we found in favour  of  the
      Appellant on both refugee and human rights grounds. Mr Adler then made
      application for a funding order. We  noted  that  there  had  been  no
      application made within the body of the application for an  order  for
      reconsideration (form AIT/103A). At Part D of that form  the  question
      is  posed:  'Is  an  order  for  costs  sought  under  S.103D  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002? In this  case  the  word
      'yes' has been deleted. The note below, which is  part  of  the  form,
      states that : "if an order for costs is sought you must  answer  'yes'
      to ensure that consideration is given  to  whether  or  not  an  order
      should be made".

   5. Mr Adler explained that the  form  had  been  completed  in  that  way
      because the Appellant did not have  the  benefit  of  Community  Legal
      Service (CLS) Funding at the time when the application for review  was
      lodged.

   6.  We took the view that the fact that the  application  for  a  funding
      order had not been made in the application form was not fatal as it is
      clear from the case of RS (Funding - meaning of 'significant prospect)
      [2005] UKAIT 138, that where an application for review  is  successful
      and reconsideration is  ordered,  an  application  for  funding  under
      s103D(3) may be made at any time up to  the  end  of  the  substantive
      reconsideration of the appeal. But where the  application  for  review
      was made by a  legal  representative  rather  than  the  Appellant  in
      person, there will need to be a cogent explanation why the application
      for funding was not specified at the outset on the form AIT/103A.

   7. We note that the Tribunal also found that in  the  majority  of  cases
      which are unsuccessful on reconsideration, funding  will  nevertheless
      be ordered because there was, at the time when the review was  sought,
      a  significant  prospect  that  the  appeal  would   be   allowed   on
      reconsideration. Reconsideration would not have been  ordered  at  all
      unless the Senior  Immigration  Judge  dealing  with  the  review  had
      thought that there was a real  possibility  that  the  Tribunal  would
      decide the appeal differently on reconsideration.

   8.  We enquired of Mr Adler as to why the  Appellant  did  not  have  the
      benefit of CLS funding at  the  time  of  the  application  and,  more
      importantly, as to why, when an order for reconsideration was made  on
      8 August 2005, the Appellant's solicitors did not at that stage  fully
      review the matter and apply for CLS funding at  that  stage,  assuming
      the Appellant to be otherwise eligible. (We note  that  the  Appellant
      has been in paid work whilst in the UK with modest earnings). Mr Adler
      stated that the Appellant had been funding his case privately  and  he
      was unable  to  provide  satisfactory  clarification  based  upon  the
      instructions that he had received. Mr Adler confirmed that he had been
      instructed to appear before us on a private client basis and that  the
      Appellant still did not have the benefit of CLS funding. He  had  made
      his application for a funding order only after learning at the hearing
      that the outcome was in favour of the Appellant.

   9. We note that the Solicitors' Costs Information and  Client  Care  Code
      1999 (as last amended on 9 March 2004), has this to say in relation to
      the financing of a matter:

      Client's ability to pay
      2...(j) The solicitor should discuss with the client how and when any
            costs      are to be met, and consider:-
            (i) whether the client may be eligible and should apply for
legal                  aid (including advice and assistance)...'

  10. We were concerned, although it is unclear, about the possibility  that
      the Appellant may have been financially disadvantaged from the time of
      preparing the application for a review, and certainly  from  the  time
      that the order for reconsideration was made. It appeared to us, and we
      indicated as much to Mr Adler, that in the circumstances, it  was  for
      the solicitors to check the Rules and Regulations applying to CLS  and
      to professional conduct, and  to  advise  the  Appellant  accordingly.
      Where a solicitor does not do publicly funded work, that advice  would
      include advising the client of his or  her  entitlement  or  potential
      entitlement, to assistance in the form of public funding,  and  as  to
      how to go about obtaining the benefit of that service.

  11. We note that pursuant to the LSC Guidance and Funding Code, a case  in
      which the prospects of success are 'borderline' would appear to  be  a
      case that passes the lowest merits test to enable a  case  to  proceed
      with the benefit of CLR. This applies, among others,  to  cases  which
      have overwhelming importance to the client. It appears to  us  that  a
      refugee or human rights appeal, such as the instant case, would  be  a
      case of such importance. In this type of case,  if  the  prospects  of
      success are not over 50%, then a judgment must be made as  to  whether
      the prospects of success should be categorized as borderline or  poor.
      The difference between these two categories  cannot  be  expressed  in
      precise percentage terms. A case may be regarded as having  borderline
      prospects of success if the client has a good arguable or prima  facie
      case which should be put before the  court,  even  though  because  of
      disputes of fact, or law or expert evidence it is not possible to  say
      that the legal prospects of success are over 50%.

  12. Given the guidance of the Tribunal in the case of  RS  which  we  have
      summarized above, and applying that guidance to the relevant facts and
      circumstances of this case, even as found by the first Adjudicator; it
      seems to us that the  Appellant's  case  was  one  which  was  at  all
      material times a good deal stronger than borderline.

  13. Turning to  the  provisions  of  the  CLS  Regulations  2005,  and  in
      particular Regulation 4(1), we note the restrictions on the  power  of
      the Tribunal to make section 103D orders, there set out:

            "The High Court or the Tribunal shall only make a  section  103D
        order in  immigration  review  proceedings  where  an  appellant  is
     represented  by  a  supplier  acting  pursuant  to  a  grant  of  Legal
   Representation."

  14. Mr Adler was unable to take us  to  any  provision  that  showed  that
      despite Regulation 4(1) we could nevertheless make the  order  sought.
      In all the circumstances, in the light of the fact that neither  Gupta
      and Partners nor Mr Adler is shown to be 'a supplier  acting  pursuant
      to a grant of Legal Representation ' we find that there is no power in
      the Tribunal  to  make  the  funding  order  sought.  The  Appellant's
      application for a funding order is therefore refused.

   Decision

  15. For the above reasons we make no order on the Appellant's  application
      for a funding order.







Catriona Jarvis
Senior Immigration Judge

Date: 16 November 2005





