






R (on the application of AO  &  AM)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (stay of proceedings - principles) [2017] UKUT 00168 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                     Notice of Decision/Order/Directions






                  The Queen on the application of AO and AM
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent






            Before the Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President




Having heard Mr  P  Reynolds,  of  counsel,  instructed  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, the moving party, by the Government Legal Department  and  Mr  M
Fordham QC, Ms C Kilory and Ms M  Knorr,  both  of  counsel,  instructed  by
Bhatt Murphy Solicitors on behalf of the Applicants at a  hearing  at  Field
House, London on 28 March 2017.



   i) The Upper Tribunal has the same  power  as  the  High  Court  to  stay
      proceedings.


  ii)  The  most  important  factors  influencing  the  exercise   of   this
      discretionary  power  will  normally  be  found  in   the   overriding
      objective.


 iii) Great caution is required where a stay application is founded  on  the
      contention  that  the  outcome  of  another  case  will  significantly
      influence the outcome of the instant case.


  iv) A stay application will require especially compelling justification in
      a case qualifying for urgent judicial decision.


   v) The cases of unaccompanied, isolated teenagers marooned in  a  foreign
      land suffering  from  major  psychological  trauma  and  seeking,  via
      litigation, the swiftest reunion  possible  with  a  separated  family
      member will always, in principle, have a powerful  claim  to  judicial
      prioritisation.


                            DECISION ON STAY
                           [given orally on 28 March 2017]

McCLOSKEY J

Introduction

 1) This decision determines the applications made by the  Respondent,  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    for a stay of both sets of proceedings.  The relief pursued  is  framed
    in the following terms:


         "An order that this claim be stayed along with  all  other  related
         proceedings behind the Administrative Court case of Citizens  UK  v
         SSHD (CO/5255/2016) as the issues in dispute are the same ...."




    The following order is sought in the alternative:


         "...  as an alternative that the Tribunal transfer this  claim  and
         all other claims raising the same issue to the Administrative Court
         so that all related claims can be case managed  appropriately  with
         reference to the overriding objective."


    It may be observed that this alternative form of  relief  rather  faded
    away in both the oral and written submissions of Mr Reynolds.

 2) The background to the  lodging  of  these  stay  applications  included
    certain inter-partes correspondence which was brought to the  attention
    of the Tribunal.  This was prompted by the awareness of  the  Secretary
    of State's legal representatives  that  the  initiation  of  these  two
    claims in the Tribunal,  together  with  others,  was  imminent.   This
    correspondence became the initial vehicle for the Secretary of  State's
    contention that all proceedings of a  certain  kind  commenced  in  the
    Upper Tribunal should be stayed pending determination of  the  Citizens
    UK v SSHD (hereinafter "CUK") litigation in the Administrative Court.


 3) By letter dated 17th March 2017, written under my direction, the  Upper
    Tribunal wrote to the lawyers concerned to the following effect:


      a)  UTIAC  is  a  creature  of  statute  and  exercises  no   inherent
         jurisdiction.  Its powers are contained in a combination of primary
         and secondary legislation.  UTIAC is unaware of any power to  order
         a stay in respect of any claim which has not been  issued  in  this
         Chamber.


      b) The parties' representatives were invited to identify the two cases
         most suitable for the determination of  stay  applications  by  the
         Secretary of State, "suitability" in  this  context  embodying  the
         various ingredients in the overriding objective.


      c) A timetable was directed.




    These twin applications have materialised in consequence.


Citizens UK  v  SSHD


 4) This is a judicial review claim brought by a registered charity in  the
    Administrative  Court.   Procedurally,  these  proceedings   have   the
    following landmarks:


      a) The claim was initiated on 14 October 2016.


      b) On 28th October 2016 permission to apply for  judicial  review  was
         refused by a paper decision.


      c) The Claimant's grounds were amended on 18 January 2017.


      d) On 28 February 2017 an oral permission  hearing  was  held,  giving
         rise to an order granting permission to apply for  judicial  review
         and directing that an expedited  substantive  hearing  be  held  on
         23/24 May 2017.


 5) The flavour and essence of this judicial review claim are  captured  in
    the following passages extracted from the amended grounds:


         "1.      This anxious, urgent and compelling case arises out of the
             British/French partnership in dealing with asylum seekers at a
             notorious refugee settlement in Calais known as  the  'Jungle'
             ....


         2. The ....   destruction of the jungle camp and dispersal  of  its
             inhabitants  ....  have  very  serious  implications  for  the
             welfare and safety of particularly vulnerable  asylum  seeking
             children, many of  them  with  rights  of  speedy  facilitated
             passage to the United Kingdom ....


         4. ....  A large number of children wishing to come to  the  United
             Kingdom (the 'dispersed children') were  eventually  dispersed
             on coaches to centres (CAOMIEs) across France with the promise
             that their requests to enter the United Kingdom  either  under
             Section 67 of the Immigration Act ....  or under  ...   Dublin
             III would be considered by the Defendant's officials ....


         The expedited process which was implemented  by  the  Defendant  in
         accordance with that promise has drawn to a close and yet  hundreds
         of dispersed children remain in the  CAOMIEs,  many  of  whom  have
         outstanding  family  reunification  claims  which  have  not   been
         properly considered by the Defendant."




 6) Continuing, the grounds draw particular attention  to  a  joint  United
    Kingdom/French policy, namely  "Managing  Migratory  Flows  in  Calais:
    joint declaration on UK/French co-operation", dated 20 August 2016 (the
    "Joint Declaration").  The Claimant's case is that arising out  of  the
    Joint Declaration  the Secretary of State is subject  to  a  series  of
    legal obligations ("the Obligations"), namely:


      i) To identify all children in the camp, in  particular  unaccompanied
         children and to assess their eligibility for transfer to the United
         Kingdom;


     ii) To provide the children with full and  accurate  information  about
         the  Dublin  III  regime,  including   the   family   reunification
         provisions and the associated available arrangements.


    iii) To ensure that the children have safe accommodation  allowing  easy
         access to the arrangements.


     iv) To ensure that safe accommodation  does  not  remove  the  children
         further away  from  the  support  network  of  those  agencies  and
         representatives who have been facilitating family reunification.




         The grounds canvass also the duty of investigation and the duty  of
         providing adequate and intelligible reasons for decisions.   It  is
         contended that these duties fall to be calibrated and discharged in
         the context of Dublin III, the EU Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,
         the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Convention on the Rights  of  the
         Child 1989.  There  is  also  a  discernible  orthodox  public  law
         overlay.




 7) CUK contends that there is powerful evidence demonstrating a failure by
    the Secretary of State to discharge the aforementioned duties.  In this
    context  I highlight  certain further passages in the grounds:


             "The Claimant's position is that  any  act  of  disregard  and
             default of the Obligations would not only be  unlawful  but  a
             matter of grave concern.  Judicial review is  a  last  resort.
             But it serves to secure accountability for relevant  acts  and
             omissions of the Defendant having had the Obligations squarely
             brought to her attention ...


             These Obligations, which  arise  in  the  context  of  a  long
             standing  failure by the Defendant and the French  authorities
             to identify and protect children  in  the  Jungle  in  Calais,
             provide them with information about their rights and set up  a
             functioning system to allow them to access  rights  to  family
             reunification in the United Kingdom


              ...


             The dispersed children  now  face  a  further  disruption  and
             dispersal from CAOMIEs due to close their doors, in some cases
             before the expedited process has concluded and  in  all  cases
             before the dispersed children have completed Dublin III family
             reunification procedures.  Having  established  the  expedited
             process on French soil with the support  and  co-operation  of
             the  French  authorities,  the  Defendant  has  an  additional
             obligation arising out of  common  law  principles  concerning
             access to justice .....   and  rights  to  procedure  fairness
             under Article 8 ECHR .....     to take all steps open  to  her
             to ensure that further dispersal from  the  CAOMIEs  does  not
             interrupt access to that process  and  in  particular  to  any
             remedies available to dispersed children  in  respect  of  the
             operation of that process.  Access to legal remedies  includes
             access to NGOs and other representatives who may  be  able  to
             facilitate the provision of UK based legal advice to dispersed
             children and their families ...."




    CUK is, therefore, challenging a series of acts and  omissions  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State.  This is reflected in  the  formulation
    of the "decision to be judicially reviewed" in the Claim Form:


         "The failure and refusal to recognise and  comply  with  the  legal
         obligations identified in the  letter  before  claim  ....   (which
         required a response by 11 October 2016)".




    Finally, I draw attention to the remedies  claimed:  these  are  purely
    declaratory, seeking confirmation  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    subject to the "Obligations"  and  that  there  has  been  an  unlawful
    failure to discharge same.


These Two Claims


 8) These two claims, together with five others, were lodged in  the  Upper
    Tribunal during week commencing 13 March 2017.  Factually they  are  of
    course quite different.  However, in substance they share  much  common
    ground.  The Applicant AO challenges the following:


         "Failure to transfer  [him]  to  the  UK  in  accordance  with  his
         substantive Dublin  III  rights  and  his  Article  8  rights  ....
         refusal/failure to act since  16  December  2016  and  ongoing  and
         including decision of 09 March 2017."




    The relief pursued is:


      i) A mandatory order requiring the Secretary of  State  to  admit  the
         Applicant to the UK forthwith.


     ii) An Order quashing the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  to
         transfer the Applicant to the UK under  her  expedited  Dublin  III
         process.


    iii) A declaration that the Secretary of State has failed in her  duties
         to  properly  investigate  the  Applicants'  claim  and  has  acted
         unlawfully.




    Both the focus of the legal challenge and the remedies pursued are  the
    same in the two cases.  Furthermore, both Applicants have  applied  for
    anonymity and expedition, while AO has also applied for interim relief.






 9) Based on what is pleaded, the Applicant AO was an  unaccompanied  minor
    during the greater part of the events forming  the  background  to  his
    claim.  His 18th birthday occurred on 08 March 2017. He is of  Eritrean
    nationality, fled his country of origin some two years ago and has been
    seeking to join his brother, AMO, who has refugee status and resides in
    the United Kingdom.  His case is  described  as  "very  compelling  and
    extremely urgent".   Evidentially, it is supported by, inter alia,  the
    report of a  consultant  psychiatrist  which  diagnoses  post-traumatic
    stress disorder, contains the assessment that  the  Applicant  is  "...
    close to the limit of what  he  could  bear  in  terms  of  flashbacks,
    anxiety, feeling unsafe and sleep deprivation" and advises that:


           ".... further delay due to legal processes is therefore  not  at
           all in [the Applicant's] best interests and may lead to  further
           re-traumatisation and irreversible damage to his mental health."


    Within this expert testimony one  also  finds  the  phrases  "extremely
    distressing" and "detrimentally affecting his mental state".




10) It is averred that this Applicant was identified as  a  child  eligible
    for consideration under the Secretary of State's expedited  Dublin  III
    Process, was interviewed accordingly and provided  evidence  about  his
    brother in the United Kingdom, culminating in the notification  to  him
    from French officials that, in common with the other children remaining
    in the CAOMI in question, the Secretary of State had  refused  transfer
    to the United Kingdom, without  adequate  particulars,  elaboration  or
    reasons.  This appears to have been followed by an unsuccessful  review
    application.




11) Most recently, a response to the pre-action letter dated 09 March  2017
    indicates the following: the Applicant was assessed  in  the  expedited
    Dublin  process;  he  was  not  accepted  initially   because   further
    investigations regard his brother were necessary; this  issue  has  now
    been resolved; the Secretary of State has asked the French  authorities
    to submit a take charge request  under  Dublin  III;  and  any  further
    evidence supporting the  Applicant's  asserted  relationship  with  his
    brother should be provided to the French authorities.  The most  recent
    evidence indicates that a stalemate continues.


12) The case of the other Applicant, AM, has certain similarities.   AM  is
    an unaccompanied and orphaned national of Eritrea, aged 16  years,  who
    aspires to join his uncle, a recognised refugee living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He has been diagnosed as suffering from  a  major  depressive
    disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms.   The  expert  in
    his case advises that he -

         "...  is severely struggling with the delay in being reunited  with
         his uncle ....


         He  is  suffering  from  psychiatric  disorder,  which   is   being
         exacerbated by his current situation where  he  feels  subjectively
         unsafe ...


         I do not believe that psychiatric  or  psychological  treatment  in
         France will improve his state, in fact I would not  recommend  this
         at all as it would be likely to destabilise him further.  He is  at
         risk of becoming increasingly suicidal if prompt reunification does
         not occur as his mental state will deteriorate further."

    In common with the other Applicant, AM was admitted  to  the  expedited
    Dublin Regulation process, he was  escorted  from  the  now  demolished
    "jungle" in Calais to a "CAOMI" and was interviewed, following which he
    was informed that he had been refused transfer to the United Kingdom on
    the ground of "family link not accepted".  This phrase is, evidently, a
    pro-forma or ("boilerplate") belonging to a spreadsheet mechanism.



The Stay Applications


13) The kernel of these stay applications is ascertainable from the witness
    statement of the GLD senior lawyer grounding these  applications.  This
    contains the following material averments:


         "4.      The SSHD considers  it  would  be  appropriate  for  these
             claims to be stayed  behind the  Citizen's  UK  Claim  as  the
             issues raised in both these claims  (and  indeed  the  various
             other related claims issued in  the  Upper  Tribunal)  are  in
             essence identical ....




         15.      ....  as  the  Tribunal  is  aware,  seven    [individual]
             claims have been issued ....


         21.      While  ....    the  Citizens  UK  claim  is  a  systematic
             systemic? [sic] challenge and these proceedings in  the  Upper
             Tribunal and related matters are all  brought  in  respect  of
             individuals .....


            all of the points they raise in this claim are also in issue  in
             the Citizens UK Claim ....




         24.      I acknowledge and appreciate that the  Applicant  in  this
             claim and indeed all the other claims will point to  the  fact
             that the Applicants are unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  minors
             who wish to be reunited with their family  after  a  difficult
             and traumatic journey to Europe.  I also  recognise  that  the
             Applicants have  adduced  psychiatric  evidence  as  to  their
             condition.  The SSHD does appreciate that it is important that
             the Applicants' position  is  resolved  quickly,  however  she
             would suggest that this factor while important cannot outweigh
             other equally as pressing consideration such as the  need  for
             appropriate case management.  Further while the  legal  claims
             may be stayed this does not mean of course that the Applicants
             cannot proceed with claiming asylum in France and pressing for
             a take charge request to be made.


         25.      Further these individuals have recourse to  assistance  in
             France if they are willing to accept it  including  presumably
             to medical care .....   AM is being supported  by  the  French
             authorities .... and he  is  being  assisted  to  register  an
             asylum claim in France .....


         26.      In the case of AO, he has elected not to claim  asylum  in
             France which is why he may become homeless.  The SSHD has made
             clear that she will very likely accept a take  charge  request
             ....


         The Applicants contend that the children put through the  expedited
         process were selected precisely because  they  were  considered  to
         require expedition.  This is not correct .....   They were selected
         simply because they had been formerly resident in  Calais  and  the
         camp had now closed and  the  SSHD  was  trying  to  process  large
         numbers of children quickly."




      Continuing,  the  deponent  advances  "two  important  reasons   which
      militate very heavily in favour of a stay" namely:


        a) the need for judicial certainty; and


        b) the conservation of limited judicial resources.



      It is further suggested that a stay  is  "the  most  sensible  way  of
      proceeding".  Finally, the witness statement ends with  the  following
      plea:


         "36.     The SSHD is complying with  the  procedural  timetable  in
             both these claims.  She is due to file  her  detailed  grounds
             and any evidence by 12 April 2017 in the Help Refugees  claim.
             In addition she faces these claims in the  Tribunal  and  also
             will likely be commencing appeal proceedings in the  Court  of
             Appeal in the  RSM  case  with  which  the  Tribunal  is  very
             familiar".


         39.      The SSHD recognises that for these claims to  be  properly
             considered the Tribunal requires her  to  fully  particularise
             her defence and to submit evidence  substantiating  her  case.
             It will however simply be impossible for the SSHD  to  provide
             the Tribunal with this level of assistance in  this  case  and
             other related Upper Tribunal  matters  at  the  same  time  as
             defending the Help Refugees and Citizens UK claims."




14) The submissions of Mr Reynolds on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    developed the main passages in the solicitor's witness statement.  They
    had, inevitably, a heavy focus  on  the  CUK  litigation  and  entailed
    drawing to my attention the nine "case studies" which  formed  part  of
    the evidence in those proceedings.  One of these (No. 9) relates to the
    Applicant AM.  The thrust of Mr Reynolds' argument was that  these  two
    cases "raise fundamentally the same points of law" as CUK "in the  same
    material factual  circumstances".   Mr  Reynolds  also  questioned  the
    asserted urgency of these cases.  Finally, in response  to  a  question
    from the Bench, he confirmed that in the CUK litigation  the  Secretary
    of State is on schedule to comply with  the  requirement  to  file  all
    evidence by 04 April 2017.


The Applicants' Riposte

15) The interlocking elements of the arguments canvassed on behalf  of  the
    Applicants included the following in particular:   the  submissions  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State acknowledged that  the  CUK  challenge
    will not delve into the facts of individual cases;  whereas  CUK  is  a
    systemic challenge, these two challenges are individualised;  there  is
    nothing unprecedented about parallel  human  rights  cases  proceeding;
    reliance on the ZS decision provides no reliable guide  to  the  proper
    determination of these applications; and, ultimately, the challenges of
    these two Applicants will be determined by  reference  to  the  various
    touchstones  identified  in  ZAT  and   Others,   in   particular   the
    implications  of  the  Applicants  having  pursued  unsuccessfully  the
    expedited process in France, the consequential inapplicability  of  the
    "exceptional circumstances" test, the  factor  of  intense  review  and
    reliance on many of the proportionality factors endorsed in [37] of the
    Court of Appeal's judgment.  Mr Fordham QC also reminded  the  Tribunal
    of the decisions in MK at [26] and [36] (duty of enquiry) and  RSM,  at
    [43]  (the  interaction  between  Articles  8  and  17  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation).

16) I have also considered in full the informal "pleading" on behalf of the
    Applicants which was compiled and provided to the Tribunal  during  the
    pre-litigation phase outlined in [2] -  [3]  above.   This  emphasises,
    inter alia, the Tribunal's duty under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998, the need to treat the best interests of the younger Applicant  as
    a primary consideration, the impact of Article 8 ECHR  on  the  factual
    frameworks advanced and the compelling  necessity  for  swift  judicial
    adjudication.  In this context Mr Fordham drew attention to  the  irony
    that a stay order precipitated by a generic claim brought by a  charity
    seeking clarification  of  the  law  in  this  sphere  could  stimulate
    substantial delays in determining  these  two  claims  and  the  others
    belonging to the cohort.


17)  Finally, my attention was drawn to United Nations General Comment  No,
    14 (2013), paragraphs 25-29 especially,  which  contain  the  following
    salient passage:

         "The courts must provide for the best interests of the child to  be
         considered in all such  situations  and  decisions,  whether  of  a
         procedural or substantive nature, and must  demonstrate  that  they
         have effectively done so."




    In this context I was invited to consider the interesting  analysis  in
    "Using International Law In Domestic Courts (Fatima), paragraph 11.12:


         "The exercise  of  discretion  by  courts  is  characterised  by  a
         consistent recognition of, and respect for,  upholding  the  United
         Kingdom's treaty obligations, including those that are incorporated
         as a matter of domestic law.  This  is  seen  particularly  clearly
         where judicial discretion  is  exercised  regarding  the  grant  or
         maintenance of injunctions and interim injunctions."


The Governing Principles

18) I begin with two propositions which I consider uncontroversial.  First,
    the decision whether to stay proceedings in any forum and,  if  so,  on
    what terms involves the exercise of a relatively broad - though not  of
    course unfettered - judicial discretion.  Second,  the  most  important
    factors influencing the exercise of this  discretion  will  normally  -
    though not invariably  -  be  found  in  the  multi-faceted  overriding
    objective.

19) The issue of jurisdiction is uncomplicated. Section 49(3) of the Senior
    Courts Act 1981 provides:


         "Nothing in   this Act shall affect  the  power  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal or the High Court to stay any proceedings before  it,  where
         it thinks fit to do  so,  either  of  its  own  motion  or  on  the
         application of  any  person,  whether  or  not    a  party  to  the
         proceedings."


         [My emphasis.]




    By section 25 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007:


         "In relation to the matters mentioned in subsection (2), the  Upper
         Tribunal ....  has ....  the same powers,  rights,  privileges  and
         authority as the High Court .


         (2) The matters are:


          a)     The attendance and examination of witnesses,


          b)     The production and inspection of documents and


          c)     All other  matters  incidental  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
             functions."




    Section 25(3) provides:


         "Subsection (1) shall not be taken -


          a) To limit any power to make Tribunal procedure rules,


          b) To be limited by anything in Tribunal  procedure  rules  other
             than an express limitation."




    Rule 5(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  under
    the rubric "Case Management Powers", provides:


         "Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act and any other enactment,
         the Upper Tribunal may regulate its own procedure."




    By Rule 5(2):


         "The Upper Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct
         or disposal of proceedings  at  any  time,  including  a  direction
         amending, suspending or setting aside an earlier direction."




    This is followed by Rule 5(3):


         "In particular, and  without  restricting  the  general  powers  in
         paragraphs (1) and (2), the Upper Tribunal may .....


         (j)      Stay .....  proceedings ....."


    [My emphasis]


    By the route charted above, the power of the Upper Tribunal to order  a
    stay of proceedings is not in doubt.




20)  Section  49(3)  of  the  Senior  Courts  Act  1981   is   an   express
    acknowledgement of the judge made nature of  both  the  power  to  stay
    proceedings and the  principles  to  be  applied.   It  has  been  long
    recognised that the power of the High  Court  to  stay  proceedings  is
    inherent in nature: Re Wickham [1887] 35 CH D 272 at  280,  per  Cotton
    LJ.  In an earlier era, a stay had the  Draconian  effect  of  bringing
    proceedings to a conclusion, unless it was of the conditional  variety.
    This has, however, been superseded by contemporary practice: Rofa Sport
    Management v DHL International UK [1989] 2 All ER 743. Accordingly,  in
    modern litigation a stay does not have the drastic consequences of  its
    19th and early 20th century ancestors. The conditional stay  sought  in
    these proceedings is not to be  confused  with  one  of  its  ancestors
    namely the permanent stay.




21)  The  issue  of  staying  proceedings  was  the  subject  of   detailed
    consideration by the Court of Appeal in AB (Sudan) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  921.   The  Court,  firstly,
    contrasted a stay of proceedings  with  a  stay  of  enforcement  of  a
    judicial decision or order.  It emphasised that stay issue involve case
    management decisions.  It added, at [25]:

         "Such decisions will rarely be challenged and even more  rarely  be
         reversed on appeal."


    The appeal in question sought to challenge  a  decision  of  the  Vice-
    President of UTIAC to refuse to grant  a  stay  of  a  judicial  review
    application pending the possible appeal to  the  Supreme  Court  in  EM
    (Eritrea).  The Court, at [26] cited with approval the Vice-President's
    formulation of the governing principles:

         "27.     A stay on proceedings may be associated with the grant  of
             interim  relief,  but  it   is   essentially   different.   In
             determining whether proceedings should be stayed, the concerns
             of the court  itself  have  to  be  taken  into  the  balance.
             Decisions as to listing, and decisions as to which  cases  are
             to be heard at any particular time are matters for  the  court
             itself and no party to a claim can demand  that  it  be  heard
             before or after any other claim. The court will want  to  deal
             with claims before it as expeditiously as is  consistent  with
             justice. But, on the other hand, it is  unlikely  to  want  to
             waste time and other valuable resources on  an  exercise  that
             may well be pointless if conducted too  soon.  If,  therefore,
             the court is shown that there will be, or there is  likely  to
             be, some event in the foreseeable  future  that  may  have  an
             impact on the way a claim is decided, it may  decide  to  stay
             proceedings in the claim until after that  event.  It  may  be
             more inclined to grant a stay if there  is  agreement  between
             the parties. It may not need to grant a stay if the pattern of
             work shows that the matter will not come on for  trial  before
             the event in question. The starting point  must,  however,  be
             that a claimant seeks expeditious determination of  his  claim
             and that delay will be ordered only if good reason is shown.


         28.      In cases where a request for  a  stay  on  proceedings  is
             coupled, expressly or by necessary implication, with a request
             for interim relief, the court will need to take   into account
             the factors relevant to both types of decision, and  may  need
             to take into account a third: that by securing interim  relief
             and a stay, the applicant may be asking the court to  use  its
             powers to give him, for as long as he can secure it, a benefit
             that he may not obtain at the trial."

    As these passages make clear, the overriding objective looms  large  in
    the determination of every stay application.

22) The Court added the following observations of  specified  relevance  in
    immigration cases:


         "28.     Immigration law has a tendency to develop rapidly,  indeed
             sometimes  at  bewildering  speed.  The   constant   flow   of
             developments arises from the industry  of  legislators,  rule-
             makers, judges and practitioners. Not only  does  the  law  in
             this area change fast. So also  do  the  political,  military,
             social and economic circumstances in  the  numerous  countries
             from which asylum seekers or other migrants may come.


         29.      Both the tribunals and the courts have    to    keep  pace
             with these constant changes. When a new appellate decision  is
             awaited it   is not unusual for  parties  in  pending  similar
             cases to seek a stay of their proceedings.


         30.      Sometimes it is obviously necessary to grant such a  stay,
             because  the  anticipated  appellate  decision  will  have   a
             critical impact upon the proceedings in hand. There  is  also,
             however, a need for realism. In the world of immigration    it
             is a fact of life that the law  which  the  judge  applies  is
             liable to change in the future, quite  possibly  in  the  near
             future.  This  cannot  usually  be  a   reason   for   staying
             proceedings. I started dealing  with  immigration  cases  some
             fourteen years ago. I cannot remember any occasion during that
             period when important decisions on  one  or  more  aspects  of
             immigration law were not eagerly awaited  from  the  appellate
             courts.


         31.      As Pill LJ observed in R (Bahta) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
             895 at [70], what the Court of Appeal says is the law, is  the
             law, unless and until overruled by  a  superior  court  or  by
             Parliament.  Likewise  country   guidance   decisions   should
             generally be applied unless and until  they  are  reversed  or
             superseded.


         32 In my view the power to stay immigration cases pending a future
             appellate decision in other litigation is a power which must
             be exercised cautiously and only when, in the interests of
             justice, it is necessary to do so. It may be necessary to
             grant a stay if the impending appellate decision is likely to
             have a critical impact on the current litigation. If courts or
             tribunals exercise their power to stay cases too freely, the
             immigration system (which is already overloaded with work)
             will become even more clogged up."


23) I distil from AB (Sudan) the following principles in particular:

      a)  Every  claimant  is  entitled  to  expect   expeditious   judicial
         adjudication.  The strength of this expectation will be  calibrated
         according to the individual litigation equation.

      b) The judicially imposed delay flowing from  a  stay  order  requires
         good reason.

      c) Judicial choreography whereby  one  case  is  frozen  awaiting  the
         outcome of another is justified for example where the assessment is
         that the latter will have a critical impact upon the former.

      d) Great caution is to  be  exercised  where  a  stay  application  is
         founded on the contention that the outcome  of  another  case  will
         significantly influence the outcome of the instant case.

24) To these principles I would add the following:  a stay application will
    require especially compelling justification in a  case  qualifying  for
    urgent  judicial  decision.  The  cases  of   unaccompanied,   isolated
    teenagers marooned in a foreign land suffering from major psychological
    trauma and seeking, via litigation, the swiftest reunion possible  with
    a separated family member will always, in principle,  have  a  powerful
    claim to judicial prioritisation.

Conclusions

25) Ultimately, the determination of these stay  applications  requires  an
    exercise  of  balancing  many  of  the  ingredients  enshrined  in  the
    overriding objective: the avoidance of excessive cost, the  unnecessary
    expenditure of finite public resources, the right of every litigant  to
    expeditious justice, the minimising of litigation delays, managing  the
    interface  and  overlap  between  two   judicial   organisations,   the
    allocation of limited judicial resources and, broadly, the  convenience
    of all concerned.  I must also weigh carefully the ages,  vulnerability
    and plight of the two litigants.  Furthermore, alertness to  a  broader
    panorama is essential since the determination of these two applications
    will clearly be influential in, though not automatically  determinative
    of, the progress and case management of the five other   live new cases
    which  have  been   initiated   in   tandem   with   these.   Fairness,
    reasonableness and proportionality loom large in an  exercise  of  this
    kind.


26) I consider the impact of the  range  of  considerations  which  I  have
    identified to be the following:


      a) These are two individual rights cases.  This is the feature which
         distinguishes them most clearly from the CUK Challenge.


      b) In the CUK Challenge, the Secretary of State's evidential  response
         will probably not be directed to individual cases except insofar as
         relevant and as required by the  duty  of  candour.   Much  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence is likely to be  generic  in  nature.
         The facts of the nine "case studies" may prove to be uncontentious.


      c) All such generic  evidence  will  form  a  necessary  part  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence in the seven  Upper  Tribunal  cases.
         The exercise of  preparing  such  evidence  will  not  have  to  be
         repeated.  It will, rather, be a single,  self-contained  exercise.
         Furthermore,  it  is  reasonably  predictable  that  much  of  this
         evidence will take the form of extant documents: official  reports,
         memoranda,   email   communications,   letters    and,    possibly,
         communications of a diplomatic character. Whatever form  it  takes,
         this exercise is now at a highly advanced stage.


      d) The additional  evidence  required  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
         response to the individual  claims  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  will,
         predictably and in principle, be case specific and fact  sensitive.
         It is represented on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that  some
         evidence of this  kind  is  expected  to  materialise  in  the  CUK
         Challenge. This will be harmonious with good husbandry in  resource
         expenditure.


      e) My evaluative assessment is that a  reasonable  proportion  of  the
         ground work required for the preparation and  presentation  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence in these two  cases  will  have  been
         completed in the context of the CUK litigation by  04  April  2017.
         No aspect of this investment of human and financial resources  will
         fall to be repeated.  There will be no duplication.




27) Next I turn my  attention  to  the  timetable  pertaining  to  the  CUK
    Challenge.  This is contained in the Order of the Administrative  Court
    dated 04 March 2017.  It makes provision  for  a  series  of  bilateral
    steps to be undertaken and completed during a period  of  approximately
    ten weeks, all of this on an expedited basis. I take into account  that
    this Order represents  the  outcome  of  the  considered  judgment  and
    planning  of  both  parties'  legal  representatives  and   the   Judge
    concerned. It has been composed and finalised on the basis that all  of
    the time limits are achievable.

28) I accept that it will be  more  convenient,  less  expensive  and  more
    comfortable for the Secretary of State and her  lawyers  if  these  two
    cases were to be stayed in the manner proposed.   However,  this  would
    impose a limitation impacting seriously on the two Applicants' right of
    access to a court, in circumstances where they have a compelling  claim
    to speedy judicial adjudication.  If they are entitled to a  remedy  it
    must  be  swift,  practical  and  effective.  Furthermore,  given   the
    distinction between the  Administrative  Court  proceedings  and  these
    cases  I  reject  the  argument  of   substantial   judicial   overlap.
    Ultimately, I consider the aforementioned rights of the  Applicants  to
    be determinative.  The factors advanced on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State do not, singly or in combination, suffice to displace,  limit  or
    delay the full enjoyment of these rights in the fact sensitive  context
    of these two cases.


Order and Directions

29) I refuse the Secretary of State's applications accordingly.

30) The Secretary of State's written representations on the  issue  of  the
    further timetabling and management of these two cases will be  provided
    by close of business on 29 March 2017.

31) The Applicants' riposte will be provided by close  of  business  on  30
    March 2017.

32) The parties' representatives will file an agreed draft case  management
    order, or their competing case management orders, by 12  midday  on  31
    March 2017. The Upper Tribunal will aspire  to,  but  cannot  guarantee
    absolutely, appropriate further directions/ by late 31 March 2017 - and
    in any event by 08.00 on 03 April 2017.

33) I shall continue to hold in reserve for as long as is possible 04 April
    2017 to deal with interim relief and/or "rolled up" applications.

34) I recognise the possibility that a slightly later date for the  hearing
    of any such application may be required in fairness to the Secretary of
    State.  Beyond this I do not venture.  The parties' representatives are
    aware of the practical outworkings of this.

35) There shall be liberty to apply.

36) Costs are reserved.

                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                        Date:  28 March 2017




Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:
