





R (on the application  of  Aydogdu)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Ankara Agreement - family  members  -  settlement)  [2017]  UKUT
00167 (IAC)






                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice









                The Queen on the application of Hacer Aydogdu
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    .
            Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President






Having considered all documents lodged, together with the oral  and  written
submissions of  the  parties'  representatives,  Ms  Peterson,  of  counsel,
instructed by London Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Ms Rhee  QC,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on  17  November  2016  and  14  January
2017.


 I) The settlement of migrant Turkish nationals and  their  family  members
    does not fall within the scope of the "stand-still clause"  in  Article
    41(1) of the Ankara Agreement (ECAA) Additional Protocol as it  is  not
    necessary for the exercise of freedom of  establishment  under  Article
    13. Thus the status of settlement in the UK for such Turkish  nationals
    and their family members cannot derive in any way from the ECAA or  its
    Additional Protocol;


II) Where a Turkish national who exercised rights under the ECAA  has  been
    granted settlement in the UK the rights of such person and  his  family
    members are not derived from the ECAA or its Additional Protocol.


McCLOSKEY J

Introduction

 1. By virtue of Council Regulation (EEC) 2760/72 (commonly  known  as  the
    "Ankara Agreement") and its Protocol, there  are  special  arrangements
    and  facilities  for  employed  and  self-employed  Turkish   nationals
    desirous of entering the EU for the purpose of working.  This  judicial
    review challenge raises certain questions relating to the  construction
    and scope of this instrument, relating particularly to the operation of
    the soi-disant "standstill clause" as regards family members  of  self-
    employed Turkish nationals.


The Two Protagonists

 2.  The  Applicant  and  her  spouse  are  both  Turkish  nationals.   The
    Applicant's spouse, now aged 33 years, taking advantage of  the  Ankara
    Agreement, lawfully entered the United Kingdom pursuant to a  grant  of
    limited leave to remain dated 08 April 2011.  On 08 October 2012 he was
    granted further leave to remain, extended to 08 April 2015.  On 09  May
    2013 the Applicant and her husband married in Turkey.  On 23 September
    2013 the Applicant was  granted  limited  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom, in her capacity of spouse.  On 04 February 2015 a son was born
    to the Applicant and her spouse in the United Kingdom.


Chronology

 3. It is convenient to tabulate the most salient dates and events  in  the
    history:


      a) On 08 April 2011 the Applicant's spouse was granted leave to remain
         in the United Kingdom to establish himself in  business  under  the
         Ankara Agreement.  Pursuant thereto, he established a self-employed
         landscaping business.


      b) On 08 October 2012, the  Applicant's  spouse  was  granted  further
         leave to remain as a Turkish business person, extending to 08 April
         2015.


      c) On 09 May 2013, the  Applicant  and  her  spouse  were  married  in
         Turkey.


      d) On 23 September 2013 the Applicant was granted leave to  enter  and
         remain in the United Kingdom as the dependent family members  of  a
         Turkish business person under the Ankara Agreement, until 08  April
         2015.


      e) On 08 November 2013, the Applicant entered the United Kingdom.


      f) On 04 February 2015 a son was born to the Applicant and her spouse.




      g) On 18 August 2015 the Applicant's  spouse  was  granted  indefinite
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


      h) On 23 September 2015 the applications of the Applicant and her  son
         for indefinite leave to remain were refused.




The Ankara Agreement and the "Stand-still" Clause

 4. In 1963 the Member States of the European Economic  Community  and  the
    Republic of Turkey  executed  an  agreement  (the  "Ankara  Agreement")
    establishing an association between the EEC and Turkey.  The principles
    on which the Agreement is based are rehearsed in Title 1.  Article 2(1)
    explains the aim of the Agreement:


         "The aim of  this  Agreement  is  to  provide  the  continuous  and
         balanced strengthening of trade and economic relations between  the
         Parties, while taking  full  account  of  the  need  to  ensure  an
         accelerated development of the Turkish economy and to  improve  the
         level of employment  and  the  living  conditions  of  the  Turkish
         people."

    The basic objectives  of  the  Ankara  Agreement  (and  it's  Protocol,
    (infra) were - and remain - the progressive fortification of trade  and
    economic  relations  between  Turkey  and  the  EC,  coupled  with  the
    establishment of a customs union in three phases.  In  the  event,  the
    timetable was not met and the final phase of the customs union was  not
    achieved until 31 December  1995,  via  Decision  Number  1/95  of  the
    Association  Council.   Turkey's  efforts   to   align   its   national
    legislation with that of the EC particularly in the fields of  customs,
    trade  policy,  competition  and  the   protection   of   intellectual,
    industrial and commercial property  were  continuing.   Notwithstanding
    the not insignificant constitutional and legislative changes which have
    been adopted, the accession of Turkey to the EC  has  not  materialised
    within the  timescale  originally  envisaged  or  at  all.   There  are
    substantial enduring concerns relating to  state  torture,  freedom  of
    expression, religious freedom and the rights of women  and  minorities.
    These are documented in official EU publications.

 5. Chapters 1 and 2 of the Ankara Agreement contain provisions relating to
    the development of a customs union and trade in agricultural  products.
    The provisions of the Agreement  of  most  importance  in  the  present
    context are arranged in Chapter 3 under the rubric of  "Other  Economic
    Provisions".  Articles 12  -  14  regulate,  respectively,  freedom  of
    movement of workers, freedom of establishment and the right to  provide
    services.  Subject to certain  unavoidable  textual  differences  these
    provisions adopt  the  same  language.   Given  the  context  of  these
    proceedings, it suffices to reproduce Article 13:


         "The contracting parties agree to be guided by Articles  52  to  56
         and Article 58 of the Treaty establishing  the  Community  for  the
         purpose of abolishing  restrictions  on  freedom  of  establishment
         between them. "


   (Articles [59] - [63] and [65] - [81] are the updated TFEU provisions).


 6. Thus the abolition of restrictions on  the  three  aforementioned  core
    freedoms was identified as one of the principal mechanisms designed  to
    facilitate  the  promotion  and  development  of  trade  and   economic
    relations between the EEC and Turkey.  The terminology "guided  by"  is
    striking.  The Agreement did not purport to extend  any  of  the  three
    core Treaty freedoms to the Turkish  population.   Rather,  the  Treaty
    provisions in question were to act as touchstones, points of reference,
    in the operation of the Agreement.  Their function was to steer, rather
    than mandate.


 7. The so-called "stand-still clause" did not form part  of  the  original
    Ankara  Agreement.   Rather,  it  was  introduced  via  the  Additional
    Protocol which was signed on 23 November 1970.  The Protocol was  based
    on the recognition that during the previous seven years Turkey had done
    enough to warrant progressing  from  the  "preparatory"  stage  to  the
    "transitional" (second) stage.  It contains detailed chapters  relating
    to free movement of goods, the elimination of quantitative restrictions
    and  the  Community's  Common  Agricultural  Policy.   These   assorted
    chapters are followed by  Title  II  which  is  entitled  "Movement  of
    Persons and Services".

 8. The first provision of Chapter II, entitled  "Right  of  Establishment,
    Services and Transport" is Article 41(1), which provides:


         "The Contracting Parties shall  refrain  from  introducing  between
         themselves any new restrictions on the freedom of establishment and
         the freedom to provide services."

    Article 41 (2) notably, in making reference to Articles 13  and  14  of
    the Ankara Agreement employs the language of  "principles".   In  doing
    so, it reiterates the objective of -


         ".... The progressive abolition by the Contracting Parties, between
         themselves, are restrictions on freedom  of  establishment  and  on
         freedom to provide services.  The  Council  of  Association  shall,
         when determining such timetable and rules for the  various  classes
         of activity,  take  into  account  corresponding  measures  already
         adopted by the  Community  in  this  field  and  also  the  special
         economic and social circumstances of Turkey".


    Among the "General and Final Provisions" assembled in Title IV, Article
    59 is deserving of attention:


         "In the fields covered by this Protocol Turkey  shall  not  receive
         more favourable treatment than that which Member  States  grant  to
         one another pursuant to the Treaty establishing the Community."

      I shall make reference infra  to  Decision  1/80  of  the  Association
      Council, in particular Article 13 which is  the  "stand-still  clause"
      relating to the discrete cohort of Turkish workers.

      The United Kingdom's Immigration Rules

 9. The United Kingdom, as noted in [1] above, became bound by  the  Ankara
    Agreement and Protocol pursuant to Council  Regulation  (EEC)  2760/72,
    which came into operation on 1 January  1973.   This  was  one  of  the
    series of measures associated with the accession of the United  Kingdom
    to the EU.


10. The exercise of gauging whether any "new" restrictions bearing  on  the
    specified  "freedoms"  have  been  introduced  by  the  United  Kingdom
    requires identification of the relevant restrictions in  force  at  the
    material time viz 1973.  These restrictions are contained in HC 509 and
    HC 510 of the  Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph  35  of  HC  509,  which
    concerns "on entry" requirements, states with reference to "dependents"
    (as defined):


         "The wife and children under 18 ....  of a person admitted  to  the
         United Kingdom to take or seek employment, or as a business man,  a
         person of independent means or a self-employed  person,  should  be
         given leave to enter for the period of his authorised stay ...."

    HC 510 regulates "after entry" requirements.   Within  this  instrument
    the topic of "settlement" is addressed at paragraph 28:


         "A person who is admitted in  the  first  instance  for  a  limited
         period and who  has  remained  here  for  four  years  in  approved
         employment or as a businessman  or  a  self-employed  person  or  a
         person of independent means, may have the time limit  on  his  stay
         removed unless there are grounds for maintaining it.   Applications
         for removal of the time limit are to be considered in the light  of
         all  the  relevant  circumstances,  including  those  set  out   in
         paragraph 4.  Once the time limit is removed no further  permission
         from the Home Office or the Department of Employment is  needed  to
         engage in any kind of business  or  employment.   Applications  for
         variation of leave to enter with a view to settlement may  also  be
         received from people originally admitted as, for example, visitors;
         but permission has to be  limited  to  close  relatives  of  people
         already accepted  for  settlement.   Particulars  are  set  out  in
         paragraphs 37-44 of the Rules for Control on  Entry  dated  October
         1972 (HC 509)."

    Thus, for Turkish businesspersons and the  self-employed,  four  years'
    economic activity in the United Kingdom is the gateway to securing  the
    status of settlement.  This is the status which the Applicant's husband
    has obtained.


11. The requirements for indefinite leave to remain,  or  settlement,  have
    evolved substantially since 1973.  They have become increasingly strict
    and exacting.  They are now enshrined in Section E-ILRP of Appendix  FM
    (HC 395).  There is an assortment of residence, language and  financial
    stipulations.  Stated succinctly, the enlightenment which the Secretary
    of State seeks from the  judgment  of  this  Tribunal  is  whether  the
    relevant current provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  and  associated
    policy relating to  settlement  apply  to  the  dependants  of  Turkish
    business persons and self-employed  persons  (as  well  as  to  Turkish
    business persons and self-employed persons) present and settled in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with the Ankara Agreement.



   The Impugned Decision


12. As noted above, a decision was made on behalf of  the  Respondent,  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 23 September 2015, refusing the leave to remain  applications  of
    the Applicant and her son.  Following  an  unsuccessful  administrative
    review process, these decisions were challenged by  the  initiation  of
    these proceedings on 22 December 2015.  The substance  and  grounds  of
    this decision are discernible from the following passages:

         "DECISION SUMMARY - Your application is refused under paragraph  41
         of HC 510  which  outlines  the  business  requirements  under  the
         Immigration Rules in force in 1973 ....


         The Secretary of State is not satisfied that you have  been  living
         in the United Kingdom with your sponsor for a period  of  at  least
         two years ....


         Paragraph 72 of the "Business Applications  under  the  Turkish  EC
         Association Agreement" guidance states:


             'The Applicant and the Turkish ECAA business person have  been
             living in the UK in a  relationship  similar  to  marriage  or
             civil partnership for a period of at least two years.'"

    The decision maker reasoned that, on the evidence,  the  Applicant  had
    been living together with her spouse in the United Kingdom for a period
    of just under 19  months  when  the  application  was  made.   This  is
    undisputed.


The Hearing: First Phase

13. To summarise, the  impugned  decision  states  unequivocally  that  the
    Applicant's quest for indefinite leave to remain was  refused  under  a
    combination of paragraph 41 of HC 510 and page 72 of the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance.  The  first  incongruity  which  emerged  during  the
    initial, uncompleted hearing was that this guidance did not  form  part
    of the (bulky) documentary evidence assembled and did  not  feature  in
    either party's  detailed  written  submissions.   The  second,  related
    incongruity is that the aforementioned submissions focus upon new  Home
    Office guidance published on 15  October  2015  which  (self-evidently)
    postdates the impugned decision and played no role therein.

14. As the hearing progressed a  further  anomaly  emerged.   The  skeleton
    argument of Ms Rhee QC, representing the Secretary of  State,  contains
    the following passage:

         "As the Secretary of State has explained and  acknowledged  in  her
         Detailed Grounds of Defence, her position ...  is  contradicted  by
         the position set out in the ECAA  Guidance  which  seeks  to  treat
         applications for ILR from Turkish business persons on the basis  of
         HC 510 ....   and  by  the  fact  that  the  Applicant's  husband's
         application for ILR was in  fact  considered  (and  granted)  under
         paragraph 28 thereof ....


         Further, the Applicant's own application  for  ILR  was  considered
         under HC 510 - albeit in conjunction with  the  provisions  of  the
         ECAA Guidance ...


         The Applicant did not satisfy  [the]  requirement  [of  two  years'
         cohabitation in the United Kingdom] ....


         However,  having  considered  the  position  with  some  care,  the
         Secretary of State's position is that settlement is not  caught  by
         the stand-still provision [in the Ankara Agreement] .
         ...


         Accordingly, both the Applicant's husband's and her own application
         for ILR should - on this basis - have  been  considered  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  Under the relevant Rules, the qualifying period
         for the grant of ILR is five years' residence.  The Applicant  does
         not satisfy this requirement ....


         It is in the interests of certainty and clarity that the  Secretary
         of State seeks a definitive ruling from the Court on this  question
         of principle before seeking to recast her guidance and position  to
         reflect the correct legal position (as confirmed by the Court)."

    In short, it was unambiguously acknowledged on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State that the  grounds  rehearsed  in  the  impugned  decision  for
    refusing the Applicant's application are incorrect  and  unsustainable.
    Ms Rhee acknowledged that the  expressed  refusal  of  the  application
    under  paragraph  41  of  HC  510  is  fundamentally  in  error.    The
    application should, rather, have been considered under  Section  E-ILRP
    of Appendix FM (HC 395) of the  Immigration  Rules  and,  specifically,
    paragraphs 1.1 - 1.5 thereof.  Paragraph 1.3 is the key provision.

15. Adjourning the hearing I made the following directions:

      a) The "missing" earlier guidance must be provided;


      b) The Secretary of State must, via a formal  letter  written  by  her
         legal representative, indicate unequivocally  the  exact  provision
         within Section E-ILRP of Appendix FM which is said to have governed
         the Applicant's application for indefinite leave to remain  at  the
         time when it was  made  viz  07  April  2015  and  decided  viz  23
         September 2015.


    As emphasised in my ex tempore ruling, the Tribunal was not  purporting
    to require the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh  or  ancillary
    decision.  Rather, taking into account the incongruities and hypothesis
    exposed at the hearing, the Tribunal required absolute  clarity  before
    proceeding further.  Moreover, given the nature of the  issue  exposed,
    this was a matter which requires  the  solemnity  and  formality  of  a
    letter  to  the  Applicant's  solicitors,   to   be   contrasted   with
    written/oral submissions of counsel based on instructions.




The Hearing: Second Phase

16. During the interlude occasioned by the aforementioned adjournment,  the
    Home Office wrote to the Applicant, by letter dated 02  December  2016.
    The purpose of this letter was to set out "...   how  your  application
    for settlement would have been treated  had  it  been  made  under  the
    current and relevant Family Rules.  In order to grasp both the  content
    of this letter and the issues in these proceedings, it is necessary  to
    appreciate that HC 509 and HC  510  were,  for  present  purposes,  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules in force in  1973  viz  at
    the time when the Ankara Agreement was concluded.

17. The letter further explains:


         "While the Home Office position  is  that  settlement  for  Turkish
         business  persons  and  their  dependents  does  not  fall  to   be
         considered under HC 510, it has previously allowed indefinite leave
         to remain ('ILR') to be obtained under the 1973 Rules."

    Continuing, the letter explains that, in addition to the  Rules,  there
    is an instrument of Home Office guidance to be applied.  The  operative
    guidance bears the title "Business Applications under  the  Turkish  EC
    Association Agreement" and was published on 22 April 2015.   This  made
    provision, at pages 65 - 67, for  the  dependent  partners  of  Turkish
    nationals admitted to the United Kingdom under  the  Ankara  Agreement.
    En Passant, the enquiry directed  by  the  Tribunal  at  [15](a)  above
    established that pages 65 - 67 of the April 2015 guidance do not differ
    from their successor (the October 2015 guidance, pages 60 - 62).


18.  Having  acknowledged  the  previous  Home  Office   practice   whereby
    settlement for  Turkish  business  persons  and  their  dependants  was
    considered  and  determined  under  HC  510,  the  letter,  continuing,
    indicates the revised  approach  of  the  Home  Office  -  namely  that
    settlement for members of this  cohort  is  governed  by  "the  current
    Immigration Rules as from time to time revised".  The effect of this is
    explained in the following terms:


         "...  The relevant applicable rules  pertaining  at  present  would
         mean that Turkish nationals  seeking  settlement  should  apply  to
         switch into one of the settlement routes such as the  Family  Rules
         within the current Immigration Rules.  The Family Rules route would
         only lead to ILR after completion of five years with the  applicant
         needing to meet all the relevant criteria for leave throughout  the
         qualifying period."

    The letter further informs the Applicant:

         "In summary, an application for ILR made under the  current  Family
         Rules would have been refused under paragraphs E.ILRP. 1.2 ...  1.3
         .... 1.4 .... 1.5 and ... 1.6."

    I interpose that the Applicant would not have been able to  demonstrate
    five years'  continuous  residence  with  her  husband  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The letter states, finally:


         "Should the Home Office position on the limitations  of  the  stand
         still clause be upheld, we may consider creating a new route enable
         dependents of those  ECAA  business  persons  with  ILR  to  secure
         further ECAA leave to remain."


19. Having considered all of the above, I am satisfied that notwithstanding
    the admitted error in the impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State
    which would, in the ordinary course of events, stimulate a  public  law
    obligation to make a fresh decision,  thereby  rendering  any  judicial
    review challenge moot, a useful purpose will be  served  by  permitting
    these proceedings to reach completion.  In particular, the judgment  of
    this Tribunal will provide important guidance to the Secretary of State
    and others in circumstances where  the  illumination  of  the  relevant
    legal rules will affect other cases and will also have an impact on the
    Secretary of State's future rule making: see R v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department, ex parte Salem [1999] 1 AC 450.    Furthermore,  a
    lawful decision remains to be made and this judgment will contribute to
    that exercise.


The Competing Arguments

20. I acknowledge the industry and care which both counsel invested in  the
    formulation of their written and oral arguments. It is  unnecessary  to
    reproduce  these  in  extenso  since  they  resolved  to  certain  core
    contentions.


21. On behalf of the Applicant, the centrepiece of the  argument  developed
    by Ms Peterson was that the imposition of the Secretary of State is  in
    contravention of the stand-still clause.  Ms Peterson argued  that  the
    settlement application of the Applicant must be determined by reference
    to the 1973 Immigration Rules, rather than the current  Rules  and  the
    guidance of the Secretary of State noted in [paragraph 12] above.   The
    decided cases upon which Ms Peterson relied included in particular (and
    not exhaustively) C-37/98 Savas [2000] ECR 1 - 2927 at [46],  [54]  and
    [69] especially and Case C-256/11, Dereci and Others.


22. The second main component of the Applicant's challenge is  an  asserted
    breach of the right to respect for family life  enjoyed  by  the  three
    family  members  concerned  under  Article  8   ECHR,   considered   in
    conjunction with section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009.   In  her  skeleton  argument  Ms  Petersen  formulated  this
    discrete challenge in the following terms:


         "The sponsor has established a  successful  business  ...   in  the
         United Kingdom and cannot leave his business without  detriment  to
         the business and provisions for the Claimant.  It is submitted that
         this is a further prohibited frustration  of  the  objects  of  the
         [Ankara Agreement] ....  and seeks to deprive the  second  Claimant
         [sic], who is less than a year old, of either his father's care  or
         the cessation of the family's income which provides for his care."

    While the description of the child of the family as  "second  Claimant"
    is inaccurate this error is of no moment;  after  the  application  was
    lodged the child of the marriage, the "second  Claimant',  was  granted
    British Citizenship.


23. The core submission of Ms Rhee QC on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    is that indefinite leave to remain (settlement) does  not  fall  within
    the scope of the stand still clause as it is neither necessary for, nor
    a corollary of, the exercise of the right in play,  namely  freedom  of
    establishment on the part of  the  Turkish  business  person  or  self-
    employed person concerned.  Rather, the grant of (mere)  limited  leave
    to remain to both the migrant and any of their dependants  suffices  to
    give effect to, and further the aims  of,  the  Ankara  Agreement.   Ms
    Rhee's second main submission is that the Applicant's  husband,  having
    been granted settlement, is no longer exercising his rights  under  the
    Agreement.   Her  argument  also  invoked  Article  59  of  the  Ankara
    Agreement (supra).


The Decided Cases

24. Both the CJEU and its predecessor (the ECJ) have given consideration to
    the Ankara Agreement and, specifically, the  stand  still  clause  from
    time to time.  In the particular context  of  freedom  of  movement  of
    workers (not this case) the applicable clause is contained  in  Article
    13 of Decision Number 1/80 of the Association Council.   The  rationale
    and effect of this clause were considered in the case of Sahin [Case C-
    242/06]. Mr Sahin, a Turkish national, challenged the introduction of a
    new  financial  levy  to  be  paid  upon  making  a  residence   permit
    application.  The Court stated, at [63]:


         "It is also settled case law that the stand-still clause enacted in
         Article 13 prohibits generally the introduction of any new  measure
         having the object or effect of making the  exercise  by  a  Turkish
         national in its territory of the freedom of  movement  for  workers
         subject to more restrictive conditions  than  those  which  applied
         ..."

    In its decision the Court also drew on Article  59  of  the  Additional
    Protocol holding that, within the  compass  of  the  Ankara  Agreement,
    Member States may  introduce  new  restrictions  on  Turkish  nationals
    provided that the same restrictions apply also to Community  nationals.
    The Court added the rider that  in  such  cases  any  new  restrictions
    introduced must not have a disproportionate impact on Turkish nationals
    when compared with the  impact  on  Community  nationals.   Ultimately,
    disproportionality was the rationale of the Court's decision, based  on
    the charge of E169 to which Turkish nationals were subjected,  compared
    with the substantially lesser charge of E30 for Community nationals who
    also received residence permits of longer temporal validity.

25. The stand-still clause pertaining to Turkish workers viz Article 13  of
    Decision Number 1/80, (supra) featured also in Case C - 561/14, (Genc).
    There the question posed by the CJEU, at [37], was whether the impugned
    measure adopted by the Member State concerned would, with reference  to
    the Article 13 standstill  clause,  be  "...   likely  to  affect  [the
    Turkish workers] freedom to carry out paid employment  in  that  Member
    State".

    At [39], the Court recalled:


         "In that regard, it is necessary to bear in mind that the Court has
         previously held that legislation which makes  family  reunification
         more difficult, by tightening the conditions of first admission  to
         the territory of the Member State concerned by spouses  of  Turkish
         nationals in relation  to  those  conditions  applicable  when  the
         Additional  Protocol  entered  into  force,  constitutes   a   'new
         restriction', within the meaning of Article 41(1) of the Additional
         Protocol, on the exercise of the freedom of establishment by  those
         Turkish nationals (judgment  in  Dogan,  C-138/13,  EU:C:2014:2066,
         paragraph 36)."


    The next ensuing passage, at [40], must also be considered:

         "That is the case since the  decision  of  a  Turkish  national  to
         establish himself in a Member State in order there  to  exercise  a
         stable economic activity could be  negatively  affected  where  the
         legislation  of  that  Member  State  makes  family   reunification
         difficult or impossible, so that that national could, as  the  case
         may be, find himself obliged to choose between his activity in  the
         Member State concerned and his family life in Turkey (see, to  that
         effect,    judgment    in    Dogan,    C-138/13,    EU:C:2014:2066,
         paragraph 35)."


    The reasoned basis of the Grand Chamber's ruling under Article 267 TFEU
    is found in the final paragraph of its judgment:


         "A national measure such as that at issue in the main  proceedings,
         making family  reunification  between  a  Turkish  worker  residing
         lawfully in the Member State concerned and his minor child  subject
         to the condition that the latter have, or have the  possibility  of
         establishing,  sufficient  ties  with   Denmark   to   enable   him
         successfully to integrate, when the child concerned and  his  other
         parent reside in the State of origin or in another State,  and  the
         application for family reunification is made more  than  two  years
         from the date on which the parent  residing  in  the  Member  State
         concerned obtained a permanent  residence  permit  or  a  residence
         permit with a possibility of permanent residence constitutes a 'new
         restriction', within the meaning of Article 13 of Decision 1/80 of
         the Association Council .............  Such a  restriction  is  not
         justified."


26. The earlier  decision  of  the  Grand  Chamber  in  Case  C  -  221/11,
    (Demirkan)  contains  an  admirably   succinct   formulation   of   the
    overarching test at [55]:


         "Consequently, irrespective of whether freedom of establishment  or
         freedom to provide services  is  invoked,  it  is  only  where  the
         activity in question  is  the  corollary  of  the  exercise  of  an
         economic activity that the 'stand still' clause may relate  to  the
         conditions of entry and residence of Turkish nationals  within  the
         territory of the Member States."




    I derive assistance also from the formulation of the  Court  in  Joined
    Cases C - 317/01 and C -  369/01,  (Abatay  and  Sahin),  another  case
    concerning the discrete cohort of Turkish workers, at [81]:


         "... a Turkish national who  is  already  lawfully  employed  in  a
         Member State no longer needs the protection of a stand-still clause
         as regards access to employment, as such access  has  already  been
         allowed and the person concerned subsequently enjoys, for the  rest
         of his career in the host Member State, the rights which Article  6
         of that decision expressly confers on him.  On the other hand,  the
         stand-still  requirement  as  regards  conditions  of   access   to
         employment is intended to  ensure  that  the  national  authorities
         refrain from taking measures likely to compromise  the  achievement
         of the objective of Decision No 1/80, which is to allow freedom  of
         movement for workers, even  if,  initially,  with  a  view  to  the
         gradual   introduction   of   that   freedom,   existing   national
         restrictions as regards access to employment may be retained ..."

27.  The  issue  of  family  reunification  was  the  subject  of  specific
    consideration by the CJEU (Second Chamber) in Case C - 138/13, (Dogan),
    where the Court stated, at [34]:

         "In that regard, it must be noted that  the  Court  has  held  that
         family  reunification  constitutes  an  essential  way  of   making
         possible the family life of  Turkish  workers  who  belong  to  the
         labour  force  of  the  Member  States,  and  contributes  both  to
         improving the quality of their stay and  to  their  integration  in
         those  Member   States   (see   judgment   in   D�lger,   C-451/11,
         EU:C:2012:504, paragraph 42)."


    The judgment continues, at [35]:

         "The decision of a Turkish  national  to  establish  himself  in  a
         Member State in order to exercise there a stable economic  activity
         could be negatively affected where the legislation of  that  Member
         State makes family reunification difficult or impossible,  so  that
         that national could, as the case may be, find  himself  obliged  to
         choose between his activity in the Member State concerned  and  his
         family life in Turkey."

28. Finally, reference must be made to the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in R (Buer) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1109.  This case concerned the scope and interpretation of  Article
    13 of Decision  Number  1/80.  The  context  was  a  challenge  to  the
    Secretary of State's decision to grant further limited leave to  remain
    in  circumstances  where  the  Claimant,  a  Turkish  employed  worker,
    asserted a right to indefinite leave to  remain  (settlement).  In  the
    interests of economy it is  unnecessary  make  detailed  references  to
    certain other pertinent decisions of the CJEU as these  are  quoted  in
    the  following  passage  in  the  judgment  of  Richards   LJ.   Having
    considered, inter alia, the decision in Sahin, Richards  LJ  continued,
    at [39]:

         "The reason why Article 13 has been held to apply to residence even
         though it does not contain any express mention of residence is that
         residence  is  a  corollary  of  employment:  without  a  right  of
         residence there can be no effective access to employment.  This has
         been brought out clearly in relation  to  Article  6(1),  which  is
         likewise silent as to residence but has been held to imply a  right
         of residence.   Thus  in  Case  C-237/91,  Kus  v  Landeshauptstadt
         Wiesbaden [1992] I-6807, referring back to Case C-192/89, Sevince v
         Staatssecretaris Van Justitie [1990] ECR I-3461 ,  the  Court  said
         this at paragraphs 29-30:


             "It also held, in that judgment, in the context of  the  third
             indent of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80  that  even  though
             that provision governs the situation  of  the  Turkish  worker
             only with respect to  employment  and  not  to  the  right  of
             residence, those two aspects of the personal  situation  of  a
             Turkish worker are closely linked and  that,  by  granting  to
             such a worker, after a specified period of legal employment in
             the Member State, access to any paid employment of his choice,
             the  provision  in  question  necessarily  implies   -   since
             otherwise the right granted by it to the Turkish worker  would
             be deprived of any effect - the existence, at  least  at  that
             time, of a right of residence for the person concerned ....
             The same is also true as regards the first indent  of  Article
             6(1) of Decision No 1/80, since without a right  of  residence
             the grant to  the  Turkish  worker,  after  one  year's  legal
             employment, of the right to renewal of his permit to work  for
             the same employer would likewise be deprived of effect."


    The judgment continues, at [40]:


         "The focus in that passage is on a right of residence in  order  to
         render effective the  right  of  access  to  work,  which  is  very
         different from a right to settlement or permanent  residence.   The
         same reasoning ought to apply to Article 13. In the case of Article
         13, moreover, the point is underlined by the limited scope  of  the
         article, discussed above. If the article is not intended to protect
         those who are already integrated into the labour force of the  host
         Member State but is intended to apply only to those who do not  yet
         qualify for rights under Article 6(1), its  concern  must  be  with
         residence up to the point where rights are acquired  under  Article
         6(1) , not with longer-term residence or settlement."


    And at [41]:


         "The close relationship between residence and employment is further
         illustrated by  Bozkurt  (see  paragraph  33  above).  One  of  the
         questions in that  case  was  whether  Article  6(1)  entitled  the
         applicant to remain in the  territory  of  the  host  Member  State
         following an  accident  at  work  which  rendered  him  permanently
         incapacitated  for  work.   The  Court  of  Justice  answered  that
         question in the  negative,  stating  at  paragraphs  39-40  of  the
         judgment:
             "It follows that Article 6 of  Decision  No  1/80  covers  the
             situation  of  Turkish  workers  who  are   working   or   are
             temporarily incapacitated for work. It does not, on the  other
             hand,  cover  the  situation  of  a  Turkish  worker  who  has
             definitively ceased to belong to the labour force of a  Member
             State because he has, for example, reached retirement age  or,
             as  in  the  present  case,  become  totally  and  permanently
             incapacitated for work."


    This reasoning impelled the Court to conclude, at [46] that Article  13
    -


         "... does not relate to settlement in the  host  Member  State  and
         does not therefore prohibit the introduction of new restrictions on
         the right of settlement."




My Conclusions

29. I consider that the first main principle to be distilled from the cases
    considered above is that any EU Member State measure  introduced  post-
    1980 which has the effect of  rendering  family  reunification  or  the
    enjoyment of family life difficult or impossible may constitute a  "new
    restriction" on the ability of a Turkish national to work or to provide
    services or to become established in the Member State  concerned.   The
    second, related principle  is  that  family  reunification  may  be  an
    essential element of a Turkish national's ability to become, or remain,
    economically  active  in  the  host  Member  State  under  the   Ankara
    Agreement. In both of these scenarios the applicable stand-still clause
    may be contravened.

30. In my judgement, the main question to be determined is to be formulated
    in the following terms: could a refusal to grant  indefinite  leave  to
    remain (i.e. settlement) to the dependants of a  Turkish  national  who
    has entered the United Kingdom and established a  business  therein  in
    accordance with the Ankara  Agreement  frustrate,  or  extinguish,  the
    ability of the Turkish national to continue to do so?


31. To the common law judge, the formulation of the question  in  this  way
    might tend to invite the conclusion that a general,  abstract  response
    is not possible.  This follows from the unavoidable reality that  every
    case will be intensively fact sensitive.   Thus,  in  some  cases,  the
    factual matrix may be such that an affirmative answer to  the  question
    is appropriate. Equally, in other cases with their distinctive  factual
    framework, a negative answer may be indicated.


32. However, having registered this initial  reservation,  I  disclaim  any
    reluctance to provide a concrete,  concluded  answer  to  the  question
    posed.  I do so on the basis that a confident answer lies in the  terms
    and aims of the Ankara Agreement, its Protocol and  the  jurisprudence,
    European and domestic, considered above.


33.  Under United Kingdom law settlement is the optimum  status  achievable
    by those who are not British nationals.  It carries with it all of  the
    rights,  advantages  and  obligations  of  British  nationality.   This
    includes exemption from the deportation provisions of statutes such  as
    the UK Borders Act 2007.   The  ultimate  sanction  is  deprivation  of
    nationality. See generally the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    Ahmed & Ors v SSHD [2017] UKUT 118 (IAC) at [26] - [31].


34. The correct answer to the question posed above does not,  in  my  view,
    require any particular sophistication.  The grant of limited  leave  to
    enter and remain to the family members of a Turkish national exercising
    rights will, in all cases bar the most exceptional, suffice  to  ensure
    the efficacious exercise and enjoyment of the economic right  in  play.
    The higher, optimum status of settlement  is  not  necessary  for  this
    purpose.  In the language of the governing jurisprudence, the grant  of
    settlement status is neither a prerequisite to nor a corollary  of  the
    exercise  of  the  primary  rights  engaged.   There  is  no   evidence
    warranting the assessment that only settlement will suffice  to  ensure
    that the rights in question can be  efficaciously  exercised.   Nor  is
    there any basis  upon  which  judicial  notice  of  this  detriment  is
    justifiable. Furthermore, nothing has been identified  in  evidence  or
    argument to warrant any distinction between  Turkish  self  -  employed
    entrepreneurs and Turkish workers.


35. Thus I apply the principles in Sahin, Buer and the  other  cases  noted
    above to the discrete context of establishment under Article 13 of  the
    Ankara Agreement.  In  particular,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Ankara
    measures to suggest that the heavier investment in the  economy  of  EU
    Member States which some Turkish national entrepreneurs might  achieve,
    depending on the fact sensitive context of individual cases,  justifies
    treatment preferential to that accorded to Turkish workers.  In passing
    (obiter) there is no apparent reason  why  the  provision  of  services
    (Article 14) should be treated any differently.


36. Insofar as  necessary,  my  primary  conclusion,  rehearsed  above,  is
    buttressed by Article 59 of the Additional Protocol.  Turkey has at all
    material times been a non-EU Member State.   Taking  into  account  the
    context of recent history it has not even achieved the status of a pre-
    accession state.  While at this  remove  the  noble  aspirations  which
    underpinned the 1963 accord may seem more  distant  than  ever,  having
    regard to political and related realities,  this  does  not  alter  the
    juridical framework. In particular,  by  1980  the  principle  of  non-
    discrimination had become firmly embedded in EU Law.  Article 59 of the
    Additional Protocol reflects this.  More  recently,  Directive  2004/38
    (the "Citizens Directive")  contains  the  outworkings  of  the  rights
    attainable by the family members of EU nationals.   Stated  succinctly,
    it would be incongruous if the  Ankara  Agreement  and  its  Additional
    Protocol were to confer on Turkish nationals and their  family  members
    rights superior to those available to EU  nationals  and  their  family
    members.  Parity is  the  most  which,  in  this  Article  59,  clearly
    contemplates. Any other conclusion is, in my judgement,  confounded  by
    the terms and aims of the two main Ankara instruments considered  as  a
    whole, basic principles of EU law and the applicable  EU  and  domestic
    jurisprudence considered above.


37. There is a further, subsidiary question: does the answer  to  the  main
    question formulated above differ if  the  economically  active  Turkish
    national has acquired the status of indefinite leave  to  remain  (i.e.
    settlement) in the United Kingdom?  In my view, where this is the  case
    the economic rights of the person concerned derive from the  status  of
    settlement and not the Ankara Agreement.  The fact that,  historically,
    the Turkish national was exercising rights under the  Ankara  Agreement
    does not in my estimation alter this analysis. The rights  asserted  by
    family members of  the  Turkish  national  concerned  -  such  as  this
    Applicant - depend upon the status of the  relevant  Turkish  national.
    They are contingent rights.  It follows,  in  my  judgement,  that  the
    Ankara Agreement and its Additional Protocol have no application to the
    matrix of the present challenge.  Thus in such cases the main  question
    posed in [30] does not arise.  I agree with  Ms  Rhee's  submission  to
    this effect.

38. But for my main conclusions above further evidence, likely  to  include
    witness statements and other materials together with  further  argument
    relating to the family reunification, Article 8  ECHR  and  section  55
    issues would have been necessary in order to determine this  challenge.
    However, this is rendered otiose by my main conclusions.

Order

39. First, I make an order quashing the impugned decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 23 September 2015.  Second,  I  consider  a  declaratory
    order reflecting my conclusions in [34] - [37]  above  appropriate,  in
    the following terms:


    (i)    The settlement in the UK of a migrant Turkish national  who  has
         exercised the right of  establishment  under  the  ECAA  and  their
         family members does not fall within the scope of  the  "stand-still
         clause" in Article 41(1) of the ECAA Additional Protocol as  it  is
         not necessary for the exercise of freedom  of  establishment  under
         Article 13 of the ECAA;


    (ii)   Where a Turkish national who exercised rights under the ECAA has
         been granted settlement in the UK the rights of  such  persons  and
         his family members are not referable to or conferred by the ECAA or
         its Additional Protocol.


Costs

40. I have considered the submissions of both parties  on  this  issue.  In
    exercising my discretion I have had particular regard to  the  history,
    evolution and ultimate main purpose of these proceedings.  There are in
    my estimation two main considerations to be  balanced.   The  first  is
    that by the initiation and prosecution of this challenge the  Applicant
    has exposed and established that  the  Secretary  of  State's  impugned
    decision is unlawful, to the extent that there is no  dispute  that  an
    order quashing the decision should be made.


41. The second principal consideration  is  that  while  the  Secretary  of
    State's arguments on the issue bearing on the declaratory order which I
    have decided to make have prevailed,  this  judgment  has,  ultimately,
    acquired the status  of  an  advisory  opinion  predominantly  for  the
    benefit of the Secretary of State.  This  judgment  will,  predictably,
    influence changes in the Immigration Rules and the Secretary of State's
    associated policies.  The circumstances in which I was agreeable to the
    proceedings continuing are rehearsed in [12] - [19] above.  In securing
    an order quashing the impugned decision of the Secretary of  State  the
    Applicant must be considered the winner in substance.  In the matter of
    costs, I conclude that this analysis is not offset sufficiently by  the
    declaratory order favouring the Secretary of State's arguments  on  the
    broader issue of legal principle debated and determined.

42. I add that if the only  outcome  of  these  proceedings  had  been  the
    declaratory order I would have made no order as to costs  inter-partes.
    I conclude, on balance, that  the  quashing  order  in  favour  of  the
    Applicant is the decisive factor in the costs debate.   Accordingly,  I
    order that the Secretary of State pay the Applicant's reasonable costs,
    to be assessed in default of agreement.


Liberty to apply

43. I include this facility.


Permission to appeal

This will be decided separately.






      Signed:
                 The President, The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey




      Dated:           18 February 2017 [initially]
                 08 March 2017 [finally]



