

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       MH (Respondent's bundle: documents not provided) Pakistan [2010] UKUT
                                                                   168 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |                             |
|On 29 April 2010                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                     Designated Immigration Judge Murray

                                   Between

                                     MH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Abdul Waheed (the sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Rule 13 of the First Tier Tribunal Rules requires  an  unpublished  document
to be supplied to the Tribunal if it is  mentioned  in  the  Notice  of,  or
Reasons for Refusal or if the Respondent relies on it.  Because  the  Notice
of, or Reasons for Refusal form the  statement  of  the  Respondent's  case,
however, the Tribunal is likely to  assume  that  a  document  mentioned  in
either, but not supplied to the Tribunal, is no longer relied on.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan born in 2007,  appealed  to  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal against the decision of the Respondent
      on 12 August 2008 refusing him entry clearance as the dependant of his
      father, who has leave in the United Kingdom as a student.  Immigration
      Judge Cohen dismissed the Appellant's appeal. The Appellant sought and
      obtained an order for reconsideration. Following the abolition of  The
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, the reconsideration continues  as  an
      appeal to this Tribunal.

   2. The refusal was on  two  grounds,  which  are  closely  linked.  Under
      paragraph 79 of the Statement of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  (HC
      395), a person seeking entry clearance as the child of a student needs
      to establish amongst other things that he:

         "(iv) can, and will,  be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately
         without recourse to public funds".

      Paragraph 320(7A) provides that entry clearance "is to be refused":

         "where false representations have been  made,  or  false  documents
         have been submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,
         and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge) or material  facts
         have not been disclosed, in relation to the application"

   3. When the  appellant's  application  was  made,  it  was  supported  by
      documents said to be statements  of  the  accounts  of  the  sponsor's
      father, with the United Bank Limited in Peshawar. The Entry  Clearance
      Officer reached the conclusion that those documents were  not  genuine
      documents.  In  those  circumstances  refusal  was   mandatory   under
      paragraph 320(7A);  and,  without  those  documents,  the  substantive
      requirements of paragraph 79(iv) could not be met.

   4. We need to set out the terms of the Notice of Refusal  insofar  as  it
      relates to paragraph 320(7A):

         "You are dependent on your sponsor who is presently a  student.  In
         support of his financial circumstances and his ability to  maintain
         you in the UK, you have submitted a statement of account issued  by
         United Bank Limited  bank.  However,  bank  management  staff  have
         verified that this statement is  not  genuine,  as  detailed  in  a
         document verification  report.  Statements  are  checked  with  the
         regional hubs and not the issuing branch as  a  protective  measure
         against fraud. I consider this reliance on suspect documentation as
         an attempt to gain  entry  clearance  by  deception,  an  act  that
         seriously undermines your credibility. As a false document has been
         submitted in relation to your  application,  it  is  refused  under
         paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

   5. The Immigration Judge dealt with the matter  without  a  hearing.  The
      important part of his determination is paragraph 8:

         "The Appellant is  financially  dependent  upon  the  sponsor.  His
         business and personal bank statements were submitted in support  of
         the application. The Respondent undertook document verification and
         produced a report. The Respondent has made very serious allegations
         concerning the documentation relied  upon  by  the  Appellant.  The
         Appellant has merely produced further documentation said to be from
         the branch. I find that the Appellant has not discharged the burden
         upon him. The  Respondent  has  produced  a  document  verification
         report,  and  the  allegations  therein  have   simply   not   been
         discharged. I therefore find that the Respondent's refusal  of  the
         Appellant's application under paragraph 320(7A)  is  one  that  was
         made correctly in all the circumstances and the Appellant's  appeal
         is bound to fail.

   6. An application for reconsideration was made by the Appellant's  father
      on his behalf. It asserts that no enquiries have been made in relation
      to the genuineness of the bank statements, and challenges the  Judge's
      conclusion on them. There is also on the file a letter  from  Mohammad
      Sarwar,  MP  for  Glasgow  Central,  demanding   reconsideration   and
      asserting of anyone who thought that the documents were forgeries that
      (apparently on Mr Sarwar's own  knowledge)  "I  can  assure  you  this
      opinion is wrong".

   7. Reconsideration was ordered. The reasons for the decision are given as
      follows:

         "The Appellant seeks an order for reconsideration in respect of the
         decision of Immigration Judge Cohen sitting at Taylor House, issued
         on 3 August 2009 to dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         Respondent's decision to refuse leave to enter the UK as the  minor
         dependent child of his father who  is  a  student  in  the  UK.  It
         appears that the appellant's father, mother and sibling are in  the
         UK and it is unclear how this very young child (born in 2007) comes
         to be alone in Pakistan. The respondent was not satisfied that  the
         appellant would be maintained and accommodated without recourse  to
         public funds, mainly because  the  sponsor  had  submitted  a  bank
         statement found not to be genuine on enquiry of the  bank  and  the
         application was refused under para 320(7A) of HC395.

         It is argued that there has been unfairness because the  sponsoring
         father was not sent notice of hearing of the appeal. Examination of
         the file reveals that the appeal form indicates that the  appellant
         wishes to have his appeal decided on the  papers  without  an  oral
         hearing and this is plainly  the  reason  why  no  notice  of  oral
         hearing was served, although a letter sent on 19 December  2008  to
         the  respondent  and  copied  to  the   sponsor   was   potentially
         misleading. A later letter, dated 27 April 2009,  does  make  clear
         that the request for the appeal to  be  determined  on  the  papers
         without  an  oral  hearing  will   be   accepted   and   that   any
         evidence/submission must be lodged by 22 June 2009. The judge  took
         into account all the documentary evidence that was so lodged.

         However, where there has been arguable unfairness is in failure  by
         the respondent and the judge to consider whether the refusal  under
         para 320(7A) is a disproportionate step given the extremely serious
         adverse effect it will have upon the immigration  history  of  this
         very young child, when refusal under  para  79  of  the  rules  for
         failure to show the necessary funds would have more than sufficed."

   8. There are three comments we need to make on those reasons.  The  first
      is that, as the documents on file make absolutely  clear,  "this  very
      young child" is not  "alone  in  Pakistan".  He  is  living  with  his
      grandparents, and that is the result of a deliberate  choice  made  by
      his parents. Secondly, as we have already indicated, the  two  grounds
      for refusal are intimately related. It is difficult to see  how  there
      could have been refusal under paragraph 79 without a finding that  the
      documents were false. If they are not false, there is evidence of  the
      Appellant's ability to meet the requirements of paragraph 79(iv). Most
      crucially, however, there is no reference in the Reasons for  Decision
      to the process by which the Immigration Judge reached  the  conclusion
      that refusal under paragraph 320(7A) was appropriate, bearing in  mind
      that the Immigration Judge's comment that the burden of proof  was  on
      the Appellant, and his reference to a  document  verification  report,
      when there is no such report on the file.

   9. At the beginning  of  the  hearing  before  us,  Mrs  O'Brien  readily
      acknowledged that the burden of proving the falsity of  documents  was
      on the Entry Clearance Officer. She told us that she had  interrogated
      a database available to her in relation to  the  verification  of  the
      documents, had seen no document verification report in  a  form  which
      suggested it had been before the Immigration Judge. We told  her  that
      we had found none  on  the  file,  and  invited  her  to  examine  the
      Tribunal's file to see if she could find one. After an adjournment  to
      enable her to do that, she told us that she had not been able to  find
      a document verification report on the file.

  10. It appears to us that in dealing with this case without a hearing, the
      Immigration Judge may have placed rather too much reliance in what was
      said in the Notice of Decision. We do not know how he came to  express
      his decision exactly in the way he did; but so  far  as  we  can  see,
      there was no evidential basis  for  him  to  conclude  that  the  bank
      statements were false. There  was  only  an  assertion  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer, unsupported by any other documentation.

  11. There is a procedural reason why the absence of  a  document  of  this
      nature has a positive rather than a merely negative impact.  Prior  to
      the  commencement  of  the  appeals  provisions  of  the  Asylum   and
      Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc.)  Act  2004,  appeals  were
      lodged with the Respondent, who had the duty of forwarding them to the
      Immigration Appellant Authority. An important reform, crucial  to  the
      independence of the immigration judiciary, was  that  appeals  to  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal and to its successor, the  Immigration
      and Asylum Chamber of the First-Tier Tribunal, are to be  lodged  with
      the Tribunal. A person  appealing  against  a  decision  of  an  Entry
      Clearance Officer may serve the notice on the Entry Clearance Officer,
      but  the  latter  is  obliged  by  rule  6(6)(b)  of  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (SI  2005/230),  which
      applied to the Notice of Appeal in this case when  it  was  given,  to
      forward the notice to the Tribunal within ten days.

  12. In conjunction with the new rules about lodging a  Notice  of  Appeal,
      were rules about the documents to be provided by the Respondent to the
      Tribunal. Rule 13 requires the Respondent to serve on the Tribunal and
      on the Appellant:

         "(1) ...a copy of -

             (a) the notice of the decision to which the Notice  of  Appeal
             relates, and any other document served on the Appellant giving
             reasons for that decision;

             ...

             (c) any other unpublished document which is referred to  in  a
             document mentioned in subparagraph (a) or relied upon  by  the
             respondent".

  13. The requirements of rule 13 are mandatory. Their intention  is  clear:
      it is to enable the Appellant to know the case he has to meet, and the
      Tribunal to have the material upon which the case can  be  judged.  If
      there are documents relating to the detection of forgery  which  ought
      in the pubic interest not to be disclosed, the procedure under s.  108
      of the 2002 Act is available, as also indicated  by  rule  51(7).  The
      word "or" in rule 30(1)(c) is not unimportant,  but  it  seems  to  us
      that,  because  the  documents  mentioned  in  subparagraph  (a)   are
      essentially the statement of the Respondent's case,  even  in  a  case
      where the obligation to disclose a document arises from the fact  that
      it is "referred to in a document mentioned in subparagraph  (a)",  the
      Tribunal is entitled to conclude that a document not  furnished  under
      rule 13 is not a document upon which the Respondent relies;  and  that
      if there is reference to it in the Notice of, or Reasons for  Refusal,
      the Tribunal is entitled to conclude that  that  reference  no  longer
      forms part of the Respondent's case.

  14. The situation in the present case was that the Appellant's application
      was  supported  by  bank  statements  sufficient  to  show  that   the
      requirements  of  paragraph  79(iv)  would  be  satisfied.  The  Entry
      Clearance Officer evidently had suspicions about those statements, but
      the evidence before the Immigration Judge was wholly  insufficient  to
      enable him to make the finding  he  did.  In  those  circumstances  he
      should have allowed the appeal on the basis that the  requirements  of
      paragraph 79 were fulfilled, and this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
      accordingly allowed on that basis.

  15. We make no direction. As we observed at the  hearing,  there  are  two
      reasons for that decision. First, the  application  was  made  on  the
      basis of the Appellant's father's leave to remain as  a  student.  His
      studies finished in December 2009. His leave was due to expire on  the
      day following the hearing before us. He told us that  he  has  applied
      for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (General)  migrant.  If  he  is
      successful, and if it is thought appropriate that the  Appellant  join
      him as a dependant of a person in the Untied Kingdom in that category,
      there will need to be a new application.

  16. Secondly, there is a passage in the Appellant's grounds of  appeal  to
      the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  which  causes  us  considerable
      concern. The passage reads as follows:

         "I the undersigned [....] do hereby solemnly and sincerely  declare
         and affirm under oath that I will definitely  follow  the  rules  &
         regulation in the United Kingdom and seeking entry clearance to the
         United Kingdom only for my father higher  studies.  I  also  affirm
         that I will abide by all prevailing rules and  regulations  of  the
         United Kingdom. Moreover, I  will  never  extend  my  stay  whether
         legally or illegally in  the  United  Kingdom  and  will  certainly
         comeback to my  native  country  Pakistan  with  my  parents  after
         completion of my father projected studies. I further guarantee that
         I will not indulge myself into any unlawful or illegal activity  in
         the United Kingdom."

  17. The sentiment is admirable: but we regard it as quite impossible  that
      a Pakistani boy aged under 3 years at the date when that document  was
      executed can have sworn or affirmed in English  in  those  terms.  The
      Appellant's father told us that he had no knowledge of the contents of
      that document. That may or may not be right, but  there  is  no  doubt
      that the document was intended to support the Appellant's appeal.

  18. Those are the reasons why we think a  direction  is  not  appropriate;
      but, as we indicated above, we allow the Appellant's appeal.



   Signed






   Mr C M G Ockelton
      Vice President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber




