
[pic]
IAC-fh-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 14, 15th March 2012                        |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                              AK (AFGHANISTAN)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Vokes and Ms E Rutherford, instructed by
                 Blakemores Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D Blundell instructed by Treasury Solicitor








         A. Law etc:

      (i) The Tribunal continues to regard as correct the summary of  legal
      principles governing  Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee  Qualification
      Directive as set out in HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2010]
      UKUT 331 (IAC)  and  more  recently  in  AMM  and  Others  (conflict;
      humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00445
      (IAC) and MK (documents -  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00126
      (IAC).

      (ii) The need, when dealing with asylum-related claims  based  wholly
      or significantly on risks arising from situations of  armed  conflict
      and indiscriminate violence, to assess whether Article 15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive is engaged, should not lead  to  judicial  or
      other decision-makers going straight to  Article  15(c).  The  normal
      course should be to deal  with  the  issue  of  refugee  eligibility,
      subsidiary (humanitarian) protection eligibility and Article  3  ECHR
      in that order.

      (iii) One relevant factor when deciding what weight to  attach  to  a
      judgment of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) that sets  out
      findings on general country condition in asylum-related  cases,  will
      be the extent to which the Court  had  before  it  comprehensive  COI
      (Country of Origin Information). However, even if there is  a  recent
      such ECtHR judgement based on comprehensive COI, the Tribunal is  not
      bound to reach the same findings: see AMM, para 115.


      (iv) There may be a useful role in country guidance cases for reports
      by COI (Country of  Origin)  analysts/consultants,  subject  to  such
      reports adhering to certain basic standards. Such a role is  distinct
      from that a country expert.

         B.  Country conditions

      (i)  This  decision  replaces  GS  (Article   15(c):   indiscriminate
      violence) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00044  as  current  country
      guidance on the applicability of Article 15(c) to the on-going  armed
      conflict in Afghanistan. The country guidance given in AA (unattended
      children) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00016  (IAC),  insofar  as  it
      relates to unattended children, remains unaffected by this decision.

      (ii) Despite a rise in the number of civilian deaths  and  casualties
      and (particularly in  the  2010-2011  period)  an  expansion  of  the
      geographical scope of the armed conflict in Afghanistan, the level of
      indiscriminate violence in that country taken as a whole  is  not  at
      such a high level as to mean that,  within  the  meaning  of  Article
      15(c) of the Qualification Directive, a  civilian,  solely  by  being
      present in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his life or
      person.

      (iii) Nor is the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence,  even  in  the
      provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be  taken  to
      include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level.

      (iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article 15(c) in
      which the respondent asserts  that  Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
      internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account
      (both in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only  the  level
      of violence in that city but also  the  difficulties  experienced  by
      that city's poor and  also  the  many  Internally  Displaced  Persons
      (IDPs) living there, these considerations will not  in  general  make
      return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

      (v) Nevertheless, this position is qualified  (both  in  relation  to
      Kabul and other potential places of internal relocation) for  certain
      categories of women. The purport of the current Home  Office  OGN  on
      Afghanistan is that whilst women with a male support network  may  be
      able to relocate internally, "...it would be unreasonable  to  expect
      lone women and female heads  of  household  to  relocate  internally"
      (February 2012 OGN, 3.10.8) and the Tribunal sees no basis for taking
      a different view.




|                                                   |
|TABLE OF CONTENTS                                  |



GLOSSARY                                             Pages 7 - 8

                                                           Paragraphs

INTRODUCTION                                          1 - 3

The Appellant's Case                                  4 - 5

Procedural History                                          6 - 8

   A. THE EVIDENCE


The Expert Evidence                              9

Dr Seddon                                              10 - 12
Dr Giustozzi                                                 13 - 16

The ARC Evidence

(a)   The Asylum Research Consultancy (ARC) Report, 2012      17 - 25
(b)   Oral evidence of Ms Stephanie Huber                     26 - 27

Background Evidence                                     28

Parties to the conflict
   (a) Government and pro-government actors                   29 - 31
   (b) The Insurgents                                   32 - 35
Causes of the conflict                                  36
Types and indices of violence                                 37 - 45
Levels of violence:
   a) Civilian casualties                                     46 - 50
   b) Targeting of civilians                            51
   c) Targeted categories of civilians                        52 - 55
   d) Combatant casualties                              56
Comparison with other conflicts                               57 - 59
Protection                                              60 - 61
Corruption                                              62
Socio-economic conditions/IDPs                                63 - 69
Humanitarian aid                                        70 - 72
Provincial level:                                             73 - 76
(a)Kabul                                                77 - 79
     IDPs in Kabul                                            80
(b) Ghazni                                              81 - 83
Returns packages                                        84 - 85
UNHCR position                                          86 - 89
UKBA Afghanistan OGN v9, 30 February 2011                     90 - 92
Tribunal country guidance and related domestic case law       93 - 99
Foreign cases:
ECtHR:                                                  100
(a) Case of N v Sweden                                        100
(b) Case of Husseini v UK                                     101
(c) JH v UK                                             101
Leading Swiss cases on Article 15(c)  and  Afghanistan                102  -
    104
Other national decisions                                      105 - 110

   B. LEGAL FRAMEWORK                              111 - 114


   C. SUBMISSIONS

Mr Vokes and Ms Rutherfords' written submissions              115 - 120
Mr Vokes' oral submissions                              121 - 132
Mr Blundell's written submissions                       133 - 138
Mr Blundell's oral submissions                                139 - 152

   D. OUR ASSESSMENT

   a) General
Initial observations                                          153 - 161
The inclusive approach                                  162 - 164
The expert evidence:
Dr Seddon                                               165 - 173
Dr Giustozzi                                                  174 - 176
 The ARC evidence                                             177 - 186
Afghanistan as a whole                                  187 - 189
UNHCR                                             190 - 193
Decisions by other courts in Europe                           194 - 207
Enhanced risk categories                                      208 - 209
Relevance of other metrics                                    210 - 212
IDPs                                                          213 - 214
The situation province-by-province                            215 - 226
Internal relocation                                           227 - 242
Kabul                                                   243
Ghazi                                                   244
Internal travel                                         245
Previous country guidance                                         246 - 247
The future situation                                        248

General Conclusions                                   249

   b) The Appellant's Case                            250 - 254

APPENDICES

Appendix A                                            Pages 79 - 81

The error of law decision

Appendix B                                            Pages 82 - 85

List of Background Country Information (COI) Documentation Considered

Appendix C
Index to Asylum Research Consultancy report                 Pages 86 - 92



    GLOSSARY OF TERMS


ACBAR - Agency Co-ordinating Body for Afghan Relief

ALP - Afghan Local Police

ANSO - Afghan NGO Safety Office

ANFS - Afghan National Security Forces

ANA - Afghan National Army

ANP - Afghan National Police

ANBG - Afghanistan's New Beginnings Group ANBG

AIHRC - Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission

AGEs - Anti-Government Elements

AOG - Armed Opposition Groups

AVR - Assisted Voluntary Return

ARC - Asylum Research Consultancy

CPI - Corruption Perception Index

CSIS - Centre for Strategic and International Studies

CRS - Congressional Research Service

DIAG - Disbandment of Illegal Armed Groups

EDPs - Externally Displaced Persons

ECtHR - European Court of Human Rights

FMR - Forced Migration Review

IEDs - Improvised Explosive Devises

ICG - International Crisis Group

IDMC - Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre

IDPs - Internally Displaced Persons

IOM - International Organisation for Migration IOM

IWPR - The Institute for War and Peace Reporting

ISAF - International Security Assistance Force

DESTIN - London School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science,  Development
Studies Institute

NCTC - National Counterterrorism Centre

OHCHR - Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights

OGN - Operational Guidance Note

PDPA - People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan

SFAC - Swiss Federal Administrative Court

US DoD - US Department of Defence

UNAMA - UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan

UNDSS - UN Department of Safety and Security

UNDP - UN Development Programme

UNHCR - UN High Commissioner for Human Rights

UNOCHA - UN Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

                 DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     Afghanistan  is  not  only  war-stricken;  it  is  riven  by   ethnic
    frictions, political factionalism, high levels  of  poverty,  impunity,
    serious abuses of human rights by  both  state  and  non-state  actors,
    ineffective governance, high levels of corruption, weak rule of law, an
    anaemic legal system, and a high  risk  of  infiltration,  cooption  or
    subversion  by  insurgents,  warlords  and  criminal  groups.   Despite
    ongoing efforts to improve training, the majority  of  Afghan  National
    Security  Forces  (ANSF)  remain   poorly   equipped   and   relatively
    ineffective.  Afghanistan has become  the  world's  largest  source  of
    externally displaced persons (EDPs) or "refugees" in  common  parlance;
    their estimated number of 3.1 million accounting for some  10%  of  its
    population.

2.    Afghanistan's affairs  are  closely  intertwined  with  those  of  its
    neighbours,  especially  Pakistan.   Thus   for   example,   Pakistan's
    neighbouring provinces provide safe havens for the  Taliban  insurgency
    and  the  lower  prices  of  goods  and  accommodation  in  them   mean
    significant numbers of Afghans spend time there. And, by virtue of  the
    involvement since November 2001 of U.S. and other international forces,
    what is  now  known  as  "the  Long  War"  also  has  an  international
    dimension. Whilst a recent strategic agreement of 1  May  2012  reached
    between Presidents Obama and Kharzai confirms  that  the  departure  in
    2014 of NATO and other  international  troops  will  not  result  in  a
    cessation of U.S. support of various kinds, the  consequences  of  that
    departure are the subject of much debate.

 3.   Bearing in mind the global resonance of this conflict, it is  as  well
    that we emphasise at the outset that our task as judges in this case is
    a limited one.  It is not to pronounce  on  the  political  and  social
    conditions in Afghanistan or the rights and wrongs of the conflict, but
    only to furnish answers to a question relating to how the claims of the
    appellant and other failed asylum-seekers and/or enforced returnees  to
    Afghanistan are to be assessed so as to  decide  whether  they  can  be
    returned consistently with Article 15(c) of Directive  2004/83/EC  (the
    "Qualification Directive"). At  the  same  time,  our  task  has  wider
    implications because we have to tackle it in the  knowledge  that  this
    case has been identified as an intended country guidance case, designed
    to consider among other things, whether increasing levels  of  violence
    in Afghanistan require us to take a different view than has been  taken
    in previous country guidance cases as to  the  application  of  Article
    15(c), GS  (Article  15(c):  indiscriminate  violence)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2009] UKIAT 00044 in particular.

The Appellant's Case

4.    The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on  1  January  1990.
    It is not in dispute that he arrived in the  UK  on  31  October  2008,
    claiming asylum straightaway.  The principal basis  of  his  claim  was
    that he had fled his home area of Ghazni to escape persecution  at  the
    hands of the family of  a  powerful  war  lord,  Jumra  Khan,  who  had
    discovered the appellant had begun a relationship  with  Khan's  niece.
    The fact that the appellant's family had been high-ranking  members  of
    Dr Najibullah's Communist regime had added to his difficulties.  On  31
    July 2009 the respondent rejected his  claim,  finding  it  lacking  in
    credibility.  In his subsequent appeal, before Immigration Judge  Obhi,
    the appellant's claim was again rejected  as  lacking  in  credibility.
    The judge had nevertheless gone on to allow his  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the evidence before him demonstrated that his home area of  Ghazni
    was unsafe for Article 15(c) purposes  because  of  the  ongoing  armed
    conflict there and that Kabul would not be a viable internal relocation
    alternative.  On 19 March 2009 the judge's decision  was  found  to  be
    vitiated by legal error in relation to  his  assessment  that  in  both
    Ghazni and Kabul the appellant would face a real risk of serious  harm,
    contrary to Article 15(c).

5.    As was made clear in the decision finding that the IJ  had  materially
    erred in law (for the text of which  see  Appendix  A),  there  was  no
    challenge brought against the judge's adverse credibility findings; and
    directions for this appeal have always taken them as a starting  point.
    All that is accepted is that he is male, aged 22, able-bodied and  from
    Ghazni.  Also preserved is the judge's finding that he has an uncle  in
    Kabul.

Procedural History

6.    When setting aside the decision of IJ Obhi, the  Tribunal  took  steps
    to progress the appeal as a potential country guidance  case  "intended
    to examine whether circumstances have changed  since  the  Tribunal  CG
    case of GS as applied to Kabul  and  other  parts  of  Afghanistan".  A
    decision was then taken to await the decision of another Upper Tribunal
    panel in AA (unattended children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00016
    (IAC) dealing with some Article 15(c)-related issues albeit  mainly  in
    the context of risk to children. In the event the determination  in  AA
    was not promulgated until 6 January 2012.  In  the  meantime,  however,
    the Tribunal conducted several Case Management Review (CMR) hearings of
    the instant case with a view to clarifying the scope of the issues, the
    expert evidence and  the  preparation  of  background  materials.   The
    Tribunal is greatly indebted to both  parties  for  their  considerable
    effort and diligence.

7.    It was intended that at the present hearing the  Tribunal  would  hear
    oral evidence  from  Dr  Giustozzi  but  regrettably  that  proved  not
    possible because of his involvement in a car accident, but Mr Vokes was
    content for his written report to  stand  as  his  only  evidence.   He
    sought  and  obtained  permission  to  call  a  different  witness,  Ms
    Stephanie Huber of Asylum Research Consultancy (ARC), whose evidence is
    set out below at paras 17-27.

8.    At the close of the hearing on 15 March 2012, the  Tribunal  indicated
    that it sought further materials from the parties in respect of several
    matters.  It is unnecessary to specify what these were except  to  note
    that one concerned further details of recent case law by courts  of  EU
    (or EU-associated) Member States dealing with  Article  15(c)  risk  in
    Afghanistan.  During the hearing the Tribunal alerted  the  parties  to
    the existence of three leading decisions made  in  2011  by  the  Swiss
    Federal Administrative Court (FAC) addressing whether safe  returns  to
    Kabul, Herat  and  Mazar-i-Sharif  were  possible.  The  Tribunal  also
    received swift responses from the parties to further directions sent on
    9th May.


   A. THE EVIDENCE


The Expert Evidence

9.    The two experts  instructed  by  the  appellant's  representatives  to
    furnish reports for this appeal were Dr Seddon and Dr Giustozzi.

Dr Seddon
10.   Until his early retirement in 2006,  Dr  Seddon  was  a  professor  in
    sociology and politics at the University of East Anglia with a  breadth
    of academic experience in conflict and development studies as  well  as
    in migration studies. In the 1990s and early 2000s he  was  a  conflict
    adviser to the British and Canadian governments and several  NGOs  with
    respect   to   conflicts   in   Nepal,   Algeria,    Western    Sahara,
    Israel/Palestine, DRC and South Africa. His report  for  this  case  is
    dated 10 October 2011.  Its  first  part  discusses  and  analyses  the
    Tribunal country guidance case of GS, taking the expert witness in that
    case, Professor Farrell, to task for concluding that figures for battle
    deaths  and  civilian  casualties  in  Afghanistan,  although  on   the
    increase, had remained relatively low, a  conclusion  which  Dr  Seddon
    considers to underestimate significantly the scale of  casualties,  due
    to over-reliance on figures from the Brookings Institute.   His  report
    then proceeds to give his own assessment of  levels  of  indiscriminate
    violence  between  2005-2010,  stating  at  para  4.3  that  they   had
    experienced a "dramatic leap" in 2009-2010 as a  result  of  the  surge
    implemented by the coalition forces and  the  insurgent  response.   He
    adds that there is "no clear indication yet that 2011 has experienced a
    significantly lower level of violence and insecurity".  At  paras  4.6-
    4.7 he discusses the report by Wikileaks of  July  2010  alleging  that
    official records significantly  underestimated  the  actual  number  of
    civilians injured and killed by coalition forces.  At  paras  4.16-4.22
    he addresses the issue of the large numbers of IDPs and  EDPs.   Whilst
    acknowledging that there are many  factors  contributing  to  the  high
    level of refugees  from  Afghanistan,  he  considers  that:  "it  seems
    reasonable to assume that the continuing and  indeed  intensifying  and
    expanding scope of the conflict, and the increasing level  of  violence
    and insecurity, is a major factor"

11.   Dealing with the issue of state protection, Dr  Seddon  quotes  a  BBC
    interview dated 7 October 2011 during which President  Karzai  said  to
    the reporter, John Simpson, that his government and the coalition  'had
    failed to provide adequate  security  for  the  Afghan  people'  .   As
    regards the Afghan police, Dr Seddon quotes sources describing them  as
    poorly  trained,  incompetent,  under-resourced   and   corrupt:   "the
    objective evidence suggests that, even now, the police have neither the
    capacity nor the willingness to provide protection for  individuals  at
    risk from particular non-state actors".  He describes protection by the
    Afghan government in Kabul as ineffective, with security in  that  city
    having deteriorated still further recently.  He says he views  Tribunal
    country guidance cases considering Kabul a viable  internal  relocation
    alternative, "even if it was not the case previously, [to be] no longer
    valid, and that Kabul, like virtually all other places in  Afghanistan,
    is insecure and unsafe". Internal relocation to Kabul "would  not",  he
    states, "ensure that a returnee would be able to live there freely  and
    without fear and maintain a viable private and family life there".  The
    International Security Force (ISAF) and the Afghan army "are clearly no
    longer able to provide adequate security, even in Kabul....".

12.   Dr Seddon concludes that in his opinion "the point  has  been  reached
    where it is time to revise the current country guidance and revise  the
    [GS view] so that "the level of indiscriminate violence in  Afghanistan
    is now [recognised to be] high enough to meet the criteria  of  Article
    15(c)".

Dr Giustozzi
13.   Dr Giustozzi is currently a visiting research  fellow  at  the  London
    School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science,   Development   Studies
    Institute (DESTIN). His numerous publications include the book, Empires
    of mud: wars and warlords in Afghanistan, 2009. He has extensive  field
    experience in Afghanistan, most recently in September-October in  Kabul
    to research corruption in  the  police  and  the  organisation  of  the
    Taliban. Dr Giustozzi's report  is  dated  2  December  2011.  He  also
    provided a brief response to two clarificatory questions asked  by  the
    Treasury Solicitor in a  letter  of  27  February  2012  about  certain
    observations made in his report.  Paras  4-18  of  his  report  address
    evidence  relating  to  the  leftist  People's  Democratic   Party   of
    Afghanistan (PDPA)/Homeland Party, targeting of  former  leftists,  the
    poor record of Afghan law enforcement agencies, both in Afghanistan  as
    a whole and in Kabul, land grabs as a source of conflict, attitudes  of
    the population towards extramarital affairs, honour killings and  blood
    feuds. Paragraphs 19-20 address the level of violence  in  Afghanistan.
    Mainly by reference to UNAMA and ANSO statistics, Dr  Giustozzi  states
    that the level of violence has quadrupled since 2007 and appears set to
    show further increases by the end of 2011. Dr Giustozzi  observes  that
    the actual number of deaths is likely to be higher than those  recorded
    by UNAMA, "as for example Afghan police,  army  and  security  services
    never report  killing  any  civilians.  Finally,  a  larger  number  of
    civilians have  been  injured  and  maimed,  but  there  are  no  exact
    statistics in this regard".

14.   At paras 21-24 Dr Giustozzi deals with the likely risks the  appellant
    would face on return. Since, like the first eighteen  paragraphs,  they
    are written on the assumption that the appellant's account of his  past
    experiences was accepted as credible, they have limited relevance,  but
    even so they identify the  lack  in  Afghanistan  of  a  state  benefit
    system,  the  limited  nature  of  medical  services  and   the   great
    difficulties  that  would  face   returnees   in   Kabul   in   finding
    accommodation and employment (unemployment being  estimated  at  35-50%
    and rates of pay being very low ($4 a day).

15.   At para 25 Dr Giustozzi concludes:

         "In summary, the risk deriving  from  indiscriminate  violence  has
         increased, even  if  the  overall  number  of  civilian  casualties
         remains relatively modest relative to the size of  the  population.
         Most indiscriminate violence occurs in the shape of pressure mines,
         which are indiscriminate by nature.  The  risk  is  mainly  on  the
         roads  connecting  the  provincial  and  district  cities  to   the
         villages.  In Kabul city  the  risk  deriving  from  indiscriminate
         violence is mainly limited to occasional terrorist attacks,  mostly
         in the central parts of the city, where most government offices and
         international targets are located...".

16.   Mention should also be made that the  background  evidence  before  us
    also includes a report  written  by  Dr  Giustozzi  for  the  Norwegian
    organisation, LANDINFO, dated 9 September 20011, to which we  refer  on
    several occasions below.


The ARC Evidence

    (a)     Asylum and Research Consultancy (ARC) Report, February 2012
17.   The authors of the Asylum and Research Consultancy (ARC) Report  begin
    by describing  their  background  and  experience  as  researchers.  In
    addition to having worked as researchers  for  UK  organisations,  both
    have also worked as researchers for the European  Council  on  Refugees
    and Exiles (ECRE) and the Office for Democratic Institutions and  Human
    Rights (ODIR/OSCE). Ms Williams holds an MA in Social Anthropology  and
    Development from SOAS and an MA (Hons)  in  Philosophy  from  Edinburgh
    University. Ms Huber holds an MA in the Theory and  Practice  of  Human
    Rights from the Human Rights Centre at the University of Essex, an  MSc
    in  Violence,  Conflict  and  Development  from  SOAS  and  a   BA   in
    Contemporary  History  from  the  University  of  Sussex.  The  authors
    explains their methodology  as  being  to  provide  objective  evidence
    available in the public domain so as to draw  out  the  salient  issues
    that illustrate the country conditions in Afghanistan  in  relation  to
    people such as the appellant.  "We have not knowingly omitted any  fact
    that could materially affect our comments  given  above".  The  salient
    issues are those identified in five questions posed by the  appellant's
    solicitors.

18.   The first question concerns the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan,
    especially in Kabul and Ghazni province,  with  reference  to  (a)  the
    number of attacks; (b) the number of casualties; and (c) the  level  of
    insurgent activities.  The report gave its response by  way  of  citing
    excerpts from various sources.   Under  the  sub-heading  "B:  Security
    situation in Kabul", the report states that:

         "The information included in this section demonstrates that despite
         the fact that Kabul is considered safer than  other  provinces,  it
         has become increasingly insecure as demonstrated by  the  incidence
         and strength of insurgent  attacks  carried  out  in  the  capital,
         including in fortified areas."


19.   Under a sub-heading, "C: Security situation  in  Ghazni",  the  report
    recalls that the December 2010 UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines had  listed
    Ghazni  as  one  of  five  provinces  which  it  considered  could   be
    characterised as in a situation of  generalised  violence  (the  others
    being Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar and parts of  Khost).   As  with  Khost,
    UNHCR only considered parts of Ghazni to be in such a  situation.   The
    ARC Report notes that the FCO currently advises against all  travel  to
    Ghazni; that in November 2011  the  BBC  reported  that  the  "volatile
    Ghazni province had been named as among those due to be handed over  by
    NATO to Afghan control" and that the  International  Crisis  Group(ICG)
    reported in June 2011 that the province had slipped from being  one  of
    the most stable to the third most volatile after Kandahar  and  Helmand
    with its security rating downgraded by ISAF.  Further reports are cited
    highlighting that in  Ghazni  the  Taliban  had  extensive  territorial
    control and that much of the insurgent activity targets the  provincial
    capital, Ghazni city, and the districts in the south and the east.

20.   The second question addressed by the ARC Report is "The prospects  for
    a young man to secure accommodation, employment, means  of  support  in
    Afghanistan, especially in Kabul  and  Ghazni  province".   The  report
    draws attention to sources detailing the country's huge number of  IDPs
    (351,907 according to Amnesty International in May 2011)  and  the  low
    living standards, (said by the CIA  World  Factbook  to  be  among  the
    lowest in the  world).   The  report  cites  sources  saying  that  the
    unemployment rate in Afghanistan is 35% and that 36% of the  population
    live below the poverty line.  Around 60% of the population suffer  from
    mental health problems.  There are real concerns about the  impact  the
    withdrawal of international troops in 2014 will have, since around  60%
    of GDP is in some way linked to their presence.

21.   In relation to Kabul the report says the background sources  establish
    that the situation for returnees and IDPs in Kabul is "dire", that IDPs
    live in worse conditions than the urban poor, that shelter  is  scarce,
    with 80% of the population living in  squatter  settlements,  that  the
    rental market "prices  out"  even  the  middle  classes  from  adequate
    accommodation and that there are an estimated 50,000 street children in
    Kabul.

22.   Concerning Ghazni, the ARC Report  marshals  sources  indicating  that
    the economic situation there is poor.

23.   The third  question  addressed  is,  "The  availability  of  effective
    protection, especially in Kabul and  Ghazni".   The  ARC  Report  notes
    ongoing concerns about the ability of the  ANSF  to  provide  effective
    protection, given lack of resources, broader  governance  deficiencies,
    high levels of corruption, politicisation  and  insurgent  infiltration
    and a climate of impunity.  There is substantial scepticism within  the
    U.S. defense establishment that the  Afghan  National  Army  (ANA)  can
    assume full security responsibility by 2014.  In areas under government
    control, the rule of law is said to be weak. In some  areas  under  the
    Taliban  control  this  organisation  is  said  to  operate  a   highly
    repressive parallel judicial system.


24.   As regards Kabul, the ARC document cites reports  that  the  ANA  took
    over security of Kabul city from Italian  forces  in  August  2008  and
    Kabul province since early 2009.  It has established a layered  defence
    system in  and  around  Kabul,  which  (according  to  the  Center  for
    Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), 15.11.2011) has resulted in
    improved security,  although  (according  to  the  same  source)  Kabul
    continues to face persistent threats, particularly in the form of high-
    profile attacks and assassinations.  Infiltration by  the  Taliban  and
    other insurgent groups is a significant problem.

25.   Regarding Ghazni, the ARC Report records, inter alia, the  Afghanistan
    Research and Evaluation Unit stating in October 2011 that  the  general
    perception is that while the government  has  maintained  control  over
    Ghazni city, it has largely lost control over the districts  and  rural
    areas in the province.

    (b)    Oral evidence of Ms Stephanie Huber
26.   Ms Huber confirmed that she is a consultant for  ARC.   ARC  had  been
    established in 2010  by  her  and  her  colleague,  Liz  Williams.   In
    preparing the ARC Report in mid December  2011  they  had  adopted  and
    applied the criteria set out in the Common EU Guidelines for Processing
    Country of Origin Information (COI) in full.  Their  report  sought  to
    synthesise from the mass of materials from recognised sources available
    on Afghanistan relevant information relating to the questions they  had
    been asked to address.  It did  not  seek  to  provide  their  personal
    opinion.  Where their report records opinions (e.g. that the  situation
    for IDPs and returnees in Kabul is "dire") that was simply  summarising
    the effect of information from other  sources:  Amnesty  International,
    for example, had  used  the  word  "miserable"  to  describe  the  same
    situation.  She considered that information that had  become  available
    since they signed off their report confirmed the overall  picture  they
    had given.  In its February 2012 report, UNAMA, for example,  had  said
    that 2011 was the fifth consecutive year in which  there  had  been  an
    increase in civilian deaths.  Whilst she considered it was necessary to
    examine the methodology of all the bodies that published data  relating
    to the armed conflict in Afghanistan, she attached significance to  the
    fact that UNAMA  has  a  presence  on  the  ground  in  most  parts  of
    Afghanistan and is committed to regular  updating.   ANSO  was  another
    body whose reports are well-respected for their independence.

27.   In reply  to  questions  from  the  panel,  Ms  Huber  said  that  the
    observation  at  p.6  of  the  ARC  Report  that  Kabul  was   becoming
    increasingly insecure was one informed by their researches.  They  took
    a similar starting point to that taken by Home Office COIS Reports, but
    the materials they cited were those they  considered  relevant  to  the
    questions asked.  She accepted there would always be some material they
    did not mention, but they did not seek to select sources in  favour  of
    one view only.  Their  principal  task  was  collating  and  condensing
    information.  She was asked if  the  ARC  Report  would  have  included
    reference to the CSIS study dated February 2012, had it been  available
    earlier.  She said that the ARC would definitely have consulted it  but
    would have gone to the actual sources.  ARC  primarily  used  reputable
    sources, but they tried to take account of the agendas of the different
    bodies providing data: some international agencies or NGOs might,  e.g.
    sometimes be inclined  to  report  in  a  particular  way  for  funding
    purposes.  ARC Reports would also draw on information provided by anti-
    government  or  pro-government  sources  even  if  not  established  or
    reputable.  ARC left it to  the  sources  to  provide  assessments.  We
    reproduce at Appendix C the index of sources for their Report  supplied
    to us by ARC.

Background Evidence

28.   The sources of background evidence we have considered  are  listed  in
    Appendix References to the COIS are  to  its  October  2011  report  on
    Afghanistan.

Parties to the Conflict
    (a)     Government and pro-government actors
29.   The ANSF includes the Afghan National Army  (numbering  171,600),  the
    Afghan  National  Police  (ANP)  (numbering  136,000),   the   National
    Directorate of Security and the Afghan Public Protection  Force  (COIS,
    10.01, 10.04).  As at October 2011, the overall strength  of  ANSF  was
    305,600.  In July 2010 the government set  up  the  ALP  (Afghan  Local
    Police) to act as "local security organs".  Its strength is  7,000  but
    it is due to grow to 30,000 by end of 2012  (COIS,  10.23).   There  is
    also an Afghan National Air force and an elite  Afghan  National  Guard
    (COIS, 10.25).

30.    The  international  forces  are  the  ISAF  (International   Security
    Assistance Force), although this  remains  a  subordinate  headquarters
    within NATO's command structure (COIS, 10.02).  In February 2011,  ISAF
    troop numbers stood at 130,000, from 48 countries.

31.   Private security firms also have a  strong  presence  in  Afghanistan,
    especially Kabul (COIS, 10.69).

    (b)    The Insurgents
32.   The three main forces comprising the insurgency  are  the  Taliban  (f
    the Quetta Shura) the Haqqani  Network  and  the  Islamic  Movement  of
    Guldbuddin Hakmatyar (Hezb-e-Islami).  Additionally, especially in  the
    north, there are transnational organisations of foreign  fighters  such
    as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the Islamic Jihad Union and  Al-
    Qaeda. Although fragmented, the  insurgency  shares  a  common  aim  of
    seeking to weaken or overthrow the  government  and  the  international
    military forces (LANDINFO, 20 September 2011). Major reports  refer  to
    insurgents as Anti-government elements (AGEs).

33.   Following the US led surge launched in late December 2009/early  2010,
    the  insurgents  have  switched  their  tactics  to  avoid  large-scale
    confrontations with ISAF forces and to  rely  instead  on  "asymmetric"
    tactics featuring an increase in the use of  IEDs  and  "high  profile"
    attacks on "soft targets" (US Department of  Defense  (USDoD),  October
    2011).   Whilst ISAF Forces  have  enjoyed  some  success  in  clearing
    insurgents from their strongholds, holding them  has  proved  difficult
    (COIS,  8.24).   According  to  the  IGC  report,  The  Insurgency   in
    Afghanistan's Heartland, 27 June 2011:

         "The insurgency has expanded far beyond its stronghold in the south
         east.  Transcending its traditional Pashtun base,  the  Taliban  is
         bolstering  its  influence  in  the  central-eastern  provinces  by
         installing shadow governments and tapping into vulnerabilities of a
         central government crippled by corruption and deeply dependent on a
         corrosive war economy.  Collusion between  insurgents  and  corrupt
         government  officials  in  Kabul  and  the  nearby  provinces   has
         increased, leading to a  profusion  of  criminal  networks  in  the
         Afghan heartland."


34.   According  to  the  LANDINFO,  Human  Rights  and  Security  Situation
    report of Dr Giustozzi, 9 September  2011,  although  the  Taliban  has
    suffered setbacks in the north-east and is under  greater  pressure  in
    the south, the number of  insurgent-initiated  attacks  has  grown  and
    insurgent numbers have grown.  There is little indication that the U.S.-
    led surge has made the insurgency crack.

35.   It must not be overlooked that the  above  identifies  only  the  main
    actors to  the  current  conflict;  it  does  not  identify  all  those
    involved.  Dr Giustozzi's report at p.25 notes that  according  to  the
    Disbandment of Illegal Armed Groups  (DIAG)  UN  Development  Programme
    (UNDP) database maintained by Afghanistan's New Beginnings Group (ANBP)
    and the Disarmament Commission,  as  of  late  2006  there  were  5,557
    illegal armed groups, a figure likely to have increased since.


Causes of the conflict
36.    On  the  causes  of  the  current  armed  conflict  in   Afghanistan,
    (Professor) Theo Farrell & Olivier Schmitt in their  March  2012  study
    published by the Division of International  Protection  UNHCR  entitled
    "The Causes, Character and Conduct of Armed Conflict, and  the  Effects
    on Civilian Populations, 1990-2010", state:

         "Internal armed conflict in Afghanistan has  had  multiple  causes.
         Much like  the  jihad  against  Soviet  forces  from  1979-89,  the
         conflict since 2001 is an Islamic  insurgency  against  an  infidel
         invader, currently led by Taliban in alliance with  the  other  two
         major insurgent  groups  in  the  east  (the  Haqqani  network  and
         Hekmatyar's HIG).  The current conflict is also a civil war.   Some
         view it as a war between Ghilzai Pashtuns (who form the core of the
         Taliban) and the victorious Northern  Alliance  (Durrani  Pashtuns,
         Tajiks, Uzbecks and Hazaras).  However, the Taliban appear to  draw
         support from  all  Afghan  ethnic  groups.   At  the  local  level,
         competition between kinship groups frames a violent competition for
         resources (land, water, control of routes, and narcotics  revenue).
         For example, the  conflict  in  Northern  Helmand  is  primarily  a
         struggle between three Pashtun tribal groups, the Alizai, Alikozai,
         and Ishaqzai.  The situation in central  Helmand  is  less  defined
         along tribal lines due to the complex tapestry of  kinship  groups,
         but still much of the  insurgency  is  defined  by  various  groups
         resisting abuse by the Afghan police who are locally  dominated  by
         the Noorzai tribe.  This illustrates the larger  point  that  since
         Afghan politics is based on patrimonialism, the  natural  order  is
         for government positions to be used to sustain one kinship group at
         the expense of others.   This,  in  turn,  further  challenges  the
         simple view of the conflict as an  Islamic  insurgency  against  an
         elected government.  Finally, the conflict also has  a  significant
         transborder dimension.  The Taliban developed in the 1990s with the
         support of the Pakistani intelligence  service  (ISI)  in  the  two
         unruly provinces that border Afghanistan, Baluchistan and the North-
         West Frontier.  The Taliban retreated across the border to Pakistan
         in 2002, and continue to generate forces and direct attacks against
         the Afghan government and ISAF from these two  provinces  with  the
         support of the ISI."

Types and indices of violence: several observations
37.   Before going any further with summarising the evidence, it  will  help
    make sense of it to make the following observations. As will be  become
    clearer when we come to summarising the  parties'  submissions,  it  is
    common ground between the  parties  in  this  case  that  in  terms  of
    measuring the physical effect of indiscriminate violence this  "metric"
    (to use the phraseology of Professor Farrell in GS) is  chiefly  to  be
    considered in terms of violence against civilians.  As Mr Blundell  put
    it in the respondent's skeleton  argument,  whilst  combatant  casualty
    figures will have a role to play in assessment, "the best indication of
    risk to civilians will still be civilian casualty figures", these being
    "the most direct indication of the  risk  faced  by  civilians  in  the
    territory in question".

38.   In the copious background  materials  there  is  a  grim  manifest  of
    figures dealing with casualties. They cover,  inter  alia,   casualties
    suffered by the ANSF and  the  ISAF  forces  as  well  as  figures  for
    violence caused by them, figures for  "total  weekly  kinetic  events",
    "people killed, injured, or kidnapped in acts  of  terrorism",   "total
    attacks", "total victims", "security incidents",  "terrorist  attacks",
    "attack  patterns",  "complex  coordinated  enemy   attacks",   "enemy-
    initiated  attacks",  "caches  and(Improvised  Explosive  Device  (IED)
    attacks",  "IED  efficacy",  "IED  activity,   "civilian   casualties",
    "incidents of hostages  and  wounded",  "civilian  deaths",   "civilian
    deaths  by  parties  to  the  conflict",  "total  civilian  deaths  and
    injuries"  "causes  of  civilian  deaths  and  casualties","   targeted
    killings and  assassinations".  In  the  Brookings  Afghanistan  Index,
    January 2012 yet further indices of similar ilk are given.

39.   When considering these figures we need to bear in mind that there  are
    a number of different bodies monitoring armed conflict-related  indices
    in  Afghanistan  including   (the  following  is  not  necessarily   an
    exhaustive list): the US Department of Defence (DoD/ISAF), the National
    Counterrorism Center (NCTC), various arms of the UN (Office of the High
    Commissoner  for  Human  Rights  (OHCHR);UN   Assistance   Mission   in
    Afghanistan  (UNAMA);  UNDP;  UN  Office  for   the   Coordination   of
    Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA); and UN Department of Safety and Security
    (UNDSS),  the  Afghan  NGO  Safety  Office  (ANSO),   the   Afghanistan
    Independent  Human  Rights  Commission  (AIHRC)  and    the   Brookings
    Institute. It appears that data-collection of this kind only began on a
    systematic basis in 2007.  Not all these organisations employ the  same
    methodology or measure precisely the same thing.     ISAF  itself,  for
    example, is said to have  confirmed  that  "[f]igures  for  ANSF-caused
    civilian casualties  are  not  monitored  by  ISAF,  and  reporting  of
    insurgent-caused civilian casualties is based on what is observed or on
    reports that can  be  confirmed  by  ISAF;  it  therefore  presents  an
    incomplete picture" (UNAMA Annual Report, 2011).  Whilst  we  were  not
    presented with full details of  the  methodologies  of  all  the  data-
    gatherers involved, it is  clear  that  the  figures  produced  by  the
    following four organisations are widely referred  to  by  commentators:
    UNAMA,  ANSO and to a lesser  extent  the  National  Counter  Terrorism
    Centre (NCTC) and the DoD/ISAF.

         In relation to  UNAMA's  figures,  its  annual  reports  contain  a
    detailed description of their methodology and confirm they are based on
    on-site investigations wherever possible and consultation with a  broad
    range of sources and types of information with corroboration and cross-
    checking in order to evaluate reliability.  Even so,  its  2011  report
    (the latest to  hand),  emphasises  that  "UNAMA  does  not  claim  the
    statistics presented in this report are complete; it may be that  UNAMA
    is under-reporting civilian  casualties  given  limitations  associated
    with the operating environment"(Annual  Report  2011,  p.ii).  ANSO  is
    another  organisation  that  provides  figures  which  also   enjoy   a
    reputation  for  reliable  and   comprehensive   data-gathering.    The
    materials we have do not explain the precise methodology used by  ANSO,
    although from a 2009 article in the Journal of Conflict Studies( Vol.29
    (2009) we glean that ANSO was formed in 2002 and is currently funded by
    the European Union, Swiss Aid and the  Norwegian  government.   It  has
    five offices (Kabul, Jalalabad,  Herat,  Kandahar  and  Mazar-i-Sharif)
    with a  staff  of  around  50.   The  Kabul  office  collects  security
    information from the regional security advisors in  each  of  the  five
    operational regions.

40.   We allude to the NCTC and DoD/ISAF figures largely  because  they  are
    discussed  in  the  CSIS  February  2012  report.  Unlike   the   other
    aforementioned bodies, the NCTC  and  the  DoD/ISAF  figures  expressly
    exclude all UK/ISAF/ANSF-inflicted casualties and violence.

41.   We shall, of course, set out  below  the  evidence  before  us  giving
    figures relating to violence and the parties' submissions  about  them,
    but in order to help the reader make sense of the figures we make three
    other observations here. First,  the  figures  provided  by  the  above
    bodies exhibit certain differences, most notably the fact that  whereas
    UNAMA records a rise in civilians deaths from 2,790 in 2010 to 3,021 in
    2011, ANSO records a reduction from 2,534 in 2010  to  2,427  in  2011.
    There is also reference to a drop in  the  number  of  "enemy-initiated
    attacks" in 2011.  Nevertheless the picture the various figures  convey
    of overall trends in the levels and patterns of violence is  relatively
    similar. Following the previous practice of  the  Tribunal  in  country
    guidance cases dealing with Article 15(c), which seeks to  take  proper
    account of  possible  or  likely  underreporting  and  the  problem  of
    establishing precise and accurate figures, we shall for the  most  part
    try and highlight those giving the highest figures, which  are  by  and
    large, the UNAMA figures and those of other UN bodies. ANSO figures are
    also noted because they are an independent body and are widely cited.

42.   A further observation is this. We will seek to evaluate  the  evidence
    later on, but it can be noted now that in respect  of  virtually  every
    indicator tracked by UNAMA and other UN bodies, violence in Afghanistan
    is on the rise.  The United Nations Department of Safety  and  Security
    (UNDSS) estimate of total incidents shows an increase  from  11,524  in
    2009, 19,403 in 2010 to 22,903 in 2011.  The  UNAMA  figures  show  the
    number of civilian deaths increasing from 2,412 in 2009, 2,790 in  2010
    to 3,021 in 2011 and the total number of  civilian  casualties  (deaths
    and injuries) increasing from 5,978 in 2009, 7,158 in 2010 to 7,528  in
    2011.   According  to  ANSO,   conflict-related   civilian   fatalities
    increased from 1,590 in 2009 to 2,027 in 2010 but later  figures  given
    are 2,534 civilian deaths in 2010 and (as just noted) a slightly lesser
    figure for 2011: 2,427. At the same time, the ANSO  figures  also  show
    that, in comparison with the second quarter of 2010, the second quarter
    of 2011 showed a countrywide attack pattern up from 19.6  incidents  to
    40.9 per day.

43.   A final observation we make at this stage is that many  studies  refer
    to a distinction  between  "targeted"  and  "indiscriminate"  violence"
    without,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  furnishing  any  precise  working
    definition of what they mean by these terms. It is  easy  to  think  of
    hypothetical examples which are clearly one or the other: e.g.,  as  an
    example of the former, a single assassin's bullet  aimed  at  a  senior
    ANSF officer; and, as an example of the latter, a large bomb left in  a
    civilian market place where there  is  known  to  be  a  broad  mix  of
    different types of civilians.  But, to echo the words of  Mr  Vokes  in
    his oral submissions, often there may not be any "bright lines" between
    the two categories of violence. For example, a bomb intended to hit  an
    ANSF regiment might by mistake kill and injure many civilians going  by
    in a bus; for example, a bomb seemingly placed in a mixed civilian site
    might in fact cause wholly or mainly police  casualties  or  particular
    types of civilian casualties only. Hence, there  is  a  need  to  treat
    references to these two types of violence with considerable caution.

44.   At the same time, it is clearly important  for  us  to  set  out  (and
    later to analyse as best we can) the evidence relating to the targeting
    of civilians in particular,  since,  in  general  terms  the  more  the
    evidence shows civilian casualty figures to  be  comprised  of  certain
    types of civilians singled out for attack (e.g. provincial and district
    governors) the more difficult may become  the  case  (depending,  inter
    alia, on the extent of the casualty figures) for saying  that  mere  or
    ordinary civilians  face a real risk of indiscriminate violence  within
    the meaning of Article 15(c).

 45.  With  these  observations  in  mind,  we  return  to  summarising  the
    evidence and submissions.

Levels of violence: (a) Civilian casualties
46.   On the situation facing civilians, Farrell and Schmitt in their  March
    2012 study for UNHCR write:

         "Between 600,000 and 2.5  million  civilians  were  killed  in  the
         Soviet  War.   The  Mujahideen  Civil  War  also   saw   widespread
         indiscriminate violence  against  civilians;  for  example,  around
         10,000 were killed in the struggle for Kabul in 1993.  In contrast,
         civilian  fatalities  since  2006  have  been  relatively   modest.
         Starting from under 1,000 in 2006, direct civilian deaths from  the
         conflict have risen by approximately 500 each year to over 2,700 in
         2010.  Civilian  casualties  caused  by  ISAF  attract  much  media
         attention and Afghan government criticism, but most  civilians  are
         killed by insurgent action (ranging from a low of 55  per  cent  in
         2008 to highs of 72 per cent in 2006 and  75  per  cent  in  2010).
         Afghanistan is the largest producer of refugees in the world,  both
         in absolute numbers and as a proportion of the national population.
          Between 2006-2009, around 2 million Afghans were refugees (out  of
         an estimated Afghan population of 30 million).  Many of  these  are
         legacy refugees from the  1980s,  when  punishing  attacks  on  the
         population caused 5 million to flee into  Iran  and  Pakistan;  the
         Mujahideen Civil War that followed discouraged many from returning.
          But it is  also  indicative  of  the  general  lack  of  security,
         especially  in  the  Southern  and  Eastern  provinces.   In  rural
         communities, civilians face daily threats of violence from  corrupt
         security forces,  insurgents,  organised  crime,  and  other  armed
         groups.  Afghan police commonly prey on  the  civilian  communities
         they are supposed to protect  (though  this  problem  has  improved
         since 2010).  In the 1990s, the Taliban were responsible  for  some
         massacres, most notably in Herat.  Since  2006,  the  Taliban  have
         exercised more discipline, in order to win local consent.  However,
         when they are unable to subvert tribal clans through subtle  means,
         the Taliban will use violence and intimidation."

47.   Acceptance on all sides that the  level  of  violence  experienced  by
    civilians in Afghanistan is generally increasing is expressed by  UNAMA
    in its July  2011  report  thus:  "the  rising  tide  of  violence  and
    bloodshed in the first half of 2011 brought injury and death to  Afghan
    civilians at levels without recorded precedent  in  the  current  armed
    conflict". According to the latest Brookings Institute  study,  "injury
    and deaths to Afghan civilians are at levels without recorded precedent
    in the current armed conflict".

48.   As  well  as  being  responsible  for  numerous  actual  incidents  of
    violence, the insurgency has relied heavily  on  threats  and  acts  of
    intimidation.  As noted by UNAMA in its July 2011 report, the  Taliban,
    in addition to acts of violence such as  abductions,  "...continued  to
    use intimidation tactics such as night letters, verbal  threats...  and
    illegal checkpoints to force communities to support them."

49.   In 2010, increased efforts  were  made  by  international  and  Afghan
    forces to reduce civilian casualties by  putting  into  place  Tactical
    Directives,    Standard    Operating    Procedures    and    reinforced
    counterinsurgency  guidelines  restricting  the  use   of   force   and
    emphasising protection.  Search and seizure operations  and  night  air
    raids were reduced. Nevertheless, although UNAMA in July 2011 estimated
    that pro-government forces were responsible for 14% of civilian deaths,
    a decrease of 9% over the same period in 2010, in his 21 September 2011
    report,  the  UN  Secretary  General  noted  an  increase  in  civilian
    casualties caused by pro-government forces. Although the Taliban has on
    occasions made statements claiming their fighters  were  instructed  to
    avoid or minimise civilian casualties, the Report of the UNHCHR  of  18
    January 2012 observed that "[d]espite  these  public  commitments,  the
    Taliban have made  no  apparent  efforts  to  adhere  to  international
    humanitarian law standards or to take action against  their  commanders
    or member who disobeyed them".

50.         A UNAMA report from 9 March  2011  attributed  55%  of  civilian
    deaths in 2010 to anti-government elements. A  huge  number,  nearly  a
    third of these, were assassinations. Both the  UNAMA  reports  covering
    2010-2011 and the January 2012 UNHCHR document note that AGEs  continue
    to carry out indiscriminate attacks against hospitals, religious places
    and other places  protected  under  international  law  and  that  AGEs
    increasingly employed unlawful means of warfare,  particularly  victim-
    activated press plate IEDs that act like anti-personnel  landmines.  It
    is said in the latter report (para 12) that IEDs  accounted  for  2,278
    civilian casualties (888 deaths  and  1,390  injuries)  making  it  the
    single largest killer of civilians in 2011. The UNAMA Annual Report for
    2011 notes as well that the civilian death toll  from  suicide  attacks
    rose dramatically in 2011. There were 431 civilians who were killed  in
    such attacks. "While the number of suicide  attacks  did  not  increase
    over 2010, the nature of these attacks changed, becoming more  complex,
    sometimes involving multiple suicide bombers,  and  designed  to  yield
    greater numbers of dead and injured civilians".

Levels of Violence: (b) Targeting of Civilians
51.   Evidence dealing with  the  targeting  of  civilians  reveals  a  very
    similar picture. As noted already, Dr Giustozzi in his 9 September 2011
    report for LANDINFO stated that the ongoing Afghan  conflict  was  "not
    particularly bitterly targeted at civilians".   Figures  indicated,  he
    said, that "the parties in the conflict have been  trying  to  restrain
    themselves and contain civilian casualties".  In relation to  insurgent
    acts:

         "...episodes of targeting of civilians because of their association
         with one of the parties in the conflict have been rare.   The  main
         exception  is  represented  by  government  officials,   whom   the
         insurgents have been proactively targeting and  increasingly  so...
         ethnic and religious minorities have not been targeted."


      When  talking  about  the  situation  in  the  cities  in  government-
    controlled areas, Dr Giustozzi states:

         "In sum, for the Afghan urban dweller, there are two  main  sources
         of risk: one, quite small, is to get caught in a terrorist  attack,
         usually taking place in city centres.  The other is to  get  caught
         in the repression,  which  is  only  likely  for  those  of  recent
         immigration into the city from a village or from the refugee  camps
         in Pakistan."


Levels of violence: (c) Targeted categories of civilians
52.   Major reports highlight that the insurgents  have  targeted  two  main
    types of civilians: (a) those associated with the coalition forces  and
    other international bodies; (b) those associated with the government at
    central and provincial levels.

 53.  For 2010 the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights  Commission  (AIHRC)
    and UNAMA recorded 381 assassinations and executions - more than double
    the number for 2009.  There were also 251 incidents where at least  559
    civilians  were  abducted.   Abductions  targeted   senior   provincial
    officials, tribal elders, aid and construction workers and  educational
    officials among others.  The  majority  of  victims  were  abducted  on
    suspicion of spying  for  the  government  and  international  military
    forces.  At the same time, the AIHRC and UNAMA human  rights  estimated
    that in 2010 these abduction figures included  at  least  151  ordinary
    civilians (UNAMA Report, 9 March 2011). The  UNAMA  Annual  report  for
    2011 states that it had  documented  495  targeted  killings  in  2011,
    exceeding the high rate recorded for 2010. It is said  that  women  and
    children increasingly bore the brunt of the armed conflict.

54.   The insurgents have targeted in particular  coalition  forces,  UNAMA,
    international NGOs, aid workers and foreign diplomatic missions as well
    as civilian personnel working for the international bodies or projects.

55.   As regards targeting of those associated with the  Afghan  government,
    according to UNAMA's July 2011 report:

         "Targeted killings continued at last year's high rate.  The  report
         notes that those targeted are in general those civilians  perceived
         to support the Afghan government or international forces.  It noted
         attacks on provincial and district  governors,  provincial  council
         members, chief of police, members of peace councils, tribal  elders
         and fighters entering the reintegration program,  off-duty  police,
         teachers, educational officials as being singled out  for  targeted
         killings.  Between January and  June  2011,  UNAMA  documented  190
         targeted killings compared to 181 in the same period in 2010."

Levels of violence (d) Combatant casualties
56.   The Brookings Institute provides a graph of  US  and  coalition  troop
    figures showing casualty figures of 514 in 2009, 711 in 2010 and 566 in
    2011. The  same  body  records  the  number  of  insurgents  killed  as
    approximately 3,200 in 2011, a  very  considerable  increase  from  the
    1,066 in 2010.

Comparison with other conflicts
57.   We noted earlier references in  Dr.  Seddon's  report  to  comparisons
    made  by  Professor  Farrell  in  GS  between  the  armed  conflict  in
    Afghanistan and  that  in  several  other  countries,  including  Iraq.
    Although expressing doubt these  were  proper  comparators,  Dr  Seddon
    himself did not furnish any further data about such comparisons.

58.   The respondent relied on very recent comparative data set out in  CSIS
    study by A Cordesman & A Burke, "Afghanistan: The Failed Metrics of Ten
    Years of War" dated 9 February 2012. It focuses on comparison with Iraq
    and Pakistan.

59.   In his 9 September 2011 LANDINFO report, in a passage we have  already
    quoted, Dr Giustozzi, without  explaining  his  points  of  comparison,
    wrote that:

         "[i]n comparative terms the on-going Afghan conflict has  not  been
         particularly bitterly  targeted  at  civilians.  Although  civilian
         casualties have gradually increased year-on-year, they have done so
         less than proportionally with the increase in the number of violent
         incidents from 2008 onwards.  This suggests that the parties in the
         conflict have  been  trying  to  restrain  themselves  and  contain
         civilian casualties."

      The Swiss Federal Court judgment SA v  Federal  Office  for  Migration
    (16 June 2011) 9.7.4 - see below para 102 -  notes that the  Heidelburg
    Institute  for  International  Conflict  Research  in   its   "Conflict
    Barometer 2009" rated 31  conflicts  around  the  world  as  "extremely
    violent" and classed seven of these as  wars,  including  Afghanistan's
    (no more information is given than that).

Protection
60.   According to  the  CRS  Report  of  22  September  2011,  the  Kharzai
    government is estimated to control  only  about  30%  of  the  country.
    Insurgents control 4%, but have some  presence  in  another  30%.   The
    remainder are controlled by tribes, warlords  or  local  groups  (COIS,
    8.02).  Criminality, weak governance, insecurity and a weak rule of law
    are  prevalent.   The  Fund  for  Peace  (20  June  2011)  has   ranked
    Afghanistan in the top ten on its Failed States Index for the past five
    years due to "security challenges" and  the  lack  of  any  functioning
    government capable of providing access to  the  basic  necessities  and
    able to implement public services in the face of  pervasive  corruption
    and drug lord challenges to state legitimacy.

61.   A number of leading commentators are sceptical that  the  "Transition"
    which started in the summer of 2011 and is intended to see hand-over by
    ISAF of security to Afghan forces by 2014,  will  be  successful  (ARC,
    pp14-15).  According to the UNAMA July 2011 report, as the conflict has
    intensified in the traditional fighting areas of  the  south,  and  the
    south-east and moved to districts in the west and north, civilians have
    experienced "a downward spiral of protection".

Corruption
62.    In  its  2010  Corruption   Perception   Index   (CPI)   Transparency
    International ranked Afghanistan at 176 of 178 countries  giving  it  a
    CPI score of 1.4 (10 is "highly clear"  and  0  is  "highly  corrupt").
    Various  major  country  reports  describe  corruption,  nepotism   and
    cronyism as being rampant at all levels  and  there  being  a  lack  of
    political will to protect the population against it.  The massive flows
    of money from the military, international donors  and  the  drug  trade
    exacerbate the problem.   A lack of political  accountability  and  low
    salaries heightened government corruption including within the ANP.  It
    is said that the average Afghan is forced to pay five  bribes  a  year;
    averaging $156 per bribe.

Socio-economic conditions/IDPs
63.   Afghanistan is a  poor  country  by  any  reckoning.  The  World  Bank
    calculates the country's "poverty headcount" to be 36%  and  illiteracy
    as high.  Yet the  economy  has  grown  so  that  since  2002  GDP  has
    increased from  182  to  592  dollars  (Institute  for  War  and  Peace
    Reporting, 22 August 2011).  Although there  are  huge  disparities  in
    wealth, with 35.4% of the workforce unemployed, the country  has  moved
    from 181st (second to last) in 2009 to 172nd on the HDI Index for 2011,
    with a strong growth rate.

64.   Rapid urbanisation has seen some 70% of the  urban  population  living
    in unplanned areas or illegal settlements; the pace of growth exceeding
    the planning and management capabilities of the government.

65.   There is said to be a significant incidence of secondary  displacement
    (returning IDPs who move again). According to  the  latest  COIS,  IDPs
    have been vulnerable to food insecurity, while physical insecurity  and
    the absences of basic services in places of  displacement  have  forced
    many IDPs into protracted secondary displacement in urban areas.   "The
    Afghan government is generally unable  or  unwilling  to  assist  IDPs.
    Hundreds of thousands of  IDPs  have  been  assisted  by  international
    agencies,  but  assistance  outside  camps  has  been  short-term   and
    restricted by problems of funding and access" (COIS, 31.02).  A  Danish
    Refugee Council report of 8 September 2011  states  that  according  to
    UNHCR since 2002 over 5.6 million Afghan refugees have returned to that
    country, yet more than 40% have not fully integrated.  The repatriation
    programme that began in 2002 is the largest UNHCR-assisted programme in
    almost 30 years.

66.   In an April 2011 report the IDMC recorded  that  730,000  people  have
    been internally displaced in Afghanistan due to  conflict  since  2006.
    At  the  end  of  January  2011,  309,000  people  remained  internally
    displaced  due  to  armed  conflict,  human  rights  abuses  and  other
    generalised violence (COIS, 31.02).  The UNAMA report for  2011  states
    that "[c]onflict and insecurity displaced 185,632 Afghans in  2011,  an
    increase of 45% from 2010."

67.   According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring  Centre  (IDMC),  13
    March 2011, a significant number of IDPs have found  at  least  minimal
    livelihoods and live in similar conditions to the  rest  of  the  urban
    poor, although it should be emphasised  that  many  urban  IDPs  remain
    vulnerable.

68.   In August 2010 flooding across the country displaced  200,000  persons
    (US State Department Report, 7 April 2011), p.20).

69.   Under the UNHCR repatriation programme, which entered  its  10th  year
    in 2011, every returnee receives US$150 upon  arrival  to  cover  their
    transport and some initial costs (IRIN, 9 November 2011). The return of
    large numbers of refugees  since  2002  has  placed  huge  pressure  on
    Afghanistan absorption  capacity  (Forced  Migration  Review  (FMR),  8
    September 2009).

Humanitarian Aid
70.   In terms of development aid, overall figures for the amount  of  money
    the international community has spent on or promised to Afghanistan are
    hard to come by, but over $67 billion has been pledged  at  four  donor
    conferences  since  2002  (Central  Intelligence  Agency  (CIA)   World
    Factbook, September 2011, COIS, 2.02). The CRS Report for Congress, Feb
    6, 2012 breaks this down, identifying  $39 billion of  that  amount  as
    being to equip and train Afghan  forces,  For  2012  it  is  said  that
    pledged amount is "... in  addition  to  about  $90  billion  for  U.S.
    military operations there".

71.    According  to  the  Agency  Co-ordinating  Body  for  Afghan   Relief
    ((ACBAR), June 2010) there are approximately 1,300 national  NGOs,  300
    international NGOs and 16 UN organisations involved in humanitarian and
    development assistance in Afghanistan as of January 2010.

72.   The Institute for War and Peace Reporting  (IWPR)   (22  August  2011)
    has warned that the planned withdrawal of international troops in  2014
    may mean the Afghan economy  faces  a  "sharp  shock"  as  60%  of  the
    country's GDP is in some way linked to the foreign troop presence.

Provincial level

73.   We have already noted evidence indicating both  a  geographical  shift
    and expansion of the armed conflict in Afghanistan  from  the  existing
    areas in the south and south east to the east and to a lesser extent in
    the west and north, although we lack precise graphs with a breakdown of
    civilian  deaths  and  casualties  and  security  incidents  for   each
    province. The UNAMA report covering 2011 notes that  the  southern  and
    southeastern regions accounted in 2011 for 64% of  all  incidents  (32%
    each), although a steep decrease after September 2011. Under a subhead,
    "Geographic Shift in the Conflict", it states:

         "As the year progressed, the conflict  gathered  intensity  outside
         those southern  provinces  where  fighting  has  historically  been
         concentrated and worsened in several provinces in the  southeastern
         and eastern regions. In the last half of  2011,  although  Kandahar
         and Helmand remained the  provinces  with  the  highest  number  of
         civilian deaths with 290 civilians killed; this number is a 39  per
         cent decrease compared to the same period in 2010.


         In contrast, the  southeastern  provinces  of  Khost,  Paktita  and
         Ghazni and eastern provinces of Kunar and Nangarhar saw a  combined
         total of 446 deaths, a 34 per cent increase compared with the  same
         period in 2010. Between July and December 2011, civilian deaths  in
         the central region jumped from 128 to 230, an 80 per cent  increase
         from the previous year. This rise was prominent in Kabul  province,
         where civilian deaths increased from 23 in the last half of 2010 to
         71 in 2011. 61 of the 71  civilian  deaths  in  Kabul  during  this
         period occurred as a result of six suicide attacks.


         Although targeted killings  by  AGEs  decreased  in  the  southern,
         central  and  northeastern  regions  in  2011,  country-wide   such
         killings rose by six per cent, with huge increases in  the  western
         region (255 per cent), the southeastern region (14  per  cent)  and
         the eastern region (107 per  cent).  This  shift  was  particularly
         evident in the second half of the year...."


74.   This report also gives a graph of "Targeted killings  by  Region  July
    to December" which notes that of the 495 targeted killings Afghanistan-
    wide, the highest numbers were in the  southern  eastern  and  southern
    provinces. The pattern overall was a decrease in the south, central and
    northeast regions but increases in other parts of the country.


75.   The ANSO report for 1 Jan-31 December 2011 provides  a  table  showing
    "comparative attack rates per province" from which it can be seen  that
    the provinces with the highest AOG attack rates in  2011  were  Helmand
    with 2,416, Ghazni with 1,679, Kandahar with 1,285, Kunar with 1,280  ,
    Paktita with 1,106 and Khost with 1,106. A graph in the earlier Jan  1-
    Sep 30th 2011 report sets out the "comparative attack  rate  -  2011  v
    2011 which contains the comment that "Ghazni  and  Khost  -  and  to  a
    lesser extent Paktya and Paktita - joined Helmand, Kandahar  and  Kunar
    as the most violent provinces". Kabul was said to show a  reduction  in
    attack rates.

76.   These figures have to be read against the  backdrop  that  the   first
    "tranche" of the "Transition" process transferring  responsibility  for
    security from ISAF to ANSF, began in July 2011, the seven areas  chosen
    being the provinces of Kabul (excluding Sarobi district), Panjshir  and
    Bamiyan and the municipal districts of Mazar-e-Sharif (Balkh province),
    Lashgor Gal (Helmand province) and  Herat  (Herat  province);  and  the
    Mehtor Lam Municipality, not including the rest of the capital district
    (Laghman  province).  A  second  "tranche  of  provinces/districts  was
    announced on 27 November  2011;  it  included  "those  areas  of  Kabul
    province not transitioned already (Sarobi district)".

      a) Kabul
77.   Kabul is home to nearly  one  fifth  of  the  population  and  is  the
    largest city. The ANA took over security in Kabul  city  from  ISAF  in
    early 2009.  In November 2010 the Kabul police chief  was  reported  as
    saying that the city needed 20,000 more police  (BBC  Monitoring  South
    Asia, 18 November 2010).  The Taliban  have  been  able  to  infiltrate
    entire units of the police and army (New York Times, 21 May 2011).   In
    June 2011 LANDINFO described the security situation in Kabul, Herat and
    Mazar-e-Sharif as having improved. On 15 November 2011 the  CSIS  noted
    that ANSF has established a layered defence system in and around  Kabul
    which has resulted in improved  security  and  the  ANSF  continues  to
    respond effectively to threats and attacks.   The  city  has  been  the
    target of high-profile attacks on so-called "soft  targets",  like  the
    Intercontinental Hotel  (June  2011),  the  British  Consulate  (August
    2011), the US Embassy and ISAF Headquarters (in September  2011).   The
    US Department of Defence, October 2011 stated  that  "Kabul  remains  a
    persistent strategic target for high-profile attacks and  assassination
    attempts".  Although most of the attacks have  been  on  government  or
    diplomatic or ISAF-related targets in the centre of the city, this  has
    not been entirely so, as illustrated by the  attacks  on  the  'Finest'
    supermarket on 28 January 2011, the attack  on  a  shrine  packed  with
    worshippers on Ashura day on 6  December  2011.  Similar  attacks  have
    occurred in early 2012.

78.   At the same time, huge  resources  are  being  poured  in  to  bolster
    security in Kabul.  The Congressional Research Service in a 22 November
    2011 report noted that approximately "$2.7 billion worth  of  vehicles,
    weapons, equipment and aircraft as being provided during August 2011  -
    March 2012".

79.   There is considerable evidence that increases in rent  in  Kabul  have
    been  steep,  pricing  out  even  the  middle  classes  from   adequate
    accommodation (ARC, p10).

IDPs in Kabul
80.   In October 2010 IRIN wrote that IDPs in Kabul had said "they had  been
    abandoned by the government and aid agencies".  On 16 February 2011 the
    Danish Refugee Council stated that many returnee families had no choice
    than to set up tents with only limited assistance. According to a  July
    2011 IRIN report, some 70% of the urban population  of  Kabul  live  in
    unplanned areas or in illegal settlements,  with  poor  sanitation  and
    lack of access to safe drinking water.

      b) Ghazni
81.   The LANDINFO report of 9 September 2011  (prepared  by  Dr  Giustozzi)
    notes that Ghazni is the only province  of  the  south-east  where  the
    Taliban has  extensive  territorial  control,  with  insurgents  having
    virtually full control in districts such as  Andar,  Moquer,  Qarabagh,
    Giro, Gelan and Nawa.  A further report from the  same  body  dated  20
    September 2011 explains that "[m]uch of the insurgent activity  in  the
    province targets the provincial capital, Ghazni city, and the districts
    in the south and east".

82.   As already noted in the ARC report,  the  ICG  in  its  27  June  2011
    report described Ghazni province as having slipped from  being  one  of
    the most stable to the third most volatile after Kandahar  and  Helmand
    with its security rating downgraded by IASF.  It wrote:

         "As in other provinces,  the  Taliban  combines  assassination  and
         intimidation  to  consolidate  its  hold  on  Ghazni,  particularly
         targeting local Afghan security forces."

      In October 2011 the Afghanistan Research  and  Evaluation  Unit  noted
    that:

         "[c]ertain groups were also identified to be more at  risk  in  the
         current period.  First, the Taliban target anyone who is  perceived
         to be working for the current government, in  any  position.   Many
         respondents in Ghazni city  were  identified  to  have  government-
         related positions in a  variety  of  roles  -  in  the  police,  as
         government staff and even as teachers...  Second,  anyone  who  was
         identified as supporting or [being] part of the Taliban faced being
         raided, interrogated or killed  by  the  government  and  coalition
         forces."

83.    The  same  report  noted  that  there  was  a   general   perception,
    particularly in the rural areas, that international troops killed  more
    civilians than insurgents.  According to the LANDINFO Giustozzi report,
    9 September 2011, there was evidence that  the  Taliban,  at  least  in
    Ghazni, threaten or kidnap family members of  government  officials  to
    force them to quit their jobs.

         In Ghazni unemployment  is  said  to  run  high  and  the  economic
    situation is said to be poor (ARC, p.12).

Returns Packages
84.   In a note produced by UKBA dated March 2012, assistance  to  returnees
    to Afghanistan is said to be of two kinds:

    (1)    Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR) packages
      For those in the asylum stream they consist of 500 cash on departure
         with a further 1,000 reintegration assistance (1,500  for  family
         cases) as cover for  flights  and  onward  travel.   For  irregular
         migrants, assistance is  limited  to  flights  and  onward  travel,
         although for vulnerable persons there  is  an  option  for  Refugee
         Action to apply for up to 1,000 reintegration  assistance.   Until
         August 2012  the  provider  in  Afghanistan  is  the  International
         Organisation for Migration (IOM). It is said to provide a meet  and
         greet  service  at  the  airport  and  to   deliver   reintegration
         assistance.  The latter consists of non-cash payments  for  certain
         activities, goods and services in Afghanistan that help build a new
         life.  Reintegration options are co-ordinated at IOM  Kabul's  main
         office.   Post-arrival,  IOM  assists  with  onward  transportation
         and/or temporary accommodation if required.


    (2)    Reintegration Services for enforced returnees
      This service, which is part of  the  UK/Afghanistan/UNHCR  Tripartite
         Returns Memorandum  of  Understanding,  currently  consists,  inter
         alia, in reception at Kabul Airport by IOM staff and an IOM doctor,
         onward  transportation  to  the   returnee's   final   destination,
         temporary accommodation with full board for up to fourteen days  at
         the Jangalak Reception Centre.  The reintegration component is said
         to consist, inter alia, in assistance in vocational and educational
         training, in kind, support  towards  the  development  of  a  small
         business and  employment/job  referrals  for  those  interested  in
         direct employment.


85.   The note states that UKBA has a Migration Delivery  Officer  based  at
    the British Embassy in Kabul who "oversees the provision of services to
    returnees".  The officer liaises directly with the Afghan Ministry  for
    Refugees  and  Repatriation  to  resolve  any  problems  identified  by
    returnees or regarding conditions on return, as appropriate".

UNHCR Position
86.   Reference has already been made to the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines
    for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from
    Afghanistan,  17  December  2010.   They  include   references   to   a
    considerable body of empirical data about conditions in Afghanistan, as
    well as UNHCR's evaluation  of  it  in  the  form  of  guidelines.  The
    Guidelines identify two types of  risk  category.  The  first  concerns
    persons with a specific risk profile:

         "UNHCR considers that individuals with the profiles outlined  below
         require a particularly careful examination of possible risks. These
         risk profiles, while not necessarily exhaustive, include  [NB.  For
         convenience we start each subcategory on a separate line:]

           i)         individuals  associated   with,   or   perceived   as
              supportive of, the Afghan Government  and  the  international
              community, including the  International  Security  Assistance
              Force (ISAF);

          ii)         humanitarian workers and human rights activists;

         iii) journalists and other media professionals;

          iv)  civilians  suspected  of  supporting  armed  anti-Government
              groups;

           v)        members  of  minority  religious  groups  and  persons
              perceived as contravening Shari'a law;

          vi) women with specific profiles;

         vii)  children with specific profiles;

        viii)  victims of trafficking;

          ix)  lesbian, gay, bisexual,  transgender  and  intersex  (LGBTI)
              individuals;

           x)         members of (minority) ethnic groups; and

          xi)  persons at risk of becoming victims of blood feuds.



87.   The second type of risk category is based on risks to persons  arising
    from  generalised  violence  in  particular   parts   of   Afghanistan.
    Concerning it, the Guidelines state that:

         "In light of the worsening security environment in certain parts of
         the country and the increasing number of civilian casualties  UNHCR
         considers that  the  situation  can  be  characterized  as  one  of
         generalized violence in Helmand,  Kandahar,  Kunar,  and  parts  of
         Ghazni  and  Khost  provinces.  Therefore,  Afghan   asylum-seekers
         formerly residing in these areas may be in  need  of  international
         protection  under  broader   international   protection   criteria,
         including complementary forms of protection. In addition, given the
         fluid and volatile nature of the conflict, asylum  applications  by
         Afghans claiming to flee generalized violence  in  other  parts  of
         Afghanistan should each be assessed  carefully,  in  light  of  the
         evidence presented by the applicant and other current and  reliable
         information  on  the  place  of  former  residence.   This   latter
         determination will obviously need to include  assessing  whether  a
         situation of generalized violence exists in  the  place  of  former
         residence at the time of adjudication." (Emphasis added).

    In relation to internal relocation the Guidelines state:

         "UNHCR  generally  considers  internal  flight  as   a   reasonable
         alternative where protection is available from the individual's own
         extended family, community or tribe  in  the  area  of  prospective
         relocation. Single males and nuclear family units may,  in  certain
         circumstances, subsist without  family  and  community  support  in
         urban and semi-urban  areas  with  established  infrastructure  and
         under effective Government control.  Given  the  breakdown  in  the
         traditional social fabric of the country caused by decades of  war,
         massive refugee flows, and  growing  internal  migration  to  urban
         areas, a case-by-case analysis will, nevertheless, be necessary."


88.   In a 2011 UNHCR country operations profile (circa  early  2011)  UNHCR
    re-affirmed its December 2010 Guidelines.

89.   In Safe at Last: Law and Practice in Selected EU  Member  States  with
    respect to Asylum Seekers Fleeing Indiscriminate Violence, UNHCR,  July
    2011, the authors note in relation to Afghanistan at p22 that:

         "...it was UNHCR's view at the time of the research  in  2010  that
         there was a worsening security situation in certain  parts  of  the
         country - in particular  Helmand,  Kandahar,  Kunor  and  parts  of
         Ghazni and Khost province - with high levels of violence and  human
         rights  violations  linked  to  the  conflict.    Moreover,   other
         provinces including Uruzgon,  Zabul,  Paktita,  Nangahar,  Badghis,
         Paktya,  Wardak  and  Kunduz  were  also  experiencing  significant
         although fluctuating levels of violence.  The violence continued to
         cause significant  population  displacement  and  high  numbers  of
         civilian casualties, in particular due to suicide attacks  and  the
         use  of  improvised  explosive  devises.   UNAMA  documented  3,268
         civilian casualties during the first six months of 2010 alone."

UKBA Operational Guidance Note (OGN) v9, 20 February 2012
90.   UKBA Operational Guidance Notes are not, of course, a source  of  COI,
    although they do sometimes contain some  references  to  relevant  COI;
    they are essentially a source of guidance to  caseworkers  on  relevant
    issues related to country conditions: see  EM  and  others  (Returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC),  para  114.  The  paragraphs  of  the
    current OGN dealing with Article 15(c) are 3.6.11-3.6.12.  They state:

         "3.6.11  At the end of 2010, UNHCR considered  that  the  worsening
               security  environment  and  increasing  number  of  civilian
               casualties was such that the situation in Helmand, Kandahar,
               Kunar, and parts of Ghazni  and  Khost  provinces  could  be
               characterised as  one  of  generalised  violence.   However,
               whilst there is indiscriminate violence  in  some  parts  of
               Afghanistan,  it  is  not  currently  at  such  a  level  in
               Afghanistan  generally  or  a  material  part  of  it,  that
               substantial grounds exist for believing  that  any  civilian
               would, solely by being present there, face a  real  risk  of
               serious harm.  Given the  complexity  and  fluidity  of  the
               situation, asylum applications by Afghans claiming  to  flee
               generalised violence in parts of Afghanistan should each  be
               assessed  carefully,  in  light  of  the   current   country
               information specific to the profile of the applicant.


         3.6.12    To  establish  a  claim  under  Article  15(c)   of   the
               Qualification Directive it will therefore be necessary for a
               claimant to establish that particular factors place  him  or
               her at additional risk  above  that  which  applies  to  the
               civilian population generally, such that he  or  she  is  at
               real risk of serious harm from the levels of  indiscriminate
               violence that do exist, and that internal  relocation  to  a
               place where there is not a real risk of serious harm is  not
               reasonable.  Case owners must consider carefully whether the
               existence of such factors mean that the harm  they  fear  is
               not in fact indiscriminate, but targeted,  if  not  at  them
               personally, at a Refugee Convention  defined  population  to
               which they belong, in which case a grant of asylum is likely
               to be more appropriate."


91.    At  paras  2.3.7-2.3.8,  in  a  subsection  dealing  with  actors  of
    protection, the OGN states:

         "2.3.7   State protection outside of Kabul will only be  accessible
               in exceptional cases.  In Kabul the  authorities,  including
               the ISAF forces, are in general willing to offer  protection
               to citizens.  However, case owners must bear  in  mind  that
               for the reasons above, their ability  to  provide  effective
               protection is limited.  It is  important  that  case  owners
               refer  to  the  most  up  to  date  country  information  to
               ascertain whether in the  circumstances  prevailing  at  the
               time the decision is made, effective protection is available
               in Kabul for an individual applicant, taking full account of
               their personal circumstances.


         2.3.8    Effective protection is not available, even in Kabul,  for
               single women or female heads of  household  without  a  male
               support network."

92.   In the subsection dealing with internal relocation the OGN  states  at
    paras 2.4.5-2.4.7:

         "2.4.5   The traditional extended family and  community  structures
               of Afghan society continue to constitute the main protection
               and coping mechanism,  particularly  in  rural  areas  where
               infrastructure is not as developed.  Afghans rely  on  these
               structures and links for their safety and economic survival,
               including access to accommodation and an adequate  level  of
               subsistence.  In certain  circumstances,  relocation  to  an
               area with a predominantly different ethnic/religious make-up
               may also not be possible due to  latent  or  overt  tensions
               between ethnic/religious groups.


         2.4.6    In practice, all returns are currently to Kabul.   Careful
               consideration must be given to any other place  of  proposed
               internal relocation and how  it  will  be  accessed,  taking
               account  of  the   latest   security,   human   rights   and
               humanitarian  conditions  in   the   prospective   area   of
               relocation at  the  time  of  the  decision,  including  the
               availability of  traditional  support  mechanisms,  such  as
               relatives  and  friends   able   to   host   the   displaced
               individuals; the availability of  basic  infrastructure  and
               access to essential services,  such  as  sanitation,  health
               care and education; and their ability to sustain themselves,
               including  livelihood  opportunities.   Single   males   and
               nuclear family units may, in certain circumstances,  subsist
               without family and community support in urban and semi-urban
               areas with established infrastructure  and  under  effective
               Government control.


         2.4.7    Unescorted internal travel for  single  women  and  female
               heads of household who do not have a  male  support  network
               can be extremely difficult.  Discrimination  and  harassment
               are common, as would be establishing themselves in  an  area
               where they did not have such a support network.   Sufficient
               protection is not available to them, even in Kabul,  and  it
               would therefore generally be unduly harsh to  expect  single
               women and female heads of household who have a  well-founded
               fear of persecution in one part of Afghanistan, and  who  do
               not have a male support network, to relocate internally."

Tribunal Country Guidance and related domestic case Law
93.   In PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-e Islami) Afghanistan CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00089, the Tribunal held that it was possible for failed asylum seekers
    to relocate to Kabul if they had a  well-founded  fear  of  what  might
    happen to them in their home areas.  In RQ (Afghan National Army - Hizb-
    e Islami -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00013  the  Tribunal
    expressed a similar view.

94.   The main focus of this case being on Article  15(c),  however,  it  is
    essential to focus primarily on Tribunal country  guidance  cases  that
    have addressed the applicability of this  provision  to  conditions  in
    Afghanistan in the light of the legal guidance given  by  the  CJEU  in
    Case C-465/07 Elgafaji [2009] WLR and QD (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620.

95.   The first such case was GS (Article  15(c):  indiscriminate  violence)
    Afghanistan CG [2009]  UKIAT  00044.   This  held  that  the  objective
    evidence did not establish that the Article 15(c) threshold was reached
    for mere civilians in  any  part  of  Afghanistan.   At  para  117  the
    Tribunal stated:

         "In  assessing  the  evidence,  the  one  thing  which  struck   us
         particularly was Professor Farrell's assertion that the  number  of
         civilian fatalities directly caused by both sides to  the  conflict
         in Afghanistan (including  those  assassinated  by  the  Taliban/Al
         Qaeda) was low in comparison  with  conflicts  of  a  similar  size
         elsewhere.  This emerges in particular from the  questions  put  to
         Professor Farrell regarding page 17 of his report.   Whilst  it  is
         apparent that any assessment of risk to civilians  needs  to  cover
         not only those casualties, but also those  who  are  injured  as  a
         result of intimidation by insurgents (which the table on that  page
         does not cover and as to which no  reliable  data  was  presented),
         Professor Farrell was nevertheless clear that the current  conflict
         in Afghanistan cannot be said to involve a high level  of  civilian
         casualties (albeit that he urged us to  take  account  of  what  he
         considered were the conflict's indirect effects).  We conclude that
         the number of direct victims of indiscriminate violence, arising as
         a result of the armed  conflict,  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         appellant, upon whom the burden of proof lies, has established that
         there is such a high level of indiscriminate  violence  that  there
         are substantial grounds to establish that he would, solely by being
         present in that country, face a real risk which threatens his  life
         or person.  We reach this view bearing in mind what  the  Court  of
         Justice had to say.  The appellant has not shown that incidents  of
         indiscriminate violence are happening on so wide a scale, and/or in
         such a way, as to pose a serious threat of real harm.   So  far  as
         indirect  effects  of  violence  are  concerned,  we  have  already
         explained why we do not consider that these can  be  said  to  fall
         within the scope of Article 15(c)."


96.   The next CG case to address Article 15(c)  risks  was  HK  and  Others
    (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment by the  Taliban)
    Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  378  (IAC).   Whilst  confined  to  issues
    relating to risks to minors, including Article 15(c)  risk,  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted that it saw no reason to take a different view  from  GS
    regarding Article 15(c) risks in Afghanistan more widely.

97.   Likewise, in AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00016 (IAC), whilst focusing its guidance on children, the Tribunal  at
    para 65 again saw no reason to take a different view more widely  about
    Article 15(c) risks in Afghanistan, although it noted  at  paras  47-66
    that the background material demonstrated an increase in indiscriminate
    violence since 2009 (paras 47 and 63), a worsening security environment
    in certain parts of the  country  and  increasing  civilian  casualties
    (paras 48-53).  It noted at para 53 that the  situation  in  Kabul  had
    been reported as deteriorating and that many  returning  refugees  were
    going hungry and were unemployed (paras 56  and  58).   It  highlighted
    sources noting the shortcomings in the ability of the Afghan government
    to provide effective protection (para  60),  but  concluded  that  "the
    evidence as to state failure does not demonstrate a significant decline
    since 2009" (para 66).  In the same para it noted  that  "there  is  no
    clear evidence as to the scale of increase in displaced  persons  since
    2009".

98.   It is to be noted, of course, that  in  HK  (Afghanistan)  and  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  315  the
    Court of Appeal remitted the appeals of HK and two others to the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that HK was on all fours with  DS.   DS's  appeal
    had earlier been remitted to the Upper Tribunal in DS  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 305 so  that
    the Tribunal could give consideration to  the  best  interests  of  the
    child duty under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009  and to the significance of efforts made by the Secretary of State
    to discharge her duty under Article 19(3) of the Reception Directive as
    implemented  into  domestic  law  by  the  Asylum  Seekers   (Reception
    Conditions) Regulations 2005.  That duty is to endeavour to  trace  the
    members of the minor's family as soon as possible after the minor makes
    his claim for asylum (reg 6). It  is  significant,  however,  that  the
    Court of Appeal in HK (Afghanistan) made  no  comment  on  the  country
    guidance given in HK and that  in  any  event  the  Tribunal's  current
    country guidance in HK now has a separate (and updated)  basis  as  set
    out in AA.

99.   We should also make mention at  this  stage  of  two  further  country
    guidance cases of the Upper Tribunal, which although not  dealing  with
    Afghanistan, have examined both  the  law  on  Article  15(c)  and  its
    application to armed conflicts situations: AMM  and  Others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC)
    and MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC). Both  of
    these post-date the Court of Appeal judgment in HM (Iraq)  [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1536 holding that HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT
    331 (IAC) (hereafter "HM") in the Tribunal was vitiated by legal error.



Foreign Cases

     i) European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)

      a) Case of N v Sweden, App.no. 23505/09, 20 July 2010
    In N  v  Sweden  the  applicant  was  a  female  Afghan  national  from
    Afghanistan who had separated from her husband and  tried  in  vain  to
    divorce him. At para 52 the ECtHR stated that:


          "Whilst being  aware  of  the  reports  of  serious  human  rights
         violations in Afghanistan...the court does not find them to  be  of
         such a nature as to show, on their  own,  that  there  would  be  a
         violation of the Convention if the applicant were to return to that
         country. The Court thus has to establish  whether  the  applicant's
         personal situation is such that her  return  to  Afghanistan  would
         contravene Article 3 ECHR."


    The Court proceeded to find at para 55 that women were at risk of  ill-
    treatment in Afghanistan "if perceived as not conforming to the  gender
    roles ascribed to  them  by  society,  tradition  and  even  the  legal
    system".  Having noted the great difficulties women faced in  obtaining
    protection against domestic  violence  or  after  leaving  their  house
    without a male guardian (paras 57-59), the Court found at para 60  that
    "[w]omen without male support and protection generally lack  the  means
    of survival, given the  social  restrictions  on  women  living  alone,
    including the limitation on their freedom of movement."


      b) Case of Husseini v Sweden, App.No.  10611/09, Judgment  13  October
         2011
100.  In Husseini v Sweden, the ECtHR (5th Section) dealt with the  case  of
    an applicant who was an ethnic Hazara, Shia  Muslim  from  Ghazni  (his
    father was of Hazara ethnicity, his mother of Pashtun  ethnicity).   At
    para 84, under the sub-head "The general situation in Afghanistan", the
    Court in a majority decision stated that it considered  "there  are  no
    indications that the situation in Afghanistan is so  serious  that  the
    return of the applicant would constitute, in  itself,  a  violation  of
    Article 3 of the Convention".

101.   In  relation  to  internal  relocation,  having  recited  the   UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines and its own case law on this question, the Court
    concluded:

         "9.8     In the present case, having  regard  inter  alia,  to  the
             government's  submission...  and  the  UNHCR  Guidelines,   it
             appears that an internal relocation alternative  is  available
             to the applicant in Afghanistan...".


    (c)    JH v UK App.No.48839/09, [2011] ECHR 2251, judgment 29  November
         2011
    In JH , which concerned an Afghan national from Kabul, the  ECtHR  (4th
    Section),  again  considering  inter  alia,  the  December  2010  UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines together with more recent  country  information,
    reached a similar conclusion as to the general situation in Afghanistan
    (see para 55).


    (ii)    Leading Swiss cases dealing with Article 15(c) in  the  context
    of Afghanistan
102.  In a decision of 16 June 2011 E-7625/2008  -  ATAF  (FAC)  -  2011/7),
    S.A. v Federal Office for Migration, - the Swiss Federal Administrative
    Court held that return of a  Hazara  applicant  to  his  home  province
    Daikundi  would  lead  to  his  "endangerment"  and  that  despite  the
    applicant having distant relatives in Kabul, it would not be reasonable
    to return him there as he had never lived in Kabul  and  would  lack  a
    stable social network.

103.  In decision D-2312/2009 of 28 October 2011 the  same  court  concluded
    in the case of a married couple of Tajik ethnicity that there  were  no
    individual circumstances that would render return to their home area of
    Herat unreasonable.

104.  The same court's decision D-7950/2009 of 30 December 2011  dealt  with
    whether it would be reasonable  for  a  "Sunni  Pashtun"  applicant  to
    return to Mazar-i-Sharif in Samangan province.  The  court  held  there
    was no general danger there, nor did the applicant's circumstances make
    his return there unreasonable (he had a stable family network there, he
    was educated  and  had  already  worked  as  an  owner  of  a  shop  in
    Afghanistan prior to his departure).

    (iii)  Other national decisions
105.  In response to a direction from the Tribunal  the  respondent  sent  a
    request for information about recent court decisions on  Article  15(c)
    applicable to Afghanistan to the  relevant  authorities  in  14  Member
    States and also Switzerland.  The responses confirm the view  expressed
    by UNHCR in Safe at Last? in July 2011 that there are wide  divergences
    of approach.  The question the respondent asked was "have your superior
    courts recently determined a case  or  cases,  in  which  they  had  to
    consider whether all or part of Afghanistan reaches the  threshold  for
    Article 15(c)?"  Some of the replies went further.

106.   In certain Member States, e.g. Finland, the position is  reported  as
    being that "no part of Afghanistan reaches  the  threshold  of  Article
    15(c)"; this position is said to have been  confirmed  by  the  Finnish
    Appeals Court.

107.  In other Member States certain regions of Afghanistan were  considered
    to cross the Article 15(c) threshold or to  be  generally  unsafe.   In
    Belgium the majority of Afghanistan's regions are considered unsafe but
    not Kabul and certain northern, western and central regions (which  are
    said to be safe).  It is added, however, that the  Belgian  Council  of
    State had confirmed that "more than 50% of the Afghan territory (mainly
    the south and  east)  [qualifies]  under  Article  15(c)".   In  France
    "indiscriminate violence has so far been determined in the provinces of
    Baghlan, Helmand, Kabul, Kunar, Kunduz, Bamion, Logor, Nangahar, Sorobi
    and Wardak", although it appears that this is in the context  of  cases
    where the applicant  has  "individualised"  his  threat.   So  much  is
    suggested by the response going on to  state  that  the  French  asylum
    court has examin[ed] this requirement of "individualisation" in Kapisa,
    Ghazni and Parwan, although in respect of the last mentioned, two cases
    of the court have reached different views.

108.  In other  countries  there  is  significant  disagreement  even  among
    courts within a Member State: e.g.  in  Germany  it  is  reported  that
    "[w]hile the higher administrative courts of Bavaria (VGH Munchen)  and
    Baden-Wrttemberg  (VGH  Mannheim)  are  currently  unmistakenly  [sic]
    denying an overall danger for every non-military, civilian  persons  in
    all or part of Afghanistan, the higher administrative court  of  Hessen
    (VGH Kassel) maintains a somewhat different point of view".

109.  In Sweden the Migration Board has found that there is violence at  the
    level of armed conflict in several  provinces,  but  in  terms  of  the
    Article 15(c) threshold it appears to  date  only  to  have  considered
    Ghazni province unsafe. The Board has specifically considered Kabul and
    Parwan provinces to be  safe.

110.  In Spain, Afghanistan as a whole is considered to  cross  the  Article
    15(c) threshold.


   B. LEGAL FRAMEWORK


111.  In view of the principal issues that arise in this appeal,  it  is  in
    order to set out several key provisions of the Qualification Directive,
    in particular Arts 9, 15 and 8:

      "Article 9

      Acts of persecution

    1.     Acts of persecution within the meaning  of  Article  1A  of  the
         Geneva Convention must:


         (a)      be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as
             to constitute a severe violation of  basic  human  rights,  in
             particular the rights from which  derogation  cannot  be  made
             under  Article  15(2)  of  the  European  Convention  for  the
             Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


         (b)       be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
             violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as  to
             affect an individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a).


    2.     Acts of persecution as qualified  in  paragraph  1,  can,  inter
         alia, take the form of:


         (a)      acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
             sexual violence;


         (b)      legal, administrative, police,  and/or  judicial  measures
             which  are  in  themselves   discriminatory   or   which   are
             implemented in a discriminatory manner;


         (c)      prosecution or punishment, which  is  disproportionate  or
             discriminatory;


         (d)      denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
             or discriminatory punishment;


         (e)      prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform  military
             service in a conflict, where performing military service would
             include crimes or acts falling under the exclusion clauses  as
             set out in Article 12(2);


         (f)      acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.


    3.     In accordance with Article 2(c),  there  must  be  a  connection
         between the reasons  mentioned  in  Article  10  and  the  acts  of
         persecution as qualified in paragraph 1.


    Article 15


    Serious harm


    Serious harm consists of:


         (a)      death penalty or execution; or


         (b)      torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
             an applicant in the country of origin; or


         (c)      serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict.


    Article 8


    Internal protection


    1.     As part of the assessment of the application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.


    2.     In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member states shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


    3.     Paragraph 1 may apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
         return to the country of origin."


    These provisions have been implemented in UK  law  by  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection Regulations 2006 and certain
    provisions of the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules (HC395)
    (paras 334-342 in  particular),  but  it  is  convenient  to  refer  to
    provisions of the Qualification Directive as (except where our national
    provisions are more generous) these are the common point  of  reference
    for judges in the EU Member States.


    In relation  to  Article  15(c),  the  Tribunal  in  AMM  at  para  328
    (observing that in overturning the  Tribunal  country  guidance  in  HM
    case, the Court of Appeal in HM (Iraq) had expressed  no  criticism  of
    what was said about the applicable law) endorsed the following  summary
    of the legal principles as set out in HM at para 67 as follows:

         "(a)     The Article seeks to elevate the  state  practice  of  not
             returning  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers  to  war   zones   or
             situations of armed anarchy for  reasons  of  common  humanity
             into a minimum standard (QD [i.e.  QD(Iraq)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
             620]  at [21]).


         (b)      The scope of protection is an autonomous concept  distinct
             from and broader than Art 3 protection even as interpreted  by
             the European Court of Human Rights  (ECtHR)  in  NA  v  United
             Kingdom (Elgafaji at [33]-[36];  QD  at  [20],  [35];  HH  and
             Others) at [31].


         (c)      It is concerned with 'threat...to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person' rather than to specific acts of violence...the  threat
             is inherent in a general situation of ...armed conflict... The
             violence that  gives  rise  to  the  threat  is  described  as
             indiscriminate, a term which implies that  it  may  extend  to
             people irrespective of their personal circumstances  (Elgafaji
             [34]).


         (d)      The Article is intended to cover the 'real risks and  real
             threats  presented  by  the   kinds   of   endemic   acts   of
             indiscriminate violence - the placing of car bombs  in  market
             places; snipers firing methodically at people in the streets -
             which have  come  to  disfigure  the  modern  world'.   It  is
             concerned with 'serious threats of real harm' (QD at [27]  and
             [31]).


         (e)      'Individual'  must  be  understood  as  covering  harm  to
             civilians irrespective of their identity where the  degree  of
             indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed  conflict
             taking place  reaches  such  a  high  level  that  substantial
             grounds are shown  for  believing  that  a  civilian...  would
             solely on account of his presence on the territory...  face  a
             real risk of being subjected to the serious threat'  (Elgafaji
             [35]).


         (f)      'The more the  applicant  is  able  to  show  that  he  is
             specifically affected by reason of factors particular  to  his
             personal circumstances, the lower the level of  indiscriminate
             violence required' (Elgafaji [39]).


         (g)      A consistent pattern of mistreatment is  not  a  necessary
             requirement to meet the real  harm  standard.   'The  risk  of
             random injury or death which indiscriminate  violence  carries
             is the converse of consistency' (QD at [32]).


         (h)      There is no requirement that  the  armed  conflict  itself
             must be  exceptional  but  there  must  be  'an  intensity  of
             indiscriminate violence great enough to meet  the  test  spelt
             out by the ECJ' and this will self evidently not  characterise
             every such situation (QD at [36]).


         (i)      'The overriding  purpose  of  Article  15(c)  is  to  give
             temporary refuge to people whose safety is placed  in  serious
             jeopardy by indiscriminate violence, it cannot matter  whether
             the source of the violence is two  or  more  warring  factions
             (which is what conflict would ordinarily suggest) or a  single
             entity or faction' (QD at [35]).


         (j)      'Civilian' means all genuine non-combatants  at  the  time
             when the serious threat  of  real  harm  may  materialise  (QD
             [37])."

112.  More recently, the Tribunal in MK at para  101  has  given  a  similar
    endorsement of the above summary.

          In relation to internal  relocation,  the  leading  UK  cases  are
    Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL  5  and
    AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  In  Januzi
    their  lordships  appeared  to  expressly  reject  a  submission   that
    assessment of the circumstances relevant to whether there was a  viable
    internal relocation alternative had to be done by applying human rights
    norms.

113.  In AH (Sudan) at para 5, Lord Bingham referred to his summary  of  the
    correct approach to the problem of internal relocation as  set  out  in
    para 21 of Januzi, adding:

         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:


             'The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so....There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
             observed  in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of  cases.
             The decision-maker  must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
             material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular
             case falls... All must depend on  a  fair  assessment  of  the
             relevant facts'.


         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
          It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant.  There is no warrant for excluding,  or  giving  priority
         to, consideration of the applicant's way of life in  the  place  of
         persecution.  There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country.  I do not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions
         in some cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying the  test,  not
         in  expressing  it.   The  humanitarian  object  of   the   Refugee
         Convention is to secure a  reasonable  measure  of  protection  for
         those with a well-founded fear of persecution in their home country
         or some part of it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up  of
         living standards around the world, desirable though of course  that
         is."

114.  He went on to clarify that  the  reasonableness  test  is  not  to  be
    assimilated with the Article 3  ECHR  issue  (para  11).   At  para  20
    Baroness Hale quoted from UNHCR's "very helpful  intervention  in  this
    case":

         "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case:


             '...the correct approach when considering  the  reasonableness
             of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all  the
             circumstances of the individual's case holistically  and  with
             specific reference to the individual's personal  circumstances
             (including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological and
             health condition, family and social  situation,  and  survival
             capacities).  This assessment is to be made in the context  of
             the conditions in the place  of  relocation  (including  basic
             human rights, security conditions, socio-economic  conditions,
             accommodation, access to health care facilities), in order  to
             determine the impact on that individual  of  settling  in  the
             proposed place of relocation and whether the individual  could
             live a relatively normal life without undue hardship'.


         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion.  Very little, apart from the conditions in the country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."


      At paras 21-22 she added:

         "21.     We  are  also  all  agreed  that  the  test  for  internal
             relocation under the Refugee Convention is not to  be  equated
             either with a 'well-founded fear  of  persecution'  under  the
             Convention or with a 'real risk of ill-treatment' contrary  to
             article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   By
             definition,  if  the  claimant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution, not only in the place from which he has fled, but
             also in the place to which he might be returned, there can  be
             no question of internal relocation.  The question pre-supposes
             that there is some place within his country of origin to which
             he could be returned without fear  of  persecution.   It  asks
             whether, in all the circumstances, it would be unduly harsh to
             expect him to go there.  If it is reasonable to expect him  to
             go there, then he can  no  longer  claim  to  be  outside  his
             country  of  origin  because  of  his  well-founded  fear   of
             persecution.  Mercifully, the test accepts that if it  is  not
             reasonable to expect him  to  go  there,  then  his  continued
             absence from his country of origin remains due  to  his  well-
             founded fear of persecution.


         22.       Further,  although  the  test  of  reasonableness  is   a
             stringent one - whether it would be 'unduly harsh'  to  expect
             the claimant to return - it is not to be equated with  a  real
             risk that the  claimant  would  be  subjected  to  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment or punishment so serious as  to  meet  the
             high threshold set by article 3 of the European Convention  on
             Human Rights.  As Lord Bingham points out, this  is  not  what
             was meant by the references to article 3 in Januzi,  including
             what was said by my noble and learned  friend,  Lord  Hope  of
             Craighead, when he referred to 'the most basic of human rights
             that are universally recognised' at para  54.   Obviously,  if
             there were a real risk of such ill-treatment, return would  be
             precluded by article 3 itself as well as being unreasonable in
             Refugee  Convention  terms.   But  internal  relocation  is  a
             different question."


C.    SUBMISSIONS

Mr Vokes and Ms Rutherfords' written submissions
115.  The central  tenet  of  the  written  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant was that given the very significant variations in  levels  of
    intensity  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  different   provinces   of
    Afghanistan, the Tribunal should apply the same "differential" model it
    had applied in the Somali  and  Zimbabwean  contexts.  Accordingly  the
    country guidance cases of GS  and  AA,  insofar  as  they  treated  the
    situation in Afghanistan as a whole as decisive, should be regarded  as
    misleading. At the very least  the  issue  of  the  "differential"  for
    indiscriminate violence in different  parts  of  the  country  was  not
    adequately explored in either GS or AA.  By reference to the ARC report
    and  the  UNAMA  Annual  report  for  2011,  it  was  clear  that   the
    geographical reach of the armed conflict was  spreading  and  that  the
    south and south east regions now accounted for 64%  of  all  incidents,
    with the situation in  the  central  area,  including  Kabul  province,
    becoming increasingly unstable. As a result the  south  east  and  east
    should be regarded as areas which had now  crossed  the  Article  15(c)
    threshold, with the Central areas (including Kabul) being  areas  which
    "may" cross that threshold and the west and north as areas where  there
    was a possibility of that threshold being crossed.

116.  Given the rising figures for the number of security incidents and  the
    number of civilians killed by IEDs, it was a "natural extrapolation  to
    point out the risk to civilians is highest  in  the  areas  of  heavier
    fighting, and insurgent activity". In such areas  the  unpredictability
    of the use of violence and the indiscriminate effects even  of  attacks
    targeted at specific targets (say of a local warlord) exposed  ordinary
    civilians to greater risk. In  addition,  an  indirect  effect  of  the
    violence was lack of security due to the failure of protection  by  the
    state. In Taliban controlled areas there was the further  problem  that
    virtually anyone not a supporter of the  Taliban  was  under  potential
    threat and the possibility for being harmed by  way  of  being  in  the
    wrong  place  at  the  wrong  time  was  magnified.  Persons  with   no
    professional or political affiliations would still be at risk.

117.   Insofar  as  the  Tribunal  had  dealt  with  comparison  with  other
    conflicts in the world, and had taken the view in GS that the level  of
    civilian casualties in Afghanistan was "surprisingly low", Mr Vokes and
    Ms Rutherford sought to rely on the report by Dr  Seddon  which  showed
    that a present comparison with the conflict  in  Somalia  in  terms  of
    deaths and injuries would appear to show (in relation to a majority  of
    observers) that the level of casualties is  significantly  higher  over
    the immediate past period of time in Afghanistan than  in  Somalia:  he
    referred to AMM, para 254.

         The appellant's written submissions also sought to persuade  us  by
    reference to Elgafaji para 39 (which sets out what has become known  as
    the "sliding-scale" principle as follows: "...the more the applicant is
    able to show that he is specifically  affected  by  reason  of  factors
    particular to his  personal  circumstances,  the  lower  the  level  of
    indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible for  subsidiary
    protection") and GS, paras 62 and 74, that even if we were to find that
    ordinary  civilians  are  not  at  Article  15(c)  risk   anywhere   in
    Afghanistan, we should nevertheless identify intermediate categories of
    persons who might be at risk by virtue of being less able than ordinary
    civilians to  avoid  the  on-going  violence.  We  refer  to  these  as
    "intermediate  categories"  as  those  submissions  clearly  meant   to
    identify categories falling short of the outright risk categories ((i)-
    (xi)) as identified by  UNHCR  in  its  17  December  2010  Eligibility
    Guidelines cited at para 86 above.  Mr Vokes and Ms Rutherford gave  as
    examples of intermediate categories:

            " fruit sellers outside  public  buildings,  day  labourers  on
         state construction projects who need as a necessity of life  to  be
         employed in this fashion or small farmers or landless labourers who
         out of economic necessity have to keep  farming  in  situations  of
         armed warfare breaking out on their land  or  the  land  that  they
         work. The latter category would include  businessmen,  more  senior
         state officials, war lords, large landowners."


118.  As regards internal relocation, it was  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    should disassociate itself from the  "unduly  harsh"  test  as  in  its
    natural meaning undue harshness  does  not  equate  to  reasonableness,
    which was a lower test. In any event, "the word "reasonable" should  be
    read down without gloss". Even if the Tribunal was not with him and  Ms
    Rutherford in relation to the application of  the  internal  relocation
    test under the Refugee Convention, its application under Article  15(c)
    should be considered as a different  matter,  as  under  Article  15(c)
    there is a "wider  differential".   Recital  25  of  the  Qualification
    Directive  makes  clear  that  the  sources  for  Article   15(c)   are
    international obligations under human rights instruments. Thus   if  in
    the context of Article 15(c) there are breaches of  fundamental  rights
    and the norms of dignified existence cannot  be  met,  then  relocation
    cannot  be  reasonable.   "In   this   sense   the   high   hurdle   of
    'reasonableness' in relation to the Refugee/Human Rights Convention  is
    relaxed".

119.  So far as this applied to  the  evidence  relating  to  conditions  in
    Kabul, it was noteworthy that returnees/IDPs have  no  organisation  to
    help them settle in Kabul; 70% have no access to electricity,  adequate
    water and sanitation; 60% of IDPs live in  tents;  80%  of  persons  in
    Kabul live in squatter  settlements  with  no  access  to  the  housing
    market; 35/40% of the workforce is unemployed, rising to 60% for youth;
    the number of displaced persons is increasing,  up  45%  in  2011;  and
    there are growing security concerns due to insurgency attacks in  Kabul
    which  the  authorities  appear  unable  to  prevent  possibly  due  to
    infiltration of the police and the army.

120.  As regards the appellant, his home province of Ghazni is  one  of  the
    worst-affected areas of Afghanistan in relation to levels of  violence.
    In such circumstances he should be considered as at Article 15(c)  risk
    in his home area. It is accepted he has an uncle and aunt in Kabul, but
    it was not accepted it would be reasonable to expect the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul, in view of the above considerations.

Mr Vokes' oral submissions
121.  Amplifying his and  Ms  Rutherford's  written  submissions,  Mr  Vokes
    contended that the background evidence now  to  hand  showed  that  the
    situation in  Afghanistan  had  worsened  since  the  UNHCR  Report  of
    December 2010 when five provinces (including parts of Ghazni and Khost)
    were considered to be in a situation of  generalised  violence  at  the
    Article 15(c) threshold making it unsafe to return anyone there.

122.  Significant gaps in the evidence when the  Upper  Tribunal  looked  at
    the situation in AA (Afghanistan), e.g. as to the  number  of  IDPs  in
    different regions, had now been filled.  The UNAMA  reports  for  2010-
    2011 showed that whilst the south and  south-east  provinces  accounted
    for 64% of all  security-related  incidents,  the  armed  conflict  had
    increased its spread geographically.  As Amnesty International said, it
    was a "deteriorating situation".   In addition, the nature of the armed
    conflict had become more dangerous for civilians, with the use  by  the
    insurgency of IEDs having caused increasing rates of civilian death and
    casualties.

123.  Kabul, he submitted, was increasingly insecure and  the  situation  of
    returnees was most likely to be similar to that experienced by IDPs who
    had been identified as a stratum of society below the urban  poor.   So
    their situation  would  truly  be  dire.   The  unemployment  rate  was
    extremely  high  (60%).   Protection  in  Kabul  was  ineffective,  the
    authorities themselves having said there was a  need  for  20,000  more
    police officers.  Corruption was rife.   The  September  2011  LANDINFO
    report, which had  described  the  situation  in  Kabul  as  relatively
    tranquil, had to be read alongside the ICG report  which  took  a  more
    pessimistic view.  Kabul increasingly resembled  Saigon  in  the  later
    stages  of  the  Vietnam  War.   There  was  a  significant  level   of
    infiltration by the insurgency of  government  security  services.   Dr
    Giustozzi's  assessment  of  the  ineffectiveness  of  the  police  was
    telling.

124.  Even the FCO advised against travel to Ghazni.  Ghazni  was  the  only
    province in which the Taliban had extensive territorial control and  it
    was where insurgent groups had the largest presence.

125.  Mr Vokes acknowledged that in order for a person to show a  real  risk
    on return of persecution, serious harm  or  ill-treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR, merely on the basis of being a civilian,  there  was  a
    high threshold, but he considered that the latest evidence demonstrated
    that in certain areas of Afghanistan, including Kabul and Ghazni,  that
    threshold had been crossed, at  least  in  relation  to  Article  15(c)
    serious harm.

126.  Civilian casualties had doubled since 2007.  The tactics  and  methods
    used by parties to the armed  conflict,  particularly  the  insurgents,
    increasingly  threatened  and  harmed  civilians.   Even  the  targeted
    killings, said Mr Vokes, had  collateral  side  effects  on  civilians.
    There was no bright line to be  drawn  between  targeted  killings  and
    indiscriminate violence.  There was clearly still a significant  degree
    of under-reporting.  Bearing in mind the  Upper  Tribunal's  acceptance
    that other metrics than civilian casualties  were  relevant,  including
    that of population displacement, there had  been  a  very  considerable
    increase in the number of IDPs, from 102,658 in 2010, 143,000  in  2011
    to 185,632 in the early months of 2012, which could not be put down  to
    natural  disasters.   Armed  attacks  had  caused  a  great   deal   of
    displacement in the past two years.  UNHCR already had real concerns at
    the failure to reintegrate of more than 40% of persons who had returned
    to Afghanistan.  The UN had access  to  less  than  half  the  country.
    Tracing Tribunal country  guidance  cases  starting  with  GS,  it  was
    evident that things had been getting  steadily  worse  even  before  AA
    which itself had noted that there  had  been  a  deterioration  in  the
    situation since HK.  The degree of risk had clearly  increased  and  it
    was time to  recognise  that  a  significant  number  of  provinces  in
    Afghanistan were unsafe.  There was now considerably  more  information
    available about the intense nature of the armed conflict in Afghanistan
    than had been before the Tribunal in GS, HK and AA.  The  Tribunal  had
    to take a holistic approach to the conflict, taking into  account,  for
    example, that economic circumstances might prevent a number of  persons
    leaving an area beset by armed conflict.

127.  When it came to Article 15(c), it was important for  the  Tribunal  to
    recognise, said Mr Vokes, that even if it rejected his arguments  about
    the high levels of indiscriminate violence in Kabul, Ghazni and certain
    other  provinces,  and  opted  instead  for  identifying  certain  risk
    categories or factors, it should seek to give effect to  the  Court  of
    Justice's notion of a "sliding scale" and so supplement such categories
    by reference to "enhanced risk categories" of civilians who  were  more
    at risk because of their occupation or likely location (or inability to
    move) to be in the vicinity of attacks targeting particular classes  of
    persons (what we prefer to term  "intermediate  categories":  see  para
    117).

128.  In relation to the respondent's reliance on  the  February  2012  CSIS
    Report (see above para 58 and below, para 134), it was important,  said
    Mr Vokes, not to attach any significant weight to its cross comparisons
    with Iraq, past or present.

129.  In relation to the issue of internal relocation, Mr  Vokes  sought  to
    make two main points, one  about  the  law,  the  other  about  country
    conditions.

130.  As to the law, Mr Vokes contended that the Tribunal  should  recognise
    that in deciding  whether  internal  relocation  was  viable  inside  a
    country in a state of armed conflict or which was a war zone, it should
    apply human rights guarantees.  If adopting  a  human  rights  approach
    would be to go further than was called for under the Refugee Convention
    or under Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive/Article  3  ECHR,
    that was justified because, as Elgafaji and AMM had recognised, Article
    15(c)  had  an  additional  scope.   The  legal  criteria  had  to   be
    liberalised due to the fact of there being an armed  conflict.   Either
    the terms "reasonable" or "unduly harsh" had to be read  down  or  they
    had to be applied less rigorously in  order  to  take  account  of  the
    humanitarian predicament posed by armed conflict.  What was  especially
    important was the combination of  security  concerns  and  the  limited
    protection  available,  coupled  with  real  socio-economic  hardships.
    There was  considerable  linkage  between  Articles  8  and  9  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

131.  In relation to the  facts,  applying  his  proposed  analysis  to  the
    situation in Kabul, Mr Vokes said he did not  seek  to  argue  that  it
    could not be a viable site of internal relocation for anyone,  e.g.  it
    may  be  that  those  connected  with  the  government  would  have  no
    significant  problems  because  they  would  be  protected,  but   even
    individual characteristics such as where a person would  be  likely  to
    find work, could make a difference.  In relation to the  evidence  that
    returnees from the UK would get some financial help,  this  would  only
    have a temporary effect.

132.  As for the appellant, Mr Vokes said that the evidence  that  he  would
    face a real risk in his home area of Ghazni was compelling.  He had  to
    accept, however, that the preserved finding of fact that the  appellant
    had an uncle in Kabul posed  difficulties  for  his  case,  albeit  the
    general plight of IDPs, who had to live in Kabul as the "poorest of the
    poor", was strongly demonstrated by the background evidence.

Mr Blundell's written submissions
133.  Mr Blundell's skeleton argument on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    took issue with the apparent attempt by  Dr  Seddon  and  Mr  Vokes  in
    written submissions to question the historic validity  of  the  country
    guidance given by the Tribunal in GS and AA. It also maintained that Mr
    Vokes was wrong to portray those cases as having confined themselves to
    conditions in Afghanistan as a whole without regard  to  parts  of  the
    country; on the contrary they had properly applied the Court of Justice
    guidance in Elgafaji which required  (see  paras  35  and  43  of  that
    ruling)  asking  whether  there  was  a  sufficiently  high  level   of
    indiscriminate violence to reach the Article 15(c) threshold  not  just
    in a country but in any material part of it.

134.  Turning to consider the evidence, in  particular  the  UNAMA  reports,
    relating to whether the Article  15(c)  threshold  was  met  in  either
    Afghanistan as a whole  or  certain  parts  of  it,   the  respondent's
    skeleton  accepted  that  the  situation  has,  to  a  limited  degree,
    deteriorated since 2010,  but,  by  reference  to  rates  for  civilian
    deaths etc, argued that:  (i)  the  actual  change  in  the  number  of
    civilian deaths is small (an increase of 231 between  2010  and  2011);
    (ii) the rate of year-on change has slowed substantially (from  15%  in
    2010 to 8% in 2011);  (iii) the number of deaths whose  source  is  not
    known has fallen from 326 to 279; (iv) the UN Secretary General  report
    of 13 December 2011 refereed to a decline of "security-related  events"
    in the last three months of 2011; (v) in contrast to the view taken  in
    GS (which assumed a ratio of 8 injuries for every civilian death),  the
    figures available now showed a ratio of less than 2:1;  and  (vi)  ANSO
    figures for civilian deaths were in fact lower and showed  a  reduction
    in the total figure for civilians deaths from 2,534 in 2010 to 2,427 in
    2011.  Hence  the  overall  picture  was  little  different  from  that
    considered by the Tribunal in AA, with reference to  the  situation  in
    May 2011. In addition, some allowance had to be made for the fact  that
    a significant number of deaths were targeted killings: 185, 431 and 495
    in 2009, 2011 and 2011 respectively. In  most  of  these  killings  the
    victims were associated  with  NGOs,  local  elders,  private  security
    contractors and ANP  recruits  or  civilian  government  officials  and
    workers. The number of deaths caused by pro-government forces had  also
    significantly decreased. The figures for combatant  casualties  for  US
    and collation troops were relatively low (711 in 2010 and 566 in 2011).
    Insurgents killed were said by Brookings Institute figures to be  3,200
    in  2011;  these  demonstrated  the  success  of  security   operations
    generally. Drawing on the CSIS report for 2012 (see above para 58),  Mr
    Blundell said that comparing indiscriminate violence in Iraq, where the
    level of violence had decreased drastically since 2006/7,  the  figures
    of civilian casualties for the two countries in  2009,  2010  and  2011
    were presently roughly the same

135.   Turning  to  other  "metrics",  although  the  number  of   IDPs   in
    Afghanistan had increased (UNHCR  estimating  433,066  in  June  2011),
    there were  many  factors  underlying  these  high  numbers,  including
    previous years  of  conflict  and  natural  disasters.  Moreover,  five
    million refugees had actually returned to Afghanistan  since  2002  and
    such returns were on-going, with heavy involvement from UNHCR, ICRC and
    other humanitarian agencies.

136.  At the provincial  level,  there  had  been  a  decrease  in  civilian
    casualties in the southern provinces; figures for Kabul  remained  low;
    and even though the figures had increased in Ghazni,  they  were  still
    low. In both Kabul and Ghazni a  very  significant  proportion  of  the
    attacks were targeted at persons with government  or  NGO  connections.
    ANSO in 2011 had described Kabul as being one  of  the  country's  most
    tranquil areas with most of the violence there being  targeted  at  the
    international forces and the Afghan authorities.  In  Ghazni  city,  it
    being a location for public  service  work,  it  was  likely  the  same
    pattern applied.

137.  In relation to Mr  Vokes'  submissions  as  to  the  law  on  internal
    relocation, the respondent submitted that he was wrong  to  argue  that
    the "unduly harsh" test laid down in Januzi and AH (Sudan) was a higher
    test than that of "reasonableness" and wrong to submit that  either  or
    both these formulations could or should be "read down". No  distinction
    between the different forms of international  protection  was  made  in
    terms  of  the  application  of  Article  8(1)  of  the   Qualification
    Directive. It was also important  to  have  regard  to  the  limitation
    within Article 15(c) to the effect of the indiscriminate violence on  a
    civilian's "life or person".  The  respondent  urged  the  Tribunal  to
    endorse the position taken in GS  at  para  72  (and  endorsed  by  the
    Tribunal in AMM at para 337) that not all forms of serious physical  or
    psychological harm, including flagrant breaches  of  qualified  rights,
    such as freedom of thought, conscience and religion,  were  covered  by
    Article 15(c).

138.  As to the facts of  the  appellant's  case,  the  respondent  did  not
    accept that the appellant had established a real risk of Article  15(c)
    serious harm in his home area of Ghazni. Alternatively,  if  which  was
    denied, the Tribunal should find that the Article 15(c)  threshold  was
    met in the appellant's home  province  of  Ghazni,  then  it  would  be
    reasonable for him to relocate to Kabul or, indeed, any other  area  of
    Afghanistan.

Mr Blundell's oral submissions
139.  Mr Blundell began with three points about the  relevant  law.   First,
    he submitted that although Mr Vokes appeared to have  given  ground  in
    relation  to  certain  arguments  he  had  advanced  in   his   written
    submissions, the Secretary of State wished to reiterate the main points
    raised in the skeleton argument submitted on her behalf.  To the extent
    that the expert report from Dr Seddon  sought  to  cast  doubt  on  the
    historic validity of  existing  Tribunal  country  guidance  cases,  he
    pointed out that there was simply  not  the  assemblage  of  background
    evidence to justify revisiting them.  Insofar as  Mr  Vokes  sought  to
    argue that GS and AA had not undertaken an analysis of  the  levels  of
    violence  in  Afghanistan  province-by-province,  that  was  incorrect,
    albeit the evidence they had was not as developed and  as  detailed  as
    now available: both GS and AA did furnish a "differential" analysis  by
    reference to the Brookings Institute data.  Indeed in AA the Tribunal's
    guidance as set out at paras 92-93 expressly emphasised the  importance
    of location.

140.  Mr Blundell's second point was that as regards  the  interrelationship
    between Article 15(c) and Article 15(b)/Article 3 ECHR,  there  was  no
    issue between the parties.  The respondent  accepted  the  position  as
    enunciated by the Court of Justice in Elgafaji and  reiterated  by  the
    Tribunal in AMM at para 334 that Article 15(c) had a wider scope.

141.  Thirdly, however, submitted Mr Blundell, it was incorrect of Mr  Vokes
    to submit that the legal test for deciding whether there was  a  viable
    option of internal relocation was less rigorous for Article 15(c)  than
    it was under the Refugee Convention or Article  15(b)/Article  3  ECHR.
    That submission was contrary to the binding  authority  of  Januzi  and
    misunderstood that "reasonableness" and undue hardship were  two  sides
    of the same coin. It also disregarded the unificatory terms of  Article
    8 of  the  Qualification  Directive,  which  applied  uniform  internal
    relocation  criteria  to  both  refugee  eligibility   and   subsidiary
    (humanitarian) protection eligibility.

142.  In reply to a question from the  panel  as  to  whether  the  apparent
    rejection by the House of Lords in Januzi of a human rights approach to
    internal  relocation  was  fully  consistent  with  the   Qualification
    Directive, Mr Blundell made three points: (i) that their Lordships  did
    have regard to the Directive; (ii) that their  Lordships'  analysis  of
    internal relocation was consistent with the Directive; and (iii) in any
    event the issue of their reconcilability did not arise in this case.

143.  Turning to the evidence, Mr Blundell said that whilst  the  respondent
    accepted for the purposes of this appeal that there were  a  number  of
    indices  or  "metrics"  for  measuring  the  level  of   indiscriminate
    violence, it was always going to be critical to focus  on  the  figures
    giving the number of civilian casualties.  Not all "metrics"  could  be
    of equal weight.

144.  Mr Blundell said that he took no issue with the evidence of Ms  Huber.
     She was clearly a very competent researcher and a very  fair  witness,
    but she herself was adamant that she was not a country expert and  that
    her summary had to be read along with the sources themselves.

145.   As  to  the  evidence  of  Dr  Seddon,  which   asserted   that   the
    indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan had now  reached  Article  15(c)
    levels, there were a number of reasons for attaching little  weight  to
    his report.  It had not been tested by cross-examination; his knowledge
    of Afghanistan was extremely limited; in contrast to Dr  Giustozzi,  he
    had no up-to-date information about the situation on the  ground;  some
    of his assertions,  (e.g.  that  at  para  3.8  of  his  report,  which
    maintained that Professor Farrell's evidence  in  GS  did  not  include
    civilians killed by the  Taliban  and  other  insurgent  forces),  were
    factually wrong (see GS, paras 85 and 106); it was apparent that he had
    not read the underlying reports disclosed by  Wikileaks  in  2010;  his
    opinion sought to furnish his own analysis of legal issues, outside his
    own expertise.

146.  As regards  Dr  Giustozzi,  whilst  the  respondent  accepted  he  had
    considerable expertise on Afghanistan, the report he had  produced  for
    this case had several blemishes. It was  clear  he  had  not  read  the
    appellant's appeal documentation properly; paras  1-18  of  his  report
    wrongly assumed that the  appellant's  account  had  been  accepted  as
    credible; Dr Giustozzi had committed the same error  in  GS  (see  para
    76).  In any event his report did not assist the appellant's case since
    he clearly did not consider, the level of  risk  in  Afghanistan  as  a
    whole or in Kabul or Ghazni to be at a high level.

147.   Mr  Blundell  turned  to  the  general  issue  of   the   levels   of
    indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan.  The  respondent  accepted,  he
    said, that there had been deterioration in the situation since AA,  but
    it was relatively modest and the rate of increase in key  indices  such
    as civilian casualties had slowed.  There was now  less  need  to  make
    allowances for under-reporting  as  accuracy  in  data  collection  had
    improved.  As noted in the  respondent's  skeleton,  whereas  Professor
    Farrell had posited a ratio of 8:1 for numbers wounded as compared with
    numbers killed, figures now available showed less than two injuries for
    every death.  The increased number of targeted killings did reduce  the
    level of risk to civilians at large.

148.  The respondent noted, said Mr Blundell, that Mr Vokes did not seek  to
    argue that Afghanistan as a whole was at  an  Article  15(c)  level  of
    risk.  The respondent did not accept,  however,  Mr  Vokes'  contention
    that several areas of Afghanistan were at such a level.  There had been
    a very significant drop in levels  of  violence  in  the  worst  areas,
    Kandahar and Helmand.  There had been an increase  in  such  levels  in
    Ghazni, but they  were  still  modest  and  it  was  safe  to  infer  a
    significant number of  the  casualties  in  that  province  arose  from
    targeting by the insurgents of governmental employees.

149.  As for  Kabul,  it  was  considered  by  the  Norwegian  COI  service,
    LANDINFO, to be a relatively stable  city  and,  again,  a  significant
    number  of  incidents  in  that  city  involved  targeted  attacks   on
    government offices and international organisations.

150.  Mr Blundell said that the respondent was not able to  agree  with  the
    analysis given by UNHCR in its December 2010 Guidelines (and reiterated
    since then). It was pertinent  that  UNHCR  itself  was  continuing  to
    facilitate  the  return  of  large  numbers  of  displaced  persons  to
    Afghanistan, although that  body  made  clear  its  concern  about  the
    significant numbers of those who had failed to  re-integrate.   It  was
    difficult to regard the serious problems of IDPs  as  having  been  the
    simple product of the present armed conflict; their problems had  their
    origins in social, political turmoil and floods and  natural  disasters
    going back four decades.

151.  In relation to any return to Ghazni, the evidence did  not  show  that
    that province was at Article 15(c)  levels  of  risk  and,  given  that
    government security forces patrolled highways, it could not be said  it
    was unsafe to travel there.  Indeed, apart from areas controlled by the
    insurgents, there  were  no  real  obstacles  to  a  person  travelling
    anywhere in Afghanistan.

152.   Even  if  an  individual  was  able  to  establish  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm in his home area, Kabul would in general be
    a safe place of relocation.  As regards the  appellant,  there  was  an
    additional reason why Kabul would be safe and reasonable  for  him;  he
    had an uncle there who owned a clothes shop.

D.    OUR ASSESSMENT

      a) General

Initial observations

153.  We have to decide this case taking into account the  entirety  of  the
    evidence and bearing in mind that, whilst the burden of proof rests  on
    the appellant, the standard of  proof  is  a  relatively  low  one  and
    requires us to apply anxious  scrutiny.  In  addressing  the  questions
    raised concerning Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, we have
    to decide what the situation is in Afghanistan now  so  as  to  make  a
    forward-looking assessment of risk.

154.  We have already made several observations at paras  37-44,  so  as  to
    help the reader have a better understanding  of  the  figures  set  out
    subsequently. We shall not repeat these here, but simply note that they
    too form part of our assessment. We do, however,  venture  one  further
    observation here. It relates to the fact that our task in  this  appeal
    is limited to  an  examination  of  the  Article  15(c)  question.  The
    appellant applied for international protection and his  appeal  against
    refusal of his application by the respondent  resulted  in  his  appeal
    being dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on asylum and Articles 2 and
    3 ECHR grounds but being allowed on subsidiary protection (humanitarian
    protection) grounds.  There  was  no  cross-appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was only granted (to  the  respondent)  on
    Article  15(c)  grounds.   All  case  management  directions  and   the
    responses by the parties have proceeded on that  basis.   However,  the
    fact that we are as a result confined to  a  consideration  of  Article
    15(c) should not be  construed  as  a  general  message  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal that when dealing with asylum-related claims based  wholly  or
    significantly on risks arising from situations of  armed  conflict  and
    indiscriminate violence that it will be right  for  decision-makers  to
    skip over the question of refugee status or  Article  15(b)  subsidiary
    protection status and go straight to Article 15(c).  On  the  contrary,
    they should ordinarily deal first with the issue of refugee eligibility
    and not deal with Article 3 ECHR until last.  That is so for a two main
    reasons.  First of all, decision-makers are obliged by the structure of
    the Qualification Directive to give primacy to the issue of eligibility
    for refugee protection; whereas Articles 15(b) and (c) are  species  of
    "subsidiary" protection: see  recitals  3,  5.  Second,  to  skip  over
    refugee eligibility would be to lend support to the misconception  that
    persons fleeing armed conflict cannot fall  within  the  Article  1A(2)
    Refugee Convention definition.  That has never been so, even  if  there
    has been recurrent hesitation about the criteria that should  apply  to
    such cases: see AM & AM (armed conflict: risk  categories)  Somalia  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00091, paras 17, 68.

155.  In relation to why Article 3 ECHR  should  be  dealt  with  last,  the
    reason is simple.  By virtue of  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive, a person who can establish an Article 3 risk, will (save  in
    one limited respect relating to heath cases) be  able  to  show  he  is
    entitled to  subsidiary  (humanitarian  protection)  under  15(b).   By
    contrast with  Article  3  ECHR,  subsidiary  protection  (humanitarian
    protection), including under Article 15(b), entitles the beneficiary to
    a legal status both at the level  of  EU  law  (Article  24(2)  of  the
    Qualification Directive) and in UK law (para 339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules).

156.  As regards whether or not to deal with Article 15(b) or  15(c)  first,
    it might seem that because the Court of Justice in  Elgafaji  has  held
    that Article 15(c) has an additional scope to Article 3  ECHR  that  it
    would always be easier to address Article 15(c) first as having broader
    scope. But establishing subsidiary protection eligibility under Article
    15(b) may sometimes be more straightforward than seeking to do so under
    Article 15(c).  This may arise where, for example, the  claimant  falls
    within a risk category but cannot  show  a  Refugee  Convention  ground
    (e.g. where he is at real risk of persecution/serious harm at the hands
    of a powerful criminal gang). It may also arise where there is a recent
    ECHR  case  that  establishes  comprehensively   that   there   is   an
    exceptionally high level of  generalised  violence  in  the  claimant's
    country that amounts to a violation of Article 3  ECHR  (see  NA  v  UK
    Application  no.  25904/07,  paras  115-116;  Sufi  and   Elmi   v   UK
    Applications nos. 8319/07 and 11449/07, paras 218, 250) and there is no
    valid reason to take a different view.   Another problem is that whilst
    it is now established that Article 15(c) has  an  additional  scope  to
    Article 3 ECHR (a near equivalent to Article 15(b) of the Qualification
    Directive), the ascertainment of that additional scope may  not  always
    be a simple matter.

157.  The sole focus of this case being nevertheless Article 15(c), we  turn
    to the central issue for decision: whether the country  guidance  given
    by the Tribunal in 2009 in GS  on  Article  15(c)  in  the  context  of
    Afghanistan stands in need of revision.  In  a  trite  sense  it  must:
    events have moved on some three years and the state of the evidence  is
    by definition different.  But what we are  concerned  with  is  whether
    developments since require a  different  answer  to  be  given  to  the
    question  of  generic  risk  arising  under  Article   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.   Whilst  several  Tribunal  country  guidance
    cases since GS - HK and AA in particular - have inevitably  had  regard
    to the post-GS state of the evidence relating to  this  question,  they
    were not convened to review it and have  sought  to  do  no  more  than
    register their understanding of  the  general  state  of  affairs  then
    current in the context of deciding more  specific  issues  relating  to
    children.

158.  On the law pertaining to Article 15(c), this Tribunal  is  in  a  much
    better position than that in GS, as there has  since  been  significant
    clarification of it afforded by the Upper Tribunal in HM  and  AMM  and
    most recently MK (we would observe that the Tribunal panel in AMM,  and
    a different Tribunal panel in  MK,  correctly  in  our  view,  did  not
    consider that the Court of Appeal decision in HM (Iraq)  contained  any
    criticism of its summary of legal principles  governing  Article  15(c)
    (for text, see above para 111). The issues in this case do  require  us
    to consider aspects of the law relating to internal  relocation  -  and
    there are one or two points we adumbrate below on that -  but in  broad
    terms both the law on that and  on  15(c)  is  now  settled.   In  what
    follows, when we refer to "the Article 15(c) threshold" we have in mind
    the central question posed by the Court of Justice in Elgafaji at [43],
    namely, does:


        "the degree of indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
        conflict taking place... (reach) such a high level that substantial
        grounds are shown for believing that any civilian, returned to  the
        relevant country or, as the case may be, to  the  relevant  region,
        would solely on account of his presence on the  territory  or  that
        country or region, face a real risk of being subject to that threat
        ?"


159.  It is right to note, however, that the Tribunal in HM  considered  the
    legal approach to Article 15(c) taken by the Tribunal  in  GS  did  not
    fully conform to the legal principles set out in Elgafaji and QD (Iraq)
    and other cases.  In  particular  it  criticised  the  attempt  by  the
    Tribunal  in  GS  to  rely  on  a  distinction  between  targeted   and
    indiscriminate  violence  (so  as  to  exclude  targeted  attacks  with
    individual caught in the cross-fire: see HM (paras 69 and 73)).

 160. This  criticism  reflected  the  view  embraced  in  HM  that  it  was
    necessary in the context of contemporary armed conflicts  to  adopt  an
    "inclusive  approach",  so  that  in  assessing   whether   levels   of
    indiscriminate violence had reached the Article  15(c)  threshold,  all
    types of violence having a potential bearing  were  to  be  taken  into
    account: see paras 70, 75. (We note that whilst the Tribunal in  HM  at
    para 78 appeared to consider that GS correctly took the view  that,  in
    establishing whether  there  was  a  causal  nexus  between  the  armed
    conflict and the indiscriminate violence, regard was  had  to  indirect
    effects, it is not entirely clear that GS consistently took that  view:
    see last sentence of para 117 cited above at para 95). However, neither
    party in this appeal has sought to argue that the above  failure(s)  of
    legal approach in GS had any material impact on its assessment  of  the
    levels of indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan at that time  and  nor
    do we.)

161.  In any event, in this appeal we adopt and  reiterate  the  summary  of
    legal principles set out in the Tribunal cases of HM, AMM  and  MK  and
    reconfirm the efficacy of an inclusive approach.

  The inclusive approach

162.  Whilst  not  asking  us  to  reconsider  the  inclusive  approach,  Mr
    Blundell urged us not to conceive it as a fixed  verity  applicable  to
    all factual situations in a uniform way,  but  rather  as  an  approach
    responsive to contingent  facts,  e.g.   that  the  figures  given  for
    civilian casualties and related incidents in  present  day  Afghanistan
    are inevitably  imprecise  and  may  reflect  a  significant  level  of
    underreporting.  He pointed out  that  improved  levels  of  monitoring
    appear to have reduced the need to allow for underreporting as much  as
    had been valid previously. He also cautioned against a possible  misuse
    of the multi-factor approach to  the  analysis  of  armed  conflict  as
    advanced by Professor Farrell and others which highlights the  need  to
    consider not just figures relating to civilian deaths and injuries  but
    other  "metrics"  such  as  degree  of  state  failure  and  population
    displacement.  We think his observations  are  well-made  and  properly
    reflect the careful language used in the Tribunal case of HM (see  e.g.
    the  reference  in  para  77  to  an  inclusive  approach  only   being
    "ordinarily" appropriate and to the  fact  that  "There  may  be  armed
    conflicts in which civilians are little affected by the fighting  going
    on, but far more often that is not the case").

163.  We also agree that the degree of  underreporting  of  civilian  deaths
    and casualties and related indices is  an  issue  of  fact  and  it  is
    notable that in the context of Afghanistan the systems  for  collecting
    and analysing indicators of violence in place when GS was decided  have
    become more sophisticated so that, for  example,  the  rough  indicator
    used by Professor Farrell of eight  wounded  to  every  one  death  now
    appears to have been an  overestimate,  at  least  in  the  context  of
    Afghanistan.   Further,   whilst   the   inclusive   approach   is   an
    indispensable safeguard against any artificial  exclusion  of  relevant
    types  of  violence,  it  must  not  lead  the  decision-maker  to  run
    everything together and to overlook or blur important features  of  the
    ongoing  conflict,  for  it  is  only  by  a  careful  delineation  and
    understanding of these features that a proper assessment  can  be  made
    about the levels of indiscriminate violence for Article 15(c) purposes.
    Ours must be a qualitative as well as a  quantitative  analysis.  Thus,
    for example,  in AMM at para 339   the  Tribunal  considered  that,  in
    addition to the level of civilian casualties,  another  factor  leading
    them to conclude that in Mogadishu the Article 15(c) threshold had been
    crossed related to the "conduct of the parties"  by  reference  to  the
    highlighting  in  background  evidence  of  widespread  violations   of
    international humanitarian law.

164.  In the light of the above, we  consider  that  whilst  we  must  guard
    against any attempt to work with a fixed equation in which in assessing
    the level of indiscriminate violence targeted  attacks  are  subtracted
    from the  assessment  of  the  level  of  civilian  casualties,  it  is
    relevant in the context of Afghanistan to analyse such matters as:  (i)
    whether the violence  employed  by  the  parties  to  the  conflict  is
    characterised by systematic targeting of civilians  on  a  wide  scale;
    (ii) whether, for example, the violence  employed  by  the  insurgents,
    when they have targeted civilians,  focuses in  large part  on  certain
    categories of civilian only; and  (iii)  whether  when  the  insurgents
    target particular categories of civilians they  routinely  cause  heavy
    "collateral" harm to  civilian  lives  and  property.   None  of  these
    observations is intended to underplay the terrible toll the "Long  War"
    is inflicting on the Afghan population;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  to
    ensure that in deciding the Article 15(c) question, due regard is  paid
    to all relevant aspects.

The expert evidence

Dr Seddon
165.  We do not consider  that  most  of  Mr  Blundell's  criticisms  of  Dr
    Seddon's report are justified.

166.  Insofar as Mr Blundell was dismissive of Dr Seddon's  credentials,  we
    note that  he  has  good  contacts  with  US  and  British  experts  on
    Afghanistan, with the FCO and  the  Royal  Institute  of  International
    Affairs and is currently preparing a book on 'The War in  Helmand',  in
    which, he states, a number of publishers are interested.  This  evinces
    an ongoing focus on the affairs of the country.

167.  Mr Blundell sought to take Dr Seddon to task for criticising  at  para
    3.8 of his report the estimate given  by  Professor  Farrell  of  2,118
    civilian deaths in 2008 for not including those civilians killed by the
    insurgents.  Dr Seddon regards this  as  demonstrating  that  Professor
    Farrell underestimated significantly the scale of civilian  casualties.
    That would seem to be based on what was said by the Tribunal itself  in
    GS at  para  97  where  they  describe  Professor  Farrell  as  himself
    acknowledging that this  figure  does  not  cover  insurgent  killings.
    However, it may be the Tribunal in GS was  confused  about  this  since
    they ( correctly) noted to the contrary at para 109  that  that  figure
    was based on a UNAMA Report which said  that  of  the  2,118  civilians
    killed, 1,160 were caused by anti-government elements.  At all  events,
    this is an inconclusive criticism.

168.  Mr Blundell expressed concern about  Dr  Seddon's  references  to  the
    Wikileaks report of July 2010.  There was nothing  to  show,  he  said,
    that Dr Seddon had read those materials.  We are not persuaded that  is
    a fair criticism.  It does not seem to us that Dr Seddon was doing  any
    more than setting down what had been said about  the  contents  of  the
    Wikileaks report in sources such as the Guardian.  We cannot  see  that
    he purported to have read them himself.  It might perhaps be said  that
    another (more thorough) country expert would have, but  we  cannot  see
    that Dr Seddon misrepresented the state  of  his  own  knowledge  about
    this.

169.  Another significant shortcoming with Dr Seddon's report  was  said  by
    Mr Blundell to be that he appears to attempt in  para  6.1  to  address
    what is essentially a legal question about the applicability of Article
    15(c)  and  opines  that  the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence   in
    Afghanistan was now high enough to meet  the  Article  15(c)  threshold
    (para 6.1).  Whilst we agree that the Article 15(c) issue  was  outside
    Dr Seddon's expertise, we consider there were mitigating circumstances.
     He had been directly asked to consider the evidence about  "levels  of
    indiscriminate violence in relation to Article 15(c)" [emphasis  added]
    and he had done his best to comply.

170.  Whilst discounting the above criticisms,  we  still  do  not  find  Dr
    Seddon's  report  assists  us  very  much.   Despite  being  asked   by
    Blakemores to prepare a report which considered, inter  alia,  "whether
    the situation in Afghanistan has changed since  the  case  of  GS",  he
    appears to have taken that as  a  cue  to  analyse  in  retrospect  the
    evidence of Professor Farrell in  GS  and  the  Tribunal  in  GS's  own
    conclusion on Article 15(c).  Whilst  we  can  understand  that  as  an
    academic unversed in the workings  of  the  Tribunal  country  guidance
    system, Dr Seddon might wish to  advance  his  own  views  on  previous
    Tribunal country guidance, we find it hard to understand how he thought
    he was adhering to the formal instructions by devoting  such  space  to
    them.  In any event, as Mr  Vokes  confirmed,  the  appellant  has  not
    raised any challenge to the  historic  validity  of  GS  or  any  other
    Tribunal country guidance case on Afghanistan and,  as  has  been  made
    clear on a number of occasions, in order for such  a  challenge  to  be
    made a party is expected to present all relevant evidence pointing  for
    and against the proposed revision: see e.g. para 13(ii) TK (Tamils,  LP
    updated) Sri Lanka (Rev) CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00049,  AM  and  AM  (armed
    conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 03444, at para  123.
    It cannot by any measure be said that Dr Seddon's report identified all
    relevant evidence; it was essentially a statement of his opinion (based
    on pre- and post-GS evidence supportive  of  his  own  conclusions)  in
    opposition to the evidence and opinion given by  Professor  Farrell  at
    the time of the GS hearing. On this point of  criticism,  we  do  agree
    with Mr Blundell.

171.  Dr Seddon criticises Professor Farrell  for  assessing  the  level  of
    civilian casualties experienced in  Afghanistan  as  being  "relatively
    low" in comparison with 'conflicts of a similar size elsewhere' without
    apparently considering conflicts other than Somalia, Rwanda,  Cambodia,
    etc "although there are many others that could have  been  considered".
    Yet his report fails to mention any such  others  or  demonstrate  that
    figures for  any  other  country  cast  doubt  on  Professor  Farrell's
    comparisons (at para 82 of GS Professor Farrell had given  as  examples
    three internal conflicts where the battle death threshold was less than
    1,000 but where there were  massive  civilian  losses;  these  were:  2
    million dead in Cambodia between 1975 and 1978, 350,000 dead in Somalia
    between 1990 and 1991, and 800,000 dead in Rwanda in 1994). Mr Vokes in
    his written submissions appears to submit to  the  contrary,  asserting
    that Dr Seddon in his report  demonstrated  that  the  comparison  with
    (present-day) Somalia showed that levels  of  violence  in  Afghanistan
    were more severe than in that country. We cannot see that  this  report
    states that, but as it is a potentially significant proposition in  its
    own right, we examine it separately below.

172.  We observe as well that Dr Seddon's level  of  expertise  on  violence
    and conflict in Afghanistan is not as research-based as we  would  have
    hoped.  He is principally an expert on parts of the  world  other  than
    south-east Asia and, whilst noting that he is planning to write a  book
    on Afghanistan, we find it slightly troubling that he should state that
    he had written on Afghanistan "most recently ... on the deep history of
    Afghanistan" when in fact the publication concerned -  the  Journal  of
    Conflict Studies - appears to be of 2003  vintage  (Vol  35,  issue  2,
    2003).  A related observation we have about Dr Seddon's report is that,
    if in fact his report draws on and is informed by his  own  network  of
    contacts, he fails to demonstrate this.

173.  In short, Dr Seddon's report for this appeal  does  little  more  than
    chronicle his  own  understanding  of  the  trends  set  out  in  other
    background evidence, accompanied by his own gloss on their significance
    for Article 15(c)  purposes,  and,  whilst  it  engages  with  evidence
    pointing in the other direction,  it  only  does  so  historically,  by
    reference to Professor Farrell's evidence in GS.  It  does  not  engage
    with more recent evidence to the contrary.

Dr Giustozzi
174.  Dr Giustozzi has provided reports and/or given evidence  in  a  number
    of Tribunal country  guidance  cases  including  GS,  HK  and  AA.   In
    relation to the report he wrote for GS, the Tribunal noted at  para  76
    that he has been accepted by the Tribunal as an expert  on  Afghanistan
    in a number of previous cases.  We note from his CV for his  report  in
    this case that he has continued to publish materials on the conflict in
    Afghanistan and to visit Afghanistan regularly, having last been  there
    in September-October 2011 in Kabul.

175.  At para 76 of GS the Tribunal noted that his report  for  that  appeal
    was of limited value "because it was prepared on  the  assumption  that
    the appellant's fear of Gul  Karim  [a  warlord]  and  land  grabs  was
    correct".  It is somewhat  unfortunate  to  find  that  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report prepared for this appeal makes a similar misplaced assumption in
    respect of the appellant's claimed fear of a different warlord.  Having
    noted that paras 4-18 of his report (and several other passages) appear
    to address aspects of the appellant's account that had previously  been
    rejected, we asked to see the letter  written  by  Blakemores  formally
    instructing him.  It is clear from this letter that its  author  sought
    Dr Giustozzi's opinion not only on  the  country  guidance  issues  the
    Tribunal had identified (to consider the current position  with  regard
    to Article 15(c) and whether Afghanistan had changed since GS) but also
    the appellant's original account. That is an unfortunate blemish on the
    firm's otherwise excellent preparation for and handling of this  appeal
    and in our view it largely excuses Dr Giustozzi's faithful  attempt  to
    respond.  That said, we concur with Mr Blundell that the fact  that  Dr
    Giustozzi devoted space to the appellant's  account  does  not  suggest
    that he had carried out in full the reading of all the  case  documents
    sent to him which he said he had done (see para 2 of his report), since
    those documents included  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and  the
    subsequent Upper Tribunal decision stating that the findings of fact of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge were to stand.

176   As regards the  passages  in  his  report  that  address  the  general
    situation in Afghanistan in terms of the level of violence and risk  on
    return, we attach significant weight to them although  it  remains,  of
    course, for us to consider their purport in the context of the evidence
    as a whole (which includes far more detailed and up  to  date  sets  of
    figures than those to which he refers).  It would have assisted if  his
    report could have explained whether and to what extent the  opinion  he
    expresses in it about the situation in Kabul is different from that  he
    gave in the Norwegian LANDINFO report of September 2011. It would  also
    have assisted if his treatment of likely accommodation problems  facing
    returnees to Kabul had not assumed that for a single man  such  as  the
    appellant there would not be the option of sharing a flat or  rooms  or
    quarters.  Leaving aside the fact that it has been found the  appellant
    has an uncle living in Kabul who has a  livelihood  there,  we  do  not
    understand sharing of accommodation to  be  an  option  unavailable  to
    single  men  in  Kabul  or  that  to  expect  a  single  man  to  share
    accommodation would of itself give rise to undue hardship.

The ARC Evidence
177.  Mr Blundell did not make any criticism of the ARC Report or  the  oral
    evidence of one of its  co-authors,  Ms  Stephanie  Huber.   Indeed  he
    commended Ms Huber's evidence  for  its  competence  and  clarity.   We
    concur.  This being the first occasion on  which,  so  far  as  we  are
    aware,  the   Tribunal   has   heard   oral   evidence   from   a   COI
    analyst/consultant, it may assist if we make several brief comments.

178.  First of all, we do see a useful role for  reports  such  as  the  ARC
    Report.  Whilst it  is  very  largely  a  collation  of  extracts  from
    background sources (as noted earlier, their index of these is  included
    at Appendix C), it  affords  a  helpful  way  of  profiling  particular
    country guidance issues.  It is technically possible for  the  Tribunal
    to comb through the background evidence before it to extract and put in
    the one place very much the same materials, but that is  time-consuming
    and is far better done by  professional  COI  analysts.   Such  utility
    depends crucially, on at  least  two  factors.  One  is  that  the  COI
    analysts concerned have relevant skills  and  experience  to  undertake
    this work (we are entirely satisfied  that  both  authors  fulfil  this
    criterion). The second factor is that those commissioning such a report
    must ask pertinent questions.   In  the  context  of  country  guidance
    cases, that makes it imperative that  the  legal  representatives  make
    sure their questions to  COI  analysts  are  clearly  confined  to  the
    identified country guidance issue(s).  In our judgment,  the  Blakemore
    Solicitors' questions mostly did just that.

179.  Second, Ms Huber was quick to disclaim any credentials  as  a  country
    expert.  We think she was entirely right to do so, but we would observe
    that it is not uncommon in our experience for purported country experts
    to do  little  more  than  combine  citation  of  COI  with  their  own
    evaluation of it.  Faced with experts of that kind who do  not  possess
    the added-value of field experience or a network  of  contacts  on  the
    ground or academic depth of knowledge,  we  would  far  rather  have  a
    professional assemblage of COI sources seeking to address issues  in  a
    salient way unencumbered by an opinion whose added value  is  sometimes
    elusive.  Such reports say what they are on the label.

180.   Third,  Ms  Huber  said  that  ARC's  methodology  did   not   differ
    significantly from that used by the Home Office COIS Reports,  but  the
    latter do not always, as the identified issues in this case illustrate,
    address relevant issues in a  concerted  or  organised  way,  The  COIS
    Report for October 2011, for  example,  covers  some  of  the  relevant
    matters, e.g. at 8 "Security Situation", but  not  systematically.   In
    this appeal ARC was able, on the basis of a research request, to  focus
    in a much more bespoke way on key aspects of the evidence  relating  to
    the central issue of indiscriminate violence both in Afghanistan  as  a
    whole and in specific provinces as  well  as  in  relation  to  certain
    matters relevant to issues of internal relocation. It may be  that  the
    same bespoke COI analysis can be furnished by the COIS Research Inquiry
    Service, but we understand there are sometimes resource  considerations
    preventing that.

181.  Fourth, the ARC Report  demonstrates  the  value  of  presentation  of
    salient COI evidence.  Partly  in  response  to  criticisms  for  being
    (unduly)  selective  and  unrepresentative,  COIS   reports   currently
    sometimes resemble a collage of conflicting sources.  It is not  always
    easy to make sense of their overall purport.  The ARC Report,  although
    seeking to avoid being  (unduly)  selective,  does  endeavour  to  draw
    together what  sources  disclose  about  trends  and  patterns  in  the
    background evidence.  So long as it does that  by  close  adherence  to
    established standards, both legal standards as set out, for example  in
    Article 4 of the Qualification Directive and Article 8  of  (2005/85/EC
    (the Procedures Directive) (see TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2009]  UKAIT  00049  and  soft  law  standards,  e.g.  the  Common  EU
    Guidelines on processing Country of  Origin  Information  (COI),  April
    2008, we see no drawback to such an enterprise. (Our use above  of  the
    adverb "unduly" is a considered one; in our view it  is  impossible  in
    the "Age of Information" for any COI  analysis,  certainly  on  generic
    country guidance issues, to cover every item of material available  via
    the internet etc.)

182.  Fifth we do, however, make three criticisms: (i) If ARC is  to  adhere
    to its own claim, made by Ms Huber before us, that  it  does  not  give
    opinions and leaves that to the sources, then  it  must  take  care  to
    avoid giving its own gloss, e.g.  describing  conditions  for  IDPs  in
    Kabul as "dire", even if that gloss is consonant with evaluations given
    in the sources; (ii) if there is value to this type of COI analysis, it
    must show that it has marshalled the evidence for, as well as  against,
    a particular view.  We notice that in one or  two  places  the  report,
    although clearly seeking when relevant  to  present  evidence  pointing
    either for or against a particular view, was very  sparing  in  dealing
    with one or the other side - for example, at B on page  6,  the  report
    states:

         "The information included in this section demonstrates that despite
         the fact that Kabul is considered safer than  other  provinces,  it
         has become increasingly insecure as demonstrated by  the  incidence
         and strength of insurgent  attacks  carried  out  in  the  capital,
         including in fortified areas" [emphasis added].


      What in our view the researcher should have  added  here  was  chapter
    and verse as to the sources which considered Kabul  to  be  safer  than
    other provinces and  greater  precision  as  to  which  provinces  (all
    provinces?).

183.  More importantly, (iii) reports of this kind must take care to  ensure
    relevancy. We consider that the  report's  attempts  to  give  detailed
    illustrations did not  in  at  least  one  context  exhibit  sufficient
    relevance.  When addressing "C: Security situation in Ghazni"  on  page
    8, the report prefaces a list of incidents with the words:

         "The following incidents resulting in civilian  deaths  and  injury
         detailed in this section are not exhaustive, but rather  indicative
         of the current security situation in Ghazni province".


      Yet of the fifteen incidents then listed, eight  refer  to  deaths  of
    police officers or insurgents [i.e. combatants] without  any  reference
    to civilian deaths or injuries.  Another incident refers to the killing
    on 18 June 2011 of  four  Afghan  private  security  guards  protecting
    supply trucks for NATO-led troops - hardly (if at all) typical civilian
    casualties.

184.  Whilst we regard the above blemishes as isolated  ones,  we  hope  any
    future reports by COI analysts will seek to avoid them.  Where,  as  is
    likely to be the case with ARC, the COI consultancy body is  ordinarily
    going to be instructed by appellant's representatives seeking  help  in
    assisting their clients in appeals, it will be especially important for
    the Tribunal to be reassured that reports of this kind do not  seek  to
    perform any advocacy role, but only seek to elicit relevant COI. In the
    past, predecessors of the COIS reports have been criticised for seeking
    to perform an advocacy role for the Home Office. We must apply the same
    standards to both sides.

185.  To summarise, we consider that in country guidance cases there may  be
    a useful role for reports by COI analysts (such  as  ARC),  subject  to
    such reports adhering to  certain  basic  standards.  Such  a  role  is
    distinct from that of a country expert.

186.  Keeping in mind the observations we made at paras  37-44  and  153-164
    above  in  particular,  we  turn  then  to   the   central   topic   of
    indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan and whether  the  Article  15(c)
    threshold is reached in respect of returnees who are ordinary civilians
    with no relevant risk characteristics.

Afghanistan as a whole

187.  We have no doubt that in  general  terms  the  level  of  violence  in
    Afghanistan is rising.  Despite some indications of a downturn in  some
    relevant indices in certain quarters of 2011  and  despite  significant
    differences between the UNAMA and ANSO figures for civilian casualties,
    all major studies agree the underlying trend is worsening or  at  least
    not improving significantly.  We  remind  ourselves  that  we  recorded
    earlier the number of civilian deaths  according  to  UNAMA  as  having
    risen from 2,412 in 2009, 2,790 in 2010  to  3,021  in  2011.  Civilian
    injuries rose from 3,556 in 2009, 4,368 in 2010 to 4,507 in 2011. Other
    indicators, such as "security incidents", show a broadly similar rise.

188.   The respondent's position, as articulated before us  by  Mr  Blundell
    and set down in its current OGN and other sources, is that nevertheless
    the level of violence for Afghanistan as a whole  does  not  cross  the
    Article 15(c)  threshold.   Bearing  in  mind,  however,  that  (i)  in
    December 2010 UNHCR, an international organisation with an extensive on
    the ground presence in Afghanistan, was of  the  view  that  even  then
    there were several provinces  where  the  level  of  indiscriminate  or
    generalised violence had already reached the Article  15(c)  threshold;
    (ii)  the position taken  by  courts  in  some  European  countries  is
    similar to that of UNHCR; and (iii) the level of violence (according to
    UNAMA figures among others) has risen since then, it is right  that  we
    consider this question with great care.

189.  We shall begin by clarifying the approach  to  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines and to decisions by courts in Europe.

UNHCR

190.  We attach considerable weight  to  the  UNHCR  Guidelines,  not  least
    because in Afghanistan UNHCR has staff on the ground at least  in  some
    parts of the country and because the Guidelines are  based  on  a  very
    considerable body of evidence subjected to a rigorous  methodology.  We
    also  take  note  that  these  Guidelines   make   sufficiently   clear
    (notwithstanding the use of the word "may": see above para 87  and  the
    passage "Afghan asylum seekers formerly residing in these areas may  be
    in need of international  protection....")  that  UNHCR  considers  the
    level of generalised violence in Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar, and parts of
    Ghazni and Khost provinces to cross the Article 15(c) threshold: see p3
    and n.240. At paras 155-6 of AMM, in  response  to  a  submission  from
    Counsel acting for UNHCR as an intervener  that  the  Tribunal  "should
    accept the assessment" set out in the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  for
    Assessing the International Protection  Needs  of  Asylum-Seekers  from
    Somalia (May 2010), with update to June 2011 Guidelines (para 154), the
    Tribunal stated:


            "155. Both the evidence cited in the Guidelines and  the  legal
         interpretation of that evidence, particularly  as  regards  Article
         15(c), are highly significant to our tasks. At the end of the  day,
         however, it is our job, on  the  basis  of  all  the  evidence  and
         submissions, to reach a view as to whether the  evidence,  properly
         interpreted, reaches the particular threshold, whether as regards a
         well-founded fear  of  persecution  or  a  fear  of  indiscriminate
         violence in the context of Article 15(c). That is  what  Parliament
         requires us to do, in the context of re-making decisions on appeals
         under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The  fact
         that UNHCR lawyers, on the basis of the evidence before them,  have
         reached a particular conclusion, whilst extremely  helpful,  cannot
         be determinative.


             156. The exercise undertaken by  the  UNHCR  lawyers  is  also
         significantly different from the proceedings which  have  generated
         this determination. The parties have not only  respectively  sought
         to  place  before  us  evidence  which   (compatibly   with   their
         professional duties) points towards different legal outcomes;  they
         have also probed and tested each other's evidence, not  least  that
         of the experts who gave oral evidence. It is no  criticism  of  the
         UNHCR Guidelines to  observe  that  the  circumstances  surrounding
         their compilation were very different. This is not to  trumpet  the
         merits of an adversarial system of adjudication; one can detect the
         same dialectic at work in the judgment in Sufi & Elmi. It is merely
         to be aware of the points of difference between an assessment by  a
         non-judicial  organisation  tasked   with   pursuing   humanitarian
         objectives and the  responsibilities  of  fact-finding  courts  and
         tribunals..."

191.  Although we have to consider  a  distinct  set  of  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines relating to a different country, it seems  to  us  that  the
    above observations have much the same force.

192.  A further feature of the UNHCR evidence in this case  is  that  it  is
    not confined to that set out in its  Eligibility  Guidelines  but  also
    includes numerous documents dealing with its involvement  in  voluntary
    returns and repatriation programme. As the  Tribunal  has  observed  in
    other country guidance decisions dealing with countries in which  UNHCR
    participates in voluntary return and repatriation programmes, it is not
    always easy to see how such participation is consistent with a  set  of
    Guidelines that identify certain parts  of  the  country  concerned  as
    unsafe - unless such programmes avoid return to those parts. We are not
    aware that UNHCR's programmes in Afghanistan avoid any particular parts
    of the country. Whilst we must do  our  best  to  reconcile  these  two
    different bodies of evidence, we shall not treat the apparent  conflict
    in UNHCR's stance as in itself an adverse factor in this  case,  as  we
    did not have proper submissions on it.

193.  In addition to the above, the Eligibility Guidelines are now  over  17
    months old and we have to decide this case on the basis of the evidence
    before us, including that relating to recent incidents and events.

Decisions by other courts in Europe

194.  It is a drawback that we do not have certified  translations  or  full
    transcripts of all the decisions cited to us, but it has  been  helpful
    nevertheless to have translations of  some  and  summaries  of  others.
    Whilst it seems to us highly desirable that judges in Europe (who  have
    to apply common legal standards set out in EU  law  and  have  to  have
    regard to ECHR jurisprudence) should look to each other's decisions  as
    a source of assistance in terms of the application of the relevant  law
    to  facts  relating  to  general  conditions  in  a  country  such   as
    Afghanistan, the extent of help such decisions can  provide  on  issues
    related to  Article 15(c) and its application must be a function, inter
    alia,  of the extent to which they apply the legal  guidance  given  in
    Elgafaji and the extent to which they apply that guidance on the  basis
    of comprehensive COI and support their findings by clear reasons. We do
    not attempt in this decision to try and identify more precisely what is
    meant by "comprehensive COI" except to note that such evidence  appears
    to be one of the elements of what Laws LJ in S and Others  [2002]  EWCA
    Civ 539 - when delineating what was necessary in order for findings  of
    fact on general country conditions  to  serve  as  country  guidance  -
    described  as  the  need  for   the   decision   to   be   "effectively
    comprehensive" (para 29). In relation to the  decisions  of  the  Swiss
    Federal Administrative Court, however, some of which (S.A. principally)
    do refer to a significant number of background sources, including UNAMA
    and ANSO reports, we would observe that in addition to Switzerland  not
    being an EU Member State, its courts plainly do  not  apply  the  legal
    criteria set out in the Qualification Directive. The S.A. case was also
    addressing the situation 11 months ago.

 195. Other things being equal, our Tribunal  will  be  disposed  to  attach
    significant weight to judgments of the ECtHR, not  simply  because  (at
    least in relation to grounds of appeal in asylum-related cases based on
    Articles 3 and sometimes other ECHR articles) we are obliged by s.2  of
    the Human Rights Act to take them into account; but  also  because  the
    ECtHR has increasingly had  to  address  applications  raising  generic
    issues about conditions in countries affected by generalised  violence.
    In this regard we attach significance to the fact that  such  judgments
    are reached by a senior body of European judges in  the  context  of  a
    jurisprudence that has  set  out  clear  standards  for  evaluation  of
    relevant COI: see e.g. NA v UK paras 118-122. At the same time:

    (i)     We are  mindful  that  the  limited  supervisory  role  of  the
        Strasbourg Court means that fact-finding -  whether  about  general
        country conditions or any other subject -  is at the outer  margins
        of that role. Even though its clear jurisprudence establishes  that
        in asylum-related cases  it  must  apply  an  ex  nunc  or  current
        assessment of the facts, and even though  in  the  past  few  years
        (especially following its decision in Salah  Sheekh  v  Netherlands
        App.no.1948/04  and  NA v UK), it has been prepared in this context
        to   undertake  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  general   country
        conditions, its readiness to do so appears to depend very  much  on
        whether the submissions of the  respective  parties  and/or  third-
        party interveners adduce what they  consider  to  be  comprehensive
        COI; and also on whether the Court identifies a  case  as  a  "lead
        case". In addition, whether the ECtHR applies its own jurisprudence
        setting out criteria for evaluating COI is, as always,  a  question
        of fact. A  further  complication  is  that  (unlike  the  practice
        followed in our country guidance cases for a number of  years  now)
        the ECtHR does not always enumerate in full the background  country
        materials on which it has relied.

    (ii)    Further, even  if  the  Strasbourg  Court  has  had  regard  to
        comprehensive COI, that does not necessarily mean  we  will  follow
        its findings. As the Tribunal has observed in AMM at para 115:


              "...whilst the Strasbourg Court's guidance as to  the  general
             approach to evidence  is  part  of  its  jurisprudence,  to  be
             followed by United Kingdom courts and tribunals to  the  extent
             demanded by the House of Lords and Supreme  Court  authorities,
             the weighing of the evidence and  the  conclusions  as  to  the
             relative weight to be placed  on  the  items  of  evidence  are
             ultimately matters for the tribunal. Whilst the factual finding
             the Strasbourg Court has made as a result of applying  its  own
             guidance is something to which the domestic tribunal must  have
             regard, the tribunal is not bound to reach the same finding."

    Accordingly, one relevant factor the  Tribunal will take  into  account
    when deciding what weight to attach to judgments of the ECtHR that  set
    out findings on general country conditions, will be the extent to which
    the  Court  has  before  it  comprehensive  COI  (Country   of   Origin
    Information).   But even when there is a relevant  Strasbourg  decision
    that makes findings based on comprehensive COI,  the  Tribunal  is  not
    bound to reach the same findings.

196.  What we have just said has implications for the weight we  can  attach
    to the Court's judgments in Husseini and JH. In neither case  does  the
    Court appear to have had before it a  comprehensive  body  of  COI  (we
    reiterate the point made immediately above that the ECtHR decisions  do
    not enumerate all the background sources to which it had regard; we can
    only go by what is shown on the face of the record). Further,  we  must
    not overlook that in Husseini and JH the ECtHR was not considering risk
    of generalised violence province by province. Nor must we  forget  that
    the CJEU in Elgafaji and our own Tribunal in AMM, have emphasised  that
    in any event Article 15(c) has an "additional scope" to Articles 2  and
    3 of the ECHR.

197.  Leaving to one side  for  the  moment  the  issue  of  the  levels  of
    indiscriminate violence at the provincial level, we are  not  persuaded
    that the level of violence in Afghanistan taking the country as a whole
    is at, or is even close to, that which would cross  the  Article  15(c)
    threshold.  There are a number of reasons.

198.  First, although figures for civilian deaths and casualties in the  low
    thousands must always be an acute concern, they have to  be  considered
    in the context of the size of the overall population  which  is  widely
    accepted as now being in excess of  30  million.   On  the  2011  UNAMA
    figures for civilian deaths of 3,021 and injuries of 4,507 (which added
    together totals 7,528)  there  are  less  than  0.1  per  cent  of  the
    population who are direct victims of violence.  On 2011 figures as  set
    out in the CSIS report of February 2012, the total number of casualties
    (adding together hostages (755), wounded (3,625) and dead (2,494)  came
    to 6,874. That  amounts  again  to  less  than  0.1  per  cent  of  the
    population. (We also note that according to Farrell and Schmitt's March
    2012 study, "in contrast" to the  two  previous  wars  in  Afghanistan,
    "civilian fatalities since 2006 have been relatively modest.").

 199. Secondly, the  nature  and  extent  of  violence  adversely  affecting
    civilians is less intense than it has been in certain  other  countries
    in which, for some periods at least, indiscriminate violence has or may
    have reached a  high  level.    Dr  Seddon  in  his  report  criticised
    Professor Farrell in GS for only drawing comparison  with  Somalia  and
    certain other countries. Whilst we would  agree  that  in  the  current
    state of international war studies there is no comprehensive data  that
    might  enable  precise  comparisons  and  that  we  must  approach  any
    comparison with other countries  (in  respect  of  which  the  detailed
    evidence is  not  before  us  in  this  case)  with  caution  (see  the
    observation to similar effect made in para 258 of the Tribunal decision
    in HM), we note that Dr Seddon did not volunteer  any  better  or  more
    relevant comparators.   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal's  own  experience,
    whilst limited to only a number of  the  current  30  odd  major  armed
    conflicts in the world, does aid us in gaining a  greater  perspective.
    In this regard it is particularly pertinent to look at situations where
    the Tribunal has previously found a country or part  of  a  country  to
    have crossed the Article 15(c) threshold.  That was done in AM  and  AM
    ((armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008]  UKAIT  03444  and
    again in AMM in relation to Mogadishu  where,  save  for  very  limited
    categories, return to that city was found to pose a  real  risk  of  an
    Article 15(c) violation. In both AM and AM (as noted by  the  ECtHR  in
    Sufi and Elmi at para 246) and in AMM, the Tribunal attached particular
    weight  to  the  figures  for  civilian  casualties  coupled  with  the
    egregious  conduct  of  the  combatants  which  featured  frequent  and
    systematic  acts  of  indiscriminate  violence  harming  civilians  and
    targeted at civilian areas: see e.g. AMM, paras 339, 359.

200.  In HM, although finding that neither Iraq as a whole nor any  specific
    region of it was at that time  at  the  Article  15(c)  threshold,  the
    Tribunal did indicate: (i) that it did not rule out that the levels  of
    violence in Iraq at the height of  the  conflict  in  2006/7  may  have
    crossed the Article 15(c) threshold  (para  255);  and  (ii)  that  the
    situation in Mosul/Ninewah province at the time (2010) may have been at
    or nearing the Article 15(c) threshold (para 263). (We bear in mind, of
    course, that in HM (Iraq) [2010] EWCA Civ 1322 HM was found to be wrong
    in law and so it lacks the status of country guidance,  but,  as  noted
    earlier, the Court of Appeal made  no  adverse  comment  on  the  above
    findings).

201.  Further perspective on the Tribunal's  past  assessments  on  Iraq  is
    afforded by the evidence now to hand from the Center for Strategic  and
    International  Studies  (CSIS)  in   its   February   2012   study   on
    "Afghanistan: the Failed Metrics of Ten years  of  War".   Although  Mr
    Vokes quite rightly urged that we should read this report as reflecting
    its authors' own agenda, he did not seek to cast doubt on  its  use  of
    existing figures drawn from various established sources.

202.  The comparison made in this study with Iraq, whilst  we  approach  any
    comparison with caution, strikes  us  as  of  help  in  providing  some
    perspective since both this country  and  Afghanistan  have  a  roughly
    similar population and both have been embroiled in conflict  in  which,
    in addition to armed encounters between different internal actors,  has
    featured armed encounters between various domestic insurgents (aided by
    foreign fighters) and international forces led by US  military  forces.
    Both conflicts are also still ongoing. The principal  findings  of  the
    CSIS study, based on figures up to the end of 2010/2011, are: (i)  that
    the figures for victims of the  Iraq  War  in  its  two  peak  years  -
    2006/2007 - are nearly ten times as high as in  Afghanistan  currently;
    (ii) that in  more  recent  years,  the  total  number  of  attacks  in
    Afghanistan, whilst higher in 2011 than in Iraq, is  still  lower  than
    comparable levels in Iraq in 2009 and 2010;  and (iii) that the type of
    violence in Iraq had produced a much higher ratio of wounded/killed (in
    Iraq in 2009-2010 the rate was two and a half times that of Afghanistan
    in 2009-2011).  CSIS figure 5 shows  that  in  Iraq  in  2009-2011  the
    figures  of  killed/wounded  were  3,654/13,168  (2009),   3,363/11,689
    (2010), 2,310/6,848 (2011), as compared to figures for  Afghanistan  of
    2,779/4,192 (2009), 3,205/4,877 (2010) and 2,494/3,625 (2011).

203.  Mr Vokes in his and Ms  Rutherford's  written  submissions  sought  to
    argue that on the basis of Dr  Seddon's  report  it  was  evident  that
    levels of violence in Afghanistan  were  now  worse  than  in  Somalia.
    Whilst we cannot see that Dr Seddon's report says as much, it is  right
    that we address this contention by  reference  to  the  recent  country
    guidance case of AMM. Whilst finding  it  difficult  to  gauge  whether
    civilian deaths were increasing or decreasing from previous years,  the
    Tribunal in AMM noted the very high figures for wounded - see e.g.  the
    mention in para 271 of there being,  in  the  nine  months  January  to
    September 2010, 5,485 weapons-related injuries reported just  by  three
    Mogadishu hospitals. The population of Somalia, of course,  is  roughly
    one third that of Afghanistan. Further, as already noted, the  Tribunal
    clearly saw the level of intensity being aggravated by  the  systematic
    targeting of civilians including by mortar shelling.

204.  A third reason relates to the fact that a significant number  of  acts
    of violence carried out against civilians in  Afghanistan  as  a  whole
    appear to have arisen  in the  context  of  attacks  targeting  certain
    types of civilians (essentially persons in  some  kind  of  influential
    position  perceived  by  the  insurgents  as  supporting   the   Afghan
    government or international forces (see  above  paras   50,  51,  75)),
    without such attacks having routinely caused widespread harm  to  other
    civilians unconnected with such persons.

 205. As we go on to explain, our above finding does not mean  that  Article
    15(c) has no application to civilians in targeted categories.  Were  it
    not for the fact that such persons would if facing a threat of  removal
    be very likely to be able to establish both refugee and  Article  15(b)
    eligibility, their  being  in  a  targeted  category  would  be  highly
    relevant to applying Article 15(c)'s "sliding side". But it does  serve
    to indicate that the figures for  acts  of  violence  against  ordinary
    civilians, grim reading though they make, remain at a relatively modest
    level. In this context it seems to us that the words  of  Dr  Giustozzi
    (who is after all one of the expert witnesses relied on by Mr Vokes  in
    this appeal) stating that the armed conflict in Afghanistan so far  has
    "not particularly bitterly targeted civilians" (see above para 59), are
    particularly apt.

206.  A further factor, although we note straightaway that we did  not  have
    full and precise evidence on the matter, is that the major  reports  do
    not appear to regard the violations of international  humanitarian  law
    presently occurring in Afghanistan as being  anything  like  as  large-
    scale or systematic as have occurred  in  the  past  in  Iraq  or  more
    recently in Somalia. Whilst the prevalent use by the insurgents of IEDs
    is a major and increasing cause of civilian  casualties,  by  the  same
    token such devices are in general terms small-scale and their increased
    heavy use is regarded, by ISAF (with some  justification we think),  as
    symptomatic of the insurgency's degraded  capacity  to  inflict  large-
    scale violence. Even if not  all  the  figures  support  Mr  Blundell's
    contention that the deaths/wounded ratio in  Afghanistan  is  now  less
    than 1:2, the CSIS report of February 2012 shows that it  is  certainly
    less than prevails (even now) in Iraq.

207.  We bear in mind, of course, that the targeted  killing  of  particular
    types  of  civilians  is  not  only  murderous  but  also  contrary  to
    international humanitarian law and its occurrence degrades the security
    environment for ordinary civilians not in the targeted categories:  the
    effects of civilian deaths, however caused, on any  population  may  be
    extreme and long-lasting. Because  targeted  killing  is  one  of  "the
    varieties of ways in which civilians come to harm" (to borrow from  the
    formulation in the Tribunal case of HM para  82),  it  does  indirectly
    impact on risk to ordinary civilians. That is why it can never be right
    to attempt some  simple  subtraction  of  targeted  violence  from  the
    overall sum of indiscriminate violence. Nevertheless, it cannot be said
    that such targeting killings,  without  more,  directly  establish  the
    "more general risk of harm" or that such indiscriminate violence within
    the meaning of Article 15(c) is the  violence  that  "..  extend[s]  to
    people irrespective of their personal  circumstances"  contemplated  by
    Elgafaji at paras 33, 34.

"Enhanced risk  categories"

208.  We have referred to submissions made by Mr  Vokes  and  Ms  Rutherford
    seeking to persuade us by reference to GS, paras 62 and 74 that even if
    we were to find that ordinary civilians are not at Article  15(c)  risk
    anywhere in Afghanistan,  we  should  nevertheless  identify  "enhanced
    risk" categories of persons who might  be  at  Article  15(c)  risk  by
    virtue of being less able than ordinary civilians to avoid the on-going
    violence.  As  already  noted,  we  prefer  to  refer   to   these   as
    "intermediate  categories"  as  they  are  clearly  meant  to  identify
    categories falling short of  outright  risk  categories  ((i)-(xi))  as
    identified by UNHCR in its  17  December  2010  Eligibility  Guidelines
    cited at para 86 above.  Mr Vokes and Ms Rutherford gave  the  examples
    (see above para 117) of fruit sellers  outside  public  buildings,  day
    labourers on state construction projects who need  as  a  necessity  of
    life to be employed in  this  fashion  or  small  farmers  or  landless
    labourers who out  of  economic  necessity  have  to  keep  farming  in
    situations of armed warfare breaking out on their land or the land that
    they work. (They also added that "the  latter  category  would  include
    businessmen, more senior state officials, war lords, large landowners",
    but we must confess to finding it difficult to see  how  such  examples
    come within the "necessity"-based  criterion  seemingly  relied  on  in
    relation to all the other examples.)

209. We agree with Mr Vokes  and  Ms  Rutherford  that  the  "sliding-scale"
    element of Article 15(c) as set out by the Court of Justice in Elgafaji
    in para 39 would appear to make it possible for anyone with a  relevant
    individual characteristics to be able to show a real risk under Article
    15(c) even if the relevant level of violence was not at a  high  enough
    level for such a person to qualify merely as a civilian. The Court does
    not  confine  its  description  to  civilians   whose   relevant   risk
    characteristics are such as to make them at risk of serious harm  under
    15(a) or (b) (or indeed Article 1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  or
    Article 3 of the ECHR). In principle, therefore,  there  is  scope  for
    Article 15(c)'s "sliding-scale" to protect  not  only  recognised  risk
    categories such as those set out (non-exhaustively)  by  UNHCR  in  its
    2010 Eligibility Guidelines (i)-(xi), but also intermediate  categories
    who do not come within the former's scope.  That  would  appear  to  be
    consistent with the view taken by  the  German  Federal  Administrative
    Court in the case of BVerG 10 C 4.09, 27 April 2010 (a translated  copy
    of this was made available to us, but we note that the same version has
    now been reported in the International Journal of Refugee Law, Vol  23,
    No 1, March 2011 as ZG v The Federal Republic of Germany, at  pp.  113-
    131). At para 33 the Court in ZG makes this comment about the  sliding-
    scale element:

             "If there are no personal circumstances  increasing  risk,  an
         especially high level of indiscriminate violence is  necessary;  if
         personal circumstances increasing risk are present, a  lower  level
         of  indiscriminate  violence  will  suffice.  These  factors   that
         increase risk primarily include those personal  circumstances  that
         make the applicant appear more severely affected by  general,  non-
         selective violence, for example because he is forced by  reason  of
         his profession - e.g. as a physician or journalist - to spend  time
         near the source of danger..."

         It also seems to us that this is consistent with the  position  set
    out in the UKBA OGN 3.6.12 (see above para 90). But we found Mr  Vokes'
    and Ms Rutherford's proposed examples somewhat too hypothetical (and in
    part somewhat too diverse: see above para 208) and we think  it  unwise
    to attempt identification of actual categories without fuller  analysis
    of actual existent examples in relation to specific locations. Further,
    and this was the point mainly relied on by Mr Blundell, in the  context
    of Afghanistan, there would ordinarily be (save for certain  categories
    of women) a viable internal relocation alternative for a  returnee  who
    appeared to fall into any such intermediate  category.  Manifestly  the
    appellant in this case  did  not  fall  within  any  intermediate  risk
    category.

      Relevance of other metrics

210.  In our analysis so far we  have  placed  focus  on  available  figures
    relating to civilian deaths and injuries  and  related  measurement  of
    violence.  Mr Vokes, however, has urged us  to  continue  the  approach
    taken in GS and in HM and AMM of considering other relevant  "metrics".
    Subject to insisting upon such metrics  being  treated  as  "secondary"
    rather than "primary", Mr Blundell did not  seek  to  argue  that  such
    metrics were not important indicators in  our  holistic  Article  15(c)
    assessment.  Indeed, the documents produced by the respondent  included
    the World Development Report for 2011 entitled "Conflict, Security  and
    development, Ch.2 Vulnerability to violence" which advocates a  similar
    approach to that of Professor Farrell.  In our  view  such  statistical
    information and data helps inform our holistic approach and reminds  us
    of our opening words that in addition to being war-stricken Afghanistan
    has many other problems.

211.  One such metric or indicator is state ineffectiveness.  Here it  seems
    to us Mr Vokes is able to mount a formidable argument for  saying  that
    Afghanistan is a failed state and that there is widespread evidence  of
    its inability to protect its population in the way that a stable  State
    can.  Nevertheless, this metric must be considered in  the  context  of
    the existing levels of physical violence and the related  threats  they
    pose to the civilian population. It is principally about the protection
    a state is able to afford its citizens in a time of war and  emergency;
    it is not principally about whether, for example, there is  a  criminal
    justice system ensuring punishment of offenders.  Further,  even  if  a
    somewhat artificial effect created by the NATO intervention, the  heavy
    involvement of  the  international  community  and  more  recently  the
    building up of a very sizeable Afghan army and security force, it is an
    inescapable fact that by way of direct or indirect support for security
    from the  international  community,  there  are  sources  of  immediate
    physical protection and assistance available to the Afghan  population.
    Even though the current timetable envisages large-scale  withdrawal  of
    international forces by 2014, it  is  clear  that  the  ANSF  is  being
    expanded and trained up to some level of capability so  that,  even  if
    the ANSF does significantly less well post-2014 at providing  security,
    there will not be a security vacuum. (This appears to be  confirmed  by
    the May 1, 2012 strategic agreement reached  between  Presidents  Obama
    and Kharzai.)

212.  There is also a very significant level  of  support  provided  to  the
    Afghan population by myriad aid and humanitarian agencies, domestic and
    international.  It is of course, painfully  clear  that  despite  their
    efforts those agencies fail to reach and help all Afghans in  need  and
    fail to remedy the poor socio-economic conditions that face  the  great
    majority of the population.  Yet it remains firstly  that  by  dint  of
    high levels of international support in money and in kind, the  economy
    is improving and the country's GDP has nearly trebled in the past  nine
    years; and secondly that despite such adverse conditions  there  is  no
    evidence of significant levels of destitution.  There  is  no  reliable
    evidence before  us  that  such  support  is  likely  to  significantly
    diminish despite the anticipated  change  in  the  way  the  government
    intends to operate in the future.

      EDPs and IDPs

213.  We take into account the population displacement in large numbers  has
    been and is still taking place in Afghanistan both in terms of  persons
    leaving (EDPs) and  persons  returning  (returning  IDPs)  and  persons
    moving internally (IDPs per se). We attach significant  weight  to  the
    views expressed by UNHCR in its December  2010  Eligibility  Guidelines
    and their subsequent reiterations of the  same.   We  are  mindful,  as
    well, of the huge challenges facing UNHCR and other bodies  in  seeking
    to address what is one of the  world's  largest  IDP  problems  and  we
    acknowledge straightaway  that  the  UNHCR  research  and  reports  are
    studiously careful to highlight ongoing shortcomings in current  return
    and reintegration programmes, e.g. the fact that 40% of  returned  IDPs
    appear not to reintegrate. Equally those reports show that many IDPs do
    achieve reintegration and that large numbers of  people  are  making  a
    voluntary choice to return, including  to  areas  of  Afghanistan  most
    affected by the on-going armed conflict. By virtue of  the  involvement
    of UNHCR and other major humanitarian agencies, we  cannot  infer  that
    such people are kept in the dark as to the general situation  in  their
    home areas/places of relocation.

214.  As we noted earlier, we have not as yet seen any clear explanation  of
    how, if UNHCR's International Protection Division  considers return  to
    certain provinces of Afghanistan to be unsafe  due  to  the  levels  of
    generalised violence, other arms of the same international organisation
    can be active in facilitating their return.  We have given  thought  to
    whether there are features that might distinguish the  UNHCR-supervised
    returnee from the ordinary returnee sent back by the UK government.  On
    the face of it, it is difficult to see any distinguishing features that
    would render the former generally safe and the latter generally unsafe,
    since both sets of persons, receive cash grant as well as reintegration
    assistance. But in the absence of full submissions on this  matter,  we
    confine ourselves here to the fact that the evidence shows  significant
    numbers of voluntary returns.

      The situation province-by-province

215.  To this point the Tribunal's view as to the  absence  of  any  Article
    15(c) level of risk in Afghanistan as a whole is not one  which  either
    party to this appeal has opposed.   Mr  Vokes  for  the  appellant  has
    carefully confined his challenge to the issue of whether the  situation
    in certain provinces (or parts of provinces) in Afghanistan now crosses
    the Article 15(c) threshold.  He asks us to find that there are now  at
    least several provinces in  the  south,  south-east  and  east  of  the
    country that engage Article 15(c) generally,  including  in  particular
    Ghazni, which is the appellant's home province.

216.  It is right that we should place particular focus on the situation  at
    the provincial level, not just because that is the  approach  taken  by
    UNHCR and some national courts and/or authorities in  several  European
    countries, but because our previous summary of the background  evidence
    has pinpointed that "much of the violence is  concentrated  in  certain
    areas of the country and, in the words of the February 2012 CSIS report
    (to take a very recent source), "most fighting is  highly  regional  in
    Pashtun areas, rather than nationwide".

217.  Nevertheless, we do  not  think  that  bearing  in  mind  their  known
    populations the current evidence indicates that there is  any  province
    where the level of violence reaches the Article 15(c) threshold.   Thus
    according to the UNAMA 2011 report, the two provinces with the  highest
    number of civilian deaths  were  in  Kandahar  and  Helmand,  with  290
    civilians killed.  The combined total of the south-eastern and  eastern
    provinces (which  Mr  Vokes  identified  as  the  main  hub  of  recent
    increases in the levels of  violence)  accounted  for  446  deaths.  In
    Ghazni  province,  even  taking  into  account  that  it  has  seen   a
    significant rise in violent incidents, the figure  of  the  numbers  of
    civilians killed are still relatively low (even assuming for the moment
    that the majority of the 446 deaths recorded  by  UNAMA  for  the  five
    south-western and eastern provinces  occurred  in  Ghazni).   A  factor
    which appears to be particularly important in  relation  to  Ghazni  is
    that the background sources consider the proportion of targeted attacks
    to be very significant. As already noted, both the 9 September LANDINFO
    report by  Dr  Giustozzi  and  the  October  2011  the  report  by  the
    Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit,  for  example,  describe  the
    Taliban as targeting anyone in Ghazni  city   identified  as  having  a
    government-related position in a variety of roles - in the  police,  as
    government staff and even as teachers.

218.  According  to  statistics  we  have  been  given,  the  population  of
    Kandahar is 1,127,000  and  that  of  Helmand  1,744,700.   We  do  not
    consider that, viewed in the context of the provincial  populations  of
    Kandahar and Helmand, 290 civilian deaths is a figure indicative of  an
    Article 15(c) threshold of violence for civilians generally. Similarly,
    bearing in mind that the population of Ghazni province is 1,149,400, we
    do not think that even if all the 446 deaths (for the south-eastern and
    eastern provinces) recorded by UNAMA were treated as having occurred in
    that province, such a figure is  indicative  of  a  level  of  violence
    giving rise to a real risk of Article 15(c) serious harm  to  civilians
    generally.

219.  As regards Kabul, even confining attention to Kabul  city,  given  the
    fact that this has a reported population of around 5 million  and  that
    Kabul province does not  feature  in  any  list  of  the  most  violent
    provinces, the  argument  for  any  engagement  of  the  Article  15(c)
    threshold, if based primarily  on  civilian  deaths,  is  even  weaker:
    according to the 2011 UNAMA report, the number of  civilian  deaths  in
    Kabul in 2011 was 71.  We remind ourselves that the population of Kabul
    is around 5 million.

220.  It is not entirely clear that the national court decisions  that  have
    found the level of indiscriminate  violence  in  certain  provinces  of
    Afghanistan to cross the Article 15(c) threshold  have  considered  the
    matter of civilian  deaths/casualties  by  reference  to  the  relevant
    population figures, but even assuming that is  so,  none  of  those  to
    which we were referred, except some of the Swiss cases, appear to  have
    looked at a comprehensive body of sources. In  relation  to  the  Swiss
    decisions, as noted already, they do not apply Article 15(c) and in any
    event their approach to internal  relocation  is  clearly  inconsistent
    with authorities that are binding on us (Januzi, AH (Sudan). A  further
    consideration is, of course, that in any event we have to consider  the
    position as of now, not as it was previously and must make our decision
    according to the weight we ascribe to the evidence before us.

221.  Mr Vokes has sought to argue that, just as we must look at  more  than
    the metric or data relating to "civilian casualties"  when  considering
    Afghanistan as a whole, we must do likewise in relation  to  assessment
    of Article 15(c) risk at a provincial level. We agree. In  this  regard
    he highlighted various features of the evidence relating to Ghazni  and
    Kabul especially those relating to socio-economic conditions.

222.  In relation to Ghazni, it is clear that in addition  to  its  security
    problems it has a growing unemployment problem,  but  it  is  far  from
    being the country's poorest province and  there  is  relatively  little
    evidence of significant levels of destitution. We do not consider  that
    the socio-economic conditions in Ghazni, even taken  cumulatively  with
    the known level of violence there and other relevant  factors,  suffice
    to establish Article 15(c) risk in this province.

223.  In respect of Kabul, Mr Vokes recognises that in terms of many  socio-
    economic indicators, its vantage point as the centre of government  and
    international  organisations  and  its  position   as   the   country's
    wealthiest province, poses problems for the argument that return  there
    will cause serious harm arising from  poor  socio-economic  conditions,
    but he rightly points out that these features continue  to  make  it  a
    magnet for many IDPs and other rural dwellers  seeking  employment  and
    better opportunities, with the result that the city  cannot  cope  with
    the rapid expansion in its population, and returnees in particular face
    a life akin to that of the city's large IDP population who  in  general
    live at a lower level than the city's poor.  He also points out that we
    have to consider matters cumulatively so that the lack of  security  is
    also treated as a relevant factor.   Once  again,  we  think  that  the
    background evidence supports much of his argument  and  we  accept,  of
    course, we have to consider matters cumulatively.

224.  At the same time, we do not think that the situation of  UK  returnees
    to Kabul (even limiting this category to persons whose home area is not
    Kabul) and IDPs in Kabul are wholly the same. As noted earlier (leaving
    to  one  side  irregular  migrant  returnees),  there  are  return  and
    reintegration packages available.  It would be unwise to exaggerate the
    importance of such packages:  they  are  chiefly  designed  to  cushion
    against immediate travails on return.  That  said,  by  assisting  with
    skills training and inquiries related to employment opportunities, they
    clearly do help position returnees advantageously as compared  to  IDPs
    marooned in squatter settlements in outlying areas. (UK  returnees  who
    previously  lived  in  Kabul  would  ordinarily  have  the   additional
    advantage of knowing the city and having family and or social  networks
    there.)

225.  In addition (as already indicated in  relation  to  Afghanistan  as  a
    whole),  whilst  the  overall  picture  is  of  aid  and   humanitarian
    organisations struggling unequally to deal with the  manifold  problems
    of the urban poor and IDP population, and whilst  we  do  not  seek  to
    minimise the  significant  incidence  of  physical  and  mental  health
    problems and food insecurity, there is little evidence  of  significant
    numbers of such persons in Kabul suffering destitution or inability  to
    survive at subsistence levels.  These are cold words for those actually
    living in these conditions, but we reiterate  our  opening  observation
    that our task in this case  is  a  limited  one  of  assessing  country
    conditions by reference to established legal criteria, Article 15(c) in
    particular.

226.  It is also significant in our judgement that the areas which Mr  Vokes
    says are most likely to be those resorted to by returnees  to  Kabul  -
    the poorest areas of the city or its environs - have been, and continue
    to be, much less affected by indiscriminate violence. As we have  seen,
    whilst there are incidents of attacks throughout the  city,  the  great
    majority  have  concentrated  on  areas   where   the   government   or
    international organisations have their offices or where their employees
    frequent.

    Internal relocation

227.  One of the issues we have to decide in revisiting the  application  of
    Article 15(c)  in  the  context  of  present-day  Afghanistan  concerns
    internal relocation. Whilst confined to the Article 15(c)  context,  it
    is inevitable that  what  we  say  below  will  have  implications  for
    consideration of this issue in the context  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the
    Refugee Convention, Article 15(b) of the  Qualification  Directive  and
    Article 3 ECHR; but it is not our task here to spell out what they are.



    When analysing  this  issue,  it  is  important  to  clarify  that  the
    respondent's position  as  expressed  in  submissions  before  us  must
    clearly be read in the context of the concession that has been made  in
    recent Home Office OGNs on Afghanistan, namely that whilst women with a
    male support network may be able to relocate internally "...it would be
    unreasonable to expect lone women and  female  heads  of  household  to
    relocate internally" (February 2012 OGN, 3.10.8) and the Tribunal  sees
    no basis for taking a different view. (Much the same position was taken
    by the ECtHR in the case of  N  v  Sweden  on  the  basis  of  a  close
    consideration of major background sources.)

228.  It is clear from the structure  of  Article  8  of  the  Qualification
    Directive that internal relocation is  a  necessary  element  which  is
    relevant not just to establishing refugee eligibility (under Articles 2
    and 9) but also to establishing  subsidiary  (humanitarian)  protection
    eligibility under all three limbs of Article 15 - 15(a), (b) and 15(c).
    So far as concerns internal relocation being a necessary  consideration
    for Article 15(c) purposes, it has been  confirmed  by   the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union (CJEU) ruling in Elgafaji that an Article
    15(c)  issue can arise not just in relation to the whole of  a  country
    but also part(s) of it: see para 43.  If  a  civilian's  home  area  or
    region is considered to be in a state  of  indiscriminate  violence  at
    above the Article 15(c)  threshold,  he  will  still  not  be  able  to
    establish eligibility for subsidiary (humanitarian)  protection  unless
    able to show either a continuing risk of serious harm (the Article 8(1)
    "safety" limb) or circumstances that would make it unreasonable for him
    to  relocate  to   another   area   or   region   (the   Article   8(1)
    "reasonableness" limb).

229.  If the proposed place of relocation is one which is not  significantly
    affected  by  armed  conflict  and/or  indiscriminate   violence,   the
    established legal principles to be applied are clear.

230.  If, however, the proposed  place  of  relocation  is  beset  by  armed
    conflict/significant indiscriminate violence, then we  must  apply  the
    principle set out in Elgafaji at para 36, namely that  effect  must  be
    given in the assessment to the fact that this  provision  has  its  own
    additional scope or "field of application" as  compared  with  that  of
    Article 15(b)/Article 3 ECHR: see AMM, para 334.

231.  The impact of the Elgafaji approach in relation to the first  limb  of
    the Article 8(1) inquiry, the "safety" limb,  is  easy  to  understand;
    ordinarily it will be to ask the  same  question  about  the  level  of
    indiscriminate violence in the area of relocation as  was  asked  about
    the level in the civilian's home area. But we  can  see  no  principled
    basis for not applying the same approach to the second limb of  Article
    8(1) also, the "reasonableness" inquiry.  Indeed, it might be said that
    considerations of general difficulties facing civilians would  apply  a
    fortiori when considering reasonableness.  Thus, for  example,  in  the
    most typical case that arises for an Afghan applicant (who is not  from
    Kabul) who has been able to establish real risk of serious harm in  his
    home area, it will  be  necessary  in  determining  reasonableness  for
    decision-makers to  factor  in  the  evidence  relating  to  levels  of
    indiscriminate violence in Kabul.

232.  It has also to be borne in mind that by analogy  with  the  principles
    enunciated by the House of Lords in Januzi and AG (Sudan), just  as  an
    applicant  seeking  to  establish  refugee  protection  eligibility  by
    pointing to factors making it unreasonable for him to relocate does not
    need to show the difficulties in the  place  of  relocation  reach  the
    level of persecution (or Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment), so an applicant
    seeking to establish subsidiary protection eligibility does not need to
    show that difficulties in the place of  relocation  cross  the  Article
    15(c) threshold of serious harm.

233.  By the same token, this analogy only takes us  so  far,  because,  the
    "reasonableness" test remains, as noted by Baroness Hale in para 22  of
    AH (Sudan), a "stringent" one (see above para 114). In para 41  of  the
    same decision Lord Brown, by reference to  several  opinions  given  in
    Januzi, described it as a "rigorous" test.

234.  Before  turning  to  apply  this  understanding  to  Kabul  and  other
    possible internal relocation  alternatives  for  Afghan  applicants  in
    protection cases, it is necessary to address a separate  strand  of  Mr
    Vokes' argument as to the law on internal relocation.  His  submissions
    were difficult to follow in places, but it  is  clear  enough  that  he
    considered that we should  find  that  whether  one  is  talking  about
    refugee protection, subsidiary protection or Article 3 ECHR protection,
    the approach to the reasonableness of internal relocation has to  be  a
    human rights approach. His fall back submission was  that  even  if  we
    took the view that  for  assessing  reasonableness  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, we were bound by Januzi and AH (Sudan) not to take a  human
    rights  approach,  the  sources  for  interpreting  serious  harm  were
    expressly identified by recital 25 of the  Qualification  Directive  as
    being human-rights based. This prompted us to raise  with  Mr  Blundell
    whether the state  of  UK  case  law  fully  reflected  the  principles
    relating  to  internal  relocation  codified  in  Article  8   of   the
    Qualification Directive.

235.  The thrust of our inquiry was this. Even considered  purely  as  cases
    concerned with internal relocation under  the  Refugee  Convention,  in
    relation to both  Januzi and AH (Sudan), there are  possible  questions
    as to what their eventual position was regarding the  extent  to  which
    human rights norms were to govern the assessment.   It  is  clear  from
    Article 9 of the Qualification  Directive,  read  in  conjunction  with
    Article 8, that assessment of whether an applicant can find  protection
    against persecution by moving to another part of the  country  must  in
    the first instance be made in  the  context  of  an  inquiry  into  the
    "safety" limb, namely whether relocation  affords   protection  against
    persecution; and in deciding whether the latter is still a real  threat
    in the place of relocation decision-makers are required by Article 9(1)
    to construe that in terms of whether there are  "severe  violations  of
    basic human rights" or "an accumulation of various measures,  including
    violation of human rights, that are sufficiently severe  as  to  affect
    an individual in a similar manner". So even confined to  this  limb  of
    the Article 8(1) inquiry, a human rights  approach  would  seem  to  be
    necessitated by Article 9.

 236. Still confining matters to refugee eligibility, what happens  when  an
    applicant  for  international  protection  cannot  succeed  under   the
    "safety" limb, so that his  success  turns  on  whether  he  can  still
    succeed under the "reasonableness" limb? As just highlighted,  we  know
    from Januzi and AH (Sudan) that in order to show  reasonableness  under
    Article 8(1), it  is  unnecessary  to  show  these  violations  are  in
    themselves at the Article 9(1) level. So the question  is  -  one  made
    more acute by the seeming rejection in Januzi and AH (Sudan) of a human
    rights approach - what type of approach should continue to  govern  the
    less demanding "reasonableness inquiry".

 237. For our part, it is difficult to see how  the  Article  8(1)  inquiry,
    having begun (as it must) on a human rights basis under  Article  8(1),
    can suddenly switch to a different type of approach having  nothing  to
    do with human rights.  It would seem to make for  more  sense  for  the
    decision-maker to keep in mind the same human rights framework  subject
    to recognising that even  violations  falling  short  of  Article  9(1)
    levels may suffice to show unreasonableness.

238.   Still  maintaining  focus  on  refugee  protection,  it  is  arguable
    therefore that Januzi and AH (Sudan) do not furnish a  complete  answer
    to the question of a human  rights  approach  to  internal  relocation,
    notwithstanding the apparent rejection in Januzi of  the  human  rights
    argument that was advanced by appellants' counsel in these cases.

239. All this has evident implications for assessing internal relocation  in
    the different context of subsidiary (humanitarian) protection since, as
    already noted, the criteria set out in Article 8  govern  both  refugee
    and subsidiary (humanitarian) protection. It may be, if Januzi  and  AH
    (Sudan) are understood to negate  a  human  rights  approach,  that  Mr
    Vokes' fall  back  argument  about  recital  25  of  the  Qualification
    Directive giving the latter additional human rights  bolstering,  would
    then need to be considered in its own right.


240.  In the event, we have decided not to seek to resolve this issue,  save
    to note that it is difficult to conclude that the Law Lords  in  either
    Januzi or AH (Sudan) intended to reject all recourse  to  human  rights
    norms.  At para 22, Baroness Hale, for example,  said  that  she  found
    "very helpful" the UNHCR intervention submission which stated that this
    assessment is to be made in the context of the conditions in the  place
    of relocation "including basic human rights..." and she went on to  say
    that "I do not understand there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
    approach and that commended by Lord  Bingham  in  paragraph  5  of  his
    opinion".

241.  Our reason for declining to try and resolve  this  issue  is  that  we
    agree with Mr Blundell that the application or not of  a  human  rights
    approach to internal relocation does not obviously impact on the issues
    of fact identified  in  this  appeal.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
    however, we can state that whether one applies  the  existing  approach
    enjoined in Januzi and  AH  (Sudan)  or  an  alternative  human  rights
    approach that takes serious or near serious violations of  basic  human
    rights as its basic framework, our conclusions on  the  facts  of  this
    case (both as  concerns  the  general  situation  and  the  appellant's
    particular circumstances) would be the same.

242.  We should explain how our  above  analysis  affects  the  respondent's
    submission that we should endorse the position taken in GS at  para  72
    (and endorsed by the Tribunal in AMM at para 337)  that  the  "life  or
    person" criterion set out in Article 15(c) does not cover all forms  of
    serious physical or psychological harm, and does not  include  flagrant
    breaches of qualified rights, such as freedom  of  thought,  conscience
    and religion. That submission was made primarily in relation to Article
    15(c) risk in a person's home area but  has  obvious  implications  for
    internal relocation. All we would say about it here is that  we  cannot
    agree with the respondent that the Tribunal in  AMM  directly  endorsed
    the GS position; whilst the  appellant's  representatives  in  AMM  did
    refer to GS, their basic submission was that the  European  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights required the notion of harm to be interpreted so  as
    to guarantee "human dignity". That is all  that  the  Tribunal  in  AMM
    sought to reject. Be that as it may, we cannot see that even if the  GS
    position is right and that the "life or person"  formulation  restricts
    the material scope of Article 15(c), that it precludes a  human  rights
    approach to unpacking what "life or person" means. But in any event  we
    do not think  that  we  have  heard  anything  that  would  justify  us
    departing from existing case law on the meaning of this criterion.

Kabul

243.  As regards Kabul city, we have  already  discussed  the  situation  in
    that city and we cannot see that for the purposes  of  deciding  either
    refugee eligibility or subsidiary protection eligibility  (and  we  are
    only formally tasked with deciding the latter) that conditions in  that
    city make relocation there in general unreasonable, whether  considered
    under Article 15(c) or under 15(b) or 15(a). We emphasise the words "in
    general" because it is plain from Article 8 (2) and our  domestic  case
    law on internal relocation (see AH (Sudan) in particular) that in every
    case there needs to be  an  inquiry  into  the  applicant's  individual
    circumstances; and what those circumstances are will very often  depend
    on the nature of specific findings made about  the  credibility  of  an
    appellant in respect of such matters as whether they have  family  ties
    in Kabul. But here our premise concerns an appellant with  no  specific
    risk characteristics and someone found to have an uncle in  Kabul:  see
    above paras 3,5,154, 186 and below, paras 250-254).  To  summarise  our
    conclusion, whilst when assessing  a  claim  in  which  the  respondent
    asserts  that  Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable  internal   relocation
    alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both  in  assessing
    "safety" and reasonableness") not only the level of  violence  in  that
    city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's poor and also
    the many IDPs living there, these considerations will  not  in  general
    make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable,  although  it  will  still
    always be necessary to examine an applicant's individual circumstances.

Ghazni

244.  In relation to Ghazni, however, we note  that  it  is  accepted   that
    there are significant numbers  of  districts  in  that  province  under
    Taliban control (although not the city itself) and we  do  not  exclude
    that, for most civilians in such districts that is a  factor  that  may
    make it unreasonable for them to relocate there, although that  is  not
    to say that a person with a history of family support for the  Taliban,
    would  have  difficulties;  much  will   depend   on   the   particular
    circumstances of  the  case.   Outside  Taliban  controlled  districts,
    however, we do not find that internal relocation would  in  general  be
    unreasonable.

Internal travel

245.  Mr Blundell's skeleton argument  notes  that  the  appellant  has  not
    sought to suggest that any route of  return  within  Afghanistan  would
    place him at risk. "Where an appellant in any given case wishes to rely
    on risk on a route of return, it is for  them  to  demonstrate  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal that it  would  meet  the  high  threshold
    required by  Article  15(c):  HH  (Somalia)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426  at
    paragraph 84. Having not done so, the Secretary of  State  proceeds  on
    the basis that it is no part of the appellant's case that the route  of
    return to his home area of Ghazni would create an Article 15(c)  risk".
    We consider this to be an accurate statement both of the law and of the
    position as regards the appellant's case. Since we did  not  have  full
    submissions on the issue of safety of different  routes  of  return  in
    Afghanistan, we do not seek to give guidance on  it,  although  we  are
    bound to say that nothing in the evidence before us indicates that  the
    main routes of travel from  Kabul  to  other  major  cities  and  towns
    experience violence at an intensity sufficient to engage Article  15(c)
    for the ordinary civilian. The position may be different when it  comes
    to travel from the main cities and towns to villages: we note  in  this
    regard that Dr Giustozzi in his report at para 25 (see above  para  15)
    said that "[m]ost  indiscriminate  violence  occurs  in  the  shape  of
    pressure mines, which are indiscriminate by nature. The risk is  mainly
    on the roads connecting the  provincial  and  district  cities  to  the
    villages." Routes of this kind may be under the control of the  Taliban
    and/or other insurgents and hence will require a case-by-case approach.
     It is true that the FCO, among  others,  has  issued  travel  guidance
    warning against travel  to  certain  parts  of  Afghanistan  (including
    Ghazni)  but they have not done so seeking to apply legal criteria.

    We make two final observations on the general situation,  one  concerns
    the past, the   other the future.

Previous country guidance

246.  It is necessary for us to specify the effects of our above  assessment
    for relevant country guidance  pertaining  to  Afghanistan.  Given  the
    limited scope of our inquiry - into the applicability of Article  15(c)
    for ordinary civilians in Afghanistan - it is not appropriate for us to
    review all current CG  cases  on  Afghanistan,  although  our  findings
    plainly have implications for some of the matters covered in  them,  in
    particular our findings on internal relocation. It will suffice to  say
    first of all that whilst in general terms we have  not  been  persuaded
    that the time has come to revise the position as regards Article  15(c)
    as set out in  GS, nevertheless, the need for our guidance to be up-to-
    date, coupled with the need to ensure it is applied  in  the  light  of
    post-GS guidance on the  law, leads us to conclude that GS is no longer
    to be considered as country guidance as to  the  present  relevance  of
    Article 15(c) to Afghanistan.

247.  In the course of our deliberations we have  not  seen  any  reason  or
    evidential basis to depart from the child-specific  guidance  given  in
    AA.

The future situation

248.  Whilst we  have  reached  our  assessment  of  country  conditions  in
    Afghanistan so far as they relate to Article 15(c)  so  as  to  make  a
    forward-looking assessment of risk based on the  present  evidence,  we
    cannot overlook the fact that the  current  overall  trend  is  one  of
    rising levels of violence now over several years,  even  if  relatively
    gradual. Nor can we overlook that  although  we  consider  the  planned
    departure of most of the NATO and international troops in 2014  is  not
    reasonably likely to leave a security vacuum, this departure  obviously
    gives rise to more  unknowns  about  what  is  likely  to  happen  than
    otherwise. Hence it seems to us that whilst the guidance we  give  will
    continue to have validity for the immediate future,  we  will  need  to
    keep the situation in the country under careful review  over  the  next
    few years.

General conclusions

249.   Drawing  together  the  assessment   given   above,   our   principal
    conclusions are as follows:

   A.   Law etc:

      (i) The Tribunal continues to regard as correct the summary of  legal
      principles governing  Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee  Qualification
      Directive as set out in HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2010]
      UKUT 331 (IAC)  and  more  recently  in  AMM  and  Others  (conflict;
      humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00445
      (IAC) and MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC).

      (ii) The need, when dealing with asylum-related claims  based  wholly
      or significantly on risks arising from situations of  armed  conflict
      and indiscriminate violence, to assess whether Article 15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive is engaged, should not lead  to  judicial  or
      other decision-makers going straight to  Article  15(c).  The  normal
      course should be to deal  with  the  issue  of  refugee  eligibility,
      subsidiary (humanitarian) protection eligibility and Article  3  ECHR
      in that order.

      (iii) One relevant factor when deciding what weight to  attach  to  a
      judgment of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) that sets  out
      findings on general country condition in asylum-related  cases,  will
      be the extent to which the Court  had  before  it  comprehensive  COI
      (Country of Origin Information). However, even if there is  a  recent
      such ECtHR judgement based on comprehensive COI, the Tribunal is  not
      bound to reach the same findings: see AMM, para 115.


      (iv) There may be a useful role in country guidance cases for reports
      by COI (Country of  Origin)  analysts/consultants,  subject  to  such
      reports adhering to certain basic standards. Such a role is  distinct
      from that a country expert.

   B.   Country conditions

      (i)  This  decision  replaces  GS  (Article   15(c):   indiscriminate
      violence) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKIAT  00044  as  current  country
      guidance on the applicability of Article 15(c) to the on-going  armed
      conflict in Afghanistan. The country guidance given in AA (unattended
      children) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00016  (IAC),  insofar  as  it
      relates to unattended children, remains unaffected by this decision.

      (ii) Despite a rise in the number of civilian deaths  and  casualties
      and (particularly in  the  2010-2011  period)  an  expansion  of  the
      geographical scope of the armed conflict in Afghanistan, the level of
      indiscriminate violence in that country taken as a whole  is  not  at
      such a high level as to mean that,  within  the  meaning  of  Article
      15(c) of the Qualification Directive, a  civilian,  solely  by  being
      present in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his life or
      person.

      (iii) Nor is the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence,  even  in  the
      provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be  taken  to
      include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level.

      (iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article 15(c) in
      which the respondent asserts  that  Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
      internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account
      (both in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only  the  level
      of violence in that city but also  the  difficulties  experienced  by
      that city's poor and  also  the  many  Internally  Displaced  Persons
      (IDPs) living there, these considerations will not  in  general  make
      return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

      (v) Nevertheless, this position is qualified  (both  in  relation  to
      Kabul and other potential places of internal relocation) for  certain
      categories of women. The purport of the current Home  Office  OGN  on
      Afghanistan is that whilst women with a male support network  may  be
      able to relocate internally, "...it would be unreasonable  to  expect
      lone women and female heads  of  household  to  relocate  internally"
      (February 2012 OGN, 3.10.8) and the Tribunal sees no basis for taking
      a different view.

     (b)    The Appellant

250.  In  the  light  of  our  general  assessment,  our  treatment  of  the
    appellant's case can be brief.  As already noted, he is  someone  whose
    asylum claim has been disbelieved and all that has been accepted  about
    him is that he is an Afghan national,  an  able-bodied  male,  aged  22
    (born on 1 January 1990) whose home area is Rozala  village  in  Ghazni
    province where he  and  his  family  have  a  shop  selling  fruit  and
    vegetables.  His family also had a shop in  Ghazni  city.   He  has  an
    uncle who lives in Kabul  where  he  carries  out  a  business  in  the
    clothing trade.

251.  Mr Vokes has not sought to submit that the appellant would be at  risk
    of Article 15(c) in Ghazny by virtue of being from one of the districts
    that is controlled by the Taliban.  We have not been  informed  whether
    the appellant's village Rozala, which he said is  close  to  the  city,
    falls into that category; but since the appellant's evidence  was  that
    his family also had a base in Ghazni city, we do not consider  that  he
    would need to return to his village in order to live in safety in  that
    province.

252.  Insofar as the appellant puts his case on the basis that Ghazni  is  a
    province in a state  of  generalised  violence  at  the  Article  15(c)
    threshold, we reject it, subject to the caveat expressed earlier  about
    the situation  in  Taliban-controlled  areas  of  that  province.   Our
    reasons are effectively the same as those set out above  at  paras  217
    and 222. The appellant, therefore, has failed to show that he  faces  a
    real risk of serious harm in his home area.

253.  Even if it could be persuaded that the appellant would be at  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm in his home area (Ghazni province or Ghazni
    city), we would  not  find  that  he  was  lacking  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative in Kabul. We  have  taken  full  account  of  Dr
    Giustozzi's assessment that internal relocation for the appellant would
    be difficult if  not  altogether  impossible  (although,  as  explained
    earlier, we have not been  helped  by  the  fact  that  Dr  Giustozzi's
    assessment was made on the mistaken basis that the appellant had  given
    a credible account of his past  experiences).   Even  considered  as  a
    single young male returning on his own without any family  support,  it
    is our finding that he would be able to live in  Kabul  in  safety  and
    without undue hardship.  In particular, we do  not  think  that  rising
    prices for accommodation would prevent him finding shared accommodation
    and in this regard (as in regard to finding work) he would  start  from
    the advantageous position of being  able  to  benefit  from  a  returns
    package.  But in point of fact he will not be  returning  as  a  single
    young adult male without family support, as he has an  uncle  in  Kabul
    who has a business there and there is no valid reason   to  think  this
    man would not help him with accommodation and finding a job.

254.  For the above reasons:

      The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in  its  decision  on
    Article 15(c) and its decision as regards Article 15(c)  has  been  set
    aside.

      The decision we  remake  is  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    Article 15(c) grounds (It has already  been  dismissed  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds).



Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Storey




                       APPENDIX A: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Re: AK (Appeal Number: AA/08956/2009)

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Akther, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
For the Respondent:    Miss F Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

         ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS, 19 March 2010

1.    The appellant is a national of  Afghanistan.   On  31  July  2009  the
    respondent made a decision to refuse leave to enter having  refused  to
    grant  asylum.  In  a  determination  notified  on  28  September  2009
    Immigration Judge (IJ)  Obhi  allowed  his  appeal.   The  respondent's
    success in an application for reconsideration brought the matter before
    me, who must now decide it as a judge of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber.

2.    Having heard submissions from both sides  on  19  March  2009  I  have
    decided that the IJ materially erred in law.  There is no challenge  to
    the IJ's principal findings of fact. These involved wholesale rejection
    of the appellant's claim that he and his family had been targeted by  a
    powerful warlord and had attracted additional wrath in his  local  area
    by running away to Kabul with a young woman, Parveen.  The only  reason
    the IJ gave for allowing the appeal nevertheless was his belief that in
    both the appellant's home area (Ghazni) and in Kabul  he  would  be  at
    risk of serious harm in the form of indiscriminate  violence,  contrary
    to Article 15(c) of the Refugee Qualification Directive.  Having  cited
    the judgment of the European Court of  Justice  (ECJ)  in  Elgafaji  C-
    465/07 [2009] 2 CMLR 45 and that of the Court of Appeal  in  QD  (Iraq)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 620, the IJ concluded:

         "30.     The appellant has said that the risk to  him  arises  from
             the threat posed by Ghulam Mohammad and Jumma  Khan.   He  has
             not described a situation of indiscriminate violence or a fear
             of being caught up in the general violence in the country.   I
             note that his uncle lives in Kabul and that he appears to have
             carried on a business there even in the face of  the  conflict
             which has continued there.  It is clear that there is  a  high
             level of indiscriminate violence and the COIR report for  June
             2009 describes an increasingly difficult situation  in  Kabul,
             with elements of the  Taliban  and  criminal  forces  joining.
             Paragraph 8.17 of the report states that  of  the  four  doors
             leading  out  of  Kabul,  four  are  compromised  by   Taliban
             activity. The  report  goes  on  to  describe  a  hostile  and
             threatening situation for the security forces as well  as  the
             general civilians. I note also that in the case of QD  and  AD
             the Court confirmed that AIT was not  necessary  to  establish
             whether the risk of serious violence came from, namely whether
             it arose out of the armed conflict  or  criminality  and  that
             often it would be difficult  to  distinguish.  Whereas  it  is
             usually argued that it would be safe to return  an  individual
             to Kabul because of the presence of the international  forces,
             based on the information contained  in  the  COIR  I  am  less
             inclined to  accept  that  the  appellant  would  be  safe  if
             returned there, even noting that his uncle has  resided  there
             for some time and none of his evidence suggest a fear  of  the
             general situation in Afghanistan.  However  I  note  that  the
             COIR report also suggests that Ghazni  is  assessed  as  being
             insecure. Most of the areas are described as being insecure. I
             am therefore satisfied that at the present time the  appellant
             has shown that there is a real risk that the appellant's  life
             or  person would be threatened as a result  of  indiscriminate
             violence. I am not persuaded that there is an area to which he
             could relocate without facing a real risk."

3.    There are two related reasons why I consider the IJ's reasoning to  be
    legally erroneous. First he appeared to consider that the Elgafaji test
    of "a high level of indiscriminate violence"  was  met  in  respect  of
    Kabul simply by virtue of the June  2009  COIR  Report  describing  the
    situation there as "increasingly difficult",  hostile  and  threatening
    for civilians and security forces as well and noting that gates leading
    out of Kabul were  compromised  by  Taliban  activity.   That  approach
    ignored the fact that the  Elgafaji  test  as  analysed  in  QD  (Iraq)
    requires not just a "high level of individual  violence"  but  "such  a
    high level ... that substantive grounds exist  for  believing  that  an
    applicant ... would, solely by being present there, face  a  real  risk
    which threatens his life or person".   The IJ's approach also failed to
    explain why he considered the COIR report's analysis demonstrated  such
    a high level. At the very least  he  should  have  examined  what  this
    report said about the available figures for deaths and injuries.    Had
    he done this he would have had to engage with the fact that the  latest
    figures for civilians killed in the conflict, around 2,100 during  2008
    for the whole of Afghanistan, scarcely suggested  the  high  level  for
    indiscriminate violence envisaged in Elgafaji and QD.

4.    The IJ also erred in wholly failing to explain why  he  was  departing
    from Tribunal country guidance dealing with Afghanistan which  included
    several cases reported since  the  Qualification  Directive  came  into
    force on 10 October 2006, including PM  and  Others  (Kabul  -  Hizb-I-
    Islam) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089 and MI  (Hazara  -  Ismaili  -
    associate of Nadiri family) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKIAT  00035.  Whilst
    these cases did not deal expressly with Article 15(c), they made  clear
    that they did not consider that the levels of insecurity and danger  in
    Kabul and Afghanistan generally were sufficient to make returns  unsafe
    for civilians generally.  By virtue of AIT Practice Direction  18.2  an
    IJ was required to follow Tribunal CG unless there  is  fresh  evidence
    justifying a departure. The IJ's  attempt  at  para  30  to  treat  the
    coverage given in the COIR  report  for  June  2009  as  justifying  an
    abandonment  of  existing  Tribunal  country   guidance   was   plainly
    inadequate.   He also failed to heed the warning given by the  Tribunal
    in a number of reported cases, e.g. MK  (AB  &  DM  confirmed)  DRC  CG
    [2006] UKAIT 00001 at para 20 to the effect that  the  wider  the  risk
    category concerned (and here the effect of his reasoning  was  that  no
    Afghan asylum seeker could be returned to that country) the greater the
    need for the IJ to have regard to a comprehensive body of evidence  (as
    opposed to one or two items).

5.    Although  the  more  recent  Tribunal  country  guidance  case  of  GS
    (Article 15(c): indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00044 had not been published at the  time  as  the  IJ  determined  the
    appeal of the appellant - and so it was not an error  on  his  part  to
    fail to follow  it  -  the  analysis  of  the  evidence  in  this  case
    highlighted the extent of the IJ's failure to  address  adequately  the
    issue before him concerning the threshold of  indiscriminate  violence.
    Their conclusion (which also took into account the same COIR report  of
    June 2009) was that the current conflict "cannot be said to  involve  a
    high level of civilian causalities" (para 117).

6.    Both parties were in agreement with me that were I to  set  aside  the
    decision of the IJ for a material error of law the case would  need  to
    be adjourned for a further hearing.  The present position  is that  the
    Tribunal will now consider whether this case should  go  forward  as  a
    potential country case intended to examine whether circumstances  since
    the Tribunal CG case of GS [2009] UKAIT 00084 have changed  so  that  a
    different view should be taken of Article 15(c) as applied to Kabul and
    other parts of Afghanistan.  To that end, the  next  step  will  be  to
    convene a CMR hearing.

UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY, 19 March 2010


       APPENDIX B: LIST OF BACKGROUND COUNTRY OF ORIGIN INFORMATION (COI)
                          DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED
|     |Document                                           |Date          |
|Item |                                                   |              |
|1    |BBC News, "Does deal mark new era in US-Afghan     |3 May 2012    |
|     |relations?"                                        |              |
|2    |Theo Farrell and Olivier Schmitt / UN High         |April 2012    |
|     |Commissioner for Refugees, "The Causes, Character  |              |
|     |and Conduct of Armed Conflict, and the Effects on  |              |
|     |Civilian Populations, 1990-2010"                   |              |
|3    |Country of Origin Information Service - Casualty   |Submitted     |
|     |Figures in Afghanistan                             |March 2012    |
|4    |Country of Origin Information Service -            |Submitted     |
|     |Humanitarian Aid in Afghanistan                    |March 2012    |
|5    |Country responses to UKBA's request for information|Submitted     |
|     |concerning recent court cases about Article 15(c)  |March 2012    |
|     |-Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Germany,       |              |
|     |France, Hungary, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Slovenia,  |              |
|     |Sweden, Switzerland                                |              |
|6    |Population Figures in Afghanistan (various sources)|Submitted     |
|     |                                                   |March 2012    |
|7    |UK Border Agency, "Assistance for Returnees to     |26 March 2012 |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |              |
|8    |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan   |February 2012 |
|     |(UNAMA) / Afghanistan Independent Human Rights     |              |
|     |Commission (AIHRC), "Afghanistan: Annual Report    |              |
|     |2011: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict"   |              |
|9    |UNHCR, "2011 UNHCR country operations profile -    |Undated       |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |(accessed 23  |
|     |                                                   |February 2012)|
|10   |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:      |20 February   |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |2012          |
|11   |Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), "World Factbook:|15 February   |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |2012          |
|12   |Center for Strategic & International Studies, A. H.|9 February    |
|     |Cordesman and A. A. Burke,  "Afghanistan: The      |2012          |
|     |Failed Metrics of Ten Years of War"                |              |
|13   |Congressional Research Service (CRS), "Afghanistan:|6 February    |
|     |Post-Taliban Governance, Security and U.S. Policy" |2012          |
|14   |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO), "ANSO        |January 2012  |
|     |Quarterly Data Report Q.4 2011"                    |              |
|15   |Human Rights Watch, "World Report 2012:            |22 January    |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |2012          |
|16   |BBC News, "Afghanistan country profile"            |12 January    |
|     |                                                   |2012          |
|17   |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO), "The ANSO    |2011          |
|     |Report, Issue: 75, 1-15 June 2011"                 |              |
|18   |The World Bank, "World Development Report 2011:    |2011          |
|     |Conflict, Security, and Development. Chapter 2:    |              |
|     |Vulnerability to Violence"                         |              |
|19   |United Nations Development Programme, "Human       |2011          |
|     |Development Report 2011: Frequently Asked Questions|              |
|     |(FAQs) about the Human Development Index (HDI)"    |              |
|20   |United Nations Development Programme, "Human       |2011          |
|     |Development Report 2011: Human Development Index   |              |
|     |and its components"                                |              |
|21   |United Nations Development Programme, "Human       |2011          |
|     |Development Report 2011: Human Development Index   |              |
|     |trends, 1980 - 2011"                               |              |
|22   |United Nations Development Programme, "Human       |2011          |
|     |Development Report 2011: Technical notes"          |              |
|23   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General on|13 December   |
|     |the situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |2011          |
|     |for international peace and security"              |              |
|24   |US Department of State, "Background note:          |28 November   |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |2011          |
|25   |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO), "ANSO        |October 2011  |
|     |Quarterly Data Report Q.3 2011"                    |              |
|26   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin Information   |11 October    |
|     |Report: Afghanistan"                               |2011          |
|27   |U.S. Department of State, "Country Reports on      |August 2011   |
|     |Terrorism 2010: Afghanistan" (excerpt)             |              |
|28   |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO), "ANSO        |July 2011     |
|     |Quarterly Data Report Q.2 2011"                    |              |
|29   |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan   |July 2011     |
|     |(UNAMA), "Afghanistan: Midyear Report 2011:        |              |
|     |Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict"         |              |
|30   |The Long War Journal, "Afghan National Army update:|21 July 2011  |
|     |July 2011"                                         |              |
|31   |Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Ministry of       |June 2011     |
|     |Economy, and the World Bank, "Afghanistan:         |              |
|     |Provincial Briefs: June 2011"                      |              |
|32   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General on|23 June 2011  |
|     |the situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |              |
|     |for international peace and security"              |              |
|33   |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO), "ANSO        |21 June 2011  |
|     |Bi-Weekly Report"                                  |              |
|34   |US Department of State, "Trafficking in Persons    |14 June 2010  |
|     |Report 2010: Afghanistan"                          |              |
|35   |Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2011 -        |16 May 2011   |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |              |
|36   |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO), "ANSO        |April 2011    |
|     |Quarterly Data Report Q.1 2011"                    |              |
|37   |The Brookings Institution, "Afghanistan Index:     |30 April 2011 |
|     |Tracking Variables of Reconstruction and Security  |              |
|     |in Post-9/11 Afghanistan"                          |              |
|38   |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (Norwegian |11 April 2011 |
|     |Refugee Council), "Afghanistan: Need to minimise   |              |
|     |new displacement and increase protection for       |              |
|     |recently displaced in remote areas"                |              |
|39   |Jacob Rothing, Middle East Institute, "Protracted  |5 April 2011  |
|     |Displacement in Afghanistan can be Mitigated by a  |              |
|     |Change in Policy"                                  |              |
|40   |US Department of State, "Trafficking in Persons    |5 April 2011  |
|     |Interim Assessment 2011: Afghanistan"              |              |
|41   |Centre for Strategic and International Studies,    |7 March 2011  |
|     |"Afghanistan and the Uncertain Metrics of Progress,|              |
|     |Part Three: Key Ongoing Challenges"                |              |
|42   |International Council for Security and Development |February 2011 |
|     |(ICOS), "Afghanistan Transition: Dangers of a      |              |
|     |Summer Draw Down"                                  |              |
|43   |The World Bank, "Afghanistan Data and Statistics:  |25 February   |
|     |Poverty at a Glance"                               |2011          |
|44   |Refugee Documentation Centre of Ireland,           |23 February   |
|     |"Afghanistan: Information on the current threat of |2011          |
|     |indiscriminate violence"                           |              |
|45   |House of Lords European Union Committee, "House of |16 February   |
|     |Lords European Union Committee 8th Report of       |2011          |
|     |Session 2010-2011: The EU's Afghan Police Mission: |              |
|     |Report with Evidence"                              |              |
|46   |Human Rights Watch, "Afghanistan: Government       |13 February   |
|     |Takeover of Shelters Threatens Women's Safety"     |2011          |
|47   |Amnesty International, "Afghan parliament          |27 January    |
|     |inauguration highlights crisis of accountability"  |2011          |
|48   |Human Rights Watch, "Annual Report  2011 -         |24 January    |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |2011          |
|49   |UNHCR, "UNHCR Seeks Common Sense European Approach |19 January    |
|     |towards those fleeing violence"                    |2011          |
|50   |The Brookings Institution (contributors E Ferris,  |2010          |
|     |Khalid Koser, Susanne Schmeidl), "Displacement in  |              |
|     |the Muslim World, A Focus of Afganistan and Iraq,  |              |
|     |2009 & Internally Displaced persons in Pakistan and|              |
|     |Afghanistan A report from the Field , 2010"        |              |
|51   |The Brookings Institution, "Internal Displacement  |15 December   |
|     |and Refugee Status Determination"                  |2010          |
|52   |Refugee Documentation Centre of Ireland,           |19 November   |
|     |"Afghanistan: Treatment by the Taliban in          |2010          |
|     |Afghanistan of persons believed to be suspected    |              |
|     |spies for the government"                          |              |
|53   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General on|14 September  |
|     |the situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |2010          |
|     |for international peace and security"              |              |
|54   |Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), "Backgrounder: |19 August 2010|
|     |Afghanistan's National Security Forces"            |              |
|55   |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission    |8 August 2010 |
|     |(AIHRC), "Civilian Casualty Figure; First Seven    |              |
|     |Months of 2010 (1st January - 31st July)"          |              |
|56   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General   |16 June 2010  |
|     |pursuant to paragraph 40 of resolution 1917 (2010)"|              |
|57   |Amnesty International, "Amnesty International      |27 May 2010   |
|     |Report 2010: Afghanistan"                          |              |
|58   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General on|10 March 2010 |
|     |the situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |              |
|     |for international peace and security"              |              |
|59   |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan   |13 January    |
|     |(UNAMA), "Afghanistan: Annual Report 2009:         |2010          |
|     |Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict"         |              |
|60   |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission    |2009          |
|     |(AIHRC), "Causes of Torture in Law Enforcement     |              |
|     |Institutions"                                      |              |
|61   |David T MacLeod, "Leveraging Academia to Improve   |2009          |
|     |NGO driven Intelligence" Journal of Conflict       |              |
|     |Studies Vol.29                                     |              |
|62   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin Information   |26 June 2009  |
|     |Report: Afghanistan"                               |              |
|63   |United Nations, "World Statistics Pocketbook -     |18 April 2009 |
|     |Afghanistan Country Profile"                       |              |
|64   |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission    |December 2008 |
|     |(AIHRC), "Insurgent Abuses against Afghan          |              |
|     |Civilians"                                         |              |


    APPENDIX C: INDEX  OF  FULL  DOCUMENTS  USED  IN  THE  ARC  REPORT  (as
    furnished by ARC)


|1    |UN News Service, "Security Council condemns        |7 December    |
|     |'heinous' attacks on Afghan civilians"             |2011          |
|2    |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, "Afghanistan      |6 December    |
|     |Travel Advice, Afghanistan"                        |2011          |
|3    |Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), "World Factbook"|31 November   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|4    |"Afghanistan Protection Cluster: Protection        |30 November   |
|     |Overview on the Eastern and South-Eastern Regions" |2011          |
|5    |BBC News, "Afghan president announces second troop |27 November   |
|     |transition"                                        |2011          |
|6    |Khaama Press,  "IED explosion injures at least 3   |23 November   |
|     |NATO troops near Kabul"                            |2011          |
|7    |Afghanistan Analysts Network, "Afghanistan's       |22 November   |
|     |Paramilitary Policing in Context: The Risk of      |2011          |
|     |Expediency"                                        |              |
|8    |Congressional Research Service, "Afghanistan:      |22 November   |
|     |Post-Taliban Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy"|2011          |
|9    |BBC News, "Afghan police killed during Nato night  |19 November   |
|     |raid"                                              |2011          |
|10   |Pajhwok, "Would-be suicide bomber detained in      |16 November   |
|     |Kabul"                                             |2011          |
|11   |Center for Strategic and International Studies,    |15 November   |
|     |"The Afghanistan-Pakistan War at the end of 2011:  |2011          |
|     |Strategic Failure? Talk Without Hope? Tactical     |              |
|     |Success? Spend Not Build (And Then Stop Spending)?"|              |
|12   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty,                 |11 November   |
|     |"FACTBOX-Security developments in Afghanistan"     |2011          |
|13   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News      |9 November    |
|     |(IRIN), "Numbers of returnees down"                |2011          |
|14   |BBC News, "Afghanistan 'suicide attack' hits city  |3 November    |
|     |of Herat"                                          |2011          |
|15   |Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, "Healing |October 2011  |
|     |Complexes and Moving Forwards in Ghazni Province"  |              |
|     |(excerpt)                                          |              |
|16   |Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, "Wartime |October 2011  |
|     |Suffering: Patterns of Violations in Afghanistan"  |              |
|17   |U.S. Department of Defense, "Report on Progress    |October 2011  |
|     |Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan"      |              |
|     |(excerpt)                                          |              |
|18   |The Guardian (London), "Taliban car bomb attack    |30 October    |
|     |kills US troops in Kabul: Deadliest insurgent blast|2011          |
|     |in months leaves 13 dead"                          |              |
|19   |Agence France-Presse, "Kabul street children       |24 October    |
|     |struggle to survive"                               |2011          |
|20   |Human Rights Watch, ""Just Don't Call It A         |September 2011|
|     |Militia": Impunity, Militias and the 'Afghan Local |              |
|     |Police'"                                           |              |
|21   |Reuters, "Security developments in Afghanistan"    |27 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|22   |The New York Times, "Gunman Kills C.I.A. Employee  |27 September  |
|     |At Embassy Annex in Kabul"                         |2011          |
|23   |The Guardian (London) - Final Edition, "Taliban    |22 September  |
|     |tight-lipped over killing of former Afghan         |2011          |
|     |president: Afghanistan destabilised by             |              |
|     |assassination in Kabul Diplomatic tension grows    |              |
|     |amid alleged Pakistan link"                        |              |
|24   |Reuters - AlertNet, "FACTBOX-Security developments |21 September  |
|     |in Afghanistan"                                    |2011          |
|25   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General on|21 September  |
|     |the situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |2011          |
|     |for international peace and security"              |              |
|26   |Norwegian Country of Origin Information Centre     |20 September  |
|     |(LANDINFO), "Afghanistan: Security Report November |2011          |
|     |2010 - June 2011: Part 1"                          |              |
|27   |Norwegian Country of Origin Information Centre     |20 September  |
|     |(LANDINFO), "Afghanistan: Security Report November |2011          |
|     |2010 - June 2011: Part 2"                          |              |
|28   |Reuters - AlertNet, "FACTBOX-Security developments |16 September  |
|     |in Afghanistan"                                    |2011          |
|29   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Attack On Kabul|14 September  |
|     |Ends After 20 Hours"                               |2011          |
|30   |Norwegian Country of Origin Information Centre     |9 September   |
|     |(LANDINFO), "Afghanistan: Human Rights and Security|2011          |
|     |Situation: Report by Dr. Antonio Giustozzi"        |              |
|31   |The Brookings Institution, "Afghanistan Ten Years  |6 September   |
|     |after 9/11: Counterterrorism Accomplishments while |2011          |
|     |a Civil War Is Lurking?"                           |              |
|32   |Danish Refugee Council, "Danish Refugee Council    |8 September   |
|     |upscale reintegration efforts in Afghanistan"      |2011          |
|33   |US Department of Defense, "Report on Progress      |23 November   |
|     |Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan"      |2010          |
|     |(excerpt)                                          |              |
|34   |BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political Supplied by  |30 August 2010|
|     |BBC Worldwide Monitoring, "Taleban attack district |              |
|     |centre in Afghan east"                             |              |
|35   |Institute for War and Peace Reporting, "Troop      |22 August 2011|
|     |Pullout Bad for Afghan Economy"                    |              |
|36   |Reuters, "FACTBOX-Security developments in         |20 August 2011|
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |              |
|37   |Agence France-Presse, "Suicide blasts target       |19 August 2011|
|     |British Council in Kabul"                          |              |
|38   |US Department of State, "Country Report on         |18 August 2011|
|     |Terrorism 2010 - Afghanistan"                      |              |
|39   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Afghan         |15 August 2011|
|     |Policeman Killed In Attack On Governor's Office"   |              |
|40   |Daily Outlook Afghanistan, "The Future of          |9 August 2011 |
|     |Afghanistan, an Opportunity and a Responsibility   |              |
|     |for Youth"                                         |              |
|41   |Institute for War and Peace Reporting, "Deadly     |28 July 2011  |
|     |Mines Still Take Toll in Afghanistan"              |              |
|42   |Integrated Regional Information Networks, "Kabul:  |6 July 2011   |
|     |Afghanistan's water crisis"                        |              |
|43   |International Crisis Group, "The Growing Danger in |29 June 2011  |
|     |Kabul"                                             |              |
|44   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Taliban Attack |29 June 2011  |
|     |On Landmark Kabul Hotel Kills 12, Injures 18"      |              |
|45   |Refugees International, "U.S. Congress must halt   |28 June 2011  |
|     |payments to Afghan local police due to human rights|              |
|     |abuses"                                            |              |
|46   |International Crisis Group, "The Insurgency in     |27 June 2011  |
|     |Afghanistan's Heartland" (excerpt)                 |              |
|47   |International Crisis Group, "The Insurgency in     |27 June 2011  |
|     |Afghanistan's Heartland: Executive Summary and     |              |
|     |Recommendations"                                   |              |
|48   |BBC News, "Afghan policemen die in attack in Ghazni|22 June 2011  |
|     |province"                                          |              |
|49   |The Fund for Peace, "The Failed States Index 2011" |20 June 2011  |
|50   |Business Recorder, "Taliban kill nine in Kabul     |19 June 2011  |
|     |police station attack"                             |              |
|51   |Reuters, "FACTBOX-Security developments in         |18 June 2011  |
|     |Afghanistan, June 18"                              |              |
|52   |UNESCO, "Arming the Afghan Police with literacy"   |14 June 2011  |
|53   |Centre for Strategic and International Studies,    |13 June 2011  |
|     |"Can Afghan Forces Be Effective By Transition?"    |              |
|54   |UN High Commissioner for Refugees, "World Bank,    |1 June 2011   |
|     |Study Reveals Vulnerability of IDPs Living in      |              |
|     |Afghan Cities and Urges a Comprehensive Approach to|              |
|     |Support Durable Solutions"                         |              |
|55   |Amnesty International, "Annual Report 2011:        |May 2011      |
|     |Afghanistan"                                       |              |
|56   |Associated Press Online, "Afghan police: Kabul     |31 May 2011   |
|     |market blast kills civilian"                       |              |
|57   |The Evening Standard (London), "Restoration work is|25 May 2011   |
|     |symbol of a country not yet ready"                 |              |
|58   |Al Arabiya, "Taliban suicide bomber kills 6 medical|21 May 2011   |
|     |students at Kabul military hospital"               |              |
|59   |The New York Times, "Suicide Bomber Attacks Kabul  |21 May 2011   |
|     |Military Hospital"                                 |              |
|60   |Reuters, "FACTBOX-Security developments in         |14 May 2011   |
|     |Afghanistan, May 14"                               |              |
|61   |International Crisis Group, "The Afghan National   |12 May 2011   |
|     |Army: A Force in Fragments"                        |              |
|62   |Oxfam, "No Time to Lose: Promoting the             |10 May 2011   |
|     |Accountability of the Afghan National Security     |              |
|     |Forces"                                            |              |
|63   |BBC News, "Fresh violence in Afghanistan after     |9 May 2011    |
|     |Kandahar attack"                                   |              |
|64   |Reuters, "FACTBOX-Security developments in         |1 May 2011    |
|     |Afghanistan, May 1"                                |              |
|65   |BBC News, "Afghan pilot kills eight US troops at   |27 April 2011 |
|     |Kabul airport"                                     |              |
|66   |Reuters, "Security developments in Afghanistan,    |23 April 2011 |
|     |April 23"                                          |              |
|67   |International Business Times News, "Suicide bombing|18 April 2011 |
|     |in Kabul targets defense minister"                 |              |
|68   |Reuters, "FACTBOX-Security developments in         |18 April 2011 |
|     |Afghanistan, April 18"                             |              |
|69   |Pajhwok Afghan News, "Suicide blast hits army      |10 April 2011 |
|     |vehicle in Kabul; 7 injured by Khwaja Basir Ahmad" |              |
|70   |US Department of State, "2010 Country Reports on   |8 April 2011  |
|     |Human Rights Practices: Afghanistan"               |              |
|71   |Pajhwok Afghan News, "4 bombers killed, 3 ISAF     |2 April 2011  |
|     |soldiers injured in Kabul attack by Khwaja Basir   |              |
|     |Ahmad"                                             |              |
|72   |United Nations, "Report of the Secretary-General on|16 March 2011 |
|     |the situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |              |
|     |for international peace and security"              |              |
|73   |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre,           |13 March 2011 |
|     |"Afghanistan Profile"                              |              |
|74   |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan   |9 March 2011  |
|     |(UNAMA) / Afghanistan Independent Human Rights     |              |
|     |Commission (AIHRC), "Afghanistan: Annual Report    |              |
|     |2010: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict"   |              |
|75   |Danish Refugee Council, "Reaching out to poor      |16 February   |
|     |Afghans in urban tent settlements"                 |2011          |
|76   |Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development,  |15 February   |
|     |"Afghanistan: Over 3,000 shelters provided and     |2011          |
|     |improved access to infrastructure and livelihoods  |              |
|     |for thousands of vulnerable individuals in Kabul"  |              |
|77   |Voice of America News, "Taliban Claims             |14 February   |
|     |Responsibility for Kabul Blast"                    |2011          |
|78   |Associated Press Online, "Bomb explodes in central |8 February    |
|     |Kabul; no dead reported"                           |2011          |
|79   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Kabul Housing  |31 January    |
|     |Shortage Leaves The Middle Class Behind"           |2011          |
|80   |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR),      |28 January    |
|     |"Afghans Complain of Police Harassment"            |2011          |
|81   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Suicide Attack |28 January    |
|     |Kills Eight In Kabul Supermarket"                  |2011          |
|82   |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for |19 January    |
|     |Human Rights (OHCHR), "Report of the United Nations|2011          |
|     |High Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation|              |
|     |of human rights in Afghanistan and on the          |              |
|     |achievements of technical assistance in the field  |              |
|     |of human rights"                                   |              |
|83   |Pajhwok Afghan News English, "Giro residents facing|13 January    |
|     |starvation by Mirwais Himmat"                      |2011          |
|84   |Agence France-Presse (AFP), "Four killed, 29       |12 January    |
|     |wounded in Kabul suicide attack"                   |2011          |
|85   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News      |10 January    |
|     |(IRIN), "Afghanistan: Call for help for IDPs,      |2011          |
|     |deportees in Helmand"                              |              |
|86   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Explosion In   |4 January 2011|
|     |Kabul Kills One, Wounds Three Others"              |              |
|87   |BBC News, "Afghanistan attacks target army bases,  |19 December   |
|     |killing 13"                                        |2010          |
|88   |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees      |17 December   |
|     |(UNHCR), "UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for         |2010          |
|     |Assessing the International Protection Needs of    |              |
|     |Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan"                   |              |
|89   |Refugees International (USA), "Afghanistan: In a   |1 December    |
|     |Time of Conflict"                                  |2010          |
|90   |Associated Press Online, "9 Afghan guards kidnapped|30 November   |
|     |in Kabul province"                                 |2010          |
|91   |International Crisis Group, "Afghanistan: Exit vs  |28 November   |
|     |Engagement"                                        |2010          |
|92   |The Washington Post, "Afghanistan's disheartened"  |22 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|93   |Oxfam, "Nowhere to Turn: The Failure to Protect    |19 November   |
|     |Civilians in Afghanistan"                          |2010          |
|94   |BBC Monitoring South Asia - political supplied by  |18 November   |
|     |BBC Worldwide Monitoring, "Police numbers in Afghan|2010          |
|     |capital need to double - Kabul police chief"       |              |
|95   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News      |15 November   |
|     |(IRIN), "Afghanistan: Winter misery as food prices |2010          |
|     |rise"                                              |              |
|96   |Associated Press Online, "Afghan officials: Kabul  |12 November   |
|     |attack kills 1, wounds 2"                          |2011          |
|97   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News      |3 November    |
|     |(IRIN), "Afghanistan: UNHCR worried about growing  |2010          |
|     |number of conflict IDPs"                           |              |
|98   |United States Institute of Peace, "Dangerous       |October 2010  |
|     |Liaisons with the Afghan Taliban: The Feasibility  |              |
|     |and Risks of Negotiations"                         |              |
|99   |The Times of Central Asia, "New project to clear   |27 October    |
|     |mines from Ghazni city begins"                     |2010          |
|100  |Daily Outlook Afghanistan, "60% Should Not Be      |15 October    |
|     |Surprising"                                        |2010          |
|101  |Integrated Regional Information Networks News      |14 October    |
|     |(IRIN), "Afghanistan: Little relief for growing    |2010          |
|     |number of conflict IDPs"                           |              |
|102  |Pajhwok Afghan News English, "Woman injured in     |5 October 2010|
|     |Kabul rocket strike"                               |              |
|103  |Integrated Regional Information Networks News      |4 October 2010|
|     |(IRIN), "All hopes pinned on Kazakhstan wheat"     |              |
|104  |US State News, "Coalition forces kill Taliban      |11 September  |
|     |senior commander planning Kabul attacks"           |2010          |
|105  |New York Times, "Fatal Attack on Guesthouse in     |10 August 2010|
|     |Afghan Capital"                                    |              |
|106  |The Independent (London), "Kabul blast kills three |19 July 2010  |
|     |ahead of Afghan state-building conference; As      |              |
|     |international delegates start to arrive, militants |              |
|     |declare their intent"                              |              |
|107  |Eurasianet.com, "Corruption Expanding at Alarming  |13 July 2010  |
|     |Rate in Afghanistan - Survey"                      |              |
|108  |UN News Centre, "Attack on UN vehicle in Afghan    |29 June 2010  |
|     |capital leaves one staff member dead"              |              |
|109  |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for |7 June 2010   |
|     |Human Rights (OHCHR), "Concluding observations of  |              |
|     |the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural     |              |
|     |Rights: Afghanistan"                               |              |
|110  |Pajhwok Afghan News English, "Nawa residents face  |3 May 2010    |
|     |numerous problems"                                 |              |
|112  |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (Norwegian |15 April 2010 |
|     |Refugee Council), "Afghanistan: Armed conflict     |              |
|     |forces increasing numbers of Afghans to flee their |              |
|     |homes"                                             |              |
|113  |The International Council on Security and          |March 2010    |
|     |Development, "Operation Moshtarak: Lessons Learned"|              |
|114  |BBC Monitoring South Asia - political supplied by  |3 March 2010  |
|     |BBC Worldwide Monitoring, "Article says corrupt,   |              |
|     |incompetent Afghan officials must be sacked"       |              |
|115  |Ria Novosti, "Haggling over goods in Afghanistan   |24 October    |
|     |leaves 1 dead, 4 injured"                          |2009          |
|116  |OCHA, "Afghanistan: Middle aged and mentally ill in|18 October    |
|     |Kabul"                                             |2009          |
|117  |International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),   |25 September  |
|     |"Afghanistan: the human cost of war"               |2009          |
|118  |International Crisis Group, "Afghanistan: What Now |31 August 2009|
|     |for Refugees?"                                     |              |
|119  |BBC Monitoring South Asia, "Afghan TV debates      |10 July 2009  |
|     |impact of Helmand operations"                      |              |
|120  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,           |23 February   |
|     |"Afghanistan: Recruitment by illegal armed groups  |2007          |
|     |and other non-state actors for voluntary or forced |              |
|     |service and labour"                                |              |



( David T MacLeod, "Leveraging Academia to Improve NGO driven
Intelligence".

