

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Chege (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th January 2015                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE NICOL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             GEORGE JOSEPH CHEGE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms L Kenny Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Gentili of Islington Law Centre



   The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights  grounds  has  been
   brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:


    i. is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined by s117D (2) (a), (b)
       or (c);
   ii. if so, does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A of the  Immigration
       Rules;
  iii. if not are there very compelling circumstances over and beyond those
       falling within 399 and 399A relied upon, such identification  to  be
       informed by the seriousness  of  the  criminality  and  taking  into
       account the factors set out in s117B.


   Compelling as an adjective has the  meaning  of  having  a  powerful  and
   irresistible effect; convincing.


   The purpose of paragraph 398  is  to  recognize  circumstances  that  are
   sufficiently compelling to outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation
   but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.

   The task of the judge  is  to  assess  the  competing  interests  and  to
   determine whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2)  or  whether  the
   public interest arguments should prevail notwithstanding  the  engagement
   of Article 8.


   It follows from this that if an appeal does not succeed on  human  rights
   grounds, paragraph 397 provides the respondent with a residual discretion
   to grant leave to remain in exceptional circumstances where an  appellant
   cannot succeed by invoking rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan promulgated on 22nd  October  2014
      following a hearing on 9th October 2014 to  allow  the  appeal  of  Mr
      Chege against a decision to deport him made pursuant  to  s3  (5)  (a)
      Immigration Act 1971.
   2. Permission was granted on the grounds that it was  arguable  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law: "The [sic] overall the  findings
      reached by the IJ were not supported by  the  evidence  and  he  found
      compelling compassionate circumstances  where  none  existed,  drawing
      inadequate  conclusions  about  the  protection  of  the  public   and
      deterrence from further commission of crime."


        Background


   3. Mr Chege, a Kenyan citizen, entered the UK aged  26  on  13th  January
      1995 and claimed asylum. His application for asylum was refused but he
      was granted exceptional leave to remain until May 2004. In  July  2005
      he was granted indefinite leave to remain. In 2008 he was convicted of
      assault and sentenced to 5  months  imprisonment  and  issued  with  a
      letter from the Secretary of State warning him that he was  liable  to
      deportation as a consequence of having offended but  that  deportation
      action was not being pursued at  that  time.  In  April  2013  he  was
      convicted  of  affray  and  sentenced  to   9   months   imprisonment.
      Deportation action was initiated and a decision to make a  deportation
      order was taken on 13th November 2013 and was served on 15th  November
      2013.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the   appeal   "under   the
      Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds".


   4.  In  addition  to  these  two  offences,  Mr  Chege  has  committed  a
      significant number of other offences: 2 offences against the person; 2
      offences against property; 1  theft  and  kindred  offence;  2  public
      disorder offences; 6 offences  relating  to  police/courts/prisons;  2
      drug offences and 8 miscellaneous offences (mainly driving/insurance).
      His first conviction was on 7th October 1997 and the  last  conviction
      immediately prior to the index offence was on 30th July  2010  and  he
      was given a caution on 29th June 2011 for a further offence of affray.

   5. Mr Chege was diagnosed HIV positive in 1999. According to the lead  GP
      at Pentonville prison his medical conditions at that time (June  2013)
      were asthma, HIV infection and anxiety and he recorded  that  all  the
      conditions were  well  controlled;  he  had  good  prognosis  for  all
      conditions  "assuming  adherence  with  the  prescribed  medications".
      Reports from Dr Maryam Shahmanesh (Senior  Clinical  Lecturer/Honorary
      Consultant in sexual health and HIV medicine) stated that Mr Chege has
      had  extremely  erratic  anti-retro  viral   use   due   to   "complex
      psychosocial situation, homelessness  and  imprisonment".  She  stated
      that he would require lifelong treatment and  "it  is  of  the  utmost
      importance that he is able to access second line  treatment  and  have
      the psychosocial stability to support his  adherence  to  his  current
      regimen [sic] for as long as possible". She expressed the opinion that
      deportation to Kenya would jeopardise his current fragile recovery and
      that isolation and dramatic change could trigger mental  deterioration
      and erratic engagement with HIV care. In a letter  dated  7th  October
      2014 she stated that she was already seeing evidence that Mr Chege was
      withdrawing and disengaging  and  that  although  he  had  not  ceased
      adhering to his therapy there was such a risk.

   6. Lisa Davies (HCPC Registered and BPS Chartered Forensic  Psychologist)
      expressed the opinion in a report dated 19th May 2014  that  Mr  Chege
      would benefit from "urgent psychiatric assessment with specific  focus
      on suicide risk, current mental state  and  the  need  for  treatment"
      [sic]. Professor Abou-Saleh  (Professor  of  Psychiatry  and  Honorary
      Consultant Psychiatrist) in a report dated 8th October  2014  referred
      to Mr Chege taking an overdose of his prescribed  medication  on  26th
      April 2013 and being discovered by a prison officer. He referred to Mr
      Chege as saying he tried to hang himself on 3rd May 2013. There is  no
      record of this in the prison  medical  records.  Professor  Abou-Saleh
      stated

             "Mr Chege is currently suffering from mental  health  problems
             of  depression  and  cocaine  issue,   conditions   that   are
             aggravated  by  the  threat  of  deportation  and  are   often
             associated with demoralisation and hopelessness. I believe  he
             is  likely  to  engage  with  treatment  for  his  psychiatric
             conditions if the threat of deportation is removed:  Mr  Chege
             had previously engaged  with  treatment  for  his  psychiatric
             treatment, which he received from his GP and from HMP  medical
             services.
             Importantly he has attempted  suicide  in  the  past  and  was
             assessed at high suicide risk when assessed by Ms Lisa  Davies
             in May 2014. In my opinion there is a  high  risk  of  suicide
             given his current depressive disorders and ongoing drug misuse
             and the threat of deportation. He is  well  supported  by  his
             mother  with  whom  he  lives.  This  protective  factor   has
             contributed to decreased risk of suicide."


   7. Mr Chege was married and has a son born in the UK  who  is  a  British
      Citizen. That marriage broke down many years ago and  he  has  had  no
      contact with his son for many years. There are no contact proceedings.
      His mother and sister are in the UK. His mother gave evidence  at  the
      First-tier Tribunal hearing but his sister did  not.  From  emails  it
      appears that his sister may be in touch with  siblings  in  Kenya  but
      there was little evidence about them other  than  an  email  from  the
      sister saying they wanted nothing to do with Mr Chege.


   8. Although Mr Chege appealed the decision to deport him on Article 3 and
      8 grounds, it was accepted by Mr Gentili before us that Mr  Chege  did
      not meet the threshold of Article 3.

   9. The First-tier Tribunal found:

             "[16] The key factors  identified  by  Mr  Gentili:  were  the
             length of the  appellant's  lawful  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom, nearly 20 years, and the fact that he has spent  well
             over half of his adult life in the United  Kingdom.  The  fact
             that all of his close family members are in the United Kingdom
             and in particular he has been living with his mother  who  has
             provided the appellant  with  significant  support.  That  the
             appellant has a son in the United Kingdom, now 15  years  old,
             with whom he is still seeking contact. That the  appellant  no
             longer has significant ties to Kenya the country of his  birth
             which he has not been back  to  since  coming  to  the  United
             Kingdom. The appellant's HIV status, diagnosed in  the  UK  in
             1999 and the serious consequences  to  the  appellant  of  the
             withdrawal of the medication and medical support available  in
             the United Kingdom should the appellant be returned to  Kenya.
             All of these factors are to be  weighed  in  the  balance  but
             cumulatively I find that  they  do  not  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deportation. The only factor in my judgment, which
             is capable of doing  this,  is  the  suicide  risk  identified
             within the medical evidence....
             ....
             [19]...I ... find there is a significantly increased  risk  of
             suicide were the appellant to be informed that he  was  to  be
             deported to Kenya,  arising  at  all  stages  of  the  removal
             process and following removal. I find  these  risks  are  best
             evidenced in the  medical  evidence  outlined  above  and  the
             appellant's previous suicide attempts while in prison  in  the
             United Kingdom. It is these risks and these risks alone  which
             enable, justify and  necessitate  a  finding  that  there  are
             exceptional circumstances in this appeal such as  to  outweigh
             the significant public interest  in  deportation.  As  I  have
             indicated Mr Whitehead, who represented  the  respondent,  did
             not seek to persuade me  that  the  threshold  in  exceptional
             circumstances  was  different  to  that  in  very   compelling
             circumstances but I find for the sake of completeness that the
             suicide  risk  justifies  a  finding  that  there   are   very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A.
             [20] I have had regard  to  Part  5A  of  section  19  of  the
             Immigration Act 2014. I have given considerable weight to  the
             public interest question.  Section  19  does  not  assist  the
             appellant  in  demonstrating  that  his   removal   would   be
             disproportionate.  Both  representatives  accepted  that   the
             appellant could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 117C
             and in particular the exemptions set out therein,  which  have
             now been, adopted partially within the immigration  rules.  On
             the contrary these provisions necessitate a finding  that  the
             appellant's removal is in the public interest.  However  as  I
             have indicated the public interest on the particular facts  of
             this appeal is outweighed by the very compelling circumstances
             outlined above."


        Legislative framework


  10. S19  Immigration  Act  2014  inserted  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 with effect from 28th July  2014.  All
      deportation appeals heard after that date,  whether  the  decision  to
      deport or the deportation order was made prior to that  date  or  not,
      are subject to this new statutory scheme.


  11. The amendment to Part 5A reads as follows:

             117A Application of this Part


                  (1)  This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                      required to determine whether a decision  made  under
                      the Immigration Acts-

                       (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                           and family life under Article 8, and
                       (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                           the Human Rights Act 1998.

                  (2) In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                       court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                      (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in
                      section 117B, and
                      (b)  in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign
                           criminals,  to  the  considerations   listed   in
                           section 117C.

                  (3) In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                       means the question of whether an interference with  a
                       person's right to respect for private and family life
                       is justified under Article 8(2).




             117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in
             all cases

                  (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                       in the public interest.


                  (2)  It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                      the interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the
                      United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter  or
                      remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
                      English, because persons who can speak English-
              [pic] [pic]  [pic]
                      (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                      (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


                  (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular
                      in the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the
                      United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter  or
                      remain  in  the  United   Kingdom   are   financially
                      independent, because such persons-
                      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                      (b) are better able to integrate into society.


                  (4)      Little weight should be given to-
                      (a) a private life, or
                      (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
                      that is established by a person at a  time  when  the
                      person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


                  (5)  Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                      established by a person at a time when  the  person's
                      immigration status is precarious.


                  (6)      In the case of a person  who  is  not  liable  to
                      deportation, the public interest does not require the
                      person's removal where-
                      (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and
                      (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                      to leave the United Kingdom.



             117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals




                  (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.


                  (2)  The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                      criminal, the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in
                      deportation of the criminal.


                  (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                      been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  four
                      years or  more,  the  public  interest  requires  C's
                      deportation  unless  Exception  1  or   Exception   2
                      applies.


                  (4)  Exception 1 applies where-
                           (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United
                              Kingdom for most of C's life,
                           (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in
                              the United Kingdom, and
                           (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to
                              C's integration into the country to which C is
                              proposed to be deported.


                  (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                      subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or
                      a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                      qualifying child, and the effect of  C's  deportation
                      on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


                  (6)  In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                      sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least
                      four years, the public interest requires  deportation
                      unless there are very compelling circumstances,  over
                      and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.


                  (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                      be taken into account where a court  or  tribunal  is
                      considering a decision to deport a  foreign  criminal
                      only to the extent that the reason for  the  decision
                      was the offence or offences for  which  the  criminal
                      has been convicted.



             117D Interpretation of this Part


                  (1)      In this Part-"Article 8" means Article 8  of  the
                      European Convention on Human Rights;

                      "qualifying child" means a person who  is  under  the
                      age of 18 and who-

                           (a)  is a British citizen, or
                           (b)  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                               continuous period of  seven  years  or  more;
                               "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
                               (a)  is a British citizen, or
                               (b)  who is settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
                                   (within the meaning of  the  Immigration
                                   Act 1971 - see section  33(2A)  of  that
                                   Act).

                   (2)     In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-



                           (a)  who is not a British citizen,
                           (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom
                               of an offence, and
                           (c)  who-
                                (i) has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                                   imprisonment of at least 12 months,
                                (ii)    has been convicted  of  an  offence
                                   that has caused serious harm, or
                                (iii)   is a persistent offender.

                  (3)    For the purposes of  subsection  (2)(b),  a  person
                        subject to an order under-

                           (a)   section  5  of   the   Criminal   Procedure
                               (Insanity) Act 1964 (insanity etc),
                           (b)   section  57  of  the   Criminal   Procedure
                               (Scotland) Act 1995 (insanity etc), or
                           (c)  Article 50A of the Mental  Health  (Northern
                               Ireland) Order 1986 (insanity etc),  has  not
                               been convicted of an offence.

                  (4)  In this Part, references to a  person  who  has  been
                      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a    certain
                      length of time-

                           (a)  do not include a person who has  received  a
                               suspended   sentence    (unless    a    court
                               subsequently orders that the sentence or  any
                               part of it (of whatever length)  is  to  take
                               effect);
                           (b)   do  not  include  a  person  who  has  been
                               sentenced to a period of imprisonment of that
                               length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
                               sentenced to consecutive sentences  amounting
                               in aggregate to that length of time;
                           (c)   include  a  person  who  is  sentenced   to
                               detention,  or  ordered  or  directed  to  be
                               detained, in  an  institution  other  than  a
                               prison (including, in particular, a  hospital
                               or an institution for  young  offenders)  for
                               that length of time; and (d) include a person
                               who   is   sentenced   to   imprisonment   or
                               detention,  or  ordered  or  directed  to  be
                               detained,  for   an   indeterminate   period,
                               provided that it may last for at  least  that
                               length of time.

                  (5)      If any question arises for the purposes  of  this
                      Part as to whether a person is a British  citizen,  it
                      is for the person asserting that fact to prove it."



  12. The Immigration Rules were amended at the same time as s117A to  s117D
      came into effect and read, in so far as relevant to  this  appeal,  as
      follows:


             "A362.Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation
             under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article  8  will
             only succeed where the requirements of these rules  as  at  28
             July 2014 are met, regardless of when the notice of  intention
             to deport  or  the  deportation  order,  as  appropriate,  was
             served.
             ...
             396. Where a person is liable to deportation  the  presumption
             shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It  is
             in the public interest to deport where the Secretary of  State
             must make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of
             the UK Borders Act 2007.
             397. A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's
             removal pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
             Convention. Where deportation would not be contrary  to  these
             obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
             the public interest in deportation is outweighed.
             Deportation and Article 8
             A398. These rules apply where:
             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.
             398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and
             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months;
             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,
             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and
                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case
                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and
                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or
             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and
                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and
                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,
                  because of compelling circumstances over and above  those
                  described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.
             399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -
             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and
             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported.
             399B. Where an Article 8 claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
             successful:
             (a) in the case of a person who is in  the  UK  unlawfully  or
             whose leave to  enter  or  remain  has  been  cancelled  by  a
             deportation order, limited leave may be  granted  for  periods
             not exceeding 30 months and subject to such conditions as  the
             Secretary of State considers appropriate;
             (b) in the case of a person who has not  been  served  with  a
             deportation order, any limited leave to enter or remain may be
             curtailed to a period not exceeding 30 months  and  conditions
             may be varied to such conditions as  the  Secretary  of  State
             considers appropriate;
             (c) indefinite leave to enter or remain may be  revoked  under
             section 76 of the 2002 Act  and  limited  leave  to  enter  or
             remain granted for a period not exceeding 30 months subject to
             such  conditions  as  the   Secretary   of   State   considers
             appropriate;
             (d) revocation of a deportation order does  not  confer  entry
             clearance or leave  to  enter  or  remain  or  re-instate  any
             previous leave."
        Consideration


  13. There had been some discussion before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
      whether the Rules presently in force were the  relevant  Rules  to  be
      considered in determining Mr Chege's appeal or whether  the  Rules  in
      force at the date of the decision were the relevant Rules. In  so  far
      as his appeal was concerned the parties agreed that the outcome  would
      in any event be the same whichever set of Rules was considered. HC 532
      provides that "the changes take effect on 28 July 2014  and  apply  to
      all ECHR Article 8 claims from foreign criminals which are decided  on
      or after that date". Although this appears  on  its  face  to  mean  a
      decision by the SSHD, because the Tribunal does not take decisions  in
      the context in which that expression is  here  being  used,  paragraph
      A362 refers to the Rules having effect regardless of when  the  notice
      of intention or the deportation order ...was served;  the  explanatory
      memorandum at 3.4 and 3.5 talks of harmonisation  of  the  Rules  with
      Immigration Act 2014 and [38] and [39] of YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA  Civ
      1292 make clear that irrespective of when the  deportation  order  was
      signed or a decision to deport made, if the appeal is determined after
      28th July 2014, then the Rules in force on that date are the  relevant
      Rules.


  14. Mr Chege does not fall within the automatic deportation  regime  -  he
      has not been convicted and sentenced to  detention  for  a  period  in
      excess of 12 months. It was agreed  by  both  parties  that  he  is  a
      foreign criminal as defined in s117D (2) (c) (iii), because  he  is  a
      persistent offender.


  15. The deportation of foreign criminals (s117C  (1))  is  in  the  public
      interest and unless Exception 1 or 2 applies (s117C (4)  or  (5))  the
      public interest "requires" deportation. That is however not the end of
      the required analysis. S117A requires a Tribunal, when called upon  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts  breaches
      a person's right to respect for private and family life under  Article
      8 when considering the "public interest  question"  in  particular  to
      have regard to the considerations set out in s117B  and  s117C.  S117A
      (3) further makes clear that the "public interest question" means  the
      question whether an interference is justified under Article  8(2).  It
      is therefore not sufficient to merely consider the factors set out  in
      s117B and s117C in determining whether the interference is justified.

  16. There is no contradiction between paragraph A362 which asserts that  a
      claim under Article 8 will  only  [our  emphasis]  succeed  where  the
      requirements of the Rules are met and paragraph 397 which states  that
      a deportation order will not be made if removal would be  contrary  to
      the UK's obligations under the Conventions referred to.


  17. Paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules envisages  that  a  deportation
      order will not be made if  removal  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
      obligations under the Human Rights Convention ie under  Article  8  in
      this appeal. If deportation would not be contrary to those obligations
      then it would only be in exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
      interest in deportation is outweighed.


  18. Paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules  apply  where  a
      foreign criminal who is liable for deportation claims his  deportation
      would be contrary to the UK's international obligations. Mr Chege,  it
      was agreed, fell within paragraph 398(c) and thus, if he does not fall
      within  paragraph  399  or  399A  then  the  public  interest  in  his
      deportation would only be outweighed in  Article  8  terms  "by  other
      factors where there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above
      those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

  19. In the context of this appeal, it was  accepted  by  Mr  Gentili  both
      before the First-tier Tribunal and before us that  Mr  Chege  did  not
      fall within either paragraph 399 or 399A: he  has  neither  a  partner
      with whom he has a genuine and subsisting relationship and nor does he
      have a child with whom  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship (paragraph 399). He has not been lawfully resident in the
      UK for most of his life.

  20. Although there has been a rule change since MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 1192, it remains plain that the Rules, in so far as deportation is
      concerned, remain a complete code for  the  consideration  of  whether
      removal would result in a breach of the UK's obligations under Article
      8.

  21. As was said in [39] of MF  "...  the  rules  expressly  contemplate  a
      weighing  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  against   'other
      factors'...this must be a reference to all  other  factors  which  are
      relevant to proportionality and entails an implicit  requirement  that
      they are to be taken into account". The Court of  Appeal  went  on  to
      say:


             "42....the  scales  are  heavily   weighted   in   favour   of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             "exceptional") is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal. In our view, it is no  coincidence  that  the  phrase
             "exceptional circumstances" is used in the new  rules  in  the
             context of weighing the  competing  factors  for  and  against
             deportation of foreign criminals. ?
             43. The word "exceptional" is often used to denote a departure
             from a general rule. The general rule in the  present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs
             399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to outweigh the public interest in deportation. These
             compelling reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".


  22. This approach was approved in AJ (Angola) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1636  per
      Sales LJ at [40]:

             "The requirement that claims by  appellants  who  are  foreign
             criminals for leave to remain, based on the Convention  rights
             of themselves or their partners, relations or children, should
             be assessed under the new rules  and  through  their  lens  is
             important,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  has
             emphasised. It seeks to ensure uniformity of approach  between
             different officials, tribunals and courts who have  to  assess
             such claims, in the interests of fair and equal  treatment  of
             different appellants with similar cases on the facts. In  this
             regard, the new rules also serve as a safeguard in relation to
             rights of appellants  under  Article  14  to  equal  treatment
             within the scope of Article 8. The requirement  of  assessment
             through the lens of the new rules also seeks  to  ensure  that
             decisions are made in a way that is properly informed  by  the
             considerable weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by Parliament in
             the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State (as  the
             relevant Minister with responsibility  for  operation  of  the
             immigration system), so as to  promote  public  confidence  in
             that system in this sensitive area."


  23. Are the "exceptional circumstances" referred to in paragraph  397  the
      same  as  the  "other   factors"   amounting   to   "very   compelling
      circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs  399  and
      399A" capable  of  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  deportation
      referred to in paragraph 398? In our  view  they  are  not  the  same.
      Although in MF (Nigeria) there is an  apparent  equating  of  the  two
      phrases, this was in the context  of  the  rules  as  they  were  then
      drafted, reflecting Strasbourg jurisprudence. In the present rules the
      question  of  whether  there  are  "exceptional  circumstances"  is  a
      question to be asked when and only when it has  already  been  decided
      that removal would not result in a  breach  of  the  UK's  obligations
      under Article 8.  The first question to be determined is whether there
      would be a breach of the UK's Article 8 obligations and that  task  is
      undertaken by assessment through the lens of the rules  and  Part  5A.
      This is reflected in the explanatory memorandum that was  attached  to
      HC532 (which brought into effect the amendments to the Rules  pursuant
      to  the  regime  introduced  by  the  insertion  of  Part  5A  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002):  "outside  exceptional
      cases, it will be proportionate under Article 8 for an  applicant  who
      fails to meet the requirements of the rules to  be  removed  from  the
      UK".


  24. The purpose of the phrase  "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
      above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A"  ensures  that  a
      decision taken by the Secretary of State (and the Tribunal)  does  not
      result in a breach of  the  UK's  obligations  under  the  ECHR.  This
      reflects s117A NIAA 2002, which requires particular regard to  be  had
      to the criteria in s117B and s117C in determining the "public interest
      question". It is essential that particular regard and consideration is
      had to them in the  overall  assessment  of  the  public  interest  in
      deportation.


  25. What are "very compelling circumstances over and above those described
      in paragraphs 399 and 399A"  referred  to  in  the  closing  words  of
      paragraph 398? They can only be circumstances, which are  sufficiently
      compelling to outweigh the public interest in deportation  and  render
      such deportation a breach of Article 8.  The  present  Rules  set  out
      particular aspects that must be taken into account in the weighing  of
      proportionality; they allow for consideration of  other  circumstances
      that may not fall within that rubric  but,  in  the  language  of  the
      Rules, those circumstances "must be very compelling". The  purpose  of
      398 is to recognise circumstances that are sufficiently compelling  to
      outweigh the public interest in deportation but do not fall within 399
      and 399A.  It is for reasons that the Rules in the deportation  scheme
      constitute a complete code in relation to Article 8 claims.

  26. "Compelling" as an adjective has the meaning of having a powerful  and
      irresistible effect; convincing. In JD (Congo) and others v Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 327, the phrase "some
      other compelling reason" was considered as one  element  of  the  test
      whereby permission would be granted. Sullivan LJ, at [22] said:

             "...it is important not to lose sight of Lord Dyson's  warning
             [in Cart v the Upper  Tribunal  [2011]  UKSC  28]  that  "Care
             should be exercised in giving examples of what might be  'some
             other  compelling  reason'  because  it  will  depend  on  the
             particular circumstances of the case". Undue  emphasis  should
             not be laid on the need for  the  consequences  to  be  "truly
             drastic".

        The annexing of the word "very" indicates the very  high  threshold
        that has to be passed to meet the requirements of the Rules.

  27. This has the effect that where a person has  been  sentenced  to  less
      than four years imprisonment or the decision to deport has been  taken
      "because, in the view of the SSHD, their offending has caused  serious
      harm or  they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
      disregard for the law" (s117D(2)(c), paragraph 398(c)), if they do not
      meet Exception 1 or 2 (s117C(4) or (5) of NIAA 2002; paragraphs 399 or
      399A) there have to be  additional  'very  compelling  circumstances'.
      Although this appears to be setting a high bar for those who have  not
      been imprisoned for lengthy periods, this only bites if a person  does
      not fall within  one  of  the  exceptions  (paragraph  398)  or  is  a
      persistent offender  or  their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm.
      Paragraph 398 codifies Article 8 rights and the  displacement  of  the
      public interest in deportation.


  28. Those individuals who do not come within paragraph 399  or  399A  will
      need to establish very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
      described in paragraphs 399 and 399A  because  nothing  else  will  be
      weighty enough to outweigh the public interest in deportation.


  29. It is at this stage that everything  relevant  is  considered  as  the
      decision  maker  looks  at  the  circumstances  not   falling   within
      paragraphs 399 and 399A  to  see  whether  they  outweigh  the  public
      interest in deportation. That is the exercise of  striking  a  balance
      between the competing interests in play, an exercise to be carried out
      through the lens of the rules, as Sales LJ expressed it,  against  the
      backdrop of s117A to s117D of the 2002 Act so that the deportation  of
      foreign criminals is in the public interest and the more  serious  the
      offence the greater is the public interest in deportation.

  30. Thus the more serious or persistent the offending, the more compelling
      the circumstances would have to be. This is  the  consequence  of  the
      interplay between s117A(3) NIAA2002, s117C(2) NIAA2002, and  paragraph
      398 of the Immigration Rules. To construe the Rules in any  other  way
      would be to subvert s117A(3) and prevent proper assessment of the UK's
      obligations under Article 8.

  31. In the course of this assessment it is necessary for consideration  to
      be given to broader issues that affect society; the "public interest";
      see N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 [83]:

                  "...broad issues of social cohesion and public  confidence
                  in the administration of the system by  which  control  is
                  exercised over non-British Citizens who enter  and  remain
                  in the UK. They include an element of deterrence, to  non-
                  British Citizens who are already here, even  if  they  are
                  genuine refugees and to those minded to  come,  so  as  to
                  ensure that they  clearly  understand  that  whatever  the
                  circumstances, one of the consequences  of  serious  crime
                  may well be deportation..."

  32. In AM [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 Pitchford LJ said [24]:


                  Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of preventing
                  crime and disorder is not, therefore, to be seen  as  one-
                  dimensional in its effect. It has the effect not  only  of
                  removing the risk of re-offending by the deportee himself,
                  but also of deterring other foreign nationals in a similar
                  position. Furthermore, deportation  of  foreign  criminals
                  preserves public confidence in a system of  control  whose
                  loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder.


  33. It follows that the correct approach, where an appeal on human  rights
      grounds has been brought in  seeking  to  resist  deportation,  is  to
      consider

   a. is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined by s117D (2)  (a),  (b)
      or (c);
   b. if so, does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the  Immigration
      Rules;
   c. if not are there very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
      falling within 399 and 399A relied upon,  such  identification  to  be
      informed by the seriousness of the criminality and taking into account
      the factors set out in s117B.


        The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
        determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
        for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
        whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
        notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.
        It follows from this that if an appeal does not  succeed  on  human
        rights grounds,  paragraph  397  provides  the  respondent  with  a
        residual  discretion  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  exceptional
        circumstances where an appellant cannot succeed by invoking  rights
        protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.


        Mr Chege

  34. There is no challenge to the decision by the SSHD that Mr Chege  is  a
      foreign criminal because he is a persistent offender.


  35. Although the First-tier Tribunal judge refers to s19  Immigration  Act
      2014 and the immigration rules, he failed to carry out  an  assessment
      in  accordance  with  the  legal  framework  we  have  discussed.   He
      identified that various factors such as length of  residence,  family,
      HIV were insufficient to found a successful appeal but then considered
      that Mr Chege's mental health considerations were sufficient. Although
      the judge referred to the mental health issues being 'very compelling'
      there was no identification of this by  way  of  consideration  of  Mr
      Chege's criminality. Furthermore the judge failed to factor  into  his
      assessment the care Mr Chege would be  given  during  the  process  of
      deportation from the UK such as to determine whether that would affect
      the conclusion that there were very compelling circumstances over  and
      above those in 399 and 399A. The judge failed to assess  and  consider
      the public interest in deportation.

  36. The assessment was legally flawed and cannot stand.

    37. We set aside the decision to be re-made.

    38. At the conclusion of the hearing we discussed with the parties  the
        future conduct of this appeal if we  were  to  set  aside  the  FtT
        decision. It was agreed that if that were the case then the  appeal
        should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  re-heard  with
        no findings preserved.


    39. We therefore direct accordingly.




                                         Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
