





                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

R (on the application of A) v London Borough  of  Croydon  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
00168 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                           19 to 22 January,
                                                       4 and 9 February 2015



                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                            ON THE application OF

                                      a

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                          LONDON BOROUGH OF CROYDON

                                                                  Respondent



Representation

Ms S S Luh, instructed by Maxwell Gillott Solicitors appeared on  behalf  of
the applicant.
Mr J Cowen, instructed by the Solicitor, London Borough of Croydon



                                  JUDGMENT

(1) A's account

1.   A says she was born on the first day of the tenth month (Sene) of  1989
in the Ethiopian calendar, which converts to 8 June 1997  in  the  Gregorian
calendar.  In Ethiopia in the spring of 2007 she was on her  way  to  school
with some friends, when she was offered a lift by men in a vehicle. A  never
reached her school. She was taken to a  compound,  held  with  other  girls,
photographed (for the purposes  of  producing  a  passport  photograph)  and
trafficked as a domestic worker to Bahrain.  There she worked for  some  six
years for Mr Aqeel.  On one occasion,  she  was  returned  to  Ethiopia  for
several weeks, where she was housed in the same compound to  which  she  had
been taken immediately following her abduction,  and  made  to  work  there,
before being required to return to Bahrain.

2.   In 2013 A was transferred by Mr Aqeel to the family of FM and his  wife
RH, for whom she also worked unpaid, under duress.  FM and RH brought  A  to
the United Kingdom in July 2013 as a  domestic  worker,  primarily  to  look
after their children, one of  whom  was  to  receive  medical  treatment  in
London.  After some weeks, A was able to escape from FM but  fell  into  the
hands of a stranger, Sarah, whom A had asked for help.   Sarah  held  A  for
several weeks, until she was able to  escape  and  present  herself  to  the
United Kingdom authorities.

3.   On 14 August 2014 the Home Office wrote to the Metropolitan  Police  to
say that the Home Office was "able to confirm that  we  conclusively  accept
that [A] is a victim of trafficking." FM and  RH  are  on  police  bail,  in
connection with the allegation  that  they  trafficked  A  into  the  United
Kingdom.


(2) The respondent's case

4.   The primary case for the respondent, as advanced by Mr Cowen,  is  that
A is a thoroughly dishonest individual.   Far  from  being  only  around  10
years old when she first left Ethiopia for Bahrain, the respondent  contends
that A's date of  birth  is  as  set  out  in  her  Ethiopian  passport:  25
September 1986.  She was, thus, 20 years old when she arrived in Bahrain  in
2007. She was not trafficked but went voluntarily as a domestic  worker  for
Mr Aqeel, and, subsequently, FM and RH. According to Mr  Cowen  (relying  on
the written evidence of Mr Aqeel) A was the "mastermind" of the  arrangement
whereby she went to work for FM, specifically so A could  reach  the  United
Kingdom.   At  no  time  was  A  trafficked  or  held  against   her   will.
Photographic evidence, obtained by  FM's  United  Kingdom  criminal  defence
team, shows A happy and relaxed with FM and/ or members of  his  family,  at
Alton Towers Amusement Park, the  Trocadero,  Piccadilly  and  a  children's
playground in London.  A voluntarily left FM and RH (possibly having  stolen
some of their jewellery) before going to ground for several weeks  in  order
to concoct her story; in particular, a "timeline" that  would  make  her  at
all material times a child and, thus, entitled  to  the  support  which  the
United Kingdom provides for children in A's position.

5.   Although that is  the  respondent's  primary  case,  both  of  the  age
assessments that are the subject of these proceedings assessed  A  as  being
over 18,  without  ascribing  to  her  a  particular  date  of  birth.   The
respondent's secondary position accordingly appears to be that,  even  if  A
is younger than the date of birth given on her Ethiopian passport,  she  was
at all material times over the age of 18.


(3) The proceedings

6.    The  first  age  assessment  was  undertaken  in  January   2014.   An
application for judicial review in respect  of  it  was  filed  in  February
2014. On 21 February 2014 Lang J transferred the application  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.  A second age assessment, undertaken by the  respondent  in  March
2014, is also challenged in the present proceedings. On 28 March  2014,  the
Upper Tribunal granted certain interim relief following a contested  hearing
and on 28 May 2014, permission to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings  was
granted  by  consent  and  listing  directions  made.  In  conjunction  with
Counsel, in August 2014, the substantive hearing was listed to begin  on  19
January 2015.


(4) Applications to adjourn

7.   On 8 January  2015  the  respondent  applied  for  the  hearing  to  be
adjourned.  An oral hearing of that application was convened  before  me  in
the late afternoon of 14 January.  Having heard  Mr  Cowen  and  Ms  Luh,  I
refused the application.

8.   My reasons for refusing to adjourn were given orally on 14 January.  Mr
Cowen submitted that an adjournment was necessary because Ms Luh's  skeleton
argument had been received some nine days late.  Mr  Cowen  complained  that
he had not had time  fully  to  consider  it,  notwithstanding  that  (as  I
pointed out) a significant proportion of the skeleton  argument  dealt  with
matters of which Mr Cowen would already  be  fully  aware,  such  as  issues
concerning the burden and standard of proof.

9.   The respondent had very recently written to A's solicitors  to  propose
that A should be dentally  examined  by  Professor  Roberts,  a  well  known
specialist in the field of assessing likely age by reference  to  dentition.
A's solicitors had responded by refusing the invitation. Mr Cowen  submitted
that, rather than proceed to  the  substantive  hearing,  I  should  confine
myself to hearing evidence and  submissions  on  the  preliminary  issue  of
whether A's refusal to see Professor Roberts was reasonable. If I  concluded
that it was not, then I would issue a preliminary decision to  that  effect,
thereby giving A an opportunity to reconsider her position  on  this  issue.
The respondent had  offered  to  be  bound  by  whatever  Professor  Roberts
concluded.

10.  Ms Luh reiterated  A's  opposition  to  being  examined.   I  was  also
presented with written material contending, variously,  for  the  usefulness
of dental x-ray evidence in a case  of  the  present  kind;  and  that  such
evidence is lacking in material value.

11.  As stated in my oral  reasons  on  14  January,  this  Tribunal  cannot
compel A to undergo a  dental  examination  involving,  in  particular,  the
taking  of  x-rays.  So  far  as  the  "preliminary  issue"  submission  was
concerned, I considered this to be, in the circumstances, incompatible  with
the overriding  objective  in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008. A's stance was such that it was  highly  unlikely  she
would change her mind, even if faced with a preliminary  decision  that  her
refusal should be treated as unreasonable.  Given that it was common  ground
that credibility lies at the heart of the  proceedings,  I  considered  that
the appropriate course was to hear submissions on the dental issue, as  part
of the substantive proceedings, so  that  if  I  found  A's  refusal  to  be
without justification, I could treat that finding as  bearing  adversely  on
her credibility, as part of a holistic assessment of the evidence.

12.  The third basic ground for the adjournment  was,  Mr  Cowen  submitted,
that new evidence was emerging from  FM  and  RH's  criminal  defence  team.
This meant it would be premature to make findings  in  the  judicial  review
proceedings.

13.  I was unpersuaded by that submission also. Given  the  length  of  time
the judicial review proceedings had been ongoing and the speculative  nature
as to what (if anything) might emerge from the criminal investigations  (not
to mention the absence of any information as to a  timetable  for  resolving
these),  I  was,  again,   unpersuaded   that   the   overriding   objective
necessitated an adjournment; quite the opposite.

14.  At the commencement of the hearing on 19 January 2015, Mr Cowen made  a
further application to adjourn, essentially for the same reasons as  he  had
advanced five days earlier.  He also made  reference  to  certain  telephone
records, which he said had come to light in  connection  with  the  criminal
proceedings, which were said to  show  that  A  may  have  been  telephoning
someone in Ethiopia, while she was with FM  and  RH.  FM  and  RH  had  also
supplied further photographic evidence.

15.  Ms Luh informed me that A was willing to go ahead with the  substantive
hearing, on the basis of the evidence before the  Tribunal  (including  that
very recently filed by the respondent). A  was  still  unwilling  to  submit
herself for examination by Professor Roberts.

16.  I refused Mr Cowen's adjournment application.   I  considered  that  my
reasons given on 14 January essentially held good.  I decided  that  it  was
in accordance with overriding objective to proceed.   In  doing  so,  I  had
regard to the fact that Mr Ambat, the social worker who had been  in  charge
of the second age assessment, had been unwell for a  significant  period  of
time in 2014, which had meant that he and Mr Cowen had met  in  consultation
in connection with these proceedings later than might  otherwise  have  been
the case.  I also took into account what Mr Cowen told  me  on  19  January;
namely, that the respondent thought A might, in fact, have had a  dental  x-
ray in connection with dental treatment given to her whilst  in  the  United
Kingdom.  The respondent, accordingly, wished to give A the  opportunity  of
providing the results of any such x-ray to Professor Roberts.

17.  Mr Ambat's illness has not been shown to have any material  bearing  on
any of the reasons advanced  for  adjourning  the  substantive  proceedings,
save for the late proposal by the respondent that the matter be  effectively
adjudicated by Professor Roberts. But, as I  have  already  explained,  that
proposal - having been met with rejection by A - was not a  good  reason  to
adjourn the substantive proceedings or to convert them  into  a  preliminary
issue hearing.  To do either of those things would not  only  keep  A  in  a
state of uncertainty but also  divert  the  Tribunal's  resources  from  the
hearing of other cases.  Neither of those outcomes was warranted.


(5) The hearing

18.  I heard oral evidence from the following individuals: -

The applicant: A spoke to her witness statement.

Vesna Hall: Ms Hall is Trafficked Girls and Young Women's Advisor  with  the
Refugee Council. She  acted  as  the  "appropriate  adult"  in  two  of  the
sessions  involving  A  and  the  social  workers,  leading  to  the   first
assessment, and also at the sessions leading to the second  age  assessment.


Claire Macmaster: Mrs Macmaster worked with A,  whilst  in  her  role  as  a
support worker at the Poppy Project, a body  which  helps  young  trafficked
women aged 16 to 24 years of age. Mrs Macmaster spent some 56 hours with  A,
going through A's history  and  also  assisting  A  with  travel  and  other
matters.  She then spent some seven  further  hours  with  A,  including  at
meetings with the Metropolitan Police. Mrs Macmaster  is  now  a  Legal  and
Research Officer at  the  Migrant  Children  and  Refugee  Legal  Unit  with
Islington Law Centre.

Joe Jakes: Mr Jakes is Education and Youth Activities Coordinator  with  the
Refugee Council, Children's Section. Mr Jakes sees A normally around two  to
three times a week at the Refugee  Council,  including  at  social  evenings
with other young people.  He also accompanied A on four  residential  trips;
in May, June, August and December 2014.  The trips were for 15  to  17  year
olds.

Marta Poeta: Ms Poeta  works  with  the  Children  Section  of  the  Refugee
Council. She acted as "appropriate adult" at A's  interview  with  the  Home
Office in November 2013.   Later,  she  encountered  A  at  Refugee  Council
social programmes for young people.  She accompanied A on three  residential
trips to Kent.

Akiko Kobayashi: Ms  Kobayashi  works  with  the  Baobab  Centre  for  Young
Survivors in Exile.  She  is  a  qualified  counsellor  and  member  of  the
British Association of Counsellors and Psychotherapists.  The Baobob  Centre
provides a specialised resource  for  young  asylum  seekers  and  refugees.
Amongst the criteria for referral is that the persons  concerned  must  have
arrived in the United Kingdom under the age of 18 and not be over 23 at  the
time of referral.  Ms Kobayashi saw A on a fortnightly basis for a total  of
nine sessions,  as  at  20  August  2014,  and  has  continued  to  see  her
fortnightly thereafter.

Kenneth Ambat: Mr Ambat is a qualified social  worker,  currently  with  the
London Borough of Croydon.  He has been  involved  in  several  hundred  age
assessments and has worked with women  from  sub-Saharan  Africa,  including
women of Ethiopian descent. Mr  Ambat  was  in  charge  of  the  second  age
assessment of A, undertaken in March 2014, by which time  certain  material,
including copies of passports  relating  to  A  had  been  supplied  to  the
respondent by FM, including the one used by A to  travel  from  Ethiopia  to
Bahrain in 2007.  FM had also provided the respondent with a  photograph  of
A taken at a "local park" and another, taken with  FM's  family,  which  was
then understood to show A at Thorpe Park, but  which  is  now  known  to  be
Alton Towers.

Susan Akingbeme: Ms Akingbeme is a  Senior  Social  Worker  for  the  London
Borough of Croydon, holding an MSc degree in social work.  She  was  present
with Mr Ambat at the session leading to the second age assessment.

Paul James: Paul James holds a diploma in social work.  He  is  employed  by
the London Borough of Croydon  Children's  Service,  in  which  capacity  he
produced the first age assessment of A.  He  paid  a  visit  to  the  London
residence of FM and RH, in order to obtain material relating to A  and  also
had telephone and email communication with them.

Sheila Johnson: Ms Johnson is a qualified social  worker,  working  for  the
London Borough of Croydon, in  which  capacity  she  assisted  Mr  James  in
carrying out the first age assessment of A.

Lucy Mukasa: Ms Mukasa is  a  Senior  Social  Worker  in  the  Unaccompanied
Minors' Team of the  London  Borough  of  Croydon.   She  visits  A  at  the
latter's home and writes reports as to how A is seen as faring.


(6) Discussion

19.  My task is to decide, as a matter of fact, the age of A,  ascribing  to
her a date of birth.  No one bears a burden of proof. The standard of  proof
is the balance of probabilities. At  the  risk  of  sounding  trite,  it  is
necessary to emphasise that standard of proof, given that there is at  least
the possibility of criminal proceedings  involving  FM  and  RH,  where  the
standard of proof and the rules of evidence are markedly different.

20.  In reaching my decision, I have had regard to all  the  evidence,  both
oral and written (whether or not specifically mentioned  in  this  judgment)
and of the oral and written submissions of counsel. Although  my  assessment
of the evidence has been made holistically, in setting it  out,  I  have  to
start somewhere (S v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA
Civ 1153). The best place seems to be:

(a) How A knows her age

21.  A told the social workers at the  second  assessment  that  her  family
told her each year what her age was.  She told the assessors  at  the  first
age assessment she was 9 years old at the last birthday she  had  celebrated
with her family, before her abduction. She also told  those  assessors  that
she was abducted two months before her 10th  birthday,  in  the  year  1999,
according to the Ethiopian calendar.  The handwritten notes of Ms Hall  make
this plain.

22.  Ms Akingbeme's first witness statement asserted that  A  had  expressly
said she was born  in  the  Ethiopian  month  of  Yakatit,  which  would  be
February; rather than Sene, which equates with  June.   Mr  Ambat  was  more
equivocal, although he felt sure in his oral evidence  that  Ms  Akingbeme's
recollection would be vindicated by  disclosure  of  Ms  Hall's  handwritten
notes of the relevant meeting. In fact, Ms Hall's notes of  the  meeting  (5
March 2014) record A's correction of the matter,  through  the  interpreter:
"I said Sene".  This is borne out by the assessor's notes,  which  record  a
claimed date of birth in the western calendar of 8 June  1997,  which  could
not be right if A had referred to Yakatit.

23.  Both Ms Akingbeme  and  Mr  Ambat  appeared  to  accept,  under  cross-
examination, that they might have misunderstood A's evidence,  as  given  at
the assessment meeting. In any event, the  significance  lies  in  the  fact
that A's consistency on this issue has been demonstrated.  In  this  regard,
I also note that in the record made by the respondent of a home visit on  31
March 2014, A corrected the social worker's record that her  date  of  birth
was 1 June 1996, saying that it should be 1997,  her  date  of  birth  being
1/10/1989 in the Ethiopian calendar.


(b) Family, home and school

24.  The respondent attacks A's credibility  on  the  ground  that  she  has
given little detail regarding her background in Ethiopia.   Mr  Ambat  noted
that A's passport describes her place of birth as "Gunchre".  Mr  James  had
similar criticisms. However,  when  he  was  taken  to  the  record  of  the
questioning in the first age assessment, Mr James accepted that there was  a
higher degree of detail than he had perhaps suggested. In any event, I  find
that there is considerable detail of what A said.   She  named  her  mother,
father, sister and uncles.  Whilst I agree with the respondent  that  it  is
somewhat odd that A did not  appear  to  think  the  actual  settlement  the
family lived in had a name, she described it as being in  the  Gurage  zone.
She attended a school at Indebir, stating it took her an  hour  to  walk  to
school.  She was able to give the name of the teacher.

25.  It is also significant that Mrs Macmaster  told  me  that  A  had  been
willing to let Mrs Macmaster make enquiries through  the  Red  Cross  as  to
where A's parents might be but that A had changed her mind  when  told  that
the Red Cross would relay whatever information came to hand,  even  if  this
meant informing A that her parents were dead.

26.  In conclusion, I do not consider that the  evidence  shows  A  as  more
likely than  not  to  be  deliberately  obfuscating  on  the  issue  of  her
background in Ethiopia.



(c) Trafficked to Bahrain?

27.  The respondent points to background evidence indicating that  it  would
be unlikely for a child younger than 13 to be trafficked from Ethiopia.  The
more general evidence  on  trafficking,  however,  to  which  Mrs  Macmaster
points, indicates  that  children  as  young  as  10  can  be  its  victims.
Certainly  Mrs  Macmaster,  whose  knowledge  of  trafficking  was   plainly
extensive,  did  not  regard  it  as  incredible  that  A  would  have  been
trafficked, at the age of 10.  Plainly, if a  trafficker  considers  that  a
particular child of that age has an economic value, as a  domestic  servant,
for instance, then he is likely to be take the opportunity to  traffic  her.


28.  Whilst I agree with the  respondent  that  the  decision  of  the  Home
Office, as competent authority, to issue a "conclusive grounds" decision  on
the issue of A's trafficking, is not binding on me (R (PM)  v  Hertfordshire
CC)[2010] EWHC 2056 (Admin)), it is at the very least  highly  material,  so
far as it proceeds on the same or a similar evidential basis as that in  the
present proceedings. Of course, the Home Office decision  was  not  made  by
reference to a matter upon which Mr Cowen places considerable  significance;
namely, A's inconsistent account of her time in the United Kingdom  and  the
photographs of her taken at Alton Towers and elsewhere.   Nevertheless,  the
Home Office's conclusive grounds decision of 14 August 2014 appears to  have
involved taking the  view  that  a  10  year  old  girl  could  credibly  be
trafficked from Ethiopia to Bahrain, since that was  a  key  aspect  of  A's
account.


(d) The 2007 passport

29.  This leads to a central matter in the respondent's decision that  A  is
an adult; namely, the passport on which she entered  Bahrain  from  Ethiopia
in 2007 and, in particular, the photograph of A in  that  passport.   It  is
clear from their evidence that Mr Ambat and Ms Akingbeme, who had a copy  of
the 2007 passport photograph during the questioning of A in connection  with
the second age assessment, were strongly of the  view  that  the  person  in
that photograph could not have been  10  years  old.   Although  the  social
workers concerned with the first age assessment did not see  the  photograph
at the time of their decision, having now seen it,  they  are  also  of  the
same opinion.

30.  I am firmly  of  the  view  that  Mr  Ambat  and  Ms  Akingbeme  placed
excessive weight upon  the  issue  of  the  2007  passport   photograph  and
allowed this to colour their approach to the assessment of A's  credibility,
beyond what is appropriate.  The  person  shown  in  the  photograph  could,
rationally, be a child of 10.  None of the witnesses for A has  changed  his
or her view of A's age as a result of seeing the  photograph.   Furthermore,
Ms Johnson said in oral evidence that the photograph could be of a  girl  in
her teens, possibly 13, thereby seriously contradicting the evidence  of  Mr
Ambat and Ms Akingbeme, in particular.

31.  It is also of significance that the Metropolitan Police, who have  been
in possession of copies of the passport since March 2014, could write on  30
July 2014 that they continued to regard A "as a  child  as  defined  by  the
Palermo Protocol".

32.  Overall,  the  respondent's  concentration  on  this  photograph  is  a
reminder of the perils of excessive reliance on physical  appearance,  given
its often unreliable nature: R (NA) v London Borough of Croydon [2011]  EWHC
2357 (Admin); AM v Solihull MBC [2012] UKUT 00118  (IAC).   In  the  present
case, the matter is compounded by the fact that  the  respondent's  reliance
on this  photographic  evidence  has  tended  to  obscure  the  respondent's
consideration of the issue of trafficking.

33.  As well as the 2007 photograph, the respondent has a copy of  A's  2012
Ethiopian passport, which contains a photograph showing the  development  in
A's facial features, as between that and the earlier photograph.

34.  The legal team acting for FM and RH in the United Kingdom  visited  the
Ethiopian Embassy and showed  Embassy  officials  the  2007  passport.   The
officials indicated that the document appeared genuine.   This  is  said  to
cast doubt on A's assertion that she was trafficked as a  10  year  old.  It
appears that the documentation supplied to the officials was in the form  of
a copy.  In any event, the  background  evidence,  including  the  US  State
Department's Trafficking in Persons Report 2014,  highlights  the  level  of
corruption  in  Ethiopia  with  regard  to  the  issuing  of  identification
documentation which, although  emanating  from  official  sources,  contains
false information. Given the undoubted scale of human trafficking itself,  I
find it highly plausible that A and her  trafficked  companions  would  have
had their photographs taken and affixed to passports  obtained  in  Ethiopia
by corrupt means.

35.  Much was made by Mr Cowen of the incredibility of A, as a 10 year  old,
being able to pass  through  passport  controls  in  Ethiopia  and  Bahrain.
However, once one takes account of the widespread nature of the practice  of
trafficking between Ethiopia and Bahrain, where on  some  estimates  90%  of
domestic  workers  are  the  victims  of  trafficking,  Mr   Cowen's   point
effectively dissolves.  For trafficking on such a scale  to  take  place,  a
significant level of official corruption is a prerequisite.  In making  this
finding, I am aware of the evidence that Bahrain is making some  efforts  to
tackle the problem of trafficking; or, at least, is  making  efforts  to  be
seen to be doing so.  Thus, Bahrain law states  that  a  person  entering  a
country as a domestic worker must be 20 years old. This  would  account  for
the date of birth in A's passport.   It  does  not,  however,  in  my  view,
follow that passport officials at the airport in  Bahrain  would  have  been
scrupulous in identifying A as a person who could not possibly be that  age.
 I also accept what Ms Luh says regarding the fact  that,  on  A's  account,
she was one of a number of girls  entering  Bahrain  together,  which  would
have been likely to dilute official scrutiny of A as an individual.

(e) Return to Ethiopia

36.  I have already described A's account of  how  she  came  to  return  to
Ethiopia.  The respondent says this  account  is  wholly  unbelievable.   Mr
Cowen disputes A's story of being taken to the  airport  in  Bahrain,  being
met in Ethiopia; and vice versa, on the return journey.  In  any  event,  Mr
Cowen contends that A was unsupervised on the flight  and  could  have  made
known her plight to airline personnel. Mr Cowen  further  contends  that  it
does not make sense for the Aqeel family, who were  allegedly  exploiting  A
in Bahrain, to send her to a compound in Ethiopia for  several  weeks,  only
to have her returned to them.

37.  I agree it looks strange. The return to Ethiopia is one of a number  of
problematic aspects with A's account.  I  find,  however,  that  it  is  not
destructive of A's credibility, either on its own  or  in  combination  with
the other negative factors, to which I shall turn  in  due  course.   In  so
concluding, I have had regard to the evidence of Mrs Macmaster,  who  was  a
highly impressive and helpful witness. Mrs Macmaster considered that,  after
several years of interaction with A, the Aqeel family could well  have  been
sufficiently confident that A would return to them.  When asked by Mr  Cowen
whether Mrs Macmaster had ever known of a trafficker who had done  something
similar, she replied in the affirmative.  She knew of a Nigerian  trafficker
who had decided to send a trafficked child on her own to Italy, via  the  UK
(where she was identified as a trafficking victim).

38.  Mrs Macmaster hypothesised that the Aqeel family might have  wished  to
go on holiday  and  had  no  need  for  A  during  that  period.   Mr  Cowen
criticised that response as indicative of Mrs Macmaster's  wish  to  support
the case of A at  all  costs.   I  disagree.  There  is  nothing  inherently
incredible in assuming  that  traffickers  may  choose  to  take  calculated
risks, particularly once they have had time to assess a victim.

39.  As well as holding  A's  passports,  FM  also  had  a  number  of  cash
receipts, recorded on their face as having been issued to A,  in  connection
with her travel to Ethiopia and,  later,  (it  seems)  her  journey  to  the
United Kingdom. Mr  Cowen  submitted  that  it  was  highly  unlikely  these
documents would have been forged.  I agree; but this  does  not  necessarily
point to  A's  having  obtained  them  personally,  rather  than  under  the
auspices of others. I agree with Mrs Macmaster that a person  who  has  been
trafficked may, after several years with the  same  family,  become  trusted
with money.  The cash receipts are, in short, of  no  material  significance
in determining credibility.


(f) Life in Bahrain

40.  A's written evidence stated that, during her time in Bahrain (when  she
worked for the Aqeel  family)  she  was  not  allowed  to  leave  the  home.
However, elsewhere in her statement A said that she "was sometimes taken  by
Mr Aqeel's wife to clean the mother's house  and  then  brought  back".   In
oral evidence, A said that this last statement was false and  that  she  had
never visited (what seems to be) Mr  Aqeel's  mother-in-law's  premises,  in
order to clean there.

41.  I have already made reference to the statement of Mr Aqeel. It  is  now
necessary to look at it in more detail.  It is dated 12  January  2015.   It
describes what is, in effect, a commercial  arrangement  between  A  and  Mr
Aqeel, whereby A  was  paid  according  to  agreed  terms  of  service.   In
addition:-

    "She was granted approx. 1 month's paid leave and return Air Ticket for
    every two years of service.  [A] entertained her entitlements [sic] and
    travelled to Ethiopia to see her family at least Twice  (i.e.  copy  of
    the Certificate of Movement issued by Bahrain Immigration".

42.  It is common ground that this assertion of  multiple  travel  by  A  to
Ethiopia is simply false.  The  Certificate  of  Movement  attached  to  the
witness statement shows as much.  According to that certificate, A  went  to
Ethiopia from Bahrain only once, in September 2011, returning  in  November.
That has  been  A's  consistent  position,  to  which  she  has  held  firm,
including during  robust  questioning  by  social  workers  during  her  age
assessment.

43.  Mr Aqeel's statement describes A as being considered part of the  Aqeel
family, being treated "with kindness and full respect" and being beloved  by
his family.  A, by contrast, contends that she  was  not  well  treated,  in
particular by the children, who would insult her.

44.  Mr Aqeel's statement says that throughout A's years with him  "she  was
in close contact with her family back in Ethiopia whom she called from  time
to time by phone  and  other  social  media  tools".   A  denies  this.   In
particular, she states that she was unable to use a computer.

45.  Mr Cowen categorised A's change of testimony regarding  visits  to  the
mother-in-law's home as indicative of her deception.  I  consider  that  A's
account of her life in Bahrain is more likely than not  to  be  exaggerated.
In particular, it is  difficult  to  understand  how  the  Aqeels  would  be
willing to see  A  return  to  Ethiopia,  especially  in  the  circumstances
described by her, if she had hitherto always been effectively a prisoner  in
their home.  But such a finding in no sense compels the conclusion  that  Mr
Aqeel is a truthful witness and that A was not trafficked to Bahrain in  the
circumstances she describes. As I  have  already  said  (and  as  historical
accounts of slavery from ancient to  modern  times  attest)  a  relationship
between a slave/trafficked person and her "employer"  may  well  develop  to
the point where she is trusted to go out and about, whether or  not  on  the
employer's business.

46.  The statement of Mr Aqeel is, in  any  event,  highly  problematic.   I
deal with some of these problems under the next  heading.  For  the  moment,
however, the entirely false  contention  regarding  A's  trips  to  Ethiopia
means that it would be quite wrong to accept his version of events  at  face
value.  Mr Cowen asked me to treat Mr Aqeel's statement in  that  regard  as
merely a mistake, given  that  it  was  contradicted  on  its  face  by  the
Certificate  of  Movement,  attached  to  the   statement.    In   all   the
circumstances, including those to  which  I  will  turn  in  due  course,  I
decline to do so. The frequency of travel to Ethiopia is inextricably  bound
up with the rest of the statement, asserting an almost idyllic  relationship
with A, which  is  at  odds  with  the  background  evidence  regarding  the
prevalence of trafficking in Bahrain but which also on its own  terms  lacks
the ring of  truth.   Mr  Aqeel's  statement,  for  the  purposes  of  these
proceedings, carries little weight.




(g) The handover

47.  Mr Aqeel's statement claims that A asked him for a  better-paying  job,
which  Mr  Aqeel  could  not  provide.   A's  contacts  with  the  Ethiopian
community led to FM contacting Mr Aqeel in May 2013.  FM was looking  for  a
person to help look after his  family,  whilst  in  London.   Mr  Aqeel  was
concerned that if A left his employ she would be obliged  to  compensate  Mr
Aqeel "for all admin and other costs pertaining to  the  work  and  resident
[sic] permits etc incurred for bringing  the  worker  from  his/her  sending
country".   Accordingly,  an  alternative  arrangement   was   devised,   in
discussion with A whereby A would give  up  her  claim  to  end  of  service
entitlements and  FM  agreed  to  cover  all  admin  fees  and  other  costs
pertaining to the issue of a new work and residence permit for  A  "as  well
as the costs of her return airfare to Ethiopia".

48.  At this point, according to Mr Aqeel, A suggested that she be  given  a
back-dated employment contract of service from FM, so as  to  indicate  that
she had been working for him since June 2011, thus obliging FM to cover  her
travel costs to Ethiopia at the end of the first two years of the  backdated
contract. According to Mr Aqeel, although  FM  "was  not  fully  comfortable
with above arrangements, it was agreed with  [A]  that  the  above  contract
document should be treated as a private/internal document  between  her  and
[FM]".

49.  Even on its own terms, none of this strikes me  as  remotely  credible.
Even assuming A were (i) older than she claims; and (ii) had  no  background
of being trafficked, it is still unlikely that she would have been  able  to
persuade FM, said to be a person of considerable  standing  in  Bahrain,  to
engage in back-dating a contract, so as to make it look as if she  had  been
working for him for far longer than  was  true.   The  more  obvious  course
would have been simply for FM to  have  agreed  to  pay  for  A's  expenses,
including an early air ticket to Ethiopia.

50.  In any case, given the undoubted untruth about the number  of  trips  A
had made to Ethiopia, it is  not  possible  to  believe  Mr  Aqeel  on  this
matter.  It is also relevant to note that the Bahraini residence permits  in
A's passport show that A worked for  the  Aqeels  until  2013.  Importantly,
this is a matter about which A has always been consistent, including  during
questioning by the respondent's social workers, who  had  been  told  by  FM
that A had worked for him for two years before coming to the United  Kingdom
in 2013.

51.  Mr James's "detailed notes" of a conversation between him and FM on  25
February 2014 are highly significant. In the conversation, FM:

    "confirmed that [A] had worked for  him,  in  Bahrain,  for  two  years
    before being employed with a couple of other maids from her country ...
    He said that he did not have much information about her background,  in
    Ethiopia, and that she had [worked] for another family in  Bahrain  for
    four years prior to working for his family. He confirmed that [A] stole
    jewellery from his family ...   [FM]  confirmed  that  it  was  a  very
    difficult process to get a visa for [A] to come to the UK. He said that
    she had lengthy interviews scheduled at the embassy and  she  had  also
    attended with one of his aides while being interviewed, on at least one
    occasion.  He also said it was an expensive process, costing  over  200
    dinars. He said that information came to light during the process which
    suggested that she was married and that she  had  not  passed  on  this
    information during her employment and that she was very secretive about
    her life in Ethiopia ... [FM] said that the  family  still  have  [A's]
    passport and said they also have her old passport. He informed me  that
    [A] has travelled to Ethiopia at least three or four times  during  the
    time she has worked for his family. He said that she was very secretive
    about telling anything about her background and that he  did  not  know
    details about her family as she never spoke about them".

52.  By the time of this conversation, A had left  FM  and  his  family  and
presented herself to the United Kingdom  authorities.   If  the  arrangement
described by Mr Aqeel for backdating A's contract with FM had been  arranged
solely for the purposes described by Mr Aqeel, it would make  no  sense  for
FM to assert to Mr James that A had worked  for  FM  for  two  years.   That
fiction was then compounded by FM's telling Mr James that  A  had  travelled
to Ethiopia at least three or four times during the time she had worked  for
his family.  As can  be  seen,  that  is  completely  untrue.  A  could  not
possibly have returned to Ethiopia three times during the fifteen  days  she
worked for FM in Bahrain.


(h) The visa

53.  There is, I find, a much better reason to explain the falsification  of
A's employment history with FM.  In order to  comply  with  the  Immigration
Rules relating to domestic servants, FM needed  to  show  that  A  had  been
working for him in his household for  at  least  one  year.   Otherwise,  FM
would be unable to obtain for A entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom,  so
that she could accompany FM and his family.

54.  Ms Luh correctly submits that the respondent's case, drawing  upon  the
evidence of Mr Aqeel and that emanating from FM, was that A, in her role  as
mastermind of the plan for her to come to the United Kingdom,  had  provided
all  the  information  in  the  visa  application  and  had   prepared   the
documentation, as well as paying the requisite fee.  It  was  put  to  A  in
cross-examination that she had submitted the application in person.

55.  The reality, I find, is very different.  The  visa  application  itself
shows that it was "SUBMITTED ON LINE"  and  that  the  "delivery"  was  "Web
Application". The documentation  also  reveals  that  the  payment  for  the
application was made on line in advance. All  of  this  coincides  with  the
answers A gave to the social workers, when she said  that  she  did  sign  a
document in connection with the visa application "but not  at  the  embassy,
at home".

56.  A's account is consistent with the process  set  out  in  the  evidence
drawn from the Home Office's official site and  the  VFS  Global  site  (VFS
being the "official partner" of UKVI for visa processing  in  Bahrain).   An
application is filled out on  line  and  then  submitted  in  person  at  an
appointment date at the offices of VFS Global.  I have already noted that  A
said she was unable to use a computer.  That aspect of her evidence was  not
specifically challenged.  It is, accordingly, difficult in  the  extreme  to
see how she would have been the person who  compiled  the  application.   In
fact, everything points to FM being that person.  His email address  is  the
one given in the application  and  both  the  landline  and  mobile  numbers
contained in the application also belong to  FM.  The  application  contains
the untruth that A began work for FM on 23 June 2011.   As  I  have  already
said, her consistent case is that this was not so.

57.  FM would plainly have had a strong motive for  pretending  that  A  had
worked for him for at least a year since otherwise FM  would  not  have  had
the benefit of A's looking after the family (particularly the  children)  in
the United Kingdom.   On  2  February  2015  FM  provided  a  short  written
statement for the Tribunal.  It is  silent  on  the  issue  of  the  untruth
contained in the visa application.

58.  One of the answers in the application form concerns wages  paid  to  A.
It reads:  "My family  keep  the  money  I  send  to  them  and  use  it  as
investment to buy seed for farming etc and keep the proceed  [sic]  from  me
with them." Whilst this might point to A having had some involvement in  the
visa application, the answer is plainly  at  variance  with  A's  consistent
account of lack of contact with her  family  in  Ethiopia.  It  is  also  at
variance with what Mr James recorded FM as saying in  Mr  James's  "detailed
notes"  (paragraph  51  above).  Given  the  problems  with  FM's  evidence,
compared with A's consistency regarding  the  visa  application  process,  I
conclude it is more likely than not that FM was wholly responsible  for  the
visa application.

59.   I  have  already  mentioned  records  concerning  cash   receipts   in
connection with the move from Bahrain to the  United  Kingdom.  In  all  the
circumstances, I do not  consider  that  the  existence  of  these  has  any
material bearing on the issue in these  proceedings.  Similarly,  I  do  not
consider that a medical certificate, dated 20 June  2013,  relating  to  any
examination of A in connection with  her  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom,
casts any adverse light on her claim.  A described in evidence  being  taken
to a medical centre in order to be examined. The  statement  in  the  report
that "This report is issued upon her request" is plainly in the nature of  a
formal statement.  It in no sense indicates that A instigated her  visit  to
the clinic.


(i) In the United Kingdom with FM and his family

60.  Here we reach a high point of the respondent's case. A has  undoubtedly
changed  her  evidence,  in  response  to   the   piecemeal   emergence   of
photographic evidence showing her with  FM  and/or  members  of  his  family
during an excursion to Alton  Towers,  Staffordshire;  as  well  as  at  the
Trocadero  Centre  in  Piccadilly,  London  and  in  an  unnamed  children's
playground, somewhere in London. A's response to the filing of a  photograph
of her in what appears to be a playhouse  in  a  children's  playground  was
that she was not posing but, rather, had  been  taken  unawares  by  one  of
their friend's children photographing her. I agree with Mr Cowen  that  this
assertion is unlikely to represent the truth.

61.  Similarly, the photographs taken at Alton Towers show  A  smiling,  for
the camera, standing next to FM and members of his family.  She  is  wearing
a sweatshirt bearing the legend "I  [?]  MINNIE"  [Mouse]   (of  which  more
later).  A appears relaxed in the company of FM and his family.  A  said  in
oral evidence that she was not smiling "with her heart".

62.  Mr Cowen submits that all this is so  destructive  of  A's  credibility
that I can properly place no weight upon the evidence of Vesna Hall,  Claire
Macmaster,  Joe  Jakes,  Marta  Poeta,  Akiko  Kobayashi  or   anyone   else
(including DC Granville of the Metropolitan Police and Julie  Allen  of  the
Home Office) who considers A to be the age she asserts.

63.  On the totality of the evidence, I do not consider  that  it  would  be
right to accede to that submission. I am in no doubt that, just as with  her
account of her time in Bahrain with the  Aqeel  family,  A  has  sought,  in
effect, to present her relationship with FM  and  his  family  in  Manichean
terms, whereby they are portrayed as cruel exploiters and she as a  helpless
slave.  But, as I have already sought to explain (and as Ms Luh in  my  view
correctly submits), to read the evidence (in  particular,  the  photographs)
in the way contended for by the respondent is to ignore  the  complex  power
dynamics, which the background evidence  discloses  may  often  be  at  work
where there has been trafficking. The truth of the matter is, I  find,  that
the relationship was more complex than either A or FM has chosen to say.  In
all the circumstances, I do not, however, consider that this requires me  to
find that A is lying about everything.   In  particular,  I  have  concluded
that A's presentation in a photograph taken at Alton  Towers  in  2013  does
not have any determinative bearing upon whether A was originally  trafficked
from Ethiopia to Bahrain in 2007 in the way (and at the age) she asserts.

64.  Amongst the material most recently filed is a list of  telephone  calls
made from FM's landline and mobile phone in  London.   This  issue  was  not
developed at the hearing. Insofar as it is one of the matters in respect  of
which Mr Cowen unsuccessfully tried to persuade me to  adjourn  -  that  the
criminal defence investigations might in due course reveal further  evidence
- I reiterate the point  already  made:  it  was  not  appropriate  to  wait
indefinitely, just to see what might emerge in this regard.

65.  FM told Mr James that A had  stolen  RH's  jewellery,  when  she  left.
Although the police were said to have been informed, FM and  RH  decided  to
take no further action; it seems, somewhat  to  the  disappointment  of  the
respondent. This allegation of theft has to be read  in  the  light  of  the
undoubted lies  that  FM  told  the  respondent,  regarding  A's  length  of
employment and return visits to Ethiopia. In this regard, one  of  the  case
studies  in  the  CEOP  Report,  Hidden  Children:   the   trafficking   and
exploitation of children within the home [2011] describes a  Pakistani  girl
who was brought to the United Kingdom on a domestic worker's  visa  but  who
was subsequently identified as a  child  victim  of  trafficking.  When  the
child ran away, her employer reported her as missing to the police, as  well
as making a complaint that she  had  stolen  jewellery  and  cash  from  the
family.  The employer and his wife, upon being arrested, asserted  that  the
victim had wanted to come to the United Kingdom to work for them.   Although
this case study is described in the  report  as  atypical,  it  is,  in  the
circumstances, noteworthy.




(j) Abducted by Sarah?

66.  A says that, after she managed to leave the household of FM, she  asked
for help from a Sudanese stranger she  met,  called  Sarah.  Although  Sarah
promised to help A, she in fact held A against her will for about  a  month,
at a location that A was unable to identify.

67.  I  agree  with  Mr  Cowen  that  the  coincidence  of  A's  meeting  an
individual who also decided to exploit her is  too  great  to  be  credible.
However, Mr Cowen's contention that, during this time, it was likely  A  was
with members of the Ethiopian community in London, constructing  a  timeline
that would make her a child  (with  all  that  that  entails)  was  somewhat
undermined by the evidence of Mr Ambat.  He  said  that  in  his  experience
asylum seekers often contrived to secure a  "period  of  reflection"  before
coming forward to the authorities. Mr Ambat's view of what  A  was  probably
doing during this time was described  by  him  as  "resting  and  worrying".
That view, coming from  an  experienced  professional,  is  more  likely  to
represent reality.  In so finding, I bear in mind that it is  one  thing  to
construct and try to learn a complex timeline; quite another to keep  to  it
as  consistently  as  A  has  largely  done,  both  under  questioning  from
different agencies and in her interactions with caseworkers and others.


(k) The age assessments

68.  It is not the purpose of these proceedings to determine  whether  there
are flaws in the respondent's age assessments.  Nevertheless,  any  problems
identified in the respondent's assessment process, may prove instructive  to
a Tribunal tasked with establishing a person's true  age.   In  the  present
case, Ms Luh exposed weaknesses in  the  assessments,  particularly  in  the
notoriously challenging area of appearance and demeanour.

69.  Somewhat oddly, both Mr James and Ms Johnson were of the view that  A's
small stature meant that she "can be viewed as an adult".  Eventually,  both
had to concede that someone with a small stature can be either an  adult  or
a child. It is possible that what Mr James and Ms Johnson were  endeavouring
to say is that adult Ethiopians (or Ethiopian women) are  more  likely  than
their western counterparts to be of small  stature,  so  as  to  present  as
children. However, neither actually said so and there is, in  any  event,  a
dearth of evidence before me to make good any such assertion.

70.  Mr James told me that A went from  appearing  unconfident,  during  one
assessment session, to appearing to  "have  an  attitude"  in  another.   He
considered this indicative of A being an adult but, when  asked  why,  could
say no more than that A had challenged the assessors.   Mr James  eventually
accepted that, from his own  experience,  15  to  17  year  olds  tended  to
challenge adults, just as A had done.

71.  It is clear from the materials relating to the  second  age  assessment
that Mr Ambat considered A had engaged in some sort of  ploy  by  wearing  a
sweatshirt  bearing  the  legend  "I  [?]  MINNIE"  [Mouse]  at   both   her
interviews.  Mr Ambat considered this to  be  a  pretence  by  A  to  appear
younger than she was.

72.  However, by the time at least of the second meeting, Mr Ambat had  seen
one of the photographs taken at Alton Towers in 2013,  where  A  is  wearing
that same sweatshirt.  Unfortunately,  this  did  not  result  in  Mr  Ambat
resiling from what he should have realised was an incorrect assumption.

73.  I have already touched on what I consider to be  the  more  significant
problem with the respondent's assessments;  namely,  that  the  respondent's
social workers were ready to take at face value  everything  they  had  been
told by FM and were overly reliant upon the 2007 passport photograph  of  A.
Under cross-examination, Mr  Ambat,  with  admirable  candour,  acknowledged
these shortcomings when he said that he considered  in  retrospect  that  he
and his colleagues may have "gone too  far"  with  the  issues  relating  to
documentation emanating from FM.

74.  Mr Ambat assessed A as 19+ at the second age assessment in March  2014.
In oral evidence, he was unwilling to put a more specific age forward.   The
consequence of this is that A could have been as young as 11 at the time  of
her 2007 passport photograph, according to Mr Ambat. Ms  Johnson,  asked  to
look at the photograph during oral evidence,  said  that  it  could  show  a
person in her teens, possibly 13.

75.  These considered views not only mean that  the  opinions  expressed  by
A's witnesses as to A's age gain force; they also  undermine  the  coherence
of the respondent's case, based on the  contention that  the  2007  passport
is, in all respects, genuine, including as to  A's  stated  age.   Once  the
possibility is accepted that the age in that passport  may  well  be  false,
the case becomes stronger for believing that A was telling the  truth  about
being trafficked.


(l) A's witnesses

76.  I have already stated my positive view of Mrs Macmaster's  evidence.  I
believe her assertion that she would not continue to support A's case,  were
she of the view that A is lying about her age.  Mrs Macmaster has had  ample
opportunity to observe A in a variety of different situations.

77.  So too has Ms Hall.  She took notes of the  meetings  she  attended  in
the course  of  the  respondent's  age  assessments.   Her  notes  of  those
meetings were demonstrated, during the hearing, to be reliable; more  so  in
general than those produced by the respondent.  Ms Hall's concern  that  the
social workers were, on certain occasions at least, suggesting  their  minds
were made up, particularly on the basis of what had been received  from  FM,
strikes me as in general well-founded  and  coincides  with  the  considered
view of Mr Ambat (see paragraph 73 above).  Ms Poeta and Mr Jakes  have  had
frequent opportunities to observe A,  including  during  residential  trips.
The same is true of Ms Kobayashi.  Overall, I regard the evidence  of  these
witnesses as revealing  a  more  profound  acquaintance  with  A  than  that
demonstrated by the respondent's witnesses.   That includes Ms Mukasa.

78.  I heard considerable cross-examination of Ms Mukasa  by  Ms  Luh  about
the difference in view between Ms Mukasa and A's current key worker, a  lady
named Maz, who is employed by  AG  Social  Care.   Maz  did  not  give  oral
evidence but has written to say that she believes A is the  age  she  claims
to be, based on Maz's observations.  The fact that AG Social Care  may  have
written to say that Maz is exceeding her brief by making these comments  is,
for present purposes, immaterial.

79.  A consistent strand of evidence from A's witnesses is that  A  has  not
been seen to have friends that are older than her peer group,  assuming  she
is 17 years old. That evidence was not successfully challenged.

80.  Overall, I accept the evidence of A's witnesses  and  give  it  weight.
That evidence is, perhaps, most graphically  summarised  by  Mrs  Macmaster,
who said in oral evidence that if A were  lying  about  her  age,  then  she
deserved to win an Oscar [for her acting ability].


(m) Dental examination

81.  This issue has  already  arisen  in  connection  with  the  adjournment
applications made by Mr Cowen. In particular, I have explained why,  in  the
circumstances, I did not consider it appropriate to abandon the  substantive
hearing,  which  had  been  fixed  months  earlier,  and  hold   instead   a
preliminary issue hearing  that  was  -  given  A's  categorical  stance  as
expressed through her legal  team  -  unlikely  to  lead  to  any  different
position than the one the parties and  the  Tribunal  had  already  reached.
That is to say, I must decide whether the refusal of A to  undertake  an  x-
ray examination by Professor Roberts (and to disclose  any  x-rays  she  may
have had in the United Kingdom) is, in the circumstances, unreasonable  and,
if it is, what inferences should be drawn.

82.  Nothing daunted, Mr Cowen, in his closing oral and written  submissions
(after  five  days  of  evidence)   reiterated   the   "preliminary   issue"
submission.  This  came  after  A  had  appeared  to  accept,  under  cross-
examination, that she might have had an x-ray  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
might be willing to undergo a further such examination; but also came  after
Ms Luh had categorically informed me, after taking A's instructions, that  A
was in fact still irrevocably opposed to doing these things.

83.  I have read the parties' respective written submissions  on  the  issue
of the relevance  of  x-ray  examination  to  determining  A's  age.   I  am
unpersuaded that A and her legal team have put forward any good  reason  for
declining to provide dental x-ray evidence.  So  far  as  the  danger  of  a
dental x-ray is concerned, I accept  Professor  Roberts's  evidence  that  a
dental x-ray delivers no more radiation than one might expect to receive  in
a single long-haul aircraft journey and that fear of radiation poisoning  is
not, in general, a good reason to decline such an x-ray.  As for the  likely
relevance of the x-ray evidence, particularly as regards the development  of
third molars, the case law, in particular,  shows  that  such  evidence  may
well, in general, be useful, even highly probative.  A has not  shown  that,
in the particular circumstances of her case, it can at this  stage  be  said
that there is bound or even likely to be no point in x-ray evidence  of  A's
teeth.

84.  Accordingly, as I said I would (if I so found), I  regard  A's  refusal
to  undertake   dental   x-ray   examination   as   unreasonable.   In   the
circumstances, I can only conclude that her refusal  is  because  she  fears
that such an examination may result in evidence tending to show that she  is
older than she claims.

85.  The crucial question, of course, is how much weight to  place  on  this
issue.  Significant though it is, I  have  decided  it  would  be  wrong  to
assume that, just because A declines to be  dentally  examined,  this  means
she must be lying about her age and that, for this reason, she was  born  on
25 September 1986.  We simply do not know what the  x-ray  would  reveal  or
how it might be interpreted by relevant dental experts.


(n) Decision

86.  The refusal to  undergo  a  dental  x-ray  and  the  other  undoubtedly
problematic features  of  A's  evidence  (in  particular,  the  photographs)
combine to make it a reasonable possibility that A's claim to be born  on  8
June 1997 is false.  However, standing back and looking at the  totality  of
the evidence, both for and against A, I have come to the conclusion that  it
is more likely than not A is telling the truth about her age.  The  positive
aspects of her case outweigh the  negative  aspects.  The  positive  aspects
include, in particular, the level of detail about her home and schooling  in
Ethiopia and the account  of  her  abduction;  her  consistency  in  putting
forward that evidence; the compatibility of her account with the  background
evidence regarding trafficking from  Ethiopia  and  the  use  of  trafficked
persons  in  Bahrain;  and  the  strength  of  the  evidence  given  by  her
witnesses.  Importantly, A held fast to her account of working  for  FM  for
only a short period, before coming to the United Kingdom,  rather  than  the
two years which FM was falsely asserting to the  respondent.  Mr  Cowen  was
unable to advance any reason why A might  feel  the  need  to  maintain  her
stance in this regard, in the face of  a  strong  challenge  from  Mr  Ambat
during the age assessment questioning.   A  was  also  shown  to  have  been
telling the truth about her single return to Ethiopia  in  2011,  again,  in
the face of untruths from FM.

87.  Whilst A has chosen not to be frank about the  complex  nature  of  her
relationship with the Aqeels and, later, FM and his family,  this  does  not
strike at the heart of her claim to have been trafficked  from  Ethiopia  in
2007, aged nearly ten.

88.  I find that A was more likely than not to have  been  born  on  8  June
1997. I shall hear Counsel if the form of any orders cannot be agreed.



                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

                                                               23 March 2015
