




R (on the  application  of  Majera)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (bail conditions: law and practice) [2017] UKUT 00163 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                                  The QUEEN
                       (ON The application OF MAJERA)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms Amanda Weston, instructed by Birnberg Peirce Solicitors, appeared on
behalf of the applicant.

Mr Sarabjit Singh, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared
on behalf of the respondent.

(1) A defect in framing the primary condition of bail granted by the  First-
tier Tribunal under paragraph 22 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration  Act  1971
does not render the grant of bail void. There has, rather, been a valid  but
defective grant of bail. In such a situation, it is  the  responsibility  of
the parties (in particular, the respondent) immediately to draw  the  defect
to the attention of the Tribunal, so that it can be corrected.

(2) Paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act gives the respondent power  to
impose restrictions on taking employment etc in respect of persons  who  are
subject to immigration control. It is difficult to see how any condition  of
bail granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  affect  this  freestanding
power.

(3) Licence conditions imposed by the National Probation Service serve  aims
wider and different from the conditions that may be imposed  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal on a grant of bail. Rather than imposing bail  conditions  "in
the same terms as the licence", which  is  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
Bail Guidance recommends, the better course is for the  First-tier  Tribunal
to  state  that  its  conditions  of  bail  are  without  prejudice  to  any
conditions contained in the licence, and for judges to ensure  there  is  no
conflict between bail conditions and licence conditions.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                   JUDGMENT
                               (13 March 2017)


JUDGE PETER LANE:


        A.  Background


1.      The applicant, who was born in 1982, arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    from Rwanda with his mother and siblings in 1997.  His mother failed in
    her application for asylum but was granted exceptional leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and, in 2005, indefinite leave to remain.  So too
    was the applicant.


2.   In September  2006  the  applicant  was  convicted  on  ten  counts  of
    robbery, for which he was sentenced to ten terms of life  imprisonment,
    with a minimum of seven years to be served.  He was also recommended by
    the Crown Court for deportation.

3.   In April 2007, the life sentences were quashed on appeal and varied  to
    indeterminate sentences, with a minimum imprisonment  of  seven  years.
    The deportation recommendation remained.

4.   A deportation order was made  by  the  respondent  in  respect  of  the
    applicant  in  November  2012.   The  applicant's  appeal  against  the
    deportation decision was dismissed  and  the  applicant  became  appeal
    rights exhausted in November 2014.

5.   In April 2014 the Rwandan authorities  informed  the  respondent  that,
    although the applicant's previous passport was genuine,  they  did  not
    accept the applicant as being a national of Rwanda, when  he  tried  to
    renew his passport in 2009, since the passport had been issued  outside
    Rwanda.



B. Release on licence/immigration detention

6.   On 30 March 2015, the Parole Board directed that the  applicant  should
    be released on licence from the open prison in which he had  been  held
    since October 2013.  After being transferred to HMP Ford, the applicant
    had undertaken unescorted day releases.  Since November  2014,  he  had
    been working, outside the prison, five  days  a  week  as  a  community
    service volunteer, at the Age UK charity shop in Worthing.

7.   Overall, the panel considered that the risk to the public posed by  the
    applicant "has reduced to a level that is manageable in the community".
     The applicant's release  was  subject  to  the  following  "additional
    licence conditions":

  . To reside permanently at approved premises and not to leave  to  reside
    elsewhere, without obtaining the  prior  approval  of  the  applicant's
    supervising  officer;  thereafter  to  reside  as   directed   by   the
    supervising officer.

  . To confine himself to an address approved by  the  supervising  officer
    between the hours of 23:00 and 07:00 daily unless otherwise authorised.
     That condition would be reviewed  by  the  supervising  officer  on  a
    weekly basis "and may be amended or removed if  it  is  felt  that  the
    level of risk that you present has reduced appropriately".

  . Not to seek to approach or communicate with certain named  individuals,
    without prior approval.

8.   Immediately upon release from imprisonment, the applicant was  detained
    by the respondent under her immigration powers.  At this  point,  those
    detaining the applicant considered they had sufficient documentation to
    effect his deportation to Rwanda.   Shortly  afterwards,  however,  the
    officers concerned were made aware  of  the  attitude  of  the  Rwandan
    authorities.  Nevertheless, on 24  April  2015  removal  directions  in
    respect of the applicant were set in error by  the  respondent.   These
    were cancelled on 8 May 2015.

9.   Attempts on behalf of the applicant to have him released on  bail  were
    hampered during the summer of  2015,  as  a  result  of  a  failure  to
    identify suitable accommodation at which the applicant was to reside.

10.  On 2 April 2015, the applicant's solicitors submitted a request to  the
    respondent for her to revoke the applicant's deportation order.  On  17
    September 2015, the respondent decided to refuse to  revoke  the  order
    but, following receipt of a Letter Before Claim from the applicant, the
    respondent, on 28 October 2015, withdrew the refusal  decision.   Since
    that time, the applicant's revocation request has remained  outstanding
    with the respondent.

11.  On 27 July  2015,  a  suitable  bail  address  for  the  applicant  was
    identified by the respondent.  An application was made  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for the applicant to be granted bail.



C. Bail application

12.  The bail application came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Narayan,
    sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  30  July  2015.   At  the  hearing,  the
    respondent's Presenting Officer spoke to the bail summary  prepared  in
    respect of the applicant.  The applicant was represented by  Mr  Furner
    of Birnberg Peirce Solicitors.

13.  The bail summary sets out the reasons why the  respondent  opposed  the
    application to the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  stated  that  since  the
    applicant "is now subject to a signed deportation order, and he  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 27 November 2014, he no longer has access to
    public funds, nor is he permitted to work; this could increase his risk
    of  committing  further  offences".   Although  the  Parole  Board  had
    directed the applicant's release, "this does  not  supersede  the  fact
    that he is subject  to  a  signed  deportation  order".   There  is  no
    guarantee that the applicant would receive another right of  appeal  in
    the United Kingdom against the decision of  the  respondent.   Although
    the applicant may have complied in the  past  "while  he  was  on  open
    conditions", the Home Office was serious in its intention to deport him
    "once a travel document becomes available".  It was also noted that the
    applicant was "subject to MAPPA conditions as he has  been  classed  as
    level 2 due to the nature of their conviction (sic)".

14.  The bail summary ended as follows:-

            "Conditions Sought in the Event of Bail Being Granted

         1.   To live and sleep each night at: [specified address]  approved
             by NOMS and only on offer until 10 August 2015.

         2.   To report on a reporting frequency  basis  to  a  Home  Office
             Reporting Centre/Police Station at: TBC - Police Station

         3.   If, on licence, to report to  the  Offender  Manager/Probation
             Officer at:

             National Probation Service
             National Offender Management Service
             90 Lansdowne Road
             Haringey
             Tottenham
             N17 9XX.

         4.    The  applicant  should  cooperate  with  the  conditions   of
             electronic monitoring as issued by the  Home  Office  and  the
             Home Office request that bail in principle is granted allowing
             48 hours or two working days for the Home Office to arrange to
             have the applicant electronically monitored by tag.

         5.   That in the event of the applicant applying for a variation of
             address or bail that  the  Home  Office  be  notified  of  the
             details of the application.

         6.   Must not enter employment, paid or unpaid, or  engage  in  any
             business or profession.

         These restrictions are being sought:

         a]   To secure the subject's attendance at any  further  interview,
             and

         b]   to reduce to a minimum any potential delay  in  notifying  the
             relevant authorities should the subject breach bail".




D. The FTT's bail decision

15.  After hearing argument, the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided to  grant
    the applicant bail, upon the recognisance of �300  of  the  applicant's
    mother.  The signed and dated decision of the judge,  set  out  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's standard bail form, contains the following:-

         "Primary Conditions of Bail

         Insert relevant section from Annex 8 with details

         The applicant is to appear before his Offender Manager".

16.  Over the page, we see the following:-

         "Secondary Conditions of Bail

         Insert relevant section from Annex 8 with details

           < Bail is granted subject to (i) the applicant cooperating  with
             the arrangement for electronic monitoring ('tagging')  as  set
             out in s.36  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  and  (ii)  the  UK  Border  Agency
             arranging electronic monitoring within  two  working  days  of
             this grant of bail.

           < Bail is granted in the same terms as the licence.

           < That in the event of the applicant applying for a variation of
             address or bail that  the  Home  Office  be  notified  of  the
             details of the application.

           < Must not enter paid employment, or engage in any  business  or
             profession.

           < The applicant is also required to comply with the terms of his
             licence.

         and

         1.   The applicant shall live and sleep  at  the  address  set  out
             above.

         2.   ".




E. The respondent's actions following the FTT's bail decision

17.  Also on 30 July 2015, shortly after  the  judge's  bail  decision,  the
    respondent gave the applicant the following:-

         "Notice of Restriction

         To: Sofian Sofian Majera Rwanda 10 January 1982

         You are detained under paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the Immigration
         Act 1971.

         The Secretary of State has decided that you should not continue  to
         be detained at this time but, under paragraph 2(5) of Schedule 3 to
         the 1971 Act, she now imposes the following restrictions on you:

         1.   Within 24 hours of receiving this notice you  must  report  in
             person to the Immigration Officer in charge of the Home Office
             Reporting Centre at address of Home Office Reporting Centre:

             Becket House, Becket House (sic), 60 - 68  St  Thomas  Street,
             London SE1 3QU.

         2.   You must then report in person to the immigration  officer  in
             charge of the Home Office Reporting Centre between  the  hours
             of 10am and 4pm on every Friday, or on such other day in  each
             week as the officer to whom you made your last  weekly  report
             may allow.

         3.   You must live at:

             [specified address]

         4.    YOU  ARE  TO  BE  MONITORED  ELECTRONICALLY   BY   MEANS   OF
             TAGGING/TRACKING

         5.   You must be present at the address shown above  for  induction
             on 31 July 2015 between the hours of 1900 and  2100,  when  an
             officer from EMS will call at  your  address  to  install  the
             Electronic Monitoring equipment and  explain  how  the  system
             operates.

         6.   Following induction you must be present at the  address  shown
             above between the hours of 2000 to 0700, every day thereafter.

         7.   You may not enter employment, paid or unpaid, or engage in any
             business or profession.

         You should note that:

         i.   ...

         ii.  If without reasonable excuse you fail to comply  with  any  of
             these restrictions you will be liable on conviction to a  fine
             not exceeding a maximum of level five of  the  standard  scale
             (�5,000) or imprisonment for up to six months or both".




F. The formal terms of the licence

18.  On 31 July 2015, the applicant was given  by  an  assistant  caseworker
    for the Secretary of State for Justice the formal terms of his  licence
    under Chapter 6 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.  The  document  bears
    the applicant's signature, indicating that it had  been  given  to  him
    "and its requirements have been explained".

19.  The document begins as follows:

         "1.  Under the provisions of Chapter 6 of the Criminal Justice  Act
             2003 you are  being  released  on  licence.   Unless  you  are
             subsequently being detained under the Immigration Act 1971 for
             the  purpose  of  your  deportation/removal  from  the  United
             Kingdom, you will be under  the  supervision  of  a  nominated
             officer and must comply with the conditions of  this  licence.
             The objectives of this supervision are to

             (a)  protect the public,

             (b)  prevent re-offending and

             (c)  help you to resettle successfully into the community.

         2.   Your supervision commences on 31/07/2015 and expires  on  LIFE
             unless this licence is previously revoked."

20.  Amongst the requirements contained in the licence were the following:-

         "5.  While under supervision you must:

             i.   Be well-behaved,  not  commit  any  offence  and  not  do
                  anything  which  could  undermine  the  purposes  of  your
                  supervision, which are to protect the public, prevent  you
                  from re-offending and help you re-settle successfully into
                  the community;

             ii.  Keep in touch with your supervising officer in accordance
                  with any instructions that you may be given;

             iii. If required receive visits from your supervising  officer
                  at your home/place of residence;

             iv.   Permanently  reside  at  an  address  approved  by  your
                  supervising officer and notify him or her  in  advance  of
                  any proposed change of address or any proposed stay  (even
                  for one night) away from that approved address;

             v.   Undertake  only  such  work  (including  voluntary  work)
                  approved by your supervising officer and notify him or her
                  in advance of any proposed change;

             vi.  Not travel outside the United  Kingdom  unless  otherwise
                  directed by your supervising officer (which will be  given
                  in exceptional circumstances only) or for the purposes  of
                  immigration deportation/removal".

21.  The final provision to note is this:-

         "7.  If you fail to comply with any requirement of your supervision
             (set out in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above) or if  you  otherwise
             pose a risk to the public, you will be  liable  to  have  this
             licence revoked and be recalled to custody until the  date  on
             which your licence would have otherwise  ended.   If  you  are
             sent back to prison and are re-released before the end of your
             licence, you will still be  subject  to  licensed  supervision
             until the end of your sentence".




G. Daniel Furner's witness statement

22.  The applicant and his solicitors had concerns about the  actions  taken
    by the respondent on 30 July, as set out in the "Notice of Restriction"
    described above.  In this regard it is necessary to turn to the witness
    statement of Daniel Furner:-

         "2.  I represented Mr Majera at the bail hearing before Immigration
             Judge Narayan sitting at IAC  Stoke  on  30  July  2015.   The
             Defendant relied on a document  called  a  'bail  summary'  in
             which she resisted the grant of bail and sought, in the  event
             bail  was  granted,  certain  conditions.   Those   conditions
             included:

                  2.   To report on a reporting frequency basis  to  a  Home
                      Office Reporting  Centre/Police  Station  at:  TBC  -
                      Police Station

                  3.    If  on  licence,   to   report   to   the   Offender
                      Manager/Probation Officer at:

                           National Probation Service
                           National Offender Management Service
                           90 Lansdowne Road
                           Haringey
                           Tottenham
                           N17 9XX

                  ...

                  6.   Must not enter employment, paid or unpaid, or  engage
                      in any business or profession.

         3.   The bail summary explained that those conditions were sought:

                  a)   to secure the subject's  attendance  at  any  further
                      interview, and

                  b)   to  reduce  to  a  minimum  any  potential  delay  in
                      notifying the relevant authorities should the subject
                      breach bail.

         4.   At the conclusion of the hearing the Judge announced that bail
             would be granted, and he heard submissions on the  appropriate
             conditions to be attached.  Unfortunately,  as  is  the  usual
             practice in the First-tier Tribunal, there is neither  a  bail
             judgment nor the  facility  to  obtain  a  transcript  of  the
             proceedings.  In the absence of the same, I have  reviewed  my
             manuscript notes from the hearing which I have used as an aide-
             memoire  and  I   summarise   the   proceedings   below.    My
             contemporaneous notes are only very cursory because the  fluid
             and discursive nature of bail hearings  does  not  permit  the
             recording of detail, but I do recall the hearing well.

         5.   It is my recollection that having agreed to the imposition  of
             electronic monitoring, and a condition  that  Mr  Majera  must
             comply  with  his  licence,  the  Judge  turned  to  reporting
             conditions.   The  Judge  asked  the  Home  Office  Presenting
             Officer whether additional reporting was really  necessary  in
             circumstances where Mr Majera was (a)  tagged  and  (b)  would
             already be reporting to his Offender Manager in any event  and
             the Presenting Officer conceded that it was not necessary.  It
             was on that basis that the application to  impose  a  separate
             reporting condition to the Home Office was refused.

         6.   At that point the Judge began instructing  his  usher  on  the
             preparation of the bail grant form.  I recall that  I  had  to
             interrupt and ask the Judge to  hear  my  submissions  on  the
             imposition of a prohibition on voluntary work.  I  made  brief
             submissions,  referring  to  the   rehabilitative   value   of
             voluntary work and the significance placed by the Parole Board
             and Protection Service on the six-months' of voluntary work at
             an  Age  UK  charity  shop  that  he  had  already  undertaken
             successfully while completing his sentence in Category D  open
             conditions.   I  acknowledged  that  paid  work  was   clearly
             inappropriate.  Mr Majera not having leave to  remain,  but  I
             submitted that  there  was  no  public  interest  whatever  in
             preventing him from continuing his  voluntary  work  while  on
             bail.  I noted that a  prohibition  on  unpaid  work  did  not
             further the object of the bail conditions as set  out  in  the
             Defendant's bail summary, and if anything there was some value
             (in terms of enforcement) of establishing a routine  where  Mr
             Majera's whereabouts would generally be  known  at  particular
             times of the day.

         7.    I  do  not  recall  that  the  Presenting  Officer  had   any
             submissions to make in response to mine, and  the  Judge  then
             agreed that there would be no prohibition on unpaid work.   He
             said he could see no reason why such a prohibition  should  be
             imposed, and if Mr Majera wanted to take  part  in  productive
             social activities consistently with his licence then he should
             be encouraged to do so.  The bail grant form  was  amended  to
             this effect and signed by the Judge, Mr Majera and his surety.

         8.   I now know that on the same day as the  bail  hearing,  a  DO4
             notice was issued by the Defendant purporting  to  release  Mr
             Majera on restrictions under schedule 3 of the Immigration Act
             1971.  A copy of that notice was never sent to me, I only  saw
             it on 30 September 2015 when I attended on my client for other
             purposes and he brought it with him.

         9.   Noting that the  Defendant  had  purported  to  impose  weekly
             reporting conditions and  a  prohibition  on  voluntary  work,
             contrary to the conditions ordered by the Judge the same  day,
             I made representations to the Defendant on 30 September  2015.
             I asserted that the Defendant either had no  power  to  impose
             these conditions, or that it was irrational and/or abusive  to
             vary them in these circumstances.

         10.  On 19 October 2015 the Defendant maintained her decision.  She
             said:

                  ... it is noted your client is no  longer  on  Immigration
                  Judge bail and is now  on  restrictions  imposed  by  Home
                  Office.  Consequently this allows the Home Office to  make
                  changes to your clients (sic) conditions without the  need
                  to making  (sic)  a  further  application  to  the  court.
                  Therefore the restrictions  imposed  on  your  client  are
                  maintained.

         11.  A supplementary letter before claim was sent the same day with
             a truncated deadline of 22 October  2015.   The  intention  in
             doing that was to link this challenge to the proposed judicial
             review of  the  Defendant's  decision  refusing  to  revoke  a
             deportation order, in which a pre-action  letter  had  already
             been sent.

         12.  When there was no response to either, I sought and obtained an
             emergency legal aid certificate.  Shortly after receiving  the
             same however, I received  a  belated  pre-action  response  in
             relation to the deportation issue, which  confirmed  that  the
             refusal to revoke had been withdrawn for reconsideration.

         13.  On 4 November 2015 the Respondent replied to the supplementary
             letter  before  claim   regarding   conditions   of   release,
             maintaining her decision.  In relation to voluntary work,  the
             Respondent said:

                  27.   With  regard  to  your  client  being  permitted  to
                      continue in unpaid work.  It  is  noted  your  client
                      became subject to a signed Deportation  Order  on  13
                      November; 2012.  Your client lodged an appeal against
                      the Deportation Order on 5 February  2013  which  was
                      dismissed on 3 July 2013.  Your client was  initially
                      refused Permission to Appeal to the First Tier on  16
                      August 2013, however was later granted Permission  to
                      appeal  to  the  Upper  Tier  on  5  September  2013.
                      Nevertheless; the appeal was dismissed by  the  Upper
                      Tier on 19 February 2014 and subsequent  applications
                      to appeal to the Court of Appeal were  also  refused.
                      As such your client's appeal rights became  exhausted
                      on 27 November 2014.

                  28.  As a result, of your client  becoming  appeal  rights
                      exhausted, on the same day the Deportation Order came
                      into effect and your  client's  Indefinite  Leave  to
                      Remain  was  revoked.   Being  subject  to  a  signed
                      Deportation  Order  prohibits  any  individual   from
                      engaging,  paid  or  unpaid,  in  any   business   or
                      profession.

                  29)  In addition to the above, a signed Deportation  Order
                      means the individual has no right to  remain  in  the
                      United Kingdom.  Your client is now the subject of  a
                      signed Deportation Order therefore there is  an  onus
                      on him to leave the United Kingdom.  Therefore it  is
                      nor  considered  unlawful  to  amend  your   client's
                      restriction  to  include  unpaid  engagement   in   a
                      business, such as voluntary work.

         14.  On 6 November 2015  I  made  further  representations  to  the
             Respondent  seeking  the  removal  of   the   voluntary   work
             prohibition.  On this occasion, I enclosed a letter  from  the
             Probation Service dated 5 November 2015 which said:

                  'I would support amending Mr Majera's conditions to enable
                  him to undertake voluntary work, as I believe  this  would
                  have rehabilitative value and contribute  towards  further
                  reducing the risk posed in the community.'

         15.  On 2 December 2015, there having been no response, I wrote  to
             the Respondent chasing a decision.

         16.   On  3  December  2015  the  Respondent  again   refused   the
             application to remove the  voluntary  work  prohibition.   She
             says:

                  'The  Immigration  Judges  bail   condition   specifically
                  stipulated your client 'Must not enter paid employment, or
                  engage in any business or profession.'   Voluntary  unpaid
                  work  would  mean  that  he  engages  in  a  business   or
                  profession.  Therefore, the Secretary of State agrees  and
                  upholds  the  Judges  decision.   Therefore  it   is   not
                  considered unlawful to amend your client's restriction  to
                  include unpaid engagement in a business, such as voluntary
                  work.'

         17.  The decision refers to the  Probation  Service's  letter,  but
             appears to discount it solely on the basis that the  probation
             service does not say the  Applicant  is  a  low  risk  of  re-
             offending.

         18.  On 26 January 2016 I sent a letter  before  claim  challenging
             the 3 December 2015 decision.

         19.  On 29 January 2016 I  attended  on  the  Applicant.   On  that
             occasion, he showed me a letter dated 4 January 2016 from  the
             Respondent in which the Respondent refused an application made
             on 2 December 2015 by the Probation Service for  a  relaxation
             of his  curfew.   I  have  never  seen  the  2  December  2015
             application, but the 4 January 2016 decision records that  the
             Probation Service  sought  a  relaxation  of  the  Applicant's
             curfew from 8pm - 7am, to 11pm - 6am, on the basis that:

                  There have been no concerns with  regard  to  Mr  Majera's
                  behaviour and this is commendable.  He is  complying  with
                  the conditions of his licence.

         20.  The 4 January 2016 decision said that: 'The details  contained
             within your correspondence dated 2  December  2015  have  been
             considered in full by an official  acting  on  behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State.  However no reason can be  found  to  vary
             his current conditions.'  The decision continued:

                  Whilst it is accepted that Mr Majera had  not  re-offended
                  since 2006, this must be considered in light of  the  fact
                  that he  has  remained  liable  to  deportation  since  13
                  November 2012.  Mr Majera's appeal rights became exhausted
                  on 27 November 2014 and his signed Deportation Order  then
                  came into force, invalidating any leave  granted  to  him.
                  As such he has had no  legal  grounds  to  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom since that date.  It is considered that his
                  precarious  state  would  be  affected  by   any   further
                  offending and it is also considered that as he is  subject
                  to license conditions for life due  to  'imprisonment  for
                  public protection', that it is in his own  best  interests
                  to abide by these conditions or risk any negative  reports
                  from the Probation Service.

         21.  On 29 January 2016 I sent a supplementary letter before claim,
             challenging the refusal of the Probation Service's application
             to relax the Applicant's curfew.

         22.  On 4 February 2016 the Respondent replied to  the  26  January
             2016  letter  before  claim  (concerning  the  voluntary  work
             prohibition), maintaining her decision.   There  has  been  no
             response to  the  supplementary  letter  before  claim  on  29
             January 2016 (concerning the curfew)".




H. The challenged decisions

23.  The decisions under challenge in this judicial review are contained  in
    the respondent's letters of 3 December 2015 and 4 January 2016.  So far
    as the earlier letter is concerned, the respondent had this to say:-

         "The Immigration Judge's  bail  condition  specifically  stipulated
         that your client 'must not enter paid employment, or engage in  any
         business or profession'.  Voluntary unpaid work would mean that  he
         engages in a business or profession.  Therefore, the  Secretary  of
         State agrees and upholds the judge's decision.  Therefore it is not
         considered unlawful to amend your client's restriction  to  include
         unpaid engagement in a business, such as voluntary work".

24.  Although consideration had been given to the probation  workers'  views
    in the letter of 5 November 2005, with  regard  to  rehabilitation  and
    risk of re-offending, the letter of 5 December said that the  applicant
    "has  a  significant,  abhorrent  and  extensive   criminal   history",
    amounting to 30 offences and  ten  convictions  for  driving  offences;
    theft; offences relating to the courts/prisons/police and robbery.

25.  Since the applicant's deportation order "revokes his  previously  (sic)
    leave that was granted to him ... without valid leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom he has no legal rights to work paid or unpaid or work in
    any business or profession".

26.  Having stated that the applicant "has no lawful basis to remain in  the
    UK" the writer warned that if the applicant "decides to stay, then  his
    life in the UK will become increasingly more difficult".   Amongst  the
    consequences of not immediately leaving were said to be the applicant's
    inability to work, checks required to be made by  landlords,  penalties
    for letting to an illegal migrant; an inability to claim benefits;  and
    a charge for any secondary healthcare.

27.  The letter of 4 January 2016 addressed a number of  matters,  including
    the "curfew" imposed on 30 July 2015.  The letter "noted  [that]  Judge
    Narayan set the primary condition for Mr Majera to  appear  before  his
    Offender Manager".  The letter then set out the secondary conditions of
    bail, as described above.  It was stated that  the  applicant  was,  in
    fact, "not subject to electronic monitoring which was a  condition  set
    by the Immigration Judge.  This is because the address supplied by  him
    was unsuitable.  It is therefore  still  deemed  appropriate  that  his
    weekly  reporting  continue  and  his  curfew  is  still   a   suitable
    alternative to electronic tagging which was imposed on him".



I. The grounds of challenge

28.  The grounds  accompanying  the  applicant's  application  for  judicial
    review contend that the decision in the letter of 3  December  2015  to
    refuse to withdraw the condition prohibiting voluntary work is based on
    a misapprehension of the law, is irrational and ultra  vires  "in  that
    the respondent has no power in law to attach additional  conditions  to
    bail which a bail judge, seized with a  bail  issue,  has  declined  to
    order".  The decision of 4 January 2016 to refuse to  vary  the  curfew
    hours is  said  to  be  "irrational  and  disproportionate  and  is  an
    unnecessary and unjustified restriction on  the  applicant's  liberty".
    Furthermore, the statement in the letter of 3 December  2015  that  the
    applicant's failure to leave the United Kingdom would result  in  "life
    in  the  UK  [becoming]  increasingly  more  difficult"  was  said   to
    demonstrate "an improper purpose in putting pressure on a person with a
    legitimate outstanding claim to leave  the  UK".   The  respondent  was
    still considering the application to revoke the applicant's deportation
    order.

29.  The applicant further contended that the prohibition on voluntary  work
    was  "undermining  the  function  of  the  Probation  Service  and  the
    applicant's right to rehabilitation", as well  as  being  "against  the
    statutory scheme and the public interest".

30.  An order was sought quashing the condition prohibiting voluntary  work,
    together with a mandatory order "that  the  respondent  adhere  to  any
    variation of licence conditions (i.e. he has a curfew) imposed  by  the
    NPS on behalf of the MOJ".



J. Grant of permission to bring judicial review proceedings

31.  Permission to bring judicial review  proceedings  was  refused  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on the papers  but  granted  when  the  application  was
    renewed orally before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith  on  22  August  2016.
    Before Judge Smith, the respondent's position was that the  application
    should be refused because the applicant had  "an  alternative  remedy";
    that is to say that the applicant "has not set out why this is a matter
    which should properly come before the  Upper  Tribunal  exercising  its
    judicial review jurisdiction, rather than  [the  applicant]  making  an
    application to the First-tier Tribunal in the ordinary  way".   In  the
    alternative, the respondent submitted that the  respondent's  decisions
    were not unlawful in their terms.

32.  Judge Smith granted permission only on the following ground:-

         "In summary, it is arguable that,  the  bail  order  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Narayan dated 30 July  2015  having  provided  as  a
         primary condition that 'the  applicant  is  to  appear  before  the
         Offender Manager', this does not require the applicant to surrender
         to the Secretary of State and arguably does  not  therefore  permit
         the  respondent  to  impose  different  conditions  or   vary   the
         conditions in that order.  It is arguable that on the facts of this
         case, the ratio of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  Raza  v  The
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 807 does
         not apply and that it remains for the First-tier Tribunal  to  vary
         conditions or impose new conditions.  It is arguable therefore that
         the Secretary of State's position as set out in her letter dated  4
         November 2015 that,  on  the  applicant  making  contact  with  his
         Offender Manager,  Immigration  Judge  bail  ceased  and  CIO  bail
         commenced is unlawful".

33.  We shall have occasion to revert to the case of Raza.  First,  however,
    it is necessary to set out the detention and bail provisions  contained
    in the Schedules to  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   This  is  necessary
    because, as we shall see,  the  respondent's  stance  in  her  detailed
    grounds of defence, following the grant of  permission,  is  strikingly
    different from that assumed by her up to  that  point.  These  grounds,
    drafted by Mr Sarabjit Singh, continued to represent  the  respondent's
    position at the hearing on 25 January 2017. They  necessitate  detailed
    consideration of the nature and scope of immigration bail.



K. Powers of detention

34.   The  powers  of  immigration  detention  relevant   in   the   present
    proceedings are contained in paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act:-



         "(2) Where notice has been given to a  person  in  accordance  with
             regulations under [section 105 of the Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (notice of decision)]  of  a  decision  to
             make a deportation order against him, [and he is not  detained
             in pursuance of the sentence or order of a court], he  may  be
             detained under the authority of the Secretary of State pending
             the making of the deportation order.

         (3)  Where a deportation order is in force against any  person,  he
             may be detained under the authority of the Secretary of  State
             pending his removal or departure from the United Kingdom  (and
             if already detained by virtue  of  sub-paragraph  (1)  or  (2)
             above when the order is made, shall continue  to  be  detained
             unless [he is released on bail  or]  the  Secretary  of  State
             directs otherwise).

         ...

         (5)  A person to whom this sub-paragraph applies shall  be  subject
             to such restrictions as to residence [, as to  his  employment
             or occupation] and as  to  reporting  to  the  police  [or  an
             immigration officer] as may from time to time be  notified  to
             him in writing by the Secretary of State.

         (6)  The persons to whom sub-paragraph (5) above applies are -

             (a)  a person liable to be detained  under  sub-paragraph  (1)
                  above, while by virtue of a direction of the Secretary  of
                  State he is not so detained; and

             (b)  a person liable to be detained under sub-paragraph (2) or
                  (3) above, while he is not so detained".




L. Bail powers

35.  The relevant bail powers are contained in paragraph 22 of Schedule 2:-

         "22.-

         (1)  The following, namely -

             (a)  a person detained under  paragraph  16(1)  above  pending
                  examination; [...]

                  (aa)  a  person  detained  under  paragraph  16(1A)  above
                        pending completion of his examination or a decision
                        on whether to cancel his leave to enter; and

             (b)  a person detained under paragraph 16(2) above pending the
                  giving  of  directions,  may  be  released  on   bail   in
                  accordance with this paragraph.

         (1A) An immigration officer not below the rank of chief immigration
             officer or the First-tier Tribunal may  release  a  person  so
             detained on his entering into a recognizance or, in  Scotland,
             bail bond conditioned for his appearance before an immigration
             officer at a time and place named in the recognizance or  bail
             bond or at such other time and place as may in the meantime be
             notified to him in writing by an immigration officer.

         (1B) ...

         (2)  The conditions of a recognizance or bail bond taken under this
             paragraph may include conditions appearing to the  immigration
             officer or the First-tier Tribunal to be likely to  result  in
             the appearance of the person bailed at the required  time  and
             place; and any recognizance shall be with or without  sureties
             as the officer or the First-tier Tribunal may determine.

         (3)     In any case in which an immigration officer or the  First-
             tier Tribunal has power  under  this  paragraph  to  release  a
             person on bail, the officer or  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may,
             instead of taking the bail, fix the amount and  the  conditions
             of the bail (including the amount in which any sureties are  to
             be bound) with a view to its being taken  subsequently  by  any
             such person as may be specified by the officer or  the   First-
             tier Tribunal; and on the recognizance or bail  bond  being  so
             taken the person to be bailed shall be released.

         (4)  A person must not be released on bail in accordance with  this
             paragraph without the consent of the Secretary of State if -

             (a)  directions for the removal of the person from the  United
                  Kingdom are for the time being in force, and

             (b)  the directions require the person to be removed from  the
                  United Kingdom within the period of 14 days starting  with
                  the date of the decision on whether the person  should  be
                  released on bail".

36.  Persons detained under paragraph 2(2) or  (3)  of  Schedule  3  may  be
    granted bail because paragraph 22 of Schedule 2 is stated by  paragraph
    2(4A) of Schedule 3 to "apply in relation to a  person  detained  under
    sub-paragraph (1), (2) or (3) as they apply in  relation  to  a  person
    detained under paragraph 16 of that Schedule".



M.  FTTIAC's Presidential Bail Guidance

37.  The First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Presidential
    Guidance Note  No  1  of  2012  comprises  "bail  guidance  for  judges
    presiding over immigration and asylum hearings".  Paragraph 3  of  this
    guidance makes it clear that it does not seek to be exhaustive  and  is
    not binding because "First-tier Tribunal Judges must apply the law and,
    if there is any divergence between the law and this guidance,  the  law
    will always be preferred".

38.  Amongst the Guidance is the following:-

         "15. Where an applicant for immigration bail has recently completed
             a prison sentence, there may be licence conditions applicable.
              The judge should be aware of such licence  conditions  before
             imposing bail conditions.  It would be  unfair  if  the  judge
             imposed conditions which were inconsistent with those  imposed
             by  the  licence.   Stringent  bail  conditions  may  not   be
             necessary if there is already an obligation  to  report  to  a
             probation officer regularly".

39.  For our purposes, the following provisions concerning  bail  conditions
    are relevant:-

         "32. The Tribunal will always set  some  conditions  when  granting
             bail to ensure that the person concerned answers when required
             to do so.  However, the stringency of the conditions set  will
             vary  according  to  the  circumstances  and  the   level   of
             monitoring of the applicant that may be required.

         33.  The first condition is to specify when bail will  end.   Where
             no immigration appeal is pending, a First-tier Tribunal  Judge
             should  grant  bail  with  a  condition  that  the   applicant
             surrenders to an Immigration Officer at a time and place to be
             specified either  in  the  bail  decision  itself  or  in  any
             subsequent variation.

         34.  The Judge  will  usually  specify  the  immigration  reporting
             centre nearest to  where  the  applicant  is  to  reside  when
             released and will often  specify  that  the  applicant  should
             answer to an Immigration Officer within seven days.

         35.  Once the applicant has answered to an Immigration  Officer  in
             accordance with that primary condition, the  duration  of  any
             further grant of bail will be  made  by  a  Chief  Immigration
             Officer rather than the Tribunal.  It is to be  expected  that
             the Tribunal's decision as to the principle of release will be
             followed in the absence of a change of  circumstances.   If  a
             person  does  not  answer   as   directed,   then   forfeiture
             proceedings are likely to commence in the Tribunal.

         ...

         37.  To enable the Tribunal  to  promote  the  achievement  of  the
             primary condition, a First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  likely  to
             impose a secondary condition.   Secondary  conditions  usually
             relate to the place of residence of the person to be  released
             on bail and how the person released on  bail  should  maintain
             contact with the immigration authorities.

         38.  ...

             iv.  A First-tier Tribunal Judge will take  into  account  any
                  licence conditions that apply to a person to  be  released
                  on immigration detention.   A  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
                  should not  grant  bail  with  bail  conditions  that  are
                  contrary  to  any  licence  conditions.   Details  of  the
                  licence will be held by the Criminal Casework  Directorate
                  and should be provided by the presenting officer  (as  per
                  the Probation Guidance contained in Annex 3).

             ...

             vi.  In addition to such reporting  conditions,  a  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge can direct that  a  person  be  subject  to
                  electronic   monitoring   ('tagging').     The    relevant
                  provisions  for  electronic  monitoring  are  set  out  in
                  s.36(4)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
                  Claimants, etc) Act 2004.  This condition is  most  likely
                  to be imposed if bail is to be granted to a person who has
                  previously  committed  a  criminal   offence   where   the
                  immigration authorities have requested it as an additional
                  safeguard for the protection of the public.   However,  it
                  remains for a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  consider  if
                  such  additional   safeguards   are   required   and   the
                  immigration authorities must substantiate such a  request.
                  Judges will also take into account the guidance in Annexes
                  5 and 8 regarding the terms of the  bail  conditions  that
                  should  be  imposed  if  electronic  monitory  is   deemed
                  necessary.

         ANNEX 8

         EXAMPLES OF STANDARD BAIL CONDITIONS

         Primary conditions of bail

         Where a First-tier Tribunal Judge grants  bail  but  no  appeal  is
         pending:

             The appellant is to appear before an  Immigration  Officer  at
             [INSERT ADDRESS] at [INSERT TIME]  on  [INSERT  DATE]  or  any
             other place and on  any  other  date  and  time  that  may  be
             required by the UK Border Agency or an Immigration Officer.

         ...

         Secondary conditions of bail

         Where tagging is required as a condition of bail.

             Bail is granted subject to (i) the applicant cooperating  with
             the arrangement for electronic monitoring ('tagging')  as  set
             out in s. 36 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants, etc)  Act  2004  and  (ii)  the  UK  Border  Agency
             arranging electronic monitoring within  two  working  days  of
             this grant of bail.

         Where bail conditions are to be linked to licence conditions.

             Where the licence conditions provide sufficient monitoring and
             control:

             Bail is granted in the same terms as the licence.

             Where the licence conditions are more general or  the  licence
             is due to end in the near future:

             The applicant is also required to comply  with  the  terms  of
             his/her licence".




N.  The respondent's position: FTT's grant of bail is void

40.  In the detailed grounds of defence, the respondent's position  (per  Mr
    Sarabjit Singh) is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's grant  of  bail
    was void.  The "purported"  grant  was  ultra  vires  paragraph  22  of
    Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.  The First-tier Tribunal's power to release
    on bail has to be "in accordance with this paragraph" in  order  to  be
    valid.  In the present case  the  judge's  imposition  of  the  primary
    condition of bail as a requirement to  appear  before  the  applicant's
    Offender Manager was manifestly non-compliant  with  paragraph  22(1A).
    As a result, the First-tier Tribunal must be found by me  not  to  have
    bailed the applicant.  Accordingly, its purported  conditions  of  bail
    are  of  no  effect.   Accordingly,   when   the   respondent   imposed
    restrictions on the applicant on 30 July 2015, she had no obligation to
    impose conditions that paid any regard to the void  conditions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



O.  Discussion

41.  Ms Weston submitted that the  need  for  certainty  was  of  particular
    importance  in  matters  concerning  liberty  of   the   person.    The
    respondent's present stance, if upheld, would lead to serious problems.
     It could not be right, she said, for parties to be left free to ignore
    bail decisions of the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that these were
    void.  It was plain from cases such as  Rochdale  Metropolitan  Borough
    Council v KW (No 2) [2015] EWCA Civ 1054 that any order of a  court  or
    Tribunal was binding until it was set aside  or  varied  in  accordance
    with the  principles  of  finality  and  certainty  necessary  for  the
    administration of justice.

42.  For his part, Mr Sarabjit Singh relied upon R  (AR  (Pakistan))  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  807.   In
    that case, the First-tier Tribunal had  granted  bail  with  a  primary
    condition that AR was to appear before the Chief Immigration Officer on
    15 October 2014.  A subsequent application by AR  to  the  Tribunal  to
    vary the secondary conditions of his bail was rejected by the  Tribunal
    in July 2015 on the basis that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction.

43.  The Upper Tribunal, however, held  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    been wrong to decline jurisdiction  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  the
    respondent had no power to remove or relax bail conditions  imposed  by
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Upper  Tribunal  considered  that  the
    species of bail in question was one of non-finite duration,  such  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had a continuing role for as long as  the  bail
    order existed.

44.  The Court of Appeal disagreed.  Having considered paragraphs 32  to  35
    of the President's bail guidance (see above) the court held as follows:-



         "24. It can be seen that this Guidance does not support  the  Upper
             Tribunal's second  sub-scenario  of  FTT  bail  of  non-finite
             duration.  The Guidance expressly  contemplates  that,  if  no
             appeal is pending before  the  FTT,  duration  of  bail  after
             surrender  to  an  immigration  officer  is   for   'a   Chief
             Immigration Officer rather than the  Tribunal'  and  that  the
             responsibility  for  considering  variation  'lies   with   an
             Immigration Officer in all other circumstances' than while  an
             appeal is pending.

         25.  The Upper Tribunal, although citing these provisions, does not
             directly address the question whether the provisions are wrong
             in law but, by implication, the Upper Tribunal has  held  that
             they are.

         26.  For my part I cannot agree with  the  Upper  Tribunal's  views
             about this. I do not get  much  assistance  from  para  21  of
             schedule 2 which deals with temporary admission to the  United
             Kingdom by an immigration officer but does not deal with  bail
             or bail conditions in connection with 'a person detained' such
             as AR was.  That is the province of para 22 which authorises a
             Chief Immigration  Officer  or  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  to
             release a detained person

                  'on his entering a recognizance ...  conditioned  for  his
                  appearance before an immigration officer  at  a  time  and
                  place named in the recognizance ...'

             This is a time-honoured form of words to express the  idea  of
             surrendering to bail.  Once a bailed person surrenders to  his
             bail (whether to magistrates or the Crown Court in a  criminal
             case or to an immigration officer in an immigration  case)  it
             is then for the person to whom he surrenders to  re-fix  bail,
             if he or  she  considers  it  appropriate  to  do  so  and  to
             determine any appropriate conditions.

         27.  It is fair to say that there are no express words in paragraph
             22 saying that bail conditions are to cease on  surrender  but
             in my view Mr Clement's (sic) guidance  correctly  states  the
             position as a matter of necessary inference from the terms  of
             paragraph 22 and particularly 22(1A).  It follows  that  there
             is no sub-scenario of FTT bail of  non-finite  duration  in  a
             case where there is no pending appeal to the FTT.  It  follows
             further that, if and to the extent conditions of bail  imposed
             by the FTT continue after surrender, they are to be treated in
             law as imposed by the immigration officer to whom the detained
             person surrenders  and  can  be  varied,  if  appropriate,  by
             another immigration officer and that the  Secretary  of  State
             was therefore entitled to discharge the conditions as she  did
             on 9th October 2015.

         28.  What then of Mr Sarabjit Singh's submissions that if  this  is
             right there is  no  need  for  the  FTT  to  impose  secondary
             conditions  and  that  the  2014  Rules  make  it  clear  that
             adversarial argument about conditions is to  be  conducted  in
             the FTT rather than at the time of surrender?  The  answer  is
             that secondary conditions (such as residence and submission to
             electronic tagging) are required because there is inevitably a
             lapse of time between release from detention and the  date  of
             surrender.  During that lapse of time, conditions such as that
             imposed by the FTT  in  this  case  will,  in  any  event,  be
             necessary.  Any conditions imposed by the  FTT  will  also  be
             important guidance to an immigration officer to whom a  bailed
             person surrenders.  He is likely to continue  the  terms;  any
             departure from them to the  prejudice  of  the  bailed  person
             would have to be justified and could be amenable  to  judicial
             review.  That might have been important in this  case  if  the
             Secretary of State had sought to maintain the curfew condition
             which, as I have said, was not imposed by the FTT at all".

45.  Mr Sarabjit Singh submitted  that  since,  in  the  present  case,  the
    judge's primary condition of bail - "to appear before [the applicant's]
    Offender Manager" - was invalid, the purported grant of bail was one of
    non-finite duration and was, accordingly, void.

46.   The respondent's contention that the  judge's  grant  of  bail  was  a
    nullity does not mean that a person may ignore a bail decision  of  the
    Tribunal which he or she  considers  invalid.   As  a  judicial  action
    (albeit by a body of limited jurisdiction)  the  Tribunal's  order  has
    effect unless and until a court or Tribunal seized of  jurisdiction  in
    respect of the matter decides that it was invalid.

47.  If, however, a court or Tribunal does so find,  then  the  decision  to
    grant bail falls to be treated as a nullity from  the  outset;  it  has
    never had legal effect.  In other words,  the  Tribunal's  decision  is
    void, not  voidable:  F  Hoffmann  La  Roche  v  SSTI  [1975]  AC  295;
    Boddington v British Transport Police [1999] 2 AC 143.

48.  The consequences of finding that a decision to grant bail is, in  fact,
    of no legal effect are likely to be  serious.   Quite  apart  from  the
    basic fact that a  person  will  have  been  unlawfully  released  from
    detention, action  may  have  been  taken  against  the  person  and/or
    sureties (eg for breach of bail  conditions).   The  task  of  deciding
    what, if any, subsequent decisions are affected  by  the  finding  that
    bail was a nullity may  be  far  from  straightforward:  see,  in  this
    regard, Ouseley  J's  detailed  analysis  in  TN  (Vietnam)  &  Anor  v
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  &  Anor  [2017]  EWHC  59
    (Admin).

49.  The fact that finding a bail decision to be a nullity has very  serious
    potential consequences is, I find, relevant to the task of interpreting
    the relevant legislation; namely, paragraph 22(1) and (1A) of  Schedule
    2 to the 1971 Act.  Was it Parliament's intention,  in  enacting  those
    provisions, that defects in  the  grant  of  bail  should  vitiate  the
    decision to grant? Alternatively, is the proper reading of paragraph 22
    that such defects - even concerning the so-called  "primary  condition"
    in sub-paragraph (1A) - mean that there has been a valid but  defective
    grant of bail, which the parties (in particular, the respondent) should
    immediately draw to the  attention  of  the  Tribunal,  and  which  the
    Tribunal has a duty immediately to correct?

50.  With  respect  to  Mr  Sarabjit  Singh,  I  do  not  consider  that  AR
    (Pakistan)  has  anything  material  to  say  about  this  question  of
    statutory construction.  The fact that "there is no sub-scenario of FTT
    bail of non-finite duration", in a  case  where  there  is  no  pending
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (paragraph 27 of the judgments), does
    not mean that bail is necessarily void if, through error, a judge fails
    to comply fully with the legislative requirements.

51.  I therefore approach the issue of statutory construction on  the  basis
    that, absent clear provision to the contrary, Parliament is unlikely to
    have intended bail decisions to be nullities  and  that  AR  (Pakistan)
    does not compel acceptance of Mr Sarabjit Singh's submissions.

52.  I do not find that the words "in accordance  with  this  paragraph"  in
    paragraph 22(1) have the effect for which Mr Sarabjit  Singh  contends.
    Although  the  description  of  sub-paragraph  (1A)  as  the   "primary
    condition" is not to be found in the 1971 Act, it is  clear  from  sub-
    paragraph (2) that sub-paragraph (1A) is one of the  "conditions  of  a
    recognizance or bail bond taken under this paragraph".  There is, thus,
    a conceptual difference between the power to release on  bail  and  the
    conditions to be imposed, including the primary condition.

53.  It is self-evident that the words "in accordance with  this  paragraph"
    in paragraph 22(1) cover the entirety of sub-paragraphs (1A) to (4)  of
    that paragraph.  Accordingly, if Mr Sarabjit Singh is correct, then the
    same consequence must follow in respect of any condition, not just  the
    primary condition. Therefore, the imposition under sub-paragraph (2) of
    an irrational condition would mean that bail had not been  granted  "in
    accordance with" paragraph 22.  But, as can readily be appreciated,  it
    would be highly problematic if any unlawful condition were to have  the
    effect of rendering the entire grant of bail void.

54.  The way in which sub-paragraph (3) is framed serves  to  underline  the
    difference between "taking"  the  bail,  which  when  done  results  in
    release, and fixing the  "conditions  of  the  bail",  which  does  not
    automatically have that result.

55.  Although not determinative, it is,  I  consider,  noteworthy  that  the
    respondent's contention that the judge's grant of bail  was  void  from
    the outset found no expression in the correspondence of the  respondent
    with the applicant's solicitors or, indeed, in  the  skeleton  argument
    filed  by  the  respondent  at  the  oral   permission   hearing.   The
    respondent's officers and legal advisers were of the  view  that  Judge
    Narayan's bail decision was legally effective.

56.  As a matter of statutory construction, I have accordingly  reached  the
    conclusion that the respondent is  now  wrong  to  contend  that  Judge
    Narayan's grant of bail falls to be treated as a nullity. I decline  to
    hold that the judge's error in the imposition of the primary  condition
    of the applicant's bail means that the Upper Tribunal should  find  the
    bail decision was void.

57.    It is therefore necessary to consider whether  the  applicant's  bail
    lasted longer than 30 July 2015, the day on which it was made.   As  we
    have already seen, the respondent, in her "notice  of  restriction"  of
    that day, seems to have taken the view that  the  Tribunal's  bail  had
    come to an end.  The contention in the correspondence was that this was
    because  the  applicant  had,  by  that  time,  fulfilled  the  primary
    condition of appearing before his Offender Manager. This contention is,
    however, unsupported by any documentary evidence that I have seen.   In
    any event, it is common ground between the parties that the requirement
    to appear before the Offender Manager is not a "primary condition" that
    can be imposed under paragraph 22(1A).  Although it is a condition that
    could validly be imposed under paragraph 22(2),  compliance  with  sub-
    paragraph  (2)  would  not  terminate  the  judge's  grant   of   bail.
    Accordingly, this asserted reason of the respondent for  regarding  the
    judge's bail as ending on 30 July 2015 cannot be correct.

58.  It is apparently the case that, later on 30 July  2015,  the  applicant
    came into contact with an Immigration Officer, who gave  the  applicant
    the notice of  restriction.   Mr  Sarabjit  Singh's  stance  before  me
    necessarily precluded him from submitting that the  applicant's  coming
    before an Immigration Officer had the effect of bringing the Tribunal's
    grant of bail to an end.  In view of my finding at paragraph 56  above,
    it is nevertheless necessary for me to consider this issue.

59.  Whilst there might be some superficial attraction in finding that  this
    contact with the Immigration Officer brought the First-tier  Tribunal's
    bail to an end, I believe it must  be  rejected.   As  I  have  already
    sought to make clear, the  proper  response,  faced  with  the  judge's
    manifestly defective bail decision, was for the respondent  immediately
    to return to the Tribunal in order to secure a primary  condition  that
    complied with paragraph 22(1A).  The respondent, like any other  party,
    has an obligation under the Procedure Rules 2014 to cooperate with  the
    First-tier Tribunal with a view to securing the overriding objective of
    dealing with cases justly and fairly.  The present proceedings  are,  I
    consider, an object  lesson  in  the  importance  of  that  obligation,
    particularly in a matter as important to  the  individual  and  to  the
    public as the grant of bail.

60.  The result of my analysis is I agree with Ms Weston  that  the  judge's
    grant of bail on 30 July 2015 is  valid  and  remains  in  force.   Its
    defective nature must be remedied.  The proper body to do this  is  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

61.  As can now be seen, there  was  much  to  be  said  for  Judge  Smith's
    decision,  when  granting   permission   to   bring   judicial   review
    proceedings, to stay the proceedings for fourteen  days  in  order  "to
    permit the respondent to consider whether to make an application to the
    First-tier Tribunal for variation of  the  bail  order".   As  will  be
    evident, the respondent declined to do so.

62.  The overall result of my finding is, in effect,  the  mirror  image  of
    the situation in AR (Pakistan).  There, the First-tier Tribunal's  bail
    had ended, having given way to the bail jurisdiction of the Immigration
    Officer.  Here, by contrast, the Tribunal's bail jurisdiction  has  not
    ended, albeit that it must be regularised.

63.  The continued existence of the Tribunal's bail means  the  respondent's
    purported bail conditions, set out in the  notice  of  restriction  and
    subsequently defended in the impugned  decisions,  can  have  no  legal
    effect.  Neither Counsel urged me to find that the scheme of  the  1971
    Act is such that, during the currency of Tribunal bail, an  Immigration
    Officer has power to amend the conditions of that bail and I can detect
    nothing in that Act to suggest this  is  possible.   Moreover,  such  a
    proposition derives no support from the judgments in AR (Pakistan).

64.  In view of these findings, it is strictly unnecessary to  consider  the
    applicant's arguments as to the ability of  the  respondent  to  impose
    conditions of bail which differ from those imposed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The legal position is that this stage has not been reached.

65.  It is, nevertheless, desirable for me to say something in this  regard,
    not least because the First-tier Tribunal  will  need  to  revisit  the
    contentious  secondary  condition  regarding  the  applicant's   unpaid
    employment.

66.  As we have seen, the judge  imposed  the  following  condition  on  the
    applicant:-

         "Must not enter paid employment,  or  engage  in  any  business  or
         profession".

67.  Despite the respondent's earlier attempt to argue the contrary,  it  is
    manifest that Judge Narayan, in imposing this  condition,  intended  to
    achieve the result that the applicant could continue working unpaid  in
    the charity shop, as he had been doing during the last  stages  of  his
    open imprisonment.  The respondent's earlier contention, that such work
    was prohibited by the requirement not to "engage  in  any  business  or
    profession", is obviously devoid of merit.

68.  The problem with the judge's employment condition is that it  does  not
    appear to be one which, given the circumstances of the applicant, could
    be made pursuant to paragraph 22(2) of Schedule 2.  The  condition  not
    to enter paid employment etc.  appears  to  have  nothing  to  do  with
    securing the applicant's appearance at a time and place required by sub-
    paragraph (1A).  There is, as far as I am aware, no suggestion that the
    applicant would be less likely to surrender to his bail if he had  been
    working in a paid, as opposed to an unpaid, capacity.

69.  I find myself in agreement with Mr Sarabjit Singh  that  responsibility
    for  operating  the  statutory  regime   concerning   restrictions   on
    employment etc. in respect of those  who  are  subject  to  immigration
    control lies with  the  respondent.   Section  1(2)  of  the  1971  Act
    provides that those not having the right of abode in the United Kingdom
    "may live, work and settle in the  United  Kingdom  by  permission  and
    subject to such regulation and control of their entry into, stay in and
    departure  from  the  United  Kingdom  as  is  imposed  by  this  Act".
    Responsibility for regulation and control lies with the respondent, not
    only directly under the Act but also under the immigration  rules  made
    in accordance with it.

70.  As we have already seen, paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 3 to the  1971  Act
    is the provision that enabled the respondent to detain  the  applicant,
    upon his release from imprisonment.   For  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    2(6)(b), the applicant was, accordingly, a person liable to be detained
    under paragraph 2(3) who, by reason of his bail, was not  so  detained.
    Therefore, paragraph 2(5) applies to the applicant.  This  states  that
    such a person "shall be subject to such restrictions as  to  residence,
    as to his employment or occupation ... as may  from  time  to  time  be
    notified to him in writing by  the  Secretary  of  State".   Thus,  the
    respondent has power to restrict the employment or  occupation  of  the
    applicant, even while he is on bail.  As a result, quite apart from  my
    concerns as to the rationale, in bail terms, for imposing an employment
    condition, I do not see how any such bail condition  could  affect  the
    respondent's freestanding ability to impose restrictions on  employment
    or occupation under paragraph 2(5) of Schedule 3.

71.  I am entirely unpersuaded that the word "work" in section 1(2) and  the
    word  "employment"  in  paragraph  2(5)  of  Schedule  3   cover   only
    remunerated work or employment.  It is unnecessary for  the  respondent
    to pray in aid for this purpose the interpretation  provisions  of  the
    immigration rules.  It is, in my view, obvious as a matter  of  English
    language that work can be paid or  unpaid.   Likewise,  the  expression
    "paid employment" presupposes that one may be  employed  in  an  unpaid
    capacity.  Even if that were not so, there is no necessary  requirement
    for a person's "occupation" to be remunerated.

72.  As has been seen, it is suggested in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Bail
    Guidance that, where a person is on licence, any bail should be granted
    "in the same terms as the licence".  What  Judge  Narayan  did  in  the
    present case went beyond the provisions of the  then  existing  licence
    position, as contained in the Parole Board's letter of 31  March  2015.
    That  letter  did  not  contain  any  specific  condition  relating  to
    employment.  The licence granted  on  31  July  2015,  however,  had  a
    condition as follows:-

         "v.  Undertake only such work (including voluntary  work)  approved
             by your supervising officer and notify him or her  in  advance
             of any proposed change".

73.  As will be apparent from what I have  said  earlier,  I  have  concerns
    about the suggestion in the Guidance that bail should  be  granted  "in
    the same terms as the licence".  The licence conditions imposed by  the
    National Probation Service are designed to serve different, wider  aims
    than the conditions that may be imposed by the First-tier Tribunal on a
    grant  of  bail  under  paragraph  22(2).   It  seems  to  me   to   be
    inappropriate to encourage bail judges to  impose  conditions  (whether
    expressly or by  reference  to  the  licence  conditions)  which,  upon
    analysis, may lack statutory validity.

74.  In my view, the better course would be for the bail decision  to  state
    that the conditions of bail are without  prejudice  to  any  conditions
    contained in the licence and for bail judges to ensure, in  each  case,
    that there is not any conflict between bail conditions and the  licence
    conditions.

75.  In paragraph 1 of the document dated 31 July 2015, it is stated that:

        "unless you are subsequently being detained under  the  Immigration
        Act 1971 for the  purpose  of  your  deportation/removal  from  the
        United Kingdom, you will be under the supervision  of  a  nominated
        officer and must comply with the conditions of this  licence.   The
        objectives of this supervision are to (a) protect the  public,  (b)
        prevent re-offending and (c) help you to resettle successfully into
        the community".

76.  Paragraph 3 provides that on:

         "release from prison (including, if applicable, any  release  from
        detention under the 1971 Act during the currency of  your  licence,
        whether or not leave has been granted for  you  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom), unless  otherwise  directed  by  your  supervising
        officer, you must report without delay  to  [named  supervisor  and
        address]".

77.  As well  making  clear  the  wider  purposes  of  the  licence  regime,
    compared with immigration bail, the provisions just  quoted  show  that
    release on licence  does  not  mean  the  person  concerned  cannot  be
    detained for deportation or other  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    During such detention, the conditions of the licence would, of  course,
    be of no effect.  But once the person concerned is on immigration bail,
    the position is that the licence conditions remain effective, with  the
    consequent need to ensure that bail conditions do not cut across them.

78.  Finally, because of my  findings,  the  present  proceedings  would  be
    incapable of providing a forum for testing the applicant's  contentions
    about the relationship between bail conditions that may be  imposed  by
    the respondent, following the applicant's surrender to  an  Immigration
    Officer, and any conditions that may have been imposed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as conditions of its immigration bail.  This matter  has,
    in any event, been authoritatively settled by the Court of Appeal in AR
    (Pakistan):-

         "Any conditions imposed by the FTT will also be important  guidance
         to an Immigration Officer to whom a bailed person  surrenders.   He
         is likely to continue the terms; any departure  from  them  to  the
         prejudice of the bailed person would have to be justified and could
         be amenable to judicial review".




P.  Decision

79.  The decisions of 3  December  2015  and  4  January  2016  fall  to  be
    quashed.  I make a declaration  that  the  applicant  remains  on  bail
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 30 July 2015.

80.  I shall hear Counsel  on  the  issue  of  costs,  if  these  cannot  be
    agreed.~~~~0~~~~
