
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

        SS (Jurisdiction - Rule 62(7);  Refugee's family;  Policy) Somalia
[2005] UKAIT 00167


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing: 18 October
2005
                                      Date of Promulgation: 24 November 2005

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                   Mr P R Lane (Senior Immigration Judge)
                  Miss B Mensah (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M Symes, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.  The restriction on grounds of reconsideration imposed by Rule 62(7)
cannot be taken to enlarge the Tribunal's statutory jurisdiction by
enabling an appellant to succeed on a ground of appeal not open to him.  2.
 The terms of any policy upon which the claimant relies must be read as a
whole.  3.  It is only in very rare cases that the terms of a policy will
allow the Tribunal to give a substantive direction in allowing an appeal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia, now aged nearly  nineteen.   He
     arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 December 2002.  He claimed  asylum.
     On 20 April 2004, he was  served  with  notice  of  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision to refuse him asylum but grant him limited  leave  to
     enter.  He appealed, and his appeal was heard by an Adjudicator, Mr  D
     Taylor, and allowed in a determination sent out on 10  November  2004.
     The Secretary of State applied for and was granted leave to appeal  to
     the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  against  that  determination.   The
     Appellant sought  unsuccessfully  to  have  the  grant  set  aside  on
     Statutory  Review.   Following  the  commencement   of   the   appeals
     provisions of the 2004 Act, the grant of permission now  takes  effect
     as an order for reconsideration by this Tribunal  of  the  Appellant's
     appeal.

  2. We should say at the outset that in a number of respects the Secretary
     of State's paperkeeping in respect of  this  appeal  has  been  rather
     unsatisfactory.   We  do  not  know  the  reason  for  the  delay   in
     determining the Appellant's claim.  What we do know is  that  when  it
     was determined, although the refusal of asylum is clear, the grant  of
     limited leave is not.  The notice of decision indicates in a paragraph
     headed "Right of appeal" that the grant is "for a period exceeding one
     year (or for periods exceeding one year in aggregate)"  but  does  not
     state for  what  period  leave  has  been  granted.   The  Appellant's
     representatives wrote on 23 April and 30 April  2004  asking  for  the
     period of the grant to be indicated.  We have not seen  any  reply  to
     those letters, but it appears  from  the  Adjudicator's  determination
     that the Appellant has leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  13
     April 2007.  Secondly, it appears that the Appellant is one  of  three
     brothers.  At his interview, he said that one brother had arrived with
     him and another earlier.  He thought that they had all asked  to  stay
     on the same basis that he had.  At  the  hearing  before  us,  neither
     party was able to tell us anything about the  current  status  of  the
     other brothers.

The Appellant's claim and his appeal

  3. The Appellant's claimed history is as follows.  He  says  that  he  is
     from Bakaraha, Mogadishu, Somalia.  He lived there  with  his  mother,
     father, three brothers and sister.  His  mother  is  of  the  minority
     Ashraf clan.  His father is of the Lugayare  sub-clan  of  the  Hawiye
     clan.  When the Appellant was aged about nine his father's brother was
     killed and, soon afterwards, there was a raid on  his  house  and  the
     Appellant was taken away.  He says that he  was  trained  as  a  child
     soldier but, before engaging in any  fighting,  he  happened  to  come
     across his father who took  him  back  home.   Then  he  and  all  his
     siblings went by lorry to Ethiopia.  They lived there for about  seven
     years.  When the Appellant was about sixteen, he was  brought  to  the
     United Kingdom by a man called Abdi.

  4. In the Appellant's witness statement, he says that he is rather  vague
     about dates particularly of things that happened a long time ago  when
     he was very young.  He says also that he was not really aware of  what
     was happening around the time that he left Ethiopia.  He says that  he
     did not know his mother was still alive and did  not  know  very  much
     about the departure of his brother Shamarke.  That may be so;  but the
     documents before us show that  the  Appellant's  mother,  having  left
     Somalia in 1999 and spent two years in Kenya, appears to have  arrived
     here some time in 2001.  She was refused asylum  on  24  October  2001
     but, following a successful  appeal,  was  granted  asylum  and  given
     indefinite leave to remain on 5 September 2002.  That  is  just  three
     months before the Appellant and his brother travelled  to  the  United
     Kingdom.

  5. The Appellant's grounds of appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
     refusal of his asylum claim were as follows:

           "1.   The Appellant's removal of the Appellant  [sic]  from  the
                 United  Kingdom   would   breach   the   United   Kingdom's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention.
           2.    The Appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution based
                 on race (perceived and actual) as the  son  of  a  minority
                 clan member."

  6. The Appellant was invited to give any additional reasons why he should
     be allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.  He did so in the  following
     terms:

           "1.   The Secretary of State  has  erred  in  not  granting  the
                 Appellant indefinite leave to remain as the minor child  of
                 a recognised refugee.  See the Asylum Policy instruction on
                 family reunion


           3.    ELIGIBILITY OF SPONSORING FAMILY MEMBERS


           3.1   Where the sponsor has refugee status


                 If a person has been recognised as a refugee in the  UK  we
                 will normally recognise family members in line  with  them.
                 If the family are abroad, we will normally agree  to  their
                 admission as refugees."

  7. In the Appellant's representatives' letter accompanying the notice  of
     appeal appears the following paragraph:

           "You will also know from the  statement  of  additional  grounds
           that we believe that the Secretary of State has erred in failing
           to grant our client indefinite leave  to  remain  as  the  minor
           child of a recognised refugee."

The Adjudicator's determination

  8. The Adjudicator's determination begins with  the  statement  that  the
     Appellant's appeal is under section 82(1)  of  the  2002  Act.   After
     setting out the Appellant's immigration history and the basis  of  his
     claim, the Adjudicator asserts that he has taken into account all  the
     documents before him, and notes that there was no oral evidence at the
     hearing.

  9. The determination continues as follows:

           "19.  It is not disputed by the respondent  that  the  appellant
                 is, as he claims to be, a citizen of Somalia and I find him
                 so to be.


           20.   The appellant's Counsel acknowledged to me that he was  in
                 some  difficulty  under  the   Refugee   Convention.    The
                 objective material  indicates  that  the  appellant,  as  a
                 member of the Hawiye clan, is unlikely to face  persecution
                 in Somalia and there is no  evidence  that  he  was  indeed
                 persecuted whilst he was  there.   I  have  no  alternative
                 therefore but formally  to  dismiss  his  claim  under  the
                 Refugee Convention.


           21.   I propose, however, to  allow  the  appeal  under  Section
                 86(3)(a) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
                 2002.  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the  "One-Stop  Appeal
                 Procedure' that the appellant must indicate in  his  appeal
                 all the grounds on which he claims to remain in the  United
                 Kingdom.  Although the  appellant,  probably  due  to  poor
                 legal advice, applied for asylum in his own right, he  made
                 it clear in his notice of appeal that it was his case  that
                 he should have been granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
                 line with the status of his mother."

 10. The Adjudicator then sets out the part of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     policy that is  cited  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  notes  that  the
     Appellant came to the United Kingdom to be with his mother, refers  to
     SSHD v Abdi (DS) [1996] Imm AR 148 and to the duty under s86 to  allow
     an appeal if the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law,  and
     continues as follows:

           "26.  ... I am satisfied that the decision of the respondent  to
                 grant only discretionary leave to the appellant was 'not in
                 accordance with the  law'.   The  respondent  has  a  clear
                 policy and he has failed to apply it.  The appellant  under
                 that policy should have been granted  indefinite  leave  to
                 remain.


           27.   I therefore allow this appeal on the basis  and,  pursuant
                 to  the  powers  given  to  me  by  Section  87(1)  of  the
                 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  for  the
                 purpose of giving effect to this  decision,  I  direct  the
                 respondent to grant  indefinite  leave  to  remain  to  the
                 appellant in line with his mother."

The appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal

 11. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal on the following grounds:

           "1.   The adjudicator has erred in law  by  directing  that  the
                 respondent be granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain  in  line
                 with his mother under the Family Reunion policy  where  the
                 provisions  relating  to   family   reunion,   covered   in
                 paragraphs 352E, states that limited leave to  remain  will
                 be granted.


           2.    The adjudicator has failed to give  due  consideration  to
                 all  sections  of  paragraph  352D  when   directing   that
                 Indefinite Leave to Remain be  granted  in  line  with  his
                 mother.  At paragraph 26 of his  determination,  Mr  Taylor
                 found that, 'It cannot be said that the respondent had  any
                 doubts about the relationship between the appellant and his
                 mother  ...",  thereby  finding  in  favour  of   paragraph
                 352D(i).  However, the adjudicator has failed to  give  due
                 consideration to  352D(iv).   The  brief  details  of  this
                 respondent's family life is  that  4  years  prior  to  his
                 mother departing Somalia, he and his siblings went Ethiopia
                 to live with their father whilst  she  stayed  in  Somalia.
                 Upon leaving Somalia the respondent's mother went to  Kenya
                 where she stayed for a further  2  years.   The  respondent
                 arrived in the UK in 2002, some 7 years after he  last  saw
                 his mother.  In directing that  the  appellant  be  granted
                 Indefinite Leave to Remain in line with his mother  without
                 full  consideration   of   the   Immigration   Rules,   the
                 adjudicator has erred in law.


           3.    In giving a direction to grant Indefinite Leave to  Remain
                 in line with his mother, the adjudicator has misapplied the
                 case  of  Abdi,  relied  upon  in  paragraph  24   of   the
                 determination.  It was found in Abdi that, '... it  is  not
                 inevitable that the application will  be  refused.   To  my
                 mind the Tribunal was correct in saying that on the footing
                 that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  the
                 matter must go back  to  the  Home  Secretary  for  him  to
                 reconsider the application ...'.  Furthermore,  the  Family
                 Reunion policy is no longer an extra statutory  policy  but
                 is and has been for  the  direction  of  this  respondent's
                 claim, part of the Immigration Rules at Paragraphs  352A-D.
                 In misapplying this case the adjudicator has erred in law."

 12. Permission was granted on all those grounds.  There was,  as  we  have
     said, an attempt to reverse  the  grant  of  permission  by  Statutory
     Review.  The claim for Statutory Review repeated in greater detail the
     Appellant's claim to indefinite leave to remain  as  the  child  of  a
     refugee.  There has been no appeal against the Adjudicator's rejection
     of the asylum claim.

Jurisdiction:  section 83 and Rule 62(7)

 13. Thus the appeal comes before us for reconsideration.   We  must  begin
     our determination with one matter that was not raised at the  hearing:
     we do not know why neither party brought it to our attention.  That is
     that there appears to  be,  and  to  have  been,  no  jurisdiction  to
     consider the principal ground advanced on behalf of the Appellant.

 14. The notice of decision indicated that the Appellant  had  a  right  of
     appeal under s83 of the 2002 Act.   That  section  is  in  the  follow
     terms:

           "83.  Appeal:  asylum claim


                    1) This section applies  where  a  person  has  made  an
                       asylum claim and
                      a) his claim has been rejected by  the  Secretary  of
                         State, but
                      b) he has been granted leave to enter  or  remain  in
                         the United Kingdom for a period exceeding one year
                         (or for periods exceeding one year in aggregate).

                 (2)   The person may appeal ... against  the  rejection  of
                 his asylum claim."

 15. Section 84 is headed "Grounds of appeal".  Subsection (1) sets out the
     grounds on which an appeal can be brought under s82 of the  2002  Act.
     Subsection (3) is as follows:

           "(3)  An appeal under section 83 must be brought on the  grounds
                 that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would
                 breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the  Refugee
                 Convention."

 16. It is in our view abundantly clear that the wider grounds available in
     an appeal under s82 are not available in an appeal under  s83.   Under
     s82, an appellant can indeed appeal on the ground  that  the  decision
     against which he appeals "is otherwise not in accordance with the law"
     (s82(1)(e));  but that ground is not available under s83.  If a person
     has been granted more than twelve months leave to enter or remain, his
     appeal is on asylum grounds only.

 17. The Adjudicator erred in stating that the appeal was  under  s82:   it
     was not.  It was under s83, as the documents before  him  made  clear.
     He also erred in taking into account grounds which were  not  open  to
     the Appellant in an appeal under s83.   It  follows  that  he  had  no
     jurisdiction to allow the appeal, as he did, on those grounds only.

 18. It is evidently extremely unfortunate that this point was not taken by
     the Secretary of State's representative at the hearing before him when
     the admissible grounds were argued, nor by the  Secretary  of  State's
     representative in the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal in the hearing
     before  us.    It   is   also   regrettable   that   the   Appellant's
     representatives appear not to have been aware of  the  position.   But
     mistake or concession  cannot  give  jurisdiction:   and  they  cannot
     override the restrictions of the statute.

 19. This Tribunal is governed  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
     (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230),  made  under  the  2002  Act  as
     amended.  Rule 62 is headed "Transitional Provisions",  and  deals  in
     part with appeals such as  the  present  appeal,  which  were  pending
     before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal at the moment  of  commencement
     of the appeals provisions of  the  2004  Act.   By  the  operation  of
     Article 5 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)
     Act 2004 (Commencement No 5 and Transitional  Provisions)  Order  2005
     (SI 2005/656) the appeal takes effect as  a  reconsideration,  and  by
     Rule 62(7):

           "... the reconsideration shall be limited to  the  grounds  upon
           which the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
           appeal."

 20. That clear restriction might, if read in isolation,  suggest  that  as
     the question whether the Adjudicator acted  outside  his  jurisdiction
     was not raised in the grounds of  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal and was not the subject of the grant of appeal, it cannot  be
     raised now.  But Rule 62(7) cannot be read in isolation.   The  rights
     of appeal are given to appellants by the 2002 Act.  The appellate body
     is this Tribunal, a creation of the 2004 Act.   Procedure  rules  made
     under those Acts cannot have the effect  of  giving  the  claimant  an
     appellate right which is excluded by  the  Acts.   Rule  62(7)  cannot
     enlarge the statutory jurisdiction;  it cannot have the effect that  a
     matter of jurisdiction cannot be the subject of reconsideration if  it
     was not the subject of the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.   In  a
     statutory Tribunal of limited jurisdiction,  matters  of  jurisdiction
     must always be amenable to litigation:   if  it  were  otherwise,  the
     Tribunal's jurisdiction could regularly be enlarged by the consent  of
     the parties or by simple error.

 21. For the foregoing reasons, we hold that despite the terms of the grant
     of appeal and of Rule 62(7) it is open to us to consider  whether  the
     Adjudicator had, under the statute, jurisdiction to do  what  he  did.
     We hold also that he had no jurisdiction  to  consider  grounds  other
     than those set out in s83 and that, as  he  had  rejected  the  ground
     based on the Refugee Convention, he could in law do nothing other than
     dismiss the appeal before him.

 22. That is sufficient to dispose of this appeal on reconsideration:  but,
     in deference to the arguments we have heard, we will give our views on
     their substantive content.

Rules and policies

 23. As the Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  indicate,  although
     nothing of the kind appears in the  Adjudicator's  determination,  the
     Immigration Rules contain  provisions  relating  to  the  children  of
     refugees.  The Rules in question were inserted by  Cm  4851  and  took
     effect from 2 October 2000.  They were amended on 18 September 2002 by
     Cm 5597.  The present form is that which is relevant for all  purposes
     in relation to this Appellant.  They are as follows:

           "352D.      The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave
                 to enter or remain in the United Kingdom [in order to  join
                 or remain with the parent who has been  granted  asylum  in
                 the United Kingdom] are that the applicant:
                    i) is the child of a parent who has been granted  asylum
                       in the United Kingdom;  and
                   ai) is under the age of 18;  and
                  iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried, and
                       has not formed an independent family unit;  and
                   iv) was part of the family unit  of  the  person  granted
                       asylum at the time that  the  person  granted  asylum
                       left the country of his habitual residence  in  order
                       to seek asylum;  and
                    v) would not be excluded from protection  by  virtue  of
                       article 1F  of  the  United  Nations  Convention  and
                       Protocol relating to the Status  of  Refugees  if  he
                       were to seek asylum in his own right;  and
                   vi) if seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                       Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity.

           352E. Limited leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of
                 a refugee may be granted provided a  valid  United  Kingdom
                 entry clearance for entry in this capacity is  produced  to
                 the Immigration  Officer  on  arrival.   Limited  leave  to
                 remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a refugee  may
                 be granted provided the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied
                 that each of the requirements of paragraph 352D(i)-(v)  are
                 met.


           352F. Limited leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of
                 a refugee is to be refused if a valid United Kingdom  entry
                 clearance for entry in this capacity is not produced to the
                 Immigration Officer on arrival.  Limited leave to remain as
                 the child of a refugee is to be refused if the Secretary of
                 State is not satisfied that each  of  the  requirements  of
                 paragraph 352D(i)-(v) are met."


 24. There  are  also  published  statements  relating  to  the  family  of
     refugees.  As in all cases where policies of this sort are referred to
     in immigration appeals,  there  is  some  difficulty  in  ascertaining
     precisely what was current at any particular time.  It  is  also  very
     far from clear in general what is  intended  to  be  the  relationship
     between policies and the Immigration Rules.

 25. In the present appeal, the Appellant claims that his case falls within
     the policy and that any restrictions applied by the Immigration  Rules
     have no effect on it.  He claims to be entitled to indefinite leave to
     remain despite the fact that the Immigration Rules appear to  preclude
     that remedy in his case.   He  further  claims  that  the  Adjudicator
     (disregarding for the moment the question of jurisdiction relating  to
     the grounds of appeal) properly ordered that he be granted  indefinite
     leave to remain because of the terms of the policy.

 26. The Immigration Rules are not a statute  or  a  statutory  instrument.
     They are made under ss 1 and 3 of the Immigration Act 1971.  That  Act
     provides in s1(2) that those not having the  right  of  abode  in  the
     United Kingdom "may live, work and settle in  the  United  Kingdom  by
     permission and subject to such regulation and control of  their  entry
     into, stay in and departure from the United Kingdom as is  imposed  by
     this Act".  The Immigration Rules are referred to  in  s1(4)  as  "the
     Rules laid down by the Secretary of State as to  the  practice  to  be
     followed in the administration of this Act for  regulating  the  entry
     into and stay in the United Kingdom of persons not having the right of
     abode".  The reference to  the  Rules  in  s3(2),  which  details  the
     procedure for making them, is in all material  respects  identical  to
     that in s1(4).

 27.  Despite  these  words,  however,  and  despite  Attorney  General   v
     DeKeyser's Royal Hotel [1920] AC 508, the  regulation  of  "the  entry
     into and stay in the United Kingdom of persons not having the right of
     abode" is not limited to the Immigration Rules, for by s33(5):

           "This act shall not be taken to  subcede  or  impair  any  power
           exercisable by Her Majesty in relation to aliens  by  virtue  of
           Her prerogative."

 28. Thus the Secretary of State, exercising for these purposes  the  royal
     prerogative, has a general dispensing power and  is  entitled  in  the
     exercise of that prerogative to  make  decisions  more  generous  than
     would be required by the Immigration Rules.   (He  cannot  effectually
     make decisions which are less generous, because of the right of appeal
     on the ground that  the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the
     Immigration Rules.)  If he publishes a policy that  is  more  generous
     than the Immigration Rules, general principles of administrative  law,
     as recognised in Abdi, may enable a person who says  that  the  policy
     applies to him to appeal against an adverse  decision  on  the  ground
     that that decision was "not in accordance with the law".

 29. The first task for such a claimant would be to establish the terms  of
     the policy at any relevant date.  If he cannot do that readily, he may
     have some difficulty in showing that there was a published  policy  in
     the sense intended by Peter Gibson LJ in Abdi.  In any  event,  as  we
     have indicated, it may not be easy to show whether a policy  currently
     available (for example,  on  the  IND  website)  is  relevant  to  the
     decision in question.

 30. Even if the claimant demonstrates the terms of  the  relevant  policy,
     however,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  entitled   to   succeed
     substantively in an appeal.  Most published policies are  not  in  the
     absolute terms of the Immigration Rules.  Most policies contain  words
     like "normally".  Many policies  do  not  declare  that  a  particular
     relief will be granted:  they provide that the Secretary of State will
     consider whether it should be.  A claimant who has  not  obtained  the
     substantive grant that he seeks can succeed on the policy only  if  he
     shows that the policy itself was not (or was  not  properly)  applied.
     If the policy says that the Secretary of  State  (will  consider)  his
     case on certain terms, he cannot succeed unless he can show  that  the
     Secretary of State did not consider his case on those terms.   If  the
     policy says that something will "normally" be granted, he is likely to
     be in some difficulties if  the  Secretary  of  State  refers  to  any
     consideration that shows that the case is less than normal.

 31. In any event, unless  the  policy  is  expressed  in  terms  that  are
     absolute or have to be regarded as absolute in the individual facts of
     the case, the effect of a successful appeal will be  merely  that  the
     decision is found to have been an  unlawful  one,  so  that  there  is
     outstanding an application before the Secretary of State.  If, by  use
     of  words  like  "consider"  or  "normally"  the  policy  includes   a
     discretion, that is a discretion which involves the  exercise  of  the
     royal prerogative, as the provisions of the 1971  Act  which  we  have
     cited above make clear.  It is not for members  of  this  Tribunal  to
     exercise the royal prerogative.

The policy applicable to the present appeal

 32. In this appeal, the Adjudicator considered a policy without  reference
     to the Rules and directed that indefinite leave to remain  be  granted
     to the Appellant on the basis of that policy as he saw  it.   In  this
     reconsideration, the  Appellant  seeks  to  defend  the  Adjudicator's
     determination and  his  direction,  on  the  ground  that  the  policy
     entitled the Appellant to indefinite leave  to  remain  and  that  the
     direction  was  an  appropriate  application  of  the  policy  by  the
     Adjudicator.

 33. It must be clear from what we have said above, if it was not otherwise
     obvious, that it is essential always to look at any policy as a whole.
      In the present case, the Appellant has, in  his  grounds  of  appeal,
     relied only on one short passage from the relevant policy.  It is true
     that the Adjudicator had the whole policy in front of him, but he does
     not appear to have been directed to it in full.  It  looks  as  though
     the judge who considered the matter on Statutory Review was not  shown
     the whole policy.  In our view, it is extremely dangerous to  consider
     arguments based on policies unless the claimant is able  to  show  the
     whole of the policy in question and show why it applies to him and why
     it produces the result that he seeks.

 34. In the present case, there is said to be no dispute about the terms of
     the applicable policy.  The Adjudicator had before him a  printing  of
     what was on the IND website on 1 November 2004.  Mr Avery confirmed to
     us that  it  is  the  one  applicable  to  the  determination  of  the
     Appellant's claim.  We must set it out in some detail.

 35. It is headed "Family Reunion".  The text is as follows:

           "1.   INTRODUCTION


           This  instruction  gives  guidance   to   caseworkers   on   the
           consideration of applications made by family members who want to
           be reunited with a person in the UK who has been:


              . recognised as a refugee;
              . granted exceptional leave to remain (prior to 1 April 2003);
              . granted humanitarian protection;
              . granted discretionary leave.


           The family of asylum seekers do not qualify to join them in  the
           UK for family reunion purposes.


           Caseworkers should bear in mind when considering family  reunion
           applications that the Human Rights Act  1998  incorporates  into
           domestic law those rights  and  freedoms  guaranteed  under  the
           European Convention on Human Rights.  Article 8 guarantees  that
           everyone has the right to respect for family and private life.


           A minor is a child aged under eighteen.  A spouse is the husband
           or wife of a principal applicant.


           Caseworkers  may  also  find  it  helpful  to   refer   to   the
           instructions on Dependants and Marriage Applications, as well as
           the relevant instructions in the IDIs.


           2.    ELIGIBILITY OF APPLICANTS FOR FAMILY REUNION


           Only pre-existing families are eligible for  family  reunion  ie
           the spouse and minor children who formed part of the family unit
           prior to the time the sponsor fled to seek asylum.


           We may exceptionally allow  other  members  of  the  family  (eg
           elderly parents) to come to the  UK  if  there  are  compelling,
           compassionate circumstances.


           The parents and siblings of a minor who has been recognised as a
           refugee are not entitled to family reunion.   Such  applications
           are considered under  the  criteria  above,  ie  there  must  be
           compelling, compassionate circumstances in order for the  family
           to be granted entry to the UK.


           Family reunion may be refused if family members fall within  the
           terms of one of the exclusion clauses in the 1951 UN Convention.


           3.    ELIGIBILITY OF SPONSORING FAMILY MEMBERS


              1. Where the sponsor has refugee status


           If a person has been recognised as a refugee in the UK  we  will
           normally recognise family members in line  with  them.   If  the
           family are abroad we will normally agree to their  admission  as
           refugees.


           It may not always be possible to recognise the family abroad  as
           refugees - eg they may  have  a  different  nationality  to  the
           sponsor or they may not  wish  to  be  recognised  as  refugees.
           However, if they meet the criteria set out in paragraph 2,  they
           should still be admitted to join the sponsor.   The  sponsor  is
           not  expected  to  meet  the   maintenance   and   accommodation
           requirements of the Immigration Rules.


              2. Where the sponsor has exceptional leave to remain


           Family members qualify to  join  a  person  granted  exceptional
           leave to remain (ELR) once that person becomes eligible to apply
           for indefinite leave to remain (ILR), usually  after  completing
           four years ELR.


           However, if the family are already  here  (whether  port  or  in
           country cases)  we  would  normally  grant  them  permission  to
           remain, in line with the sponsor.


           Applications may be considered before the four year point but we
           will only grant entry  clearance  where  there  are  compelling,
           compassionate circumstances.


           In all cases  the  sponsor  will  be  expected  to  satisfy  the
           maintenance and accommodation requirements as  set  out  in  the
           Immigration Rules (paragraphs 240(iii) and (iv) of HC395).


              3. Where the sponsor has Humanitarian Protection


           Family members qualify for family reunion once the  sponsor  has
           been granted ILR in the  UK,  normally  after  completing  three
           years of humanitarian protection (HP).


           However, if the family are already  here  (whether  port  or  in
           country cases)  we  would  normally  grant  them  permission  to
           remain, in line with the sponsor.


           Applications may be  considered  before  the  sponsor  has  been
           granted ILR but we will only  grant  entry  clearance  in  those
           cases where there are compelling, compassionate circumstances.


           In all cases  the  sponsor  will  be  expected  to  satisfy  the
           maintenance and accommodation requirements as  set  out  in  the
           Immigration Rules (paragraphs 240(iii) and (iv) of HC395).


              4. Where the sponsor has Discretionary Leave


           Family members are eligible for family reunion once the  sponsor
           has been granted ILR in the UK, normally  after  completing  six
           years of Discretionary Leave (DL).


           However, if the family are already  here  (whether  port  or  in
           country cases)  we  would  normally  grant  them  permission  to
           remain, in line with the sponsor.


           Applications may be  considered  before  the  sponsor  has  been
           granted ILR but we will only  grant  entry  clearance  in  those
           cases where there are compelling, compassionate circumstances.


           In all cases  the  sponsor  will  be  expected  to  satisfy  the
           maintenance and accommodation requirements as  set  out  in  the
           Immigration Rules (paragraphs 240(iii) and (iv) of HC395).


           4.    APPLYING FOR FAMILY REUNION


           Family reunion applications must  be  made  at  entry  clearance
           posts overseas.


           All concessions to this practice have been withdrawn."


 36. Mr Symes directed his principal submissions to the first  sentence  of
     paragraph 3.1, which is the paragraph upon  which  the  Appellant  has
     relied throughout.  He dealt at some length with the question  whether
     the Appellant was entitled to the benefit of the concession in view of
     the fact that he had not lived with his mother for  some  seven  years
     before he came to the United Kingdom.  On that point,  Mr  Symes  drew
     our attention to the phrase in paragraph 2:  "minor children who  form
     part of the family unit prior to the time the  sponsor  fled  to  seek
     asylum".  He said that "prior" did not necessarily  mean  "immediately
     prior".  The Appellant had lived with his mother until 1995.  Mr Symes
     submitted that it could not be that children who had  not  lived  with
     the parent who had claimed asylum in  the  period  immediately  before
     that parent's flight were automatically excluded.  He  invited  us  to
     envisage a number of hard cases.

 37. In our view, there is nothing in Mr Symes' submissions on that  point.
     Every child forms part of its mother's family unit at  the  moment  of
     birth.  If "prior to" meant "at  any  time  prior  to",  as  Mr  Symes
     submitted, the paragraph would have no restrictive effect despite  its
     beginning with the word "only".  Mr Symes' submissions  based  on  the
     hard cases entirely ignore the next sentence of  the  paragraph  which
     precisely deals with the possibility of admission  of  family  members
     who do not come within the  category  of  "pre-existing  families"  if
     there are compelling, compassionate circumstances.

 38.  There  are,  however,  two  much  more  serious  problems  with   the
     Appellant's claim, neither of which Mr Symes appeared to recognise  in
     his submissions to us.  We suspect, if we may  say  so,  that  he  had
     failed to read the whole of the policy upon which he relied.

 39. First, we can see nothing in the policy which suggests  that  a  minor
     child of a refugee should be granted indefinite leave to remain as the
     Appellant in this case claims.  Paragraphs 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 each  have
     a reference to "permission to  remain,  in  line  with  the  sponsor".
     There is no such reference in paragraph  3.1.   It  is  paragraph  3.1
     alone which refers to refugees, and the wording of the paragraph deals
     with their recognition as refugees.  That is an international  status.
     It is not in our view to be regarded as equivalent to a grant of leave
     to remain in the United Kingdom.  We recognise that  it  may  be  said
     that there are other provisions that entitled any person recognised as
     a refugee to indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  But we
     have not been  shown  any  such  provisions.   Thus,  insofar  as  the
     Appellant's claim is that the policy entitles him to indefinite  leave
     to remain, it must fail.

 40. Secondly, there is paragraph 4 of the policy.  This  policy  is  about
     family reunion, and paragraph 4 restricts  the  way  in  which  family
     reunion can be obtained.  That Rule might conceivably be thought to be
     relaxed in some of the wording in paragraphs 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4;  but in
     the case of a  person  seeking  to  join  a  refugee  we  can  see  no
     conceivable basis for saying that this policy applies to a person  who
     has not made an application for family reunion at an  entry  clearance
     post overseas.  The Appellant has not done so.  Nothing in this policy
     could entitle him to family reunion as defined in the policy.   He  is
     not, and never has been, a  person  to  whom  this  policy  gives  any
     benefits.  Even if he could have  advanced  the  relevant  grounds  of
     appeal, he could not have succeeded on them.

The Immigration Rules

 41. The Appellant's claim throughout has been that  the  policy  which  he
     cited supplemented the Immigration Rules and in his  case  applied  in
     preference to the Immigration Rules.  The grounds for Statutory Review
     put it in the following way:

           "It is submitted that the reference in grounds 1 and  2  to  the
           Immigration Rules are irrelevant.  Rule 352D  relates  to  those
           persons who are the minor children of refugees  and  who  either
           require  entry  clearance   (seeking   leave   to   enter),   or
           alternatively the minor child of a refugee who  has  some  other
           status in the UK, and then wishes to remain in  the  UK  as  the
           child of a refugee (seeking leave to remain).


           The claimant is somebody who does not fit into either  of  these
           situations, in that at the time of his arrival  he  neither  had
           entry clearance, nor any other status.  The claimant's situation
           is directly and explicitly covered by  the  Home  Office  Asylum
           Policy Instruction on Family Reunion.  This policy is  not  part
           of the Immigration Rules and covers  situations  which  are  not
           provided for in the immigration rules."

 42. It is right to say that at the time of his arrival the  Appellant  did
     not have entry clearance, but that does not entitle him to say that he
     does not seek it.  On the contrary:  leave to enter is precisely  what
     he does seek.  Without it, he cannot pass the immigration  authorities
     into the United Kingdom in any permanent or legal  sense.   (Leave  to
     remain is, as the Appellant's case accepts, normally appropriate for a
     person who seeks an extension of existing leave.  It is, we would add,
     also appropriate for a person born here.)

 43. In any event, the foregoing analysis of the policy, in particular  the
     reference to paragraph 4, makes it clear that insofar as  it  concerns
     the families of refugees,  the  policy  is  not  an  addition  to  the
     Immigration Rules but is in line  with  them.   Like  the  Rules,  the
     policy applies to children under eighteen.  Like the Rules, the policy
     applies to pre-existing families;  although the Rules are more precise
     as to what that means.  Like the  Rules,  the  policy  excludes  those
     within the Convention's exclusion clauses:  but only the Rules specify
     the relevant clause.  Like the Rules, the policy requires  application
     at an entry clearance post overseas;  the Rules  make  it  clear  that
     admission in this category is conditional  upon  the  grant  of  entry
     clearance.  The Rules provide that limited leave to  enter  is  to  be
     granted:  the policy says nothing about the grant of any leave to  the
     children of a refugee.  The policy adds to the Rules only  insofar  as
     it  also  applies  generally  to  cases  where  there  are  compelling
     compassionate  circumstances  and  specifically  to  those  who   seek
     admission as the family member of a person who has  not  been  granted
     refugee  status.   The  Appellant  falls  within  neither   additional
     category.

 44. The Appellant is not  himself  a  refugee.   He  is  not  entitled  to
     admission under  the  Immigration  Rules,  because  he  has  no  entry
     clearance and he was not part of his mother's "family unit"  when  she
     left Somalia.  He is entitled to nothing more under the  policy.   For
     these reasons, any appeal that he might be able to bring based on  the
     Immigration Rules or the policy could not succeed.

Conclusion

 45. Insofar as it depended on asylum grounds, the Appellant's  appeal  was
     dismissed by the Adjudicator.  There has been no challenge to that and
     to that extent only we affirm the  Adjudicator's  determination.   The
     Adjudicator  had  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  other  grounds  and
     accordingly erred in law in dealing with them.   For  the  reasons  we
     have given, however, if he had had jurisdiction he could not  properly
     have allowed the appeal or made the direction he did make.

 46.  The  Appellant's  appeal  accordingly  fails  on  all  admissible  or
     projected grounds and is accordingly dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:






