
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application  of  Vidales)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department) IJR [2015] UKUT 00166(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                              8 January 2015

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           melanie salinas vidales

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -
Mr J Collins, Kilic & Kilic Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor, appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE ESHUN: This  judicial  review  concerns  challenges  brought  by  Miss
    Vidales, a national of  Chile  born  on  25  March  2001,  against  the
    decisions  of  the  respondent,  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
    Department, on 19 April 2013, 13 May 2014, 8 August 2014 and 14  August
    2014 refusing the applicant leave to remain in the UK.   The  last  two
    decisions postdate the grant  of  permission.   There  was  no  dispute
    between the parties that the last two  decisions  formed  part  of  the
    respondent's decision making process and were  irrelevant  in  deciding
    whether relief should be granted to the applicant.

2.   Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was granted on 24  July
    2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane on the sole issue  whether  the
    Secretary of State is  obliged  to  issue  a  decision  to  remove  the
    applicant from the UK under Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999.

The Facts

3.   The applicant, who is now 13 years old, was born in the United  Kingdom
    to a mother who is from Colombia and a father who is  from  Chile.  The
    applicant is a citizen of Chile by virtue of her father's  nationality.
    At the time of her birth the  applicant's  mother  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom having made an application to remain in the UK  on  asylum  and
    refugee grounds.  On 12 December 2001 the applicant left  the  UK  with
    her mother in 2004,  and  resided  in  Colombia  with  her  mother  and
    grandmother until 2010.   Her  grandmother  then  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom and the applicant and her mother rejoined her father in Chile.

4.   On 7 April 2012 the applicant entered the UK on a valid visit visa  and
    was granted leave to enter for two months, until 7 June 2012  to  visit
    her grandmother who was dying.  On 13 June 2012 the applicant  made  an
    out of time application for leave to remain in the UK  with  her  aunt,
    Maria Fernandez Vidales Iruita on Article 8 family life  grounds.   The
    application was accompanied by a statement from Maria  Iruita  dated  6
    June 2012. In the statement it was said that  the  applicant's  mother,
    who is the sister of Maria Iruita, got involved  with  bad  people  and
    started taking  drugs.   Their  mother,  the  applicant's  grandmother,
    begged them to try and keep Melanie here with  them  in  the  UK.  They
    mentioned the possibility to the applicant's mother and she  was  happy
    about it and told them she would do all the  necessary  paperwork.   It
    was claimed  that  the  applicant's  father  who  is  in  Chile  has  a
    debilitating condition  which  prevents  him  from  looking  after  the
    applicant.  The aunt believed that the applicant would be destitute  if
    she returned to Colombia as her mother is not there to look after  her.
    It is my understanding  that  the  respondent  intends  to  remove  the
    applicant to Chile where her mother is residing.

5.   In the respondent's decision  of  19  April  2013,  it  was  stated  as
    follows:

         "You were aged 11 at the time you  submitted  the  application  and
         entered the UK on 7 April 2012.


         You have failed to demonstrate that  you  have  had  twenty  years'
         residence in the United Kingdom as required by Rule 276ADE(iii).


         You have failed to demonstrate that you meet  the  requirements  of
         Rule 276ADE(iv) as you  are  aged  under  18  but  have  not  lived
         continuously in the UK for at least seven years.


         You have failed to demonstrate that you meet  the  requirements  of
         Rule 276ADE(v) as you were not aged between 18 and 25 and had lived
         more than half your life in the United Kingdom.


         You do not meet the requirements of Rule  276ADE(vi)  as  you  have
         failed to demonstrate that you have no ties to your own country. We
         are aware that your parents live in your own country, and signed an
         authorisation allowing you to visit the UK for a short  period  and
         to return later.


         Therefore  your  claim  is  refused  under  paragraph   276B(e)with
         reference to 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended).


         An application was made on your behalf on 13  June  2012.  However,
         your leave to remain expired on 4 April 2003 [sic].  You  therefore
         did not have leave to remain at the time of your application.


         Your application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom has been
          refused and you no longer have any known basis of stay here. There
         is no right of appeal against this refusal."

6.   On 22 May 2013 the applicant's solicitors submitted to  the  respondent
    a Pre-action Protocol letter giving the background to the  application.
    It was submitted that the  respondent's  decision  that  the  applicant
    failed to satisfy the Immigration Rules paragraph 276ADE was flawed and
    not in accordance with the law in  that  the  respondent  confined  her
    consideration of the  claimant's  application  under  Article  8  to  a
    consideration of whether Appendix FM has been  met.  It was  argued  on
    the applicant's behalf that Article 8 is broader than the provisions of
    Appendix  FM  and  that  her  rights   under   Article   8   would   be
    disproportionately breached by Rule .

7.   It was further argued that the respondent  erred  in  failing  to  take
    into consideration the best interests of the applicant in contravention
    of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    The applicant argued that as a minor, her best interests are a  primary
    consideration in the determination of any application she makes, and no
    consideration appears to have been  giving to these.

8.   It was further argued that the  respondent  ought  to  have  considered
    whether or not to set removal directions so that  the  refusal  of  her
    Article 8 claim would have attracted a right of appeal.

9.   In a letter dated 13 May 2014 the respondent  stated  that  further  to
    the judicial review claim of 16  July  2013,  it  had  been  agreed  to
    reconsider the applicant's applications for further leave to remain  in
    the UK.  The respondent stated that she had reconsider the  applicant's
    application under Article 8 taking  into  account  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the Immigration Rules
    put in place on 9 July 2012.  The respondent  maintained  her  original
    decision. the respondent referred to the fact that leave to remain  was
    granted to the applicant after an interview  and  checks  having  taken
    place due to her arriving unaccompanied and without the required  leave
    to enter.  After telephone conversations with her  mother  in  Colombia
    and her sponsor in the United Kingdom, the applicant was given leave to
    enter for a period of two months in order for her to  visit  her  dying
    grandmother. During the conversations that took place  the  applicant's
    sponsor stated that the visit was not permanent as the applicant had to
    start school in her home country and that the visit was in order to see
    her grandmother whilst she  still  could.   The  applicant  immediately
    applied for further leave to remain just before  her  leave  to  remain
    expired. Therefore the applicant  has  been   resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom from date of entry for two years.

10.  The respondent was therefore satisfied that the applicant did not  meet
    the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.   The  respondent  was   also
    satisfied that the applicant had lived a large proportion of  her  life
    in Colombia and that  she  has  close  family  in  her  homeland.   The
    applicant had failed to demonstrate that she  has  no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family) with Colombia and therefore  did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv)(vi).

11.  The respondent then considered whether to grant the applicant leave  to
    remain  outside  the  Rules  and  under  Section  55.   the  respondent
    considered  the  claims  made  by  the  applicant's  aunt   about   the
    applicant's father and mother, all of which  the  respondent  said  had
    been unsubstantiated.  The respondent considered that the applicant was
    in the care of her mother  prior  to  her  arrival  in  the  UK.  There
    appeared to be no concerns regarding the applicant and her  grandmother
    came to the  United  Kingdom  without  her.   The  immigration  service
    contacted the applicant's mother upon  her  arrival  and  it  was  also
    confirmed that she would  be  returned  to  Colombia  to  continue  her
    schooling.  It had  been  claimed  that  the  applicant's  sponsor  was
    sending money  to  help  provide  for  the  applicant.  The  respondent
    considered that there was no reason  why  this  arrangement  could  not
    continue on her return to her home country. As to the  allegation  that
    the  applicant's  father  suffers  from  a  debilitating  illness  that
    prevents him from caring for his child, the respondent stated  that  no
    evidence of this had be provided to prove  this  assertion.   Therefore
    this cannot be considered as a proven fact.  The respondent stated that
    all the representations had  been  considered.  However  there  are  no
    exceptional  circumstances   or   insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
    applicant's family life being continued overseas. Relationships between
    the applicant and her parents can be commenced and  their  family  life
    can continue in Colombia.

12.  The  respondent  noted  that  whilst  the  applicant's  return  to  her
    homeland may involve a degree of disruption to her private  life,  this
    was  considered  to  be  proportionate  to  the  claim  of  maintaining
    effective  immigration  control  and  was  in   accordance   with   the
    respondent's Section 55 duties. It was decided therefore that  a  grant
    of leave outside the Rules was not appropriate.

13.  The respondent pointed out  that  recent  changes  to  the  Immigration
    Rules governed the  way  in  which  entry  clearance  applications  are
    treated  where  the  applicant  has  previously   breached   the   UK's
    immigration laws.   The  respondent  gave  various  periods  where  the
    applicant will be refused entry clearance in most  categories  if  they
    returned home voluntarily at their own expense  following  the  breach.
    The respondent finally stated  that  it  is  in  the  applicant's  best
    interests to make her own arrangements to  leave  the  UK  as  soon  as
    possible.

14.  Following the grant of permission the  respondent  issued  two  further
    letters maintaining  the original decision.

15.  In the letter dated 8 August  2014  the  respondent  relied  on  Daley-
    Murdock v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ  161  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    confirmed that there is no obligation on the Secretary of State to make
    a removal decision at the same time as refusing  leave  to  remain  and
    that there are sound reasons as to why this is not done as a matter  of
    course.

16.  The respondent stated as follows:

         "The Secretary of State will only make  a  removal  decision  where
         there is a request to do so, and where:


         .    The  refused  application  for  leave  to  remain  included  a
             dependent child under 18 who has been  in  the  UK  for  three
             years or more; or


         .    The applicant has a dependent child under the age of 18 who is
             a British citizen; or


         .    The application  is  being  supported  by  UKBI  or  has  been
             provided evidence of being supported by a local authority; or


         .    There are other exceptional and compelling reasons to  make  a
             removal decision."

17.  The respondent stated that the applicant's  case  does  not  include  a
    dependent child who has been in the UK for three years or more,  or  is
    under 19 years old and a British citizen.  There is no evidence to show
    that the applicant is being  supported  by  the  UKBI  or  by  a  local
    authority.  Furthermore,  there  is  no  evidence  of  exceptional  and
    compelling reasons to make a removal decision.  Therefore the Secretary
    of State has decided not to make a removal decision on the  applicant's
    case at the present time.

18.  In the final letter dated 14 August 2014  the  respondent  referred  to
    the Pre-action Protocol letter and the judicial review claim suggesting
    that the respondent should issue a removal decision attracting a  right
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent stated  that  the
    sole ground which the applicant pursued at the permission hearing,  and
    in respect of  which  permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  was
    granted, concerns making a removal decision. It was  said  this  letter
    was supplemental and should be read in conjunction  with  the  original
    decision of 19 April 2013 and the subsequent decision of 13 May 2014.

19.  The Secretary of State  issued  this  letter  in  accordance  with  her
    published policy guidance "Request for Removal Decisions".  The  letter
    referred to the original refusal letter which stated that there was  no
    right of appeal against a decision of refusal of leave to remain  where
    the person had no remaining leave  at  the  time  the  application  was
    submitted. In accordance with the published  guidance,  the  respondent
    has carefully reviewed her decisions of 19 April 2013 and 13  May  2014
    in the light of all available information.  The Secretary of State  was
    satisfied that those decisions, for the  reasons  already  given,  were
    correctly made and are maintained.

20.  The respondent again  went  through  her  removals  policy,  considered
    whether or not there are exceptional and compelling reasons to  make  a
    removal decision and considered the best interests  of  the  applicant.
    The respondent again considered that it  is  in  the  applicant's  best
    interests to leave the UK voluntarily  as  opposed  to  being  formally
    removed as an ovestayer, given that her application for leave to remain
    has been refused and she has no basis to reside in this country.

21.  Mr Collins relied on his skeleton argument which he said sets out  that
    there is  a  discretion  for  the  respondent  in  any  case  in  which
    discretion should be exercised rationally.  In this  case  it  was  not
    exercised rationally.

22.  He accepted that the applicant is not British and is  not  a  dependent
    child. He submitted that if the respondent's position is  that  because
    the applicant has not resided here for three years she  would  have  no
    removal decision but would be granted such a decision  if  she  were  a
    dependent child is nonsensical.  In his  skeleton  argument  he  argued
    that the respondent has erred in not adequately or properly considering
    whether on the facts this is a case where a removal decision should  be
    made even if on a strict reading of the  four  examples  provided,  the
    applicant does not come within any of  the  four  examples'  scenarios.
    Further and in the alternative,  he  argued  that  the  respondent  has
    conspicuously failed to take into  account  the  need  to  promote  the
    welfare and best interests of  the  applicant.    It  is  difficult  to
    concede that the welfare of the applicant is served by leaving  her  in
    limbo for a further and  indefinite  period  of  time.   The  applicant
    should be granted certainty.

23.  Mr Collins submitted that she accepts what the Court of Appeal said  in
    Daley-Murdock. He relied on what Sullivan LJ said at  paragraph  11  as
    follows:

         "Mr Blundell accepted that the need  to  achieve  timely  decisions
         where children were  involved  would  be  a  relevant  factor  when
         deciding whether, in any particular case, it  would  be  unfair  or
         irrational not to make a removal decision at the same time  as  the
         refusal of leave.  However, he submitted,  correctly  in  my  view,
         that each case would be fact sensitive.  There might well be  cases
         where it would not be in the  child's  best  interests  to  make  a
         removal decision rather than, e.g. waiting to  see  if  the  family
         left voluntarily after the end of the school term or year, or after
         the chid had  fully  recovered  from  hospital  treatment.   In  my
         judgement it is not possible to spell out .. either Section  55  or
         the Guidance issued there under a  general  obligation  to  make  a
         simultaneous removal decision  in  every  case  were  children  are
         refused leave to remain."

24.  Mr Collins argued that in this it is clear that the applicant,  who  is
    13 years old, will not be leaving the UK voluntarily, it being asserted
    that she would face destitution if returned to Colombia and that  there
    is no one to look after her in Chile. He argued that  on  any  rational
    view of the facts as well as a rational  reading  of  Daley-Murdock,  a
    removal decision should have been made in the instant case.

25.  Mr Collins submitted that the Supreme Court in Patel and Others  [2013]
    UKSC 72 did not disapprove what the Court  of  Appeal  said  in  Daley-
    Murdock or the decision by Mitting J in Khan [2012] EWHC  707  (Admin).
    Mr Collins relied on paragraph 13 of Khan where Mitting J held:

         "Mr Zain Malik, however, goes on  to  submit  that  the  situation,
         viewed as of today, involves an unlawful failure on the part of the
         Secretary of State to take the decision under Section 10. Seventeen
         months have gone by since the original decision.  So,  he  submits,
         the time has now arrived at which it would no longer be  reasonable
         for the Secretary of State to decline  to  make  a  decision  under
         Section 10.  A concession was made  to  Beatson  J  in  Ferguson  v
         Wilkie and Secretary of State for Justice  (misnamed  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department) [2010] EWHC 3756 (Admin)at paragraph
         19, which Beatson J noted:

             '... the defendant now accepts that she is under a public  law
             duty to make a decision about enforcement in a reasonable time
             after making a decision on an application for leave.'

         That concession was made in the context of a  case  concerning  two
         overstayers why had remained in the United Kingdom for  many  years
         without leave."

26.  Mr Collins submitted that Mitting J  accepted  that  the  proposal  has
    merit but declined to make the confession because  firstly,  there  was
    simply no evidence  from  the  applicant  about  the  circumstances  of
    himself and his sons, which now made it unsafe  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to make a decision under Section 10, against  which  he
    could have, he could have been arrested  and  which  would  permit  his
    family circumstances to be considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    their merits. Secondly, there was not a hint of this in the claim form.

27.  Mr Collins argued  that  in  this  case  evidence  from  the  aunt  was
    submitted with the  applicant's  application  and  later  evidence  was
    submitted from the applicant herself. The applicant asked for a removal
    decision in the Pre-action Protocol application. In Khan  there  was  a
    delay of seventeen months between the decision and the hearing  and  in
    addition to which there was a three month delay  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in deciding the applicant's application which in total came to  a
    delay of twenty months.  In this  case  the  delay  between  the  first
    decision and the hearing is 21 months; in addition to which we have the
    ten months between the applicant's application for leave to remain  and
    the respondent's decision  which comes to a  total  of  31  months.  Mr
    Collins submitted that on Khan principles the decision is unlawful.

28.  Mr Collins then responded to the detailed grounds of defence  submitted
    by Mr Malik.  Mr Collins submitted that the applicant has no  intention
    of leaving the UK when  there  is  nowhere  for  her  to  go.   In  her
    consideration of Daley-Murdock, the respondent failed to  consider  the
    examples given at paragraph 11 where there might be instances where  in
    respect of children the removal direction could be made.  He  submitted
    that because the  respondent  ignored  the  facts  of  this  case,  the
    respondent's conduct is not entirely rational or  lawful  in  light  of
    paragraph 11 of Daley-Murdock.

29.  With regard to the respondent's reliance on the Administrative  Court's
    decision in Oboh and Patel [2014] EWHC 967 (Admin), Mr Collins said  he
    was not challenging this decision.  He said that Oboh  was  challenging
    the respondent's removal policy itself. What they are  saying  is  that
    the welfare of the applicant was ignored by the respondent and that the
    respondent  failed  to  act  rationally.   Mr  Collins  emphasised  his
    submission that the applicant made her application in  June  2012.  She
    has  nowhere to go.  She will  not  leave  voluntarily.   They  want  a
    removal direction which will give rise to a right of appeal. This  will
    enable her to live with her aunt and uncle if the appeal is allowed  or
    removed if the appeal fails. The applicant requires certainty.

30.  Mr Malik said that  the  starting  point  is  the  decision  in  Daley-
    Murdock, which he argued provides a complete answer to the  applicant's
    submissions.  He submitted that Daley-Murdock was  an  overstayer  like
    the applicant.  He submitted that the applicant is not challenging  the
    refusal of leave by the respondent.  She is saying that the  respondent
    should have issued a removal decision as well. He  submitted  that  the
    Court of Appeal in Daley-Murdock .. the policy and objects of the  2002
    Act because of the list of appealable decisions in Section  82(2)  make
    it clear that parliament did  not intend that overstayers, unlike those
    who are lawfully in UK with  leave,  should  have  a  right  of  appeal
    against a refusal of leave to remain.   Consequently  Mr  Malik  argued
    that if the  Secretary  of  State  makes  a  removal  direction  to  an
    overstayer, she would be breaching the 2002 Act.

31.  He referred to paragraph 9 of Daley-Murdock where the Court  of  Appeal
    considered the evidence of Mr Sainsbury that a  substantial  amount  of
    people do leave voluntarily following refusal of their applications for
    leave to remain. The Court of Appeal, however, said that  the  evidence
    did not distinguish between those persons in  the  UK  with  leave  who
    apply to vary their leave, and  overstayers  who  apply  for  leave  to
    remain. in the latter type  of  case  it  is  not  irrational  for  the
    Secretary  of  State  to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  a  significant
    proportionate of those who have been unlawfully living in  the  UK  and
    have no right to remain  here  will  leave  voluntarily  following  the
    refusal  of  their  applications,  thus  making  a   removal   decision
    unnecessary. There are, therefore, sound reasons, on  grounds  of  both
    principle and practice to distinguish between those lawfully in the  UK
    and those who are overstayers, and not to impose an obligation  on  the
    Secretary of State to make a removal decision whenever she  refused  an
    overstayer's application for leave.

32.  Mr Malik then referred  to  the  argument  in  paragraph  10  of  Daley
    Murdock where it was said that where the overstayer's  family  includes
    children, the duty to have regard to the need to safeguard and  protect
    the welfare of those children imposed by Section 55  of  the  2009  Act
    when coupled with the Secretary of State's Guidance  meant  that  there
    was a need for the two decisions, refusal of leave and removal,  to  be
    taken at the same time. Mr Malik said this argument was rejected by the
    Court of Appeal who held that it is not possible to spell out of either
    Section 55 or the guidance issued thereunder a  general  obligation  to
    make a simultaneous removal decision in every case where  children  are
    refused leave to remain.

33.  Mr Malik submitted that in this case the Secretary of State's  argument
    is that it would be in the  best interests of the child to leave the UK
    rather than forcing her to leave.

34.  Mr Malik also submitted that the Court of Appeal rejected  an  argument
    that the applicant having made a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR, had
    a right to have that claim determined in a way  that  was  procedurally
    fair and that the necessary procedural safeguards included a  right  to
    appeal to an independent tribunal against the respondent's rejection of
    her claim. In any event this applicant has  not  advanced  an  argument
    that the refuels of leave to enter is unlawful. There is no  obligation
    on the respondent to grant a removal decision.  The  applicant's  claim
    under Daley-Murodck is without substance.

35.  Mr Malik submitted that the decision in  Patel  endorses  Daley-Murdock
    and goes a step further.  The Court of Appeal held that the  powers  to
    issue removal directions under Section 10 of the 1999 Act  and  Section
    47 of the 2006 Act are just that - powers. Neither Section can be  read
    as imposing an obligation to make a direction in any  particular  case.
    He added that the Secretary of State's powers of removal are defined by
    Section 10 of the 1999 Act and Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  The  former
    provides that the person who is not a British citizen  may  be  removed
    from the United Kingdom, in accordance  with  directions  given  by  an
    Immigration Officer if ... (a) having only a limited leave to enter  or
    remain, he does not observe  a  condition  attached  to  the  leave  or
    remains beyond the time limited by the leave.

36.  Mr Malik submitted that the use of the word "may" means that  it  is  a
    discretionary power.

37.  He submitted that Mr Collins' reliance on Khan  is  misconceived.  Khan
    was decided on 8 March 2011, two years before Patel was decided by  the
    Supreme Court. The tentative observations by Mitting J in Khan had been
    overtaken by Patel.  In this  instant  case  the  respondent  issued  a
    decision on 13 May 2014.  It is  not  a  case  where  seventeen  months
    passed before a decision was made.   The  concession  which  Mitting  J
    referred  to  in  Khan  was  based  on  illegal  stay  of  many  years.
    Furthermore, Mitting J's assertion that there is "some arguable  merit"
    in the concession does not establish an obligation on the Secretary  of
    State to issue a removal direction. That argument failed in Patel.

38.   Mr  Malik  submitted  that  the  removal  policy  was  issued  by  the
    respondent  following  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision   in   Patel.
    According to the removal policy the  Secretary  of  State  can  make  a
    removal  direction  where  there   are   exceptional   and   compelling
    circumstances.  It is not for the  reviewing  court  to  decide  if  an
    applicant's circumstances are compelling.  They refer  to  Mr  Collins'
    argument that the appellant says that she will  not  leave  voluntarily
    and therefore the Secretary of State should issue a removal  direction.
    Mr Malik submitted that this argument was rejected  in  Oboh.   So  the
    fact that the applicant has no intention to leave voluntarily is not  a
    good reason to issue a removal direction.

39.  Mr Malik relied on the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Khairdin  v  SSHD
    [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC). Mr Malik submitted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    referred to Nasseri [2009] UKHL 23 and R (Quila) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  45
    where it was held that a judicial review court  can  rule  for  example
    whether there  was  a  violation  of  Article  8  by  the  respondent's
    decision.  Mr Malik  submitted  that  the  applicant  has  suffered  no
    prejudice because of a failure to issue a removal direction. She  wants
    to go to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  argue  that  the  decision  was
    incompatible with her Article 8 rights but this argument has  not  been
    pleaded.

40.  Mr Malik submitted that the first reference to a request to  be  issued
    with a removal direction appeared in  the  Pre-action  Protocol  letter
    dated 22 May 2013. It was said in the letter that the applicant  argues
    that the respondent ought to have considered  whether  or  not  to  set
    removal directions so that the refusal of her  Article  8  claim  would
    have attracted a right of appeal.  The letter  did  not  say  that  the
    applicant falls within the removals policy as her case is  exceptional.



41.  The Pre-action Protocol was issued in the context of  the  respondent's
    letter dated 13 May 2014.  The applicant did not challenge the  context
    of the letter which also required her to leave voluntarily.   Mr  Malik
    said that it has been submitted  that  the  applicant  will  not  leave
    voluntarily but that is not something the applicant  has  said  to  the
    Secretary of State.  In the respondent's refusal letter  of  14  August
    2014 the respondent said that she had  taken  into  account  everything
    that ws said by the applicant.

42.   The  respondent  also  took  into  account  the  statement  from   the
    applicant's aunt.  The allegations  made  in  that  statement  and  the
    applicant's statement have not been accepted by  the  respondent.   The
    respondent formed an entirely rational view on the evidence that  there
    were no compelling circumstances in this case.  He submitted  that  the
    submissions made by Mr Collins amounted to no more than a  disagreement
    with the respondent's decision.  The respondent has  taken  account  of
    all the material submitted by the applicant. She  has  not  taken  into
    account any irrelevant material.  On any view, the decision  is  within
    the range of responses open to  the  respondent.   The  respondent  has
    rationally declined  to  issue  removal  directions  and  there  is  no
    obligation on her to do so.

43.  Mr Collins in response submitted that the  applicant  was  not  sent  a
    criteria met or not met letter by the respondent.  Mr  Malik  submitted
    that the relevant letter was the one dated 14 August 2014.

Decision

44.  There is no obligation on the respondent to make an appealable  removal
    decision in relation to an  overstayer.  This  is  made  clear  in  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Daley-Murdock and  approved  by  the
    Supreme Court in Patel. It has not been disputed that the applicant  is
    an overstayer  and  made  her  application  at  a  time  when  she  had
    overstayed and had no leave to remain.

45.  The request for the respondent  to  consider  whether  or  not  to  set
    removal directions so that the refuel of her Article 8 claim would have
    attracted a right of appeal was contained in  the  Pre-action  Protocol
    letter dated 22 May 2013.   The  letter  proposed  that  the  defendant
    withdraw her decision of 19 April 2013  and  make  a  new  decision  in
    accordance with the law not later than three months from  the  date  of
    the agreement to withdraw the decision currently  challenged.  Further,
    should the application be refused, removal directions will  be  set  to
    enable the applicant to exercise a right of appeal.  Following the Pre-
    action Protocol the respondent wrote a further letter the applicant via
    her solicitors dated 13 May 2014 containing the original decision.  The
    letter made no reference to the request for  the  respondent  to  issue
    removal directions in this case.

46.  Mr Collins argued that  the  gist  of  the  two  most  recent  decision
    letters dated 8 August 2014 and 14 August 2014 is to  the  effect  that
    there are only four scenarios where a removal decision will be made and
    that the applicant does not come within any  of  those.   He  submitted
    that the respondent failed to take into account the best  interests  of
    the child.  This factor appears  in  the  guidance  under  the  heading
    "Accepting a request for a removal decision".  The need to promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the UK is a factor a caseworker must [my
    emphasis] consider when making a decision to  accept  a  request.   The
    other two factors are

         Any direct cost in supporting the applicant  and  dependants  being
         met by the Home Office or a local authority (under  Section  21  of
         the National Assistance Act 1948 or Section 17 of the Children  Act
         1989), and

         Exceptional, compelling and compassionate circumstances


47.  Under the same heading the guidance states:


         "You can make a removal decision when requested  in  the  following
         cases:


         .    The  refused  application  for  leave  to  remain  included  a
             dependent child under 18 resident in the UK for three years or
             more


         .    The applicant has a dependent child under the age of 18 who is
             a British citizen


         .    The applicant is being supported by the  Home  Office  or  has
             provided evidence of being  supported  by  a  local  authority
             (under Section 21 of  the  National  Assistance  Act  1948  or
             Section 17 of the Children Act 1989), or


         .    There are other exceptional and compelling reasons to  make  a
             removal decision at this time."


48.  The guidance then goes on to say that if one or more  of  the  criteria
    outlined above are met, the caseworker  must  send  the  applicant  the
    criteria met letter. Mr Malik submitted that the letter dated 14 August
    2014 meets this requirement.  Indeed, in  this  letter  the  respondent
    outlined her published   guidance and the reference  to  the  scenarios
    mentioned above that she can make a removal decision where requested to
    do so.  There are the four scenarios.  I find that the  respondent  did
    consider at page 2 of that letter the welfare of  the  applicant.   The
    respondent stated as follows:


         "Your client's case does not include a dependent child who has been
         in the UK for three years or more, or  is  under  18  years  and  a
         British citizen.  It is accepted that your client is under  18  but
         that alone does not bring her within the  terms  of  the  published
         guidance.  There is no evidence to show that your client  is  being
         supported by UKBI or by a local authority. Furthermore, there is no
         credible evidence of exceptional and compelling reasons to  make  a
         removal decision at this time.  In deciding whether  or  not  there
         are exceptional and compelling reasons to make a  removal  decision
         at this time, the Secretary of State has  regard  to  the  need  to
         promote the welfare of the children who in the  UK,  your  client's
         statement dated 15 June 2013 and the  statement  of  your  client's
         aunt dated 6 June 2012.  The Secretary of State has considered  the
         best interests of your client as an integral part  of  her  overall
         assessment.  It is noted that the best interests  of  the  children
         must be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
         primary consideration; and the children's best interests do not  of
         themselves have the status of  the  paramount  consideration.   The
         assertions made in the statements,  including  the  assertion  that
         your  client's  mother  and  her  stepfather   have   a   troubling
         relationship and your client does not want to live with them,  even
         if accepted, do not amount to an exceptional or  compelling  reason
         to make her removal decision at this time.  The Secretary of  State
         considers that it is in your client's best interests to  leave  the
         UK  voluntarily  as  opposed  to  being  formally  removed  as   an
         overstayer, given that her application for leave to remain has been
         refused and she has  no basis to reside in this country."


49.  On this evidence I reject Mr Collin's argument that the respondent  did
    not consider the welfare of the applicant.

50.  Mr Collins's argument was that this a child who has nowhere to go.  She
    is in limbo and she will be granted certainty.


51.  I accept that the applicant is a  child.  There  is  a  removal  policy
    which takes into consideration the welfare of the child. This was fully
    considered by the respondent. The applicant is not in limbo. It is  not
    only the grant of a removal decision that will be her  certainty.   The
    respondent did not accept the evidence put forward by the applicant and
    her aunt in relation  to  the  circumstances  of  her  mother  and  her
    stepfather.  In any event, the respondent considered that even if  they
    were to be believed, they do not amount to  exceptional  or  compelling
    reasons to make a removal decision at  this  time.   I  find  that  the
    respondent's decision was within the range of reasonable responses open
    to her.


52.  Mr Collins argued that the applicant does not  wish  to  leave  the  UK
    voluntarily, as a result of which  she  should  be  granted  a  removal
    direction. The issue of a minority of applicants who  refuse  to  leave
    the UK voluntarily was considered by the Administrative Court  in  Oboh
    [2014] EWHC 967 (Admin).  It was argued in Oboh  that  because  only  a
    minority of applicants do  not  leave   voluntarily,  it  follows  that
    anyone who fails to leave voluntarily is in  an  exceptional  category.
    Mr  Justice  Burnett  rejected   this   argument   as   a   nonsensical
    interpretation of the guidance.

53.  Mr Collins argued that in light of the decision in Khan that the  delay
    of 31 months between the original decision made by the  respondent  and
    the date of hearing is such that the decision made by the respondent is
    unlawful and therefore the time has come to issue a  removal  direction
    in this case.


54.  I find that the circumstances of this applicant's  case  are  different
    from the concession relied on in Khan. The applicants in the concession
    made to Beatson  J  was  in  the  context  of  a  case  concerning  two
    overstayers who had remained in the UK for many  years  without  leave.
    This is very different from this applicant's case.  The  applicant  had
    overstayed by a short period when she put the application in for  leave
    to remain under Article 8 grounds.  Her circumstances were known to the
    respondent and had not been accepted by the respondent.  In any  event,
    paragraph 11 of Khan which was relied on by Mr Collins was  in  respect
    of dependent children and their families. That is not the case here.


55.  The decision I make is that the applicant's  application  for  judicial
    review is dismissed.
