
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           FW (Paragraph 322: untruthful answer) Kenya [2010] UKUT 165 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Newport (Columbus House)           |                            |
|On: 20 November 2009                         |                            |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before:

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                           Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     FW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Zia Nasim, instructed by Dexter Montague &
Partners
For the Respondent:          Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting
Officer


When a direct question is asked, and answered untruthfully, there is both  a
false representation and  a  non-disclosure;  and  it  is  not  open  to  an
Appellant who gives  an  untruthful  answer  to  a  direct  question  in  an
application form to say that the matter was not material.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Kenya,  appealed  to  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal against the decision of the Respondent on 13 July
      2009 refusing his application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom as a Tier 1 (post-study work) Migrant.  An  Immigration  Judge
      dismissed his appeal.  The Appellant sought and obtained an order  for
      reconsideration.  Thus the matter is before us.  This case is governed
      by paragraph 4 of Schedule 4 to  the  Transfer  of  Functions  of  the
      Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  Order  2010   (SI   2010/21)   and
      accordingly continues as an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   2. One of the grounds for refusal was that the Appellant did not meet the
      maintenance requirements of the relevant rules and guidance.   At  the
      hearing before  the  Immigration  Judge  the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer acknowledged (in our view clearly correctly) that that  was  a
      mistake, and we need say no more  about  it.   The  other  ground  for
      refusal was based on the way in which the Appellant had filled in  his
      application form.  Section E of the form is headed  "Personal  History
      (criminal  convictions,  war  crimes,  etc.)".    Before  any  of  the
      questions is the following note:

           "Please answer every question in this section.  It is an offence
           under Section 26(1)(c) of the Immigration Act  1971  to  make  a
           statement or representation which is known to be false or is not
           believed to be true.  Information given  will  be  checked  with
           other agencies."

      "E1.  Has the Applicant had any criminal  convictions  in  the  United
           Kingdom or any other country (including traffic offences) or any
           civil judgements made against them?"

      There is a note:


           "Note 1: convictions spent under the Rehabilitation of Offenders
           Act 1974 need not be disclosed.  More information about this Act
           is given towards the end of this section",


      as indeed it is.

   3. The Appellant had been convicted in 2007 on an offence of driving with
      excess alcohol; he was fined, and disqualified from driving for twelve
      months.  But he answered "no" to question E1.

   4. The relevant part of the  Respondent's  letter  of  refusal  reads  as
      follows:

           "In  your  application,  you  said  that  you  have  never  been
           convicted of a criminal offence.


           Failure to disclose material fact.


           I am satisfied that the statement was false and I  am  satisfied
           that this fact was material to the application because it  is  a
           mandatory field on the application form for which you  signed  a
           declaration stating that the information given by  yourself  was
           true.


           As material  facts  were  not  disclosed  in  relation  to  your
           application, it is refused  under  paragraph  322  (1A)  of  the
           Immigration Rules."


   5. That paragraph provides for mandatory refusal of an application "where
      false representations have been made  or  false  documents  have  been
      submitted (whether or not material to the application and  whether  or
      not to the applicant's knowledge), or material factors have  not  been
      disclosed in relation to the application".  The grounds of  appeal  to
      the Tribunal on this  point  were,  if  we  may  summarise,  that  the
      Appellant's failure to disclose his  conviction  was  not  deliberate,
      that the non-disclosure was not relevant to the decision  because  the
      Appellant would have been granted the leave he sought even if  he  had
      disclosed the conviction, and that  refusal  of  his  application  was
      contrary to his right to non-interference with his private life  under
      Article 8.

   6. The Immigration Judge treated the refusal as one based on  the  making
      of a false representation.  He noted that it was for the Respondent to
      prove that a false representation had been made  for  the  purpose  of
      obtaining leave.  He heard evidence from the  Appellant,  including  a
      number of excuses  and  explanation  for  question  E1's  having  been
      answered in the way it was.  His conclusions, at paragraph  9  of  his
      Determination were as follows:

           "I find  the  appellant  has  made  a  false  representation  in
           answering no to this question.  Paragraph 322(1A)  required  the
           respondent  to  refuse  his  application  because   this   false
           representation had been made.  I am satisfied upon  the  balance
           of probabilities that the appellant  chose  not  to  answer  the
           question truthfully and withheld this information to enhance the
           chance  of  the  application  being  granted.   The  appellant's
           application form that he has completed  when  read  as  a  whole
           document shows that the appellant was thinking  carefully  about
           his answers in giving detailed information about  other  things.
           The question asked  the  appellant  whether  he  had  ever  been
           convicted of a criminal offence, including traffic offences, and
           he replied no.  It is not credible that the  appellant  believed
           that his conviction was spent and need not be disclosed so  soon
           after  2007  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  his  twelve  month
           disqualification period had been completed and  the  fine  paid.
           If I apply the appellant's reasoning he would  have  thought  no
           convictions need be disclosed save those where the sentence  was
           still being served or the fine unpaid.  He is an intelligent man
           educated in this country who understood  the  questions  on  the
           form.  I do not accept he believed this in answering no to  this
           important question."

   7. He went on to say that there was no merit in the  submission  made  on
      behalf of the Appellant that the failure to disclose was not  material
      and, so far as concerns Article 8, he remarked that Article 8 does not
      provide a right to work in the UK and that he had not been assisted in
      discovering how any right of the Appellants had been breached by  this
      decision.  He said: "it appears unarguable because the refusal has not
      interfered with this private life in denying him something he did  not
      have".  He thus dismissed the appeal.

   8. The grounds for reconsideration were, first, that the refusal had been
      not on the basis of false representations but on the basis of  failure
      to disclose a  material  fact;  secondly,  that,  in  accordance  with
      Immigration Directorates Instructions, there should have been  refusal
      only if the non-disclosure was  material  and  that  the  refusal  was
      therefore not in accordance with the law; thirdly, that there  was  no
      evidence that the Appellant would not have been granted  leave  if  he
      had disclosed his conviction; fourthly, in making his  decision  under
      Article  8,  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  consider  that   the
      Appellant's private life included the pursuit of a career or business.
       Mr Nasim expanded on those grounds before us.

   9. It is fair to say that Mr Nasim had some difficulty in showing how the
      application should have been granted under the rules.  His submissions
      were devoted to the materiality of non-disclosure but  he  was  unable
      persuasively to explain  how,  given  the  false  representation,  the
      application could have succeeded.  The truth of  the  matter  is  that
      this is a case where there is no essential  difference  between  false
      representation and non-disclosure.  The  non-disclosure  was  a  false
      representation, because it was an answer to a  direct  question.   The
      answer "no" both was false and constituted a failure to disclose  what
      would  have  been  disclosed  if  the  question  had   been   answered
      truthfully.  That is not to say that there  is  always  no  difference
      between false representation and non-disclosure.  If, for example,  an
      application form contained a space in which an applicant  was  invited
      to disclose anything else he thought might be of relevance in deciding
      whether he should be granted leave, and he left that part of the  form
      blank, it might be found that he had failed  to  disclose  a  material
      fact, without making a false representation.  But  that  is  not  this
      case.

  10.  In  any  event,  we  entirely  reject  Mr  Nasim's   submissions   on
      materiality.  It is not for a person who has untruthfully  answered  a
      direct question in an application form to assert that the  answer  was
      not material in any event. If it was not material, it is difficult  to
      see why the question should have been asked.  There  is  no  basis  on
      which it can be said that, in making a decision whether to grant leave
      in this category, the Secretary of State was  obliged  to  condone  an
      offence of driving with excess alcohol; and it seems to  us  there  is
      also a sense in which a failure to answer questions  truthfully  is  a
      further factor which the Secretary of State is entitled to  take  into
      account.  It may be, therefore, that a person who honestly  admits  an
      offence may be granted leave, whereas a person who untruthfully denies
      the same offence is properly refused leave.

  11. We should add another point on false representations. It was  inherent
      in Mr Nasim's submissions that a false representation made innocently
      ought not to cause paragraph 322(1A) to be applied.  We are unable  to
      accept that submission.  It does not seem right to us to say that  the
      Secretary of State ought to grant leave on  a  false  basis,  provided
      only that the falsity was  unknown  to  the  applicant.   If  a  false
      statement is made in an application, the Secretary of  State  must  be
      entitled to refuse it.  That, indeed, appears also to be the effect of
      the words in parenthesis in paragraph 322(1A) itself.

  12. No point was raised before us on the precise formulation of  paragraph
      9 of the Immigration Judge's determination.  It might  be  conceivably
      said that, if it was for the Secretary of State to prove intention  in
      these circumstances, the Immigration Judge should look for  a  greater
      level of certainty than that expressed by the phrase "upon the balance
      of probabilities".  Whether or not that is right in the light  of  the
      authorities on the standard of proof, it is not an issue in this case.
       There is no doubt that the statement was untrue.

  13. For those reasons we are perfectly  certain  that  the  refusal  under
      paragraph 322(1A) was correct  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case.
      There is, of course, no  merit  in  Mr  Nasim's  submission  that  the
      Tribunal should consider the exercise of discretion outside the rules.

  14. We turn now to Article 8.  The argument under Article  8  put  to  the
      Immigration Judge was that as the Appellant had  been  in  the  United
      Kingdom lawfully for a period of (then) over two and a half years, and
      as he was entitled to remain, because he met the requirements  of  the
      rules, his exclusion by refusing him leave could  not  be  "necessary"
      within the meaning of Article 8.  It was  therefore  disproportionate.
      Nothing substantially more appears to have been said by  Mr Nasim  at
      the hearing before the Immigration Judge.  As we have  already  noted,
      the Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal on this ground, because  he
      did not think that the arguments put before him established  that  the
      Appellant had a viable claim under Article 8.  At the  hearing  before
      us we asked Mr Nasim what evidence there was of the incidents  of  the
      Appellant's private life protected by Article 8.  Mr Nasim's  response
      was simply to assert that the Appellant was "one of the  best  people"
      and therefore entitled to leave to remain.

  15. The position is that the Appellant had  a  period  of  leave  in  this
      country, during which  he  committed  a  criminal  offence,  which  he
      subsequently denied in an application for further leave.   Other  than
      the fact that he has been in this country for a few years, and that Mr
      Nasim describes him as "one of the best people", nothing has been said
      on the basis of which it could be concluded that he  has  a  right  to
      remain here despite not complying with the immigration rules.  In  our
      view,  he  simply  does  not.   The  Article  8  claim   is   entirely
      insubstantial and, in the circumstances, the Immigration  Judge  dealt
      with it entirely appropriately.

  16. For these reasons we find that the Immigration Judge made no  material
      error of law and we order  that  his  determination,  dismissing  this
      appeal, shall stand.




Mr C M G Ockelton
Vice President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber



