


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
| |DW (Homosexual Men - Persecution - Sufficiency of Protection)   |
| |Jamaica CG [2005] UKAIT 00168                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at:  Field House          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  28 October 2005             |On 28 November 2005             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Senior Immigration Judge)                         |
|Mr R Chalkley (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Ms S E Singer                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr S Chelvan of Counsel, instructed by
                 Southwest Law
For the respondent:          Mr M Blundell, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Men who are perceived to be homosexual and have for  this  reason  suffered
persecution in Jamaica are likely to be at risk of persecution  on  return.
Men who  are  perceived  to  be  homosexual  and  have  not  suffered  past
persecution may be at risk depending  on  their  particular  circumstances.
The Secretary of State conceded that, as a general rule, the authorities do
not provide homosexual men with a sufficiency  of  protection.   There  are
likely to be difficulties in finding safety through internal relocation but
in this respect no general guidance is given.

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who  was  born  on  19  December
      1982.   We heard both the first and second stage  reconsiderations  of
      his appeal against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Miss  J  M
      Harries, dismissing his appeals on both Refugee Convention  and  human
      rights grounds against the respondent's decision  to  give  directions
      for his removal from the  United  Kingdom  following  the  refusal  of
      asylum.

Immigration History

2.    The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  31  March  2001  and
      claimed asylum on  1  October  2001.      The  notice  containing  the
      decision against which he appeals is dated  6  November  2001.     The
      Adjudicator heard the appeal on  26  August  2004  and  permission  to
      appeal was granted by a  Vice  President  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal on 23 November 2004.

The Facts

3.    The Adjudicator outlined the facts of the case in paragraphs 8  to  11
      of the determination in the following terms,

           "8.   The appellant claims that he fears persecution in  Jamaica
                 because  of  his  sexual  orientation;   he  claims  to  be
                 homosexual.  The appellant says that he was born and  lived
                 in Kingston, Jamaica, all his life until  he  departed  for
                 the United Kingdom.  He never knew  his  father  and  lived
                 with his mother, stepfather and siblings until  his  mother
                 left Jamaica for  the  United  Kingdom  in  February  1999.
                 The appellant then remained in Jamaica with his stepfather.
                  His stepfather had a violent manner, treated the appellant
                 badly and threw him out of the family home.


             9.  The appellant says that he  was  continually  taunted  and
                 accused of being gay in Jamaica.   He says that two serious
                 incidents were the cause of  his  departure  from  Jamaica.
                 The first was in early 2000 when the appellant was  leaving
                 a gay club with a male friend in New Kingston.    They were
                 on foot when a car pulled up in front of them.    A man got
                 out of the car and shouted "batty man"  and  "gay"  at  the
                 appellant and his friend.     He  punched  and  kicked  the
                 appellant and his friend; the friend  ran  away.   The  man
                 then pulled out a gun  and  pointed  it  at  the  appellant
                 before getting back into the car and driving away.


           10.   The appellant  claims  the  second  incident  occurred  in
                 December 2000, at around 11.00 pm when he  was  waiting  at
                 the roadside for a friend he was  going  to  a  club  with.
                 The appellant claims a man came up behind him  and  held  a
                 knife to his throat.    The appellant claims this man  made
                 him walk with him to an open place of land nearby where  he
                 forced the appellant to perform oral sex on him  whilst  he
                 held  the  knife  to  his  throat  before   releasing   the
                 appellant.


           11.   The appellant says he reported  neither  incident  to  the
                 police because they would not provide  protection  and  are
                 known to be corrupt and homophobic.    The appellant claims
                 that homophobia is endemic in Jamaica;  he  says  hostility
                 towards gay men and lesbian woman is  rife  throughout  the
                 country and there is nowhere he could  safely  be  returned
                 to."


The Respondent's Reasons for Refusal


4.    The respondent did not believe the appellant's account  of  events  or
      that he was homosexual.    The respondent took the view that those who
      harassed the appellant were not agents of persecution and any  failure
      on the part of the police to apprehend the perpetrators did  not  show
      complicity in or support for such attacks.   The respondent  was  also
      of the view that there were  other  parts  of  Jamaica  to  which  the
      appellant could reasonably go.

Representation before the Adjudicator

5.    Both parties were represented at the hearing before  the  Adjudicator,
      the appellant by Mr Chelvan, who appeared before us.    The  appellant
      gave evidence, as did his witness, Mr B.

The Adjudicator's findings of credibility and fact

6.    The Adjudicator's findings of credibility and fact merit inclusion  in
      full.   In paragraphs 25 to 40 of the determination she said,

           "25.  In reaching a decision  I  have  applied  the  burden  and
                 standard of proof previously set out in this determination.


              26.  The  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  that  his   sexual
                 orientation is homosexual and the respondent  is  wrong  to
                 reject the fact that he is  gay.    He  described  his  own
                 demeanour as feminine.   The  appellant  said  that  it  is
                 obvious that he is gay, not  straight,  and  said  that  he
                 wears tight tops to show off his  shape.     The  appellant
                 says in his statement, dated 18 August 2004,  that  he  has
                 known since the age of 11 years  that  he  is  gay.     The
                 appellant says he always liked the company of girls and had
                 more in common with them than  boys;  he  enjoyed  dancing,
                 shopping and chatting.

             27. The appellant said in oral evidence that his  witness,  Mr
                 B, is a friend, but not a boyfriend, who has been known  to
                 him  for  3  years.     The  appellant  gave  evidence   of
                 homosexual relationships he had  formed  in  the  past;  he
                 named a former boyfriend as C and a more recent one  as  H.
                 Mr  B  confirmed  his  own  personal  knowledge  of   these
                 relationships and said he had been introduced to both C and
                 H by the appellant.   Mr B said that it is within  his  own
                 knowledge that the appellant is gay and  described  him  as
                 very effeminate;  he said that both he  and  the  appellant
                 are very involved in the gay community in a city in the UK,
                 where they live.


             28. In relation to the issue of the  appellant's  sexuality  I
                 accept  his  evidence.    I  am  satisfied   that   he   is
                 homosexual.    I  find  his  evidence  about  this  to   be
                 consistent throughout his claim, credible and supported  by
                 a reliable witness and plausible detail.     I  accept  the
                 evidence given by Mr B.


             29. I accept the evidence of  the  appellant  that  he  had  a
                 difficult time in Jamaica; he was verbally  abused  because
                 of his presumed sexual orientation.    He  describes  being
                 referred to as "batty boy", a well  known  slang  term  for
                 homosexuals in Jamaica.    I find the evidence given by the
                 appellant in relation to the incident in early 2000, when a
                 man alighted from a  car,  beat  him  and  his  friend  and
                 pointed a gun, to be credible.     The  appellant  gives  a
                 consistent account of the incident.    In the circumstances
                 of the incident I am satisfied to a  reasonable  degree  of
                 likelihood that the appellant was attacked because  of  his
                 homosexuality.    It is reported to  have  happened  in  an
                 area where male prostitution is practised.


             30. Questioned  about  the  incident  in  December  2000,  the
                 appellant said that he was not  injured,  just  "boxed  and
                 stuff like that", meaning he had been slapped to the  face.
                  I  accept  that  this  incident  happened  but  I  am  not
                 satisfied that there is a sufficient amount of evidence  to
                 show  that  the  attack  was  because  of  the  appellant's
                 perceived sexuality, although he says he  could  have  been
                 identified as gay because he was dressed to go out.


              31.      I am not satisfied  that  the  two  major  incidents
                 complained of by the appellant posed a  serious  threat  to
                 him.  In respect of  the  two  most  serious  incidents  he
                 describes the opportunity was there, but not taken  up,  to
                 do him considerably greater harm.     I  am  not  satisfied
                 that there  was  a  serious  intent  on  the  part  of  his
                 assailants to do him serious harm.   I accordingly  do  not
                 agree  with  the  appellant's  assessment  of   these   two
                 incidents as being occasions on which he "almost  lost  his
                 life".  Nor, as set out above, do I accept that the  second
                 incident is proved  to  be  motivated  by  the  appellant's
                 sexual orientation.   That is in no  way  to  diminish  the
                 unpleasantness of the treatment received by  the  appellant
                 or to condone such entirely unacceptable  behaviour.    The
                 incidents, must, however, be assessed within the  framework
                 of asylum and human rights law and the general situation in
                 Jamaica.


             32. I am not satisfied that the  appellant  was  genuinely  in
                 fear for his life when he left Jamaica or  that  he  has  a
                 well-founded fear of persecution if returned to Jamaica.  I
                 consider there to be merit in the submission made on behalf
                 of the respondent that the appellant's claim is  undermined
                 both by his delay in  leaving  Jamaica  and  his  delay  in
                 applying for asylum after arriving in the  United  Kingdom.
                  The delay in departing from Jamaica is not consistent with
                 the appellant's claimed fear for his life.   The  appellant
                 was cross examined about the 4 month delay in  his  leaving
                 Jamaica; he said that he had been  staying  at  a  friend's
                 house and was waiting for his mother to send him money.


             33. I do not consider the explanation the appellant gives  for
                 the  delay  in  applying  for  asylum  to  be  adequate  or
                 credible.  He applied at the end of  the  period  when  his
                 visa expired, apparently because he had not been advised to
                 apply for asylum.    These are not, in my view, the actions
                 of a person arriving in the United Kingdom in fear  of  his
                 life, regardless of the advice he did or did not receive.


             34. The appellant says, in effect, that he did not report  the
                 incident to the police in  Jamaica  because  of  their  bad
                 reputation and there would have been no point.     It  does
                 not assist his claim, in spite of this explanation, to seek
                 international  protection  before  he  looks  for  help  in
                 Jamaica.    The appellant's unwillingness to report to  the
                 police is not stated to  be  because  he  fears  attracting
                 adverse attention to his situation; he says he  is  readily
                 identifiable as gay.


             35. In interview,  apart  from  the  two  major  incidents  he
                 describes as causing him to leave to Jamaica, the appellant
                 says it was also because of the bad treatment  he  received
                 from his stepfather and the friends  he  lived  with  after
                 being  thrown  out  by  his  stepfather.    I  accept   the
                 appellant's evidence in relation to  these  lesser  events,
                 but I am not satisfied that any of the treatment  described
                 amounts to evidence of persecution or ill-treatment to  the
                 necessary  high  threshold.     Whilst  the  appellant  has
                 received  unpleasant  treatment  at  the  hands   of   some
                 individuals, I am not satisfied  that  he  has  established
                 that he left Jamaica owing to either  societal,  police  or
                 the authorities' discrimination or persecution of him.


             36. In the case of Dawkins [2003] EWHC 375 (Admin)  the  Judge
                 indicated that a citizen of Jamaica would not  normally  be
                 at risk  because  of  his  homosexuality.     The  case  of
                 Dawkins  establishes  that  an  applicant  must   establish
                 something more than the mere fact that  he  is  homosexual;
                 there must be evidence that he is going to be subjected  to
                 substantial discrimination and/or violence and abuse.     I
                 am not satisfied there is such evidence in this case.    It
                 is argued that  this  appellant  is  particularly  at  risk
                 because he can be readily identified as gay in Jamaica  and
                 his being a prostitute in the past.   Whilst I accept  that
                 the appellant may be readily identified as  homosexual  and
                 that he has acted as a prostitute in the  past,  I  do  not
                 accept that these facts elevate his claim to the  necessary
                 threshold  or  put  him  at  particular  risk.     His  own
                 evidence does not support that proposition.


             37. In the light of the evidence and the  decided  authorities
                 on the issue, I am of the view that  homosexuals  generally
                 in Jamaica, and this appellant in particular, do not face a
                 real risk of really serious ill-treatment.   This appellant
                 was not the victim of any systemised attacks.


             38. Paragraph 6.21 of the CIPU reports sets out efforts by the
                 Jamaican authorities to take firm steps and makes  specific
                 commitments to end unlawful killings with police  impunity.
                 Amnesty International have said that the disbanding of  the
                 crime management unit implicated in numerous  human  rights
                 abuses is a particularly welcome step, albeit not enough.


             39. Objective evidence makes clear the degree of disquiet  and
                 contempt many people in Jamaica feel  and  exhibit  towards
                 homosexual activity.    Homosexuals are often  the  victims
                 of the unpleasant and threatening acts.   I am, however, of
                 the view, based on the objective evidence taken as a whole,
                 that the discrimination and homophobia in Jamaican  society
                 is not state sanctioned.    I am satisfied that there is  a
                 sufficiency of protection.    In the light of  my  findings
                 of fact, the issue of relocation does not arise.


             40. I  come  to  my  conclusions  having  considered  all  the
                 documents, evidence, submissions and case law before me and
                 not least the very competently prepared, comprehensive  and
                 helpful skeleton  argument  submitted  by  the  appellant's
                 representative."


Grounds of Appeal


7.    There are four  grounds  of  appeal  and  permission  was  granted  in
      respect of all of them.    The first is that the Adjudicator erred  in
      her findings with respect to the intent behind the attack of  December
      2000  and  that  her  findings  in  this  regard  are   wrong   and/or
      unsustainable.    The  second,  not  pursued  by  Mr  Chelvan  at  the
      hearing, was that the Adjudicator's findings in relation to the  delay
      in departure from Jamaica and delay in claiming asylum in  the  United
      Kingdom are unsustainable.   The third is that the  Adjudicator  erred
      in her finding that the appellant had not been persecuted in the past.
       The fourth, that the Adjudicator erred in law  in  not  finding  that
      there was a future risk to the appellant on return to Jamaica.




The Secretary of State's Concession

8.    At the beginning of the  first  reconsideration  hearing  Mr  Blundell
      made an important  concession.     He  told  us  that,  after  careful
      consideration, the Secretary of State was not going to take any  point
      in relation to sufficiency of protection in Jamaican homosexual cases.
         He was not saying that the Secretary of State would not  argue  the
      point in very particular circumstances but,  as  a  general  rule,  he
      would  not  argue  that  the  authorities  would  provide  a  Jamaican
      homosexual with a sufficiency of protection.     Furthermore, although
      there is no specific concession, Mr Blundell has not argued that  this
      appellant or other homosexuals at risk of persecution  in  their  home
      area should be expected to relocate within Jamaica.

9.    This concession as to what is now the  considered  general  policy  of
      the  Secretary  of  State  has  been  an  important  factor   in   our
      consideration of this appeal. It impinges on the appellant's  decision
      not to seek protection from the police and our assessment of what  may
      amount to persecution or infringement of  an  individual's  Article  3
      human rights against the background of a  lack  of  state  protection.



The Appellants'  submission on the first stage reconsideration

10.    Mr  Chelvan  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  finding  that   the
      appellant had not been persecuted could not stand.    The  Adjudicator
      accepted that the appellant had suffered what amounted to  persecution
      because of his sexual orientation.   There was  past  persecution  and
      this was probative of current risk.    In  Abdul  Aziz  Faraj  v  SHHD
      [1999] INLR 451 at page 113 Peter Gibson LJ said:

           "Persecution  may  involve  physical  or  mental  ill-treatment.
           Torture  is  such  ill-treatment  carried  to  extremes.     But
           persecution, unlike torture, always involves a persistent course
           of conduct.... Since the  conduct  may  be  directed  against  a
           particular person or a particular group of persons,  an  instant
           of torture of a person which is the sole instant affecting  that
           person may amount to persecution if there  are  other  incidents
           affecting a group of  which  that  person  is  a  member.    But
           isolated incidents of  torture  are  not  enough  to  constitute
           persecution without more."


11.   Mr Chelvan submitted that the Adjudicator did not reject any  part  of
      the appellant's account of events.     She only differed from  him  in
      her assessment of how these  events  should  be  categorised  and  the
      potential consequences.    Mr Chelvan argued that  one  attack  on  an
      individual  who  belonged  to  a  particular  social  group,  such  as
      homosexuals in Jamaica, amounted to persecution.     He  argued  that,
      in the light of the Secretary of State's concession, he was in  effect
      accepting that the appellant and others like him  would  be  at  risk.
      The evidence before the Adjudicator showed  that  gay  men  and  those
      perceived as such were at risk in Jamaica.   The Adjudicator erred  in
      law by rejecting such risk, a  conclusion  not  open  to  her  on  the
      evidence.    In reply to our question as to whether what  happened  to
      the appellant amounted to torture,  Mr Chelvan argued that it was  not
      necessary for it to be torture.    The attack was serious  enough  and
      the crucial factor was that the appellant was attacked because he  was
      recognised as gay.

12.   Mr Chelvan submitted that, on the facts found by the  Adjudicator,  it
      was perverse for her to conclude that the attack was  not  because  of
      his perceived sexuality particularly as, in  the  same  sentence,  she
      said:

           "He could have been identified as gay because he was dressed  to
           go out."


The Respondents' submissions on the first stage reconsideration

13.   Mr Blundell submitted that there was no material error of law.     The
      Adjudicator's assessment of the appellant's history  and  the  factual
      circumstances could not be  categorised  as  perverse.     There  were
      three facets to the appellant's account and  the  Adjudicator  made  a
      proper assessment of them.    She found that two of  them  were  major
      incidents, but also accepted what she referred to in paragraph  35  of
      the determination as lesser events.

14.   Mr Blundell relied on what he categorised  as  a  "reverse  Demirkaya"
      (Hali Demirkaya v  SSHD  CA  -  IATRF  99-0144-4)  argument  which  we
      understood to mean that whilst past persecution is probative  but  not
      conclusive evidence of a current risk of persecution, the  absence  of
      such evidence, should lead us to the opposite conclusion.   The  first
      incident, accepted by the Adjudicator in paragraph 29,  could  not  be
      categorised as a finding of past persecution and, on its own, was  not
      sufficient to amount to persecution.    Mr Blundell referred us to the
      head note in Faraj which states:

            "Although isolated incidents  of  torture  were  not  enough  to
           constitute persecution without more, an incident of torture of a
           person which was the sole incident affecting that  person  might
           amount to persecution if there were other incidents affecting  a
           group of which that person was a member."


15.   As to the second incident, in December  2000,  where  Mr  Chelvan  had
      argued that the Adjudicator's finding that the attack was  not  caused
      by his perceived sexuality was perverse, Mr  Blundell  emphasised  the
      use of the word "although", linking the two parts of the last sentence
      in paragraph 30.    In his own account of the incident  the  appellant
      did not say that his attacker used abusive language.

16.   In relation to what amounted to perversity Mr Blundell referred us  to
      the judgment of the Court of Appeal in R v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982
      where Brooke LJ cautioned against too easy a use of the word  perverse
      (paragraph 12).

17.   Mr Blundell submitted that it was open to the Adjudicator to  come  to
      the conclusion that there was no past persecution.   In paragraphs  31
      and 37 of the determination she gave herself a proper direction as  to
      persistent and serious ill-treatment.

18.   Mr Blundell accepted that, in the light of  the  evidence  before  the
      Adjudicator, she erred in law in concluding that the authorities would
      provide the appellant with a sufficiency of protection.   However,  he
      argued that it was  not  a  material  error  of  law  because  of  her
      findings, open to her on all the evidence, that the appellant had  not
      suffered past persecution and did not have a current well-founded fear
      of persecution.   Following the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Faraj, (at  page  451),  the  question  of  whether  a  sole  incident
      affecting an individual might amount to persecution was a question  of
      fact for the Adjudicator.    The judgment in Faraj, read in the  light
      of the findings at F and G on page 452, showed that that appellant was
      involved in at least seven incidents between May 1992 and January 1994
      when he was beaten or tortured by  the  police  or  members  of  KANU.
      Under the former "Subesh" jurisdiction we would not have been required
      to take a different view from the  Adjudicator.    Under  the  current
      "error of law" jurisdiction it could not  be  said  that  any  of  the
      Adjudicator's findings were perverse.

19.   Mr Blundell asked us to find that the violence the appellant  suffered
      was opportunistic and the Adjudicator  made  proper  findings.     His
      delays in leaving Jamaica and claiming asylum  were  material  factors
      which she was entitled to take into account.   We were asked to uphold
      the determination.

The Appellants'  reply on the first stage reconsideration

20.   Mr Chelvan submitted that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  reverse
      Demirkaya principle.   In  any  event,  this  did  not  fit  with  the
      Adjudicator's finding that on return to Jamaica the appellant would be
      identified as a gay man.   The Adjudicator had clearly  accepted  that
      the appellant had come to harm.    Those who were perceived as gay men
      in Jamaica were at real risk.      Mr  Chelvan  asked  the  rhetorical
      question; how many further attacks  the  appellant  needed  to  suffer
      before it could be said that he had been persecuted?

21.   Mr Chelvan argued that Faraj must be read in line  with  the  judgment
      of the Court of Appeal in Bagdanavicius v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  1605.
       Faraj  said  that  one  incident  of  torture  could  be  enough  and
      Bagdanavicius that the tests of torture and persecution fitted hand in
      glove.  Mr Chelvan argued that,  even  if,  contrary  to  his  primary
      submission, the appellant  had  not  suffered  past  persecution,  his
      Article  3  human  rights  had  been  infringed.     Nevertheless,  he
      submitted  that  the  two  tests  were  effectively  the  same.    The
      Adjudicator erred by following the judgment in Dawkins.

Our findings as to error of law

22.   We find that there are material errors of law in the determination  of
      the Adjudicator.   The appellant had already, in early 2000, been  the
      victim of a violent attack as  a  result  of  being  recognised  as  a
      homosexual. Having accepted this and that the  appellant  was  readily
      identifiable as a gay man, it was perverse and  therefore  a  material
      error of law for the Adjudicator  to  find  that  the  attack  on  the
      appellant in December 2000, was not motivated by his sexuality,  given
      the manner in which he said he was dressed at the time and the violent
      and sexual nature of the attack upon him.   The Adjudicator's  finding
      was, in terms of paragraph 9(i) of R v SSHD, a perverse or  irrational
      finding on a matter that was material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.
      In reaching this conclusion we have taken into account the  strictures
      of Brooke LJ in R that the perversity  test  represents  a  very  high
      hurdle.

23.   We find that there is a further error  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusion that the authorities would provide  the  appellant  with  a
      sufficiency  of  protection.    Mr  Blundell  concedes  that,  on  the
      material before the Adjudicator, this was not a conclusion open to her
      and amounts to an error of law.  We agree. He argued that it was not a
      material error of law.    This submission turns on  the  soundness  or
      otherwise of Mr  Blundell's  submissions  that  it  was  open  to  the
      Adjudicator to come to the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  not
      suffered past persecution and did not have a current well-founded fear
      of persecution for a Convention reason.   If these conclusions do  not
      stand, a question to which we  will  return,  then  the  Adjudicator's
      finding does contain a material error of law.

24.   The first stage reconsideration hearing took place on 4  October  2005
      at the end of which, we adjourned for lack of time.  The second  stage
      reconsideration was heard on 28 October 2005.

The Second Stage Reconsideration

25.   On the second stage reconsideration we had  the  appellant's  skeleton
      argument from Mr Chelvan, dated 24 October  2005,  together  with  his
      earlier skeleton which was before  the  Adjudicator,  the  appellant's
      bundle running to 324 pages, the appellant's  authorities  bundle  and
      the Tribunal determination in MN (Findings on Sexuality) Kenya  [2005]
      UKIAT 00021.  On behalf of the respondent Mr  Blundell  submitted  the
      April 2005 CIPU report on Jamaica.

26.   Mr Blundell confirmed that the Secretary  of  State's  concessions  in
      relation to sufficiency of protection, referred  to  earlier  in  this
      determination, still held good.    He  did  not  argue  that  internal
      relocation would be available to the appellant and said that he  would
      not be attempting to persuade us that  the  appellant  should  not  be
      regarded as a credible witness and his account of events  accepted  in
      its entirety.

27.   Mr Chelvan took us to MN Kenya (page 308 of the appellant's bundle  at
      paragraph 15) where the Tribunal said,

      "Mr  Jorro  emphasised  that  homosexuality  is  a  matter  of  sexual
           identity rather than sexual activity.  We accept that.   Whether
           or not a person's homosexuality is an innate  characteristic  or
           chosen behaviour is immaterial.    In  either  case  it  is  not
           something that he should (not) be required to give up even if he
           could."  We think that the word "not", which we have  bracketed,
           should not appear.


28.   He argued  that  the  Convention  reason  was  membership  of  both  a
      particular social group and an imputed social group.  He relied on the
      report from Mr Sobers.  Mr Sobers standing had been addressed  in  two
      judgments of the Court of Appeal, A and Atkinson.     He was  referred
      to as a distinguished expert in relation  to  his  knowledge  of  gang
      related activities in Jamaica.    Mr Chelvan submitted that we  should
      find that Mr Sobers  had  a  similar  expertise  in  relation  to  the
      position of homosexuals in Jamaica.

29.   Mr Chelvan reminded us that the Adjudicator had found that gay men  in
      Jamaica belonged to a particular social group.   Mr Blundell said that
      he did not intend to dispute this.    Mr Chelvan sought to spread  his
      net wider.    He argued that "those seen as  not  conforming  to  what
      Jamaica sees as the norm of masculine identity in Jamaica are at  risk
      of persecution and/or real risk of Article 3 harm by  state  and  non-
      state agents  and  are  without  effective  state  protection".     Mr
      Chelvan was reluctant to indicate what  groups  or  individuals  might
      come within this category, apart from the  obvious  one  of  gay  men.
      However,  he  suggested   that   it   would   include   transvestites,
      transsexuals and perhaps others.

30.   Mr Chelvan emphasised paragraph  27  of  Mr  Sobers  report  and  also
      relied on the Human Rights Watch Report, which was  extensively  drawn
      upon in the April 2005 CIPU report.

31.   Mr Chelvan argued that, in effect, the  Secretary  of  State  accepted
      the risk category as he had defined it.     The appellant would be  at
      risk on return as a readily identifiable gay man.

32.   Our attention was drawn to the Human Rights Watch Report at pages  229
      and 292 of the appellant's bundle which, Mr Chelvan argued, showed the
      position of those, like the appellant, who were readily identified  as
      gay men.    The reality was that they could  not  resort  to  internal
      relocation.   The  appellant  would  be  identifiable  as  a  gay  man
      wherever he went in Jamaica.     Mr  Sobers  had  said  that  internal
      relocation was not possible (paragraph 92 of his report at page 195 of
      the appellant's bundle).  In relation to sufficiency of protection  Mr
      Chelvan said that  a  number  of  cases  relating  to  sufficiency  of
      protection drew on the Public Defenders  reported  comments  in  2001.
      It was thought that the Public Defender might  bring  civil  cases  or
      prosecutions against those thought to be guilty of homophobic  crimes,
      but the reality was that no such action had been taken.

33.   Mr Chelvan argued that the Secretary of State had put in no  objective
      evidence to  rebut  the  compelling  evidence  from  Mr  Sobers.    He
      accepted that there might be some gay men in Jamaica who would not  be
      at risk.    He pointed to Mr Sobers report in the footnote 70 at  page
      195 of the appellant's bundle where he said:

           "I have observed that a gay man with wealth and  status  can  be
           left alone as long as he remains within his social  circles  and
           does  not  cause  his  sexual  orientation  or  his   same   sex
           partnership to attract any attention.   His  sexual  orientation
           will be tolerated as long as he is not openly gay.   At the same
           time, I have observed that the affluent gay man can  be  subject
           to extortion for fear that his sexual orientation becomes public
           knowledge.


34.   Mr Chelvan said that in relation to  Jamaican  homosexuals  perception
      was all.

35.   Mr Blundell submitted that Mr Sobers had concentrated on gay  men  and
      suggested that we limit ourselves to consideration of those  who  were
      gay or perceived to be gay men rather  than  the  wider  category  put
      forward by Mr Chelvan.

36.   Mr Blundell accepted  that,  on  the  objective  evidence,  there  was
      popular societal hostility to gay men, but argued that  the  level  of
      risk did not cross the relevant threshold for  either  persecution  or
      infringement of an individual's Article 3  human  rights.   He  argued
      that, even  in  the  light  of  the  Sobers  report,  the  appropriate
      thresholds were not crossed.   He argued  that  there  was  little  to
      sustain Mr Sobers conclusion that gay men generally faced serious ill-
      treatment in Jamaica. He referred us to paragraph 6.155  to  6.173  of
      the CIPU report, but indicated that he did not intend to say any more.
        Mr Blundell did not argue that  the  appellant  or  any  other  male
      thought to be homosexual could relocate within  Jamaica.

37.   In relation to the particular  circumstances  of  this  appellant,  Mr
      Blundell asked us to follow the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  that  what
      happened to the appellant did not amount  to  persecution.    The  two
      incidents referred to by the Adjudicator, even if taken in conjunction
      with earlier discrimination, did not amount to serious and  persistent
      ill-treatment.   Mr Blundell continued to rely on what he referred  to
      as the reverse Demirkaya point, which he argued should be the starting
      point for consideration of past persecution.   He  accepted  that  the
      Adjudicator had found that the appellant would be readily identifiable
      as a gay man.

38.   Mr Blundell submitted that, on the appellant's own  evidence,  he  had
      been identifiable as both effeminate and gay since a  young  age.   As
      such he had suffered no more than two violent attacks,  the  first  of
      which was in any event a case of mistaken identity.    In reply to our
      question Mr Blundell accepted that, whilst  the  appellant's  attacker
      may have thought that the appellant was another man, it was reasonably
      likely that he thought he was gay.     He  argued  that  the  risk  of
      repetition was not sufficient for there  to  be  a  breach  of  either
      Convention.

39.   In reply Mr Chelvan argued that the appellant had identified a  number
      of occasions on which he suffered abuse and items were thrown  at  him
      because of his perceived sexuality and that these, combined  with  the
      two serious attacks, crossed the required threshold to show  that  the
      appellant had  suffered  both  persecution  and  infringement  of  his
      Article 3 human rights.     He argued that the  forced  sexual  attack
      would, on its  own,  amount  to  persecution.      The  appellant  had
      established that the attacks on him were persistent.  In  relation  to
      the question of the number of attacks he suffered  during  the  period
      when he was identified as a gay man, Mr Chelvan pointed out  that  the
      appellant was born in 1982 and arrived in the UK in 2001, when he  was
      approximately 18� years old.   Having discovered that he  was  gay  at
      the age of 13, there was only a relatively short period  between  1995
      and 2001 where there would  have  been  a  public  perception  of  his
      sexuality.    The appellant referred to incidents  where  stones  were
      thrown at him.   When these were taken into account with the two major
      incidents there was no period  of  respite.    Mr  Chelvan  relied  on
      paragraph 6.167 of the current CIPU report.  The  country  information
      did not support Mr Blundell's submission that there was no evidence to
      support the argument that the risk on return for  those  perceived  as
      gay men would not cross the threshold for either Convention.

40.   Mr Chelvan submitted that the real risk test set out by the  Court  of
      Appeal in Zorig Batayav v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  1489  was  satisfied.
      He relied on the Amnesty International report at pages 210 to  214  of
      the appellant's bundle and the Human Rights Watch Report  starting  at
      page 212.

The expert evidence and country material before us

41.   Mr Sober's report is dated 16 September 2005.    At page  170  of  the
      appellant's bundle he sets out the questions he has been asked:


            "Risk of harm to  homosexual  men  as  a  result  of  homophobic
            violence;


            Sufficiency of protection available to  homosexual  men  by  the
            Jamaican state;


            The possibility of internal relocation  to  avoid  the  risk  of
            homophobic inspired violence."


42.   The summary of his opinion on the following page states:

           "Based on the totality of the information  I  have,  I  consider
           that men who are, or who are perceived to be, homosexual are  at
           risk of homophobic inspired violence in Jamaica.   The  agencies
           of the Jamaican government, primarily the police, lack both  the
           capacity  and  the  will  to  offer  these  men  any   effective
           protection from those who are hostile to them because  of  their
           sexual  orientation.     Internal  relocation  in   Jamaica   is
           unlikely to reduce or eliminate this risk."


43.   Mr Sobers outlines his qualifications and experience, at paragraphs  1
      to 4 of his report (pages 171 and 172 of the bundle)  and  in  greater
      detail in Appendix One at pages 199 and 200.

44.   The Court of Appeal in A v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 175 said:

           "Mr Sobers is a member of the Jamaica bar and a former executive
           Director of the Independent Jamaica Council  for  Human  Rights.
           He is clearly a distinguished and reputable  expert  on  matters
           concerning human rights in  that  country.     Very  fairly,  Mr
           Clarke, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  describes  his
           report as a careful and considered one  by  somebody  who  knows
           what his is talking about."


45.   In Michael Atkinson v SSHD [2004] EWCA CIV 846  at  page  203  of  the
      appellant's bundle the Court referred to Mr Sobers as a "distinguished
      expert".

46.   The Secretary of State has not submitted any expert evidence in  reply
      to Mr Sober's report.  Furthermore, Mr Blundell has made no  criticism
      of Mr Sobers or his report.   It is an  impressive  and  comprehensive
      report.    We find Mr Sobers as knowledgeable about  the  position  of
      homosexuals in Jamaica as he was in his reports before  the  Court  of
      Appeal in relation to criminal gangs in  Jamaica.   With  respect,  we
      agree with the  Court  of  Appeal  that  he  is  a  distinguished  and
      reputable expert.    We find that his report is careful and considered
      and from somebody who knows what he is talking about.


47.   The following passages assist:

      "7.   Homophobia is a deeply entrenched cultural norm in Jamaica that,
           at its worst, is capable of provoking murder or  the  infliction
           of  serious  bodily  injury.     The  intensity  (and  veritable
           universality) of this norm is unconstrained by variables such as
           political orientation, social class, education, age, gender, and
           geography  (urban/rural).      Some   of   the   most   virulent
           expressions of anti-homosexuality that I have  heard  have  come
           from the so-called "educated" classes in Jamaica."


       9.   It should be noted that the mere  circulation  of  a  rumour  in
           Jamaica that one is gay would be sufficient to excite homophobic
           sentiments/violence".


48.   In relation to the attitude of  the  authorities  to  homosexuals  the
      footnote to paragraph 11 of the report refers to Articles  76  of  the
      Offences against the Person, Act which are Jamaica's sodomy laws which
      criminalise consensual homosexual conduct between adult  men.     This
      law prohibits the "abominable crime of buggery, committed either  with
      mankind or with any animal" and "gross indecency".   "Buggery",  which
      generally refers to all acts of anal intercourse and bestiality, is  a
      felony punishable by imprisonment with hard labour for up to 10 years.
          "Gross  indecency",  generally  interpreted  to  mean  any  sexual
      intimacy between men short of  anal  intercourse,  is  a  misdemeanour
      punishable by up to 2 years with hard labour.

49.   In relation to the attitude of senior  politicians,  paragraph  11  of
      the reports states:

           "Prime Minister P  J  Patterson  has  made  it  clear  that  his
           government has no intention of repealing Section 76 of the  OAPA
           (Offences against the Person Act).  In 2000, Patterson  declared
           at a People's National Party) (PNP) Conference in Kingston  that
           the laws relating to homosexuality would never be repealed while
           he was Prime Minister.  Mr  Patterson  in  June  2001  found  it
           necessary  to  declare  his  sexuality  to  the   nation.    "My
           credentials as a life long heterosexual person are  impeccable".
           Mr Patterson said, "anybody who tries to say  otherwise  is  not
           just smearing but is engaging in vulgar abuse".


50.   There are references in the  reports  to  the  position  of  Jamaica's
      Public defender, Howard Hamilton, QC.    Mr Sobers addresses these  in
      paragraph 10 of his report, in the following terms:

           "Jamaica's public  defender  Howard  Hamilton,  QC  enjoys  some
           statutory  authority  to  protect  the  fundamental  rights  and
           freedoms of Jamaicans.  However, he has maintained  that  he  is
           unable to advocate the  freedom  of  expression  of  homosexuals
           because homosexuality is against the  law  (Section  76  of  the
           Offences against the Person Act)."


51.   Mr Sobers  sets  the  scene  of  crime  and  violence  in  Jamaica  in
      paragraphs 14 to 22 of his report, recording  that  Jamaica  is  small
      Commonwealth Caribbean country of 2.6 million people.  Almost half  of
      the population resides in the Kingston Metropolitan area.      It  has
      the worst rate of violent crime in the Caribbean with a homicide  rate
      four  times  the  global  average.     The  murder  rate   has   risen
      significantly despite the introduction of  Crime  Plans  in  2002  and
      2004.   He goes on to say, in paragraph 22:

           "In the context of Jamaica's crime  culture  and  the  extremely
           high levels of interpersonal violence, homosexuals are  at  risk
           of more than verbal abuse;   As a group they are  likely  to  be
           the victims of violence and, on occasions, murder.    Homophobic
           violence enjoys a certain  impunity  in  Jamaica  that  has  not
           changed since 2001 (the year DW left Jamaica), and  I  therefore
           have no reason to believe that homosexual men are any  safer  in
           Jamaica.    Having regard to what I know of Jamaican cultures of
           crime and policing, gay men have very sound reasons to  continue
           to be fearful of homophobic violence in Jamaica."


52.   In paragraph 39 Mr Sobers says:

           "The legislators apparently considered repealing the  provisions
           of the Offences  against  the  Person  Act  so  buggery  between
           consenting adults would no longer be an  offence.   However,  no
           legislator of any political party was  likely  to  endanger  his
           political career by standing up for tolerance to homosexuality."


53.   Mr Sobers deals with the attitude of the police in paragraphs  52  and
      53 in the following terms:

           "Jamaican  police  have  traditionally   been   a   bastion   of
           homophobia.    My experience leads me to believe that homophobia
           is universal in the Jamaican  police  force.   While  there  are
           police  officers  who  do  not  personally  subscribe  to   this
           prejudice, they have to co-operate  with,  and  rely  on  fellow
           officers who do.  As far as I am aware, the police have far more
           of a reputation for  victimising  gay  persons  than  protecting
           them.    I have frequently had  members  of  the  gay  community
           complain to me of the indifference or contempt displayed to them
           by the Jamaican police.   One of the typical modes of harassment
           is to prosecute or threaten to prosecute suspected gay  men  for
           buggery  (buggery  is  illegal  for   both   heterosexuals   and
           homosexual men, but typically,  prosecutions  are  only  pursued
           against homosexual men).


           The Jamaican police therefore largely mirror (and  amplify)  the
           homophobic attitudes which are  universally  manifested  in  all
           segments of Jamaican society.    While there are police officers
           who are not homophobic, many,  if  not  most,  are  unlikely  to
           secure  the  necessary  co-operation  of  their  colleagues   to
           investigate and prosecute homophobia inspired offences.   It  is
           the exception rather  than  the  norm  for  Jamaican  police  to
           protect homosexuals from violent assaults.   Homophobia  in  the
           police like the  rest  of  Jamaican  society,  is  very  much  a
           universal constant.  "


54.   Paragraph 61 of the report states:

           "Gay men have reported being easy targets for extortion by state
           and  non-state  actors.     In  a  homophobic  environment,  the
           discrimination suffered at the hands of the police, the fear  of
           being identified as a homosexual and of being unable  to  obtain
           or pay for adequate legal  representation,  the  possibility  of
           being prosecuted for buggery, combine to prevent gay men seeking
           redress when they are victims of extortion."


55.   At paragraph 83 of his report, and for the  reasons  set  out  between
      paragraphs 69 and 82, Mr Sobers says:

           "Based on the totality of  the  foregoing,  and  indeed  my  own
           professional experience with Jamaican Constabulary Force, I have
           little  confidence  that  any  homosexual  man  would  enjoy   a
           "sufficiency  of  protection"  against  homophobic  violence  in
           Jamaica."


56.   and, in relation to internal relocation,


      "84.  Relocation within Jamaica is limited by the small  size  of  the
           island (4,400 square  miles).    The  longest  distance  between
           Jamaica's west and east coast does not exceed 150 miles by road.
             In the population of under 3 million people, homophobia is  as
           strongly felt from one end to the other.


       85.  A gay  man  relocating  outside  the  community  from  which  he
           originated would not necessarily  translate  into  avoidance  or
           elimination of the risk of attack resulting in  injury  or  even
           death.   He would find it virtually impossible to relocate to an
           area where he would avoid the problems of the homosexual male in
           Jamaica.


        86. Moreover, if a gay man were to relocate to another community, he
           would again be the stranger "suspected of being gay" who becomes
           the easy target of homophobia.   He would lack  the  established
           roots which might give him a measure of protection  if  he  were
           sufficiently discreet about this sexual  orientation.   A  known
           (as distinct from open) gay relationship is  not  impossible  to
           find in Jamaica.   However, the men  have  to  meet  the  class,
           status and wealth criteria that  could  allow  them  that  small
           measure of liberty.   Gay men who live and interact in  some  of
           the more  affluent  areas  of  Jamaica,  and  who  do  not  call
           attention to themselves and their  sexual  orientation,  can  be
           left alone.    As such, their homosexuality remains the  subject
           of  rumour  and  speculation  and  is  not   openly   discussed.
           However, this "don't ask, don't' tell" attitude  it  limited  to
           their own community and circle of friends and family.


        87. It should be specially noted that persons who offer  (or  appear
           to  offer)  support  to  homosexuals  almost  invariably  become
           targets themselves.   Few, if any persons  will  be  willing  to
           place their lives on the line in the long term."


57.   Mr Sobers sets  out  his  summary  in  paragraphs  88  to  93  in  the
      following terms:

            "Summary: risk/sufficiency of protection/internal relocation

           RISK


           88.   In the context of Jamaica's crime culture, there is a real
                 risk that any homosexual  man  will  experience  homophobic
                 violence.   Having  regard  to  what  I  know  of  Jamaican
                 society  and  its  cultures  of  crime  and  policing,  the
                 overwhelming majority of homosexual  men  have  very  sound
                 reasons   to   continue   being   fearful   of   homophobic
                 violence/reprisals.


           89.   Homophobic violence enjoys a certain impunity  in  Jamaica
                 that has not changed, and I therefore  have  no  reason  to
                 believe that gay men are any safer in Jamaica than in 2001.



           SUFFICIENCY OF PROTECTION


           90.    The  Jamaican  state  has  been  quite   ineffective   in
                 combating, much  less  neutralising  violent  crime.    The
                 institution or weaknesses of the police force reinforce the
                 status quo.   Against this background, I am  not  confident
                 that the police have the capacity to protect homosexual men
                 in Jamaica.


             91.   In  my  opinion,  there  is  also  no  "sufficiency   of
                 protection" available in Jamaica to insulate gay  men  from
                 violence  or  threats  of  violence  from  those  who   are
                 antipathetic  to  their  sexual  orientation.    Given  the
                 institutional and cultural norms of the Jamaican police, it
                 is highly unlikely that the police will be willing or  able
                 to protect gay men from homophobic attacks.   The  lack  of
                 effective oversight bodies serves to aggravate this  status
                 quo.   There does not exist, in my view any adequate  means
                 of redress, if the police fail to protect.   Having  regard
                 for the largely unrestrained  culture  of  homophobia,  the
                 Jamaican  authorities   are   unable   and   unwilling   to
                 effectively protect homosexual men.  Organisations like  J-
                 FLAG have been unable to make any significant difference to
                 this status quo.


           INTERNAL RELOCATION


           92.   Relocating to other communities in Jamaica would  not,  in
                 my  opinion,  reduce  the  risk  of  homophobic   violence.
                 Firstly,  Jamaica  is  a  small  country  in  which  it  is
                 difficult,  if  not   impossible,   to   anonymous   (sic).
                 Secondly, homophobic violence/intimidation continues to  be
                 a universal constant in Jamaica, which I would  expect  any
                 gay man to be exposed  to  in  Jamaica  wherever  he  might
                 relocate.


           CONCLUSION


           93.   I am of the view that homosexual men  remain  at  risk  of
                 harm in any part of Jamaica at this time.   I  am  also  of
                 the view that  the  available  state  mechanisms  lack  the
                 capacity for reducing or eliminating the risk."


58.   We have a letter from Amnesty International  dated  7  September  2005
      expressing their views.   Relevant passages read:

           "Amnesty International receives  frequent  reports  of  on-going
           harassment of gay men and women in Jamaica, often  amounting  to
           violence.    Such  instants  have  been  documented  in  Amnesty
           International reports including "Jamaica; killings and  violence
           by police - how many more victims" (AI  Index  AMR  38/003/2001)
           and "Jamaica: crimes of hate conspiracy of silence - torture and
           ill-treatment  based  on  sexual   identity"   (AI   Index   ACT
           40/016/2001).  Since the publication of these reports many other
           allegations have been received.


           Gay men  in  Jamaica  remain  at  risk  of  suffering  violence,
           including sexual violence.   It is certainly not implausible  to
           suggest that a person would be singled out for ill-treatment  or
           violence on account of his homosexuality.    A man from  Jamaica
           could  face  considerable  risk  of  torture  or  ill-treatment,
           possibly even death, as a result of sexuality becoming known  to
           the community."    This organisation has interviewed  many  such
           individuals who have been forced to flee  their  areas  in  such
           circumstances.    Reports of "vigilante" justice or mob violence
           are particularly common.   Vulnerability such attacks  would  be
           increased by the familiar and social isolation  that  may  occur
           that once a person's sexuality, or suspected sexuality,  becomes
           known to the local community."


59.   The US Department of State report for 2004, in  the  section  relating
      to discrimination, societal abuse and trafficking in  persons  states,
      inter alia: (at pages 222 to 223 of the appellant's bundle)

            "The Offences against the Person Act prohibits  "acts  of  gross
           indecency"  (generally  interpreted  as  any  kind  of  physical
           intimacy) between men, in public or in private and is punishable
           by 10 years in prison.    Prime Minster  Patterson  stated  that
           the country would not be pressured to change its anti-homosexual
           laws.


            The Jamaican forum for Lesbians, all sexuals, and gays  (J-FLAG)
           continued  to  report  allegations  of  human   rights   abuses,
           including police harassment, arbitrary detention,  mob  attacks,
           stabbings, harassment of homosexual  patients  by  hospital  and
           prison staff, and targeted shootings of  homosexuals.     Police
           often  did  not  investigate  such  incidents.     Some  of  the
           country's most famous dance hall singers gained the attention of
           international human rights groups  during  the  year  for  their
           homophobic lyrics, which incited violence  against  homosexuals.
            The 2001 poll found  that  96%  of  citizens  were  opposed  to
           legalising homosexual activity.


            Male inmates deemed by prison wardens to be homosexual are  held
           in a separate facility for their protection.    The method  used
           for determining their sexual orientation is subjective  and  not
           regulated by the prison system.    There were  numerous  reports
           of violence against homosexuals inmates, perpetrated both by the
           wardens and by other inmates, but few  inmates  sought  recourse
           through the prison system.


            Homosexual men were hesitant to report  incidents  against  them
           because of fear for their physical well being.     Human  rights
           NGOs and  government  entities  agreed  that  brutality  against
           homosexuals, both by police and private citizens, was widespread
           in their community.


             No  laws  protected   persons   living   with   HIV/Aids   from
           discrimination.   Human rights NGOs reported severe  stigma  and
           discrimination for this group.    Although healthcare facilities
           were prepared  adequately  to  handle  patients  with  HIV/Aids,
           healthcare workers often neglected such patients".

60.   We have, at pages 229 to 292 of  the  appellant's  bundle,  the  Human
      Rights Watch Report of  November  2000  entitled  "Jamaica:  hated  to
      death".    The lengthy summary, between pages 231 and 233 states:

           "On June 9 2004, Brian Williamson, Jamaica's leading gay  rights
           activist, was murdered  in  his  home,  his  body  mutilated  by
           multiple knife wounds.    Within an  hour  after  his  body  was
           discovered, a human rights watch researcher  witnessed  a  crowd
           gathered outside the crime scene.   A smiling  man  called  out,
           "Batty  Man  (homosexual)  he  get   killed!".     Many   others
           celebrated Williamson's murder, laughing and calling out,  "lets
           get them one at a time" "that's what you  get  for  sin"  "let's
           kill all of them".   Some sang "boom bye bye,"  a  line  from  a
           popular Jamaican song about killing and burning gay men.

           Jamaica's growing HIV/Aids epidemic is unfolding in the  context
           of widespread violence and discrimination against people  living
           with and at high risk of HIV/Aids, especially men who  have  sex
           with men.   Myths  about  HIV/Aids  persist.     Many  Jamaicans
           believe that HIV/Aids is disease of homosexuals and sex  workers
           whose "moral impurity" makes them vulnerable to it, or that  HIV
           is transmitted  by  casual  contact.    Pervasive  and  virulent
           homophobia, coupled with fear of the disease, impedes access  to
           HIV prevention information, condoms, and healthcare.

           Violent acts against men who have sex with men  are  commonplace
           in  Jamaica.     Verbal  and  physical  violence,  ranging  from
           beatings to brutal armed  attacks  to  murder,  are  widespread.
           For many, there is no sanctuary from such abuse.    Men who have
           sex with men and women who have sex with  women  reported  being
           driven from their  homes  and  their  towns  by  neighbours  who
           threatened to kill  them  if  they  remained,  forcing  them  to
           abandon their possessions  and  leaving  many  homeless.     The
           testimony  of  Vincent  G,  22,  is  typical  of  the   accounts
           documented by Human Rights Watch: "I don't live anywhere  now...
           some guys in the area threatened me.   "Batty Man  you  have  to
           leave.  If you don't leave, we will kill you".

           Victims of violence are often too scared to appeal to the police
           for protection.   In some cases the police themselves harass and
           attack  men  they  perceived  to  be  homosexual.   Police  also
           actively  support  homophobic  violence,  fail  to   investigate
           complaints of abuse, and arrest and detain them based  on  their
           alleged homosexual conduct.    In some cases, homophobic  police
           violence is a catalyst for  violence  and  serious  -  sometimes
           lethal - abuse by others.    On June 18, 2004, a mob chased  and
           reportedly  "chopped,  stabbed  and  stoned  to  death"  a   man
           perceived to be gay in Montego Bay.     Several  witnesses  told
           Human Rights Watch that police participated in  the  abuse  that
           ultimately led to this mob killing, first beating the  man  with
           batons and then  urging  others  to  beat  him  because  he  was
           homosexual.

           Because HIV/Aids and homosexuality often are  conflated,  people
           living  with  HIV/Aids  and  organisations  providing   HIV/Aids
           education and services have also been  targeted.     Both  state
           and private actors join violent threats  against  gay  men  with
           threats  against  HIV/Aids  educators  and  people  living  with
           HIV/Aids.    In July 2004, for example, the  Jamaican  Forum  of
           Lesbians, All-Sexuals  and  Gays  (J-FLAG)  received  an  e-mail
           threatening to gun down "gays and homosexuals" and "clean-up"  a
           group that provided HIV/Aids education for youth.    In  a  2003
           case, a police officer told the person living with HIV/Aids that
           he must be homosexual and threaten to kill him  if  he  did  not
           "move (his) AIDS self from here".

           Discrimination against people living with  HIV/Aids  in  Jamaica
           poses serious barriers to obtaining the necessary medical  care.
            In interviews with people living with  HIV/Aids,  Human  Rights
           Watch found that health workers often mistreated  people  living
           with HIV/Aids, providing inadequate care and  sometimes  denying
           treatment  altogether.    Doctors  failed  to  conduct  adequate
           medical examinations of people living with  HIV/Aids,  sometimes
           refusing even to touch them.    And,  in  some  cases,  lack  of
           treatment in the initial stages made it even  less  likely  that
           people living with HIV/Aids would receive healthcare services at
           a later date.   Visible  symptoms  heighten  the  discrimination
           they faced, which in turn created further barriers to  obtaining
           treatment.    People suffering from visible HIV related symptoms
           were  sometimes   denied   passage   on   public   and   private
           transportation, making it difficult to obtain any  medical  care
           facilities beyond walking distance.

           People living  with  HIV/Aids  said  that  health  workers  also
           routinely released confidential information  to  other  patients
           and to  members  of  the  public,  both  through  discriminatory
           practice that signalled patients HIV status (such as segregating
           HIV positive patients from others) and by affirmative disclosure
           of such information.    Such actions violate fundamental  rights
           to privacy and also drive  people  living  with  HIV  away  from
           services.

           Discrimination also spreads HIV/Aids in Jamaica by  discouraging
           at risk individuals from  seeking  HIV  related  information  or
           healthcare.    Men who have sex with men  reported  that  health
           workers had refused treatment at all, made abusive  comments  to
           them, and disclosed their sexual orientation,  putting  them  at
           risk of homophobic violence by others.     As a result, many men
           who have sex with men  delayed  or  avoided  seeking  healthcare
           altogether, especially for health problems that might mark  them
           as homosexual, such as sexually transmitted diseases.    Because
           the presence of other sexually  transmitted  diseases  heightens
           the risk of HIV transmission, such discrimination may have fatal
           consequences.

           Jamaica is at a critical moment in  its  efforts  to  address  a
           burgeoning HIV/Aids epidemic.   An estimated 1.5%  of  Jamaicans
           are living with HIV/Aids,  and  HIV/Aids  is  on  the  increase.
           Jamaica's  Ministry  of  Health  has  taken  steps   to   combat
           discrimination against people living with and at  high  risk  of
           HIV/Aids (such as men who have sex with men  and  sex  workers),
           which it has  recognised  as  a  key  factor  driving  Jamaica's
           HIV/Aids epidemic.   It national HIV/Aids programme has fostered
           important relationships with non-governmental organisations with
           established links to marginalised  high  risk  groups,  provided
           support for their HIV/Aids work with them, and  looked  to  them
           for  guidance  in  developing  an  effective  response  to   the
           epidemic.   It is has also provided HIV/Aids training for health
           personnel addressing stigma and discrimination.

           But  other  parts  of  Jamaica's  government   undermine   these
           important efforts  by  condoning  or  committing  serious  human
           rights abuses.   Abuses against men who are have  sex  with  men
           take place in a climate of impunity fostered by Jamaica's sodomy
           laws and are  promoted  at  the  highest  level  of  government.
           Jamaican  legal  provisions  that  criminalise  consensual   sex
           between adult men are used to justify the  arrest  of  peer  HIV
           educators and to deny  HIV  prevention  services  to  prisoners,
           among others.   High level political  leaders,  including  Prime
           Minister  PJ  Patterson  and  Minister  of  Health  John  Junor,
           repeatedly  refused  to   endorse   repeal   of   discriminatory
           legislation,  ignoring  not  only  international  human   rights
           standards but also reports by  both  the  government's  national
           HIV/Aids programme and its advisory national aids  committee  on
           the role of these laws in driving Jamaica's  HIV/Aids  epidemic.



           Jamaican health officials acknowledge that Jamaica's sodomy laws
           make it difficult for them to work directly with  men  who  have
           sex with men.    As one high level health  official  told  human
           rights watch:

                 "We don't promote direct programmes or services to MSM (Men
                 who have sex with men) as a group because the existing laws
                 impede this work (and)  because  (of)  the  high  level  of
                 stigma and discrimination, they are  not  open  to  getting
                 services through the public sector."


           The police, however, actively impede government  supported  peer
           HIV prevention efforts among men who have sex with men and  also
           among sex workers.     AIDS outreach workers reported  that  the
           very possession of  condoms,  a  key  tool  in  HIV  protection,
           triggers  police  harassment,  and  in  some  cases  arrest  and
           criminal charges.

           Jamaica's failure to take action to  stop  human  rights  abuses
           permitted by state agents, to take measure  to  protect  against
           abuses by state and private actors,  and  to  ensure  access  to
           HIV/AIDS information and services to all Jamaicans  violate  its
           obligations as a state party to regional and international human
           rights treaties.

           In 2004, Jamaica launched an ambitious project to provide  anti-
           retroviral treatment to  people  living  with  HIV/AIDS  and  to
           address underlying human rights violations that are driving  the
           epidemic.    These are promising  initiatives.    They  will  be
           compromised, however, unless government leaders make a sustained
           commitment to end discrimination and abuse against people living
           with and at high risk of HIV/AIDS.    The government knows  that
           although HIV/AIDS is stigmatised as a "gay disease"  in  reality
           in Jamaica as in most of the Caribbean, the most common means of
           transmission is heterosexual sex.   It also knows  that  if  the
           epidemic in Jamaica continues to accelerate all  Jamaicans  will
           suffer.    This  fact  should  encourage  high  level   Jamaican
           government officials to act quickly and forcefully to  eliminate
           discriminatory laws and abusive  practices  that  violate  basic
           rights to equality, dignity, privacy, and health  and  undermine
           an HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment efforts.     This  includes
           speaking out strongly and acting forcefully  against  homophobic
           violence and abusive treatment of homosexual men and  women  and
           of sex workers.   If the Jamaican government chooses instead  to
           let popular prejudices continue to  undermine  its  attempts  to
           establish right spaced HIV/AIDS policies, the  consequences  for
           all Jamaicans will be dire.     Thousands of Jamaicans  will  be
           consigned to lives of horrific abuse  and  thousands  will  face
           premature and preventable death".

61.   We have further reports from a number of organisations.  We have  read
      these but none of them  paint  a  materially  different  picture.   Mr
      Blundell did not draw our attention to any country  information  other
      than paragraph 6.155 to 6.173 of the latest April  2005  CIPU  report.
      This states:

      "Homosexuals

      6.155 According to  the  International  Lesbian  and  Gay  Association
           [ILGA] website accessed 21 February 2005, Sections 76-79 [of the
           Jamaican] Penal Code criminalises homosexual intercourse between
           men with a penalty of up  to  10  years  imprisonment,  with  or
           without hard labour.  Same sex female homosexual activity is not
           mentioned.


      6.156 The Jamaica Forum for  Lesbian,  All-Sexual  and  gays  (J-Flag)
           website, accessed 21 February 2005 states

                 "J-Flag  is  actively  lobbying  for  legal  reform.   Our
                 Parliamentary Submissions to amend  the  non-discrimination
                 clause  within   the   Constitution   to   include   sexual
                 orientation was reviewed by the Joint Select  Committee  on
                 the  Charter  of  Rights  Bill.   In  December  2001,   the
                 Committee  made  its  recommendations  to  Parliament.   It
                 declined  to  support  our  proposed  amendment   but   did
                 recommend that the House  consider  repealing  the  Buggery
                 Law.  We [J-FLAG] are  now  strengthening  our  efforts  to
                 ensure  the  successful  passage  of  this   bill   through
                 parliament, and will continue to push for the amendment  to
                 the constitution".


       6.157      The J-Flag website also stated that


                 "Contrary to popular belief, it is not actually illegal to
                 be homosexual in Jamaica.   Being  a  homosexual  does  not
                 contravene any of the existing laws; the law makes  certain
                 'homosexual acts' illegal,  and  these  laws  are  used  to
                 persecute  gay  men.   They  state  that  "acts  of   gross
                 indecency" and buggery [anal sex]  are  illegal.   Although
                 buggery refers to anal sex between a man and another man, a
                 woman or an animal, in practice the  law  is  predominately
                 enforced against two men.  Lesbians are also  discriminated
                 against in  the  wider  society,  however  no  laws  target
                 lesbian or lesbian conduct."


      6.158 The J-Flag website further  noted  that  "The  Offences  Against
           Persons Act prohibits "acts of gross indecency" between men,  in
           public or in private.  (This is a very general term which can be
           interpreted to mean any kind of physical intimacy)." Under:


               . Article 76 (Unnatural Crime); "whosoever shall be convicted
                 of the  abominable  crime  of  buggery  [anal  intercourse]
                 committed either with mankind or with any animal, shall  be
                 liable to be imprisoned and kept to hard labour for a  term
                 not exceeding ten years."


               . Article 77 (attempt); "Whosoever shall  attempt  to  commit
                 the said abominable  crime,  or  shall  be  guilty  of  any
                 assault with intent to commit the same, or of any  indecent
                 assault  upon  any  male  person,  shall  be  guilty  of  a
                 misdemeanour, and being convicted thereof shall  be  liable
                 to be imprisoned for a term not exceeding seven years, with
                 or without hard labour."

               . Article 78 (Proof of Carnal Knowledge); "Whenever upon  the
                 trial of any offence punishable under this Act, it  may  be
                 necessary to  prove  carnal  knowledge,  it  shall  not  be
                 necessary to prove the actual emission of seed in order  to
                 constitute a carnal knowledge,  but  the  carnal  knowledge
                 shall be deemed complete upon proof of penetration only."

               . Article 79 (Outrages on Decency); "Any male person who,  in
                 public or private, commits, or is a party to the commission
                 of, or procures or attempts to procure  the  commission  by
                 any male person of, any act of gross indecency with another
                 male person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanour,  and  being
                 convicted thereof shall be liable at the discretion of  the
                 court to be imprisoned for a term not  exceeding  2  years,
                 with or without hard labour."


      6.159 The J-Flag website also gave details on 'Your Rights, Duties and
           Responsibilities as a Jamaican Citizen' - one of them being that
           "as a Jamaican citizen you also have through  the  Constitution,
           the right to have your privacy respected within  your  home  and
           family."


       6.160      The J-Flag website stated that, J-Flag among other things:
           does significant personal development and community building  in
           the gay community.  They offer counselling and referral services
           to gay people and their families.  They consult and  collaborate
           with  noted  local   and   international   figures   and   human
           rights/health/political interest groups.  J-Flag  are  currently
           in  the  process  of  working  for  constitutional   and   other
           legislative changes and have made  written  submissions  to  the
           Joint Select committee of  the  Houses  of  Parliament  for  the
           inclusion of 'Sexual  Orientation'  as  a  basis  on  which  the
           Constitution of Jamaica prohibits discrimination.  They maintain
           a library and archive of resource for academic research.


      6.161 There were  no  reports  among  the  sources  consulted  by  the
           Research Directorate  of  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board,
           Ottawa JAM35108.E dated 21  August  2000  accessed  25  February
           2002,  on  the  police  protection  available  to   homosexuals.
           However, a report in the Jamaica Gleaner - a Go-Jamaica  Feature
           2001 - on Gays in Jamaica stated that


            "Homosexuals are  increasingly  becoming  the  targets  of  hate
           crimes in Jamaica but are afraid to press charges against  their
           assailants for fear of bringing attention to their  lifestyle...
           Earlier  this  year  [2001],  several  students  attending   the
           Northern Caribbean University in Mandeville  were  attacked  and
           beaten for alleged homosexual involvement...   The  police,  too
           are aware of some of the attacks which have been  made  on  gays
           but note that  they  hardly  have  enough  evidence  to  go  on.
           Several months ago [prior to  publication  of  this  feature  in
           2001] in St Catherine, police officers had  to  rescue  two  men
           from being killed by a group of angry residents.  The  men  were
           allegedly caught having oral sex in the  back  seat  of  a  car.
           'Yes it is something that happens quite  frequently.'  Explained
           an  officer  attached  to  the  Montego  Bay   police   station.
           "Homosexuals are afraid to report some of  the  atrocities  that
           have been carried out against them for fear of being exposed  so
           they remain quiet while criminals walk  free.   Police  officers
           many of whom are openly hostile towards gays,  are  also  to  be
           blamed for this.  As a member of a human rights group, it is  my
           belief that hate crimes, regardless of against whom,  are  wrong
           and should be condemned."



      6.162 The above-mentioned 2001 feature in the Jamaica  Gleaner  states
           that "Public Defender, Howard Hamilton, said that he is outraged
           at the level of hate crimes going on in the  country.   Speaking
           recently at the annual general members meeting of  the  Cornwell
           Bar Association held  in  Green  Island,  Hanover,  Mr  Hamilton
           warned that he would soon  be  instructing  lawyers  engaged  in
           private practice to file cases in the courts against  the  state
           and any other bodies on  behalf  of  citizens  who  make  strong
           allegations on breaches of their constitutional rights.  He also
           noted that attorneys would be paid for their services."


      6.163 The 2001 Jamaica Gleaner  report  feature  also  mentioned  that
           "Clayton Morgan, President of the Cornwell Bar Association, said
           that his organisation would be working closely with  the  Public
           Defender's office to  stem  the  flow  of  hate  crimes  in  the
           country.  He said that the  homophobic  nature  of  the  country
           makes it easy for homosexuals to be targeted and that people  at
           times are reluctant to assist them for fear of being branded.


      6.164 The USSD 2004 noted that

            "The Jamaica Forum for Lesbian, All Sexuals, and  Gays  (J-FLAG)
           continued  to  report  allegations  of  human   rights   abuses,
           including police harassment, arbitrary detention,  mob  attacks,
           stabbings, harassment of homosexual  patients  by  hospital  and
           prison staff, and targeted  shootings  of  homosexuals.   Police
           often did not investigate such incidents.  Some of the country's
           most  famous  dancehall  singers   gained   the   attention   of
           international human rights groups  during  the  year  for  their
           homophobic lyrics, which incited violence  against  homosexuals.
           A 2001 poll found that 96 percent of citizens  were  opposed  to
           legalizing homosexual activity."


      6.165 An article dated  19  February  2004  in  the  Jamaica  Observer
           mentioned that owing to the homophobic nature  of  Jamaica,  gay
           men can hardly expect protection even  from  their  parents.   A
           father, concerned that his son might be gay, turned up at Dunoon
           Park Technical School in east Kingston and apparently encouraged
           other students to beat his son.  School officials  withheld  the
           boy's name and the extent of his injuries  was  not  immediately
           known.  As students began to maul his son, the man  is  reported
           to have driven away.  The Washington Blade noted in  an  article
           dated 27 February 2004 that law enforcements officers,  [at  the
           time] headed by Jamaican Commissioner of Police Francis  Forbes,
           also were attacked when they  arrived  to  save  the  teen,  the
           Observer reported.  The extent of the youngster's  injuries  was
           not known, according to the Observer.  Police officials declined
           to take further action, claiming it was a family matter.


      6.166 The USSD 2004 also  reported  that  "On  June  9  [2004],  Brian
           Williamson, a prominent homosexual rights activist and  founding
           member of J-FLAG, was found stabbed to  death  at  his  home  in
           Kingston Human rights groups  believed  that  the  brutality  of
           Williamson's  death  indicated  a  hate  crime,  but   the   JCF
           maintained that the crime was a robbery.  A suspect was remanded
           in custody at year's end [2004]".


      6.167 In November 2004, a Human Rights Watch report entitled 'Hated to
           Death; Homophobia, Violence  and  Jamaica's  HIV/Aids  Epidemic'
           noted that violent acts against men who have sex  with  men  are
           commonplace in Jamaica.  Verbal and physical  violence,  ranging
           from beatings to brutal armed attacks to murder, are widespread.
            For many, there is no sanctuary from such abuse.  Men who  have
           sex with men and women who have sex with  women  reported  being
           driven from their  homes  and  their  towns  by  neighbours  who
           threatened to kill  them  if  they  remained,  forcing  them  to
           abandon  their  possessions  and  leaving  many  homeless.   The
           testimony of Vincent G., twenty-two, is typical of the  accounts
           documented by Human Rights Watch: "I don't live anywhere now....
           Some guys in the area threatened me.   "Battyman,  you  have  to
           leave.  If you don't' leave, we'll kill you."


      6.168 The November 2004  HRW  Report  also  stated  that  "Victims  of
           violence are often too  scared  to  appeal  to  the  police  for
           protection.  In some cases  the  police  themselves  harass  and
           attack  men  they  perceived  to  be  homosexual.   Police  also
           actively  support  homophobic  violence,  fail  to   investigate
           complaints of abuse, and arrest and detain them based  on  their
           alleged homosexual conduct.  In some  cases,  homophobic  police
           violence is a catalyst for  violence  and  serious  -  sometimes
           lethal - abuse by others".


      6.169 The November 2004 HRW further mentioned that

            "Jamaican health officials  acknowledge  that  Jamaica's  sodomy
           laws make it difficult for them to work directly  with  men  who
           have sex with men.  As one high-level health official told Human
           Rights Watch:  'We don't promote direct programs or services  to
           MSM [men who have sex with men] as a group because the  existing
           laws impede this work  [and]  because  [of]  the  high-level  of
           stigma and discrimination, they're not open to getting  services
           through the  public  sector.'   The  police,  however,  actively
           impede government-supported peer HIV  prevention  efforts  among
           men who have sex with men and  also  among  sex  workers.   AIDS
           outreach workers reported that the very possession of condoms  -
           a key tool in HIV prevention - triggers police  harassment,  and
           in some cases, arrest and criminal charges."


      6.170 Responding to the above mentioned November 2004 HRW Report,  the
           Jamaica Gleaner dated 18 November 2004 reported that the


            "Government yesterday [17 November 2004] dismissed claims by the
           international body, Human Rights  Watch,  that  the  authorities
           have been soft on police abuses on homosexual males and  persons
           affected  by  HIV/AIDS.   'We  find   the   approach   of   this
           organisation  unacceptably  insensitive,'  Information  Minister
           Burchell Whiteman said  in  a  statement  issued  to  the  media
           yesterday [17 November 2004].  'We  also  as  the  duly  elected
           representatives of the people feel that it  is  the  people  who
           must set out agenda in respect of the legislation which we  pass
           or the repeal of any existing laws.  We are currently not  about
           to respond to any organisation, external to this country,  which
           may want to dictate to us how and when to deal with the laws  of
           our land,' said Senator Whiteman... The international body  also
           criticised the Government's stance on legislation  (the  buggery
           law) on homosexuality,  which  they  say  is  a  'discriminatory
           legislation'."


      6.171 The Jamaica Gleaner dated 19 November 2004 also noted  that  the
           Police Federation also condemned the findings published  in  the
           November 2004 HRW and called on the minister of justice to  slap
           sedition charges on the body and local groups,  which  they  say
           were slandering both the government and the police  force.   The
           Jamaica Gleaner dated 29 November 2005 noted that "While careful
           to point out that they  were  not  advocating  violence  against
           gays, panellists at Saturday's [27  November  2004]  'Men  on  a
           Mission' conference in Montego Bay denounced homosexuality as  a
           moral defect, saying it should not be sanctioned by the Church."


      6.172 A Human Rights Watch document dated 30 November 2004 stated that




            "Jamaican authorities should reject a  police  demand  to  press
           criminal charges against local human rights defenders  who  have
           criticized police abuses against gay men and people living  with
           human rights defenders who have criticized police abuses against
           gay men and people living with HIV/AIDS, Human Rights Watch said
           today [30 November 2004] in  a  letter  to  the  Jamaican  prime
           minister.... Five Jamaican human rights organizations - Families
           Against State Terrorism, the  Independent  Jamaica  Council  for
           Human Rights, Jamaica AIDS Support, Jamaicans for  Justice,  and
           Jamaican Forum for Lesbian, All-Sexuals, and gays -  all  joined
           Human Rights in the launch of the report.   The  report  led  to
           furious denials by Jamaican government  officials,  who  claimed
           that police abuse doesn't take place.  Officials  also  defended
           Jamaica's sodomy laws, Victorian-era legislation  introduced  by
           Britain when  it  was  the  colonial  power,  as  basic  to  the
           country's sovereignty and culture.  However, Jamaica is party to
           the International Covenant on  Civil  and  Political  Rights,  a
           treaty that prohibits discrimination  on  the  basis  of  sexual
           orientation...  In  an  open  letter  to  Prime  Minister  P   J
           Patterson, Human Rights Watch responded in detail  to  criticism
           by Jamaica's commissioner of police  and  by  the  head  of  the
           National AIDS Program.  The Jamaican police  should  investigate
           allegations of homophobic abuse submitted to it  months  before,
           Human Rights Watch said."


      6.173 As reported in an article dated January 2002 in SHAAN  online  -
           IPS e-zine on Gender and  Human  Rights,  according  to  J-Flag,
           alleged homosexuals in the inner city are particularly at  risk.
           In 2002, a homosexual man was shot to death as he sought  refuge
           in a churchyard in central Kingston.


      Death of gay rights activist Brian Williamson


      6.174 An AI Press Release - AMR  38/010/2004  dated  10  June  2004  -
           'Amnesty International  mourns  loss  of  leading  human  rights
           defender' stated that


            "Amnesty International today [10 June 2004] mourns the  loss  of
           Brian Williamson, Brutally murdered on 9 June  2004,  and  urges
           that a thorough investigation be conducted into his death... the
           police have concluded that the motive for the murder was robbery
           due to the reported removal of a  safe.   Amnesty  International
           urges the investigating authorities to keep an open mind  as  to
           the  motive  behind  this  killing...  There  remains  a  strong
           possibility that Brian Williamson's profile as  a  gay  man  and
           advocate of homosexual rights made him a target for  those  with
           homophobic views.  That taking of money or other items may  have
           been an afterthought by the perpetrators of the killing with the
           primary motivation for the murder being hatred to homosexuals."


      6.175 In a release by the International Gay and Lesbian  Human  Rights
           Commission (IGLHRC) dated 14 June 2004 they stated that


            "The International  Gay  and  Lesbian  Human  Rights  commission
           (IGLHRC) mourns the death of  long-time  friend  and  colleague,
           Brian Williamson, a gay activist from Jamaica found murdered  in
           his home in Kingston last week.  Brian was a founding member  of
           Jamaica Forum for Lesbian, All-Sexuals and Gays (J-FLAG) and one
           of the country's most visible and outspoken activists."


      6.176 A Jamaica Gleaner news report dated 10 June 2004 stated that


            "The death of Brian Williamson, outspoken  gay  rights  activist
           and founding member of the  Jamaica  Forum  for  Lesbians,  All-
           Sexuals and Gays (J-FLAG), sent shockwaves throughout the  local
           gay community yesterday [9  June  2004].   According  to  police
           reports, the 59-year old Williamson was found with multiple chop
           wounds in his apartment  at  11:15  am.   Investigators  suspect
           robbery to be the main motive for the killing  as  a  safe  with
           valuables was missing, and the  apartment  had  been  ransacked.
           However, while the police suspect robbery as  the  main  motive,
           the  gay  rights  advocacy  group  J-FLAG  was  quick  to  label
           Williamson's death as a 'hate crime'."


      6.177 The same article also quoted one of his friends as saying that


            "He was very sweet, and the most adorable person you could find,
           very kind and trusting, and I believe that is what  led  to  his
           death.  He was my landlord, but he was like  family  to  me,  we
           would joke about the coincidence of  us  having  the  same  last
           name, she said, in between sobs.  I don't think  he  was  killed
           because  of  his  ...  sexual  orientation,  he  was  just   too
           trusting'."


      Findings in relation to the appellant


63.   We find that what happened to the appellant  in  Jamaica  amounted  to
      persecution for a Convention reason, his membership  of  a  particular
      social group.

64.   We repeat the passage in the judgment of  Peter  Gibson  LJ  in  Faraj
      already referred to:

            "Persecution  may  involve  physical  or  mental  ill-treatment.
           Torture   is   still   ill-treatment   carried   to    extremes.
           Persecution, unlike torture, always involves a persistent course
           of conduct... since  the  conduct  may  be  directed  against  a
           particular person or a particular group of persons,  an  instant
           of torture of a person which is the sole instant affecting  that
           person  may  amount  to  persecution  if  there  are   incidents
           affecting a group of which  that  person  is  a  member.     But
           isolated incidents of  torture  are  not  enough  to  constitute
           persecution without more."


65.   This appellant did not suffer a single incident, but two  serious  and
      violent incidents and, in addition, over a lengthy period, a number of
      incidents of aggressive harassment.   We find  that,  taken  together,
      these did amount to persecution.   They were persistent.    It is  not
      necessary that every incident should  be  as  serious  as  the  worst.
      What happened to this appellant amounted to persecution  even  without
      the assistance  of  the  observations  in  Faraj.   However,  if  such
      assistance is needed, it is available to the appellant because he  was
      a member of a group, perceived homosexuals, many of whom have suffered
      in similar ways, as the country  information  makes  clear.   We  have
      considered what is meant by "a particular group of persons"  in  Faraj
      and have concluded that it does include a group such as homosexuals in
      Jamaica.

66.   As to causation,  it  is  clear  that  the  appellant  was  persecuted
      because he is or equally importantly because he was  perceived  to  be
      homosexual.

67.   We find that homosexuals in Jamaica  belong  to  a  particular  social
      group and that the appellant is a member of that group.   It is  clear
      that homosexuals in Jamaica fulfil the required tests  for  membership
      of a particular social group.   They are regarded as a  group  by  the
      population at large.   They are not identified solely by reason of the
      persecution they fear.   We follow the reasoning of the Tribunal in MN
      Kenya already referred to and conclude that homosexuality is a  matter
      of sexual identity rather than sexual activity.    It is something  an
      individual should not be required to give up even if he could.

68.   Having concluded that the appellant suffered past persecution it  does
      not necessarily follow that he has  a  current  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution.    We accept that he has a subjective fear.   We  do  not
      find merit in Mr Blundell's submission that we should apply a  reverse
      Dermirkaya principle.     On  the  contrary,  this  is  a  case  where
      Dermirkaya principles  obtain.    The  fact  that  the  appellant  has
      suffered past persecution is probative but not conclusive evidence  of
      current risk.

69.   In the light of the country material we find that the  appellant  does
      have a current well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason and there is a real risk that his Article 3 human  rights  will
      be infringed.

70.   Mr  Blundell  accepts  that  the  authorities  will  not  provide  the
      appellant with a sufficiency of protection.    Had  he  not  made  the
      concession we would have come to that conclusion.    Mr  Blundell  has
      not argued that the appellant could resort to internal relocation, but
      he has not conceded the point.    We find that,  in  a  small  country
      like Jamaica, where homophobic  attitudes  are  prevalent  across  the
      country and the appellant, because of his  appearance  and  demeanour,
      would be perceived as homosexual wherever he went, he would be at risk
      of  persecution  and  infringement  of  his  Article  3  human  rights
      throughout Jamaica.   As he is at risk  of  persecution  there  is  no
      question but that it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  relocate.



General Conclusions

71.   Mr Chelvan has submitted that we needed to consider both a  particular
      social group and an imputed particular social group.  We find that  as
      the reasons  for  persecution  must  be  found  in  the  mind  of  the
      persecutor    there  is  no  need  to   differentiate   between   such
      categories.    The  only  question  we  need  to  ask  is  whether  an
      individual is a member of a particular social group.    It may  matter
      a great deal to an individual whether he is or is not homosexual  but,
      certainly in the context of Jamaica, whether an individual  is  or  is
      not homosexual, bisexual or asexual is of far less importance than the
      question whether he is perceived to be homosexual.     There  is  some
      force in the suggestion, that "perception is all".     Mr Blundell has
      conceded that gay men in Jamaica belong to a particular social group.

72.   Mr Chelvan sought to persuade us that a widely defined  group  was  at
      risk of persecution in Jamaica.   He put this as "those  seen  as  not
      conforming to what Jamaica sees as the norm of masculine  identity  in
      Jamaica."  Whilst we  accept  that  this  formulation  may  assist  in
      defining those who are  thought  to  be  homosexual,  it  is  a  wider
      definition than is required for the  purposes  of  this  determination
      both on the facts of the appellant's  case  and  in  relation  to  the
      expert evidence and country material before us.   We  have  not  heard
      sufficient argument nor has the material before us  been  sufficiently
      targeted for us to address anything other than the core group  of  men
      who are or are perceived to be homosexual. This determination  is  not
      intended  to  address  the   position   of   Lesbians,   Transsexuals,
      Transvestites or others who have encountered difficulties  because  of
      their actual or perceived sexuality.

73.   In Jamaica buggery and almost all types  of  sexual  activity  between
      males are criminalised.  There is no indication  that  the  government
      intends to decriminalise such activities.  On the contrary, senior and
      powerful politicians have indicated that they  have  no  intention  of
      doing so.    In 2001 the Public Rights Defender indicated that he  was
      minded to support criminal and civil action against  homophobic  acts,
      but there is no indication  that  any  such  action  has  been  taken.
      However, there is no clear evidence before us as to whether and if  so
      how often these criminal laws are enforced.

74.   Those perceived to be homosexual are  likely  to  face  discrimination
      and harassment.    There is a real possibility that discrimination and
      harassment  can  boil  over  into  serious  violence,  including   mob
      violence, and even death.   The position  of  those  perceived  to  be
      homosexual is exacerbated by  the  unpredictability  of  incidents  of
      violence and the fact, conceded by Mr Blundell, that the  authorities,
      usually the police, fail to provide a sufficiency  of  protection  and
      are sometimes guilty of  exciting  or  aiding  and  abetting  violence
      against homosexuals.

75.   Internal relocation is not,  as  a  rule,  available  to  a  perceived
      homosexual who, as a stranger in another part of Jamaica, is likely to
      be  regarded  with  suspicion,  even  before  his   homosexuality   is
      identified.    He is also likely to lose any protection he might  have
      had from family and friends in his home area.

76.   There are some early signs, for example  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch
      report,  of  attempts  to  change  the  attitudes   of   health   care
      professionals and also, amongst the population at  large,  by  J-Flag.
      However, it is apparent that little  progress  has  been  made.    The
      former head of J-Flag was murdered in circumstances where some  people
      entertain suspicions that it was a homophobic  crime,  notwithstanding
      the police view that it  was  a  robbery  that  went  wrong.    Others
      connected with J-Flag are understandably reluctant  to  be  identified
      and there  are  signs  that  those  who  might  wish  to  support  the
      decriminalisation of homosexuality and a  more  liberal  approach  are
      deterred by strong public prejudice, the  risk  of  adverse  political
      consequences and of being targeted by  association  with  those  whose
      cause they espouse.

  77. Not all homosexual men  in  Jamaica  are  likely  to  be  at  risk  of
      persecution or infringement of their Article 3 human rights.    As  Mr
      Sobers has pointed out "a gay man with wealth and status can  be  left
      alone as long as he remains within his social  circles  and  does  not
      cause his sexual orientation or his same sex  partnership  to  attract
      the attention.   His sexual orientation will be tolerated as  long  as
      he is not openly gay".  However, Mr Sobers adds the caveat  that  "the
      affluent gay man can be subject to extortion for fear that his  sexual
      orientation become public knowledge." A man who is not thought  to  be
      homosexual, perhaps because he has hidden his sexuality, is not likely
      to be at risk.  There will be no perception of  homosexuality  and  no
      history.


  78. However, an individual may allege that, were he to return to  Jamaica,
      he cannot be expected to modify his behaviour or hide  his  sexuality.
      How is such an allegation to be approached?   In  these  circumstances
      the test is not whether he should be expected to accept any  restraint
      on his liberties but would he in fact act in the way he says he would.
       We rely on the judgment of Buxton LJ in Z v SSHD [2005] Imm AR 75  at
      paragraph 16 where it is said;

`     "Although S395 was presented to the court that granted  permission  in
           this appeal as a new departure in  refugee  law,  and  for  that
           reason justifying the attention of this court, in truth it is no
           such thing.   McHugh  and  Kirby  JJ,  at  their  paragraph  41,
           specifically relied on English authority, Ahmed  v  SSHD  [2000]
           INLR 1.  It has been English law at least since that  case,  and
           the case that preceded it, Danian v SSHD [1999] INLR 535,  that,
           in the words of the leading judgment of Simon Brown LJ at pp  7G
           and 8C - D:

                 "In all asylum cases there is ultimately a single  question
                 to be asked: is there a serious risk  that  on  return  the
                 applicant would be persecuted for a  Convention  reason....
                 The critical question: if returned, would the asylum seeker
                 in fact act in the way he says he would and thereby  suffer
                 persecution?  If he would, then,  however  unreasonable  he
                 might be thought  for  refusing  to  accept  the  necessary
                 restraint on his liberties, in  my  judgment  he  would  be
                 entitled to asylum."

           It necessarily follows from that analysis that a  person  cannot
           be refused asylum on the basis that  he  could  avoid  otherwise
           persecutory conduct by modifying the  behaviour  that  he  would
           otherwise  engage  in,  at  least  if  that   modification   was
           sufficiently significant in itself to place him in  a  situation
           of persecution."

  78.  Every  case  will  turn  on  both  credibility  and  its   particular
      circumstances.  What happened to an individual before he left  Jamaica
      will be important.  If it is found that he suffered what  amounted  to
      past persecution then Demirkaya principles will assist him.  If he did
      not, his  task  will  be  the  more  difficult,  but  not  necessarily
      impossible. Factors to be taken into account  include  the  extent  to
      which an individual has been  identified  as  homosexual,  how  widely
      spread is that perception, the extent of past acts of  discrimination,
      harassment and violence, the  extent  to  which  an  individual  would
      present  as  homosexual  (for  example  through  dress,  behaviour  or
      demeanour), the extent to which he associates with other  homosexuals,
      whether he is a homosexual prostitute, and the extent to which  he  is
      perceived to flout what many people in Jamaica regard as the  norm  of
      acceptable heterosexual behaviour.


  79. With the possible exception of affluent gay men it is  likely  that  a
      man who is thought to be homosexual will  be  at  risk  of  homophobic
      intolerance,  harassment  and  ill-treatment.  The  difficulty  is  in
      assessing  whether  this  is  likely  to  cross   the   threshold   of
      persecution. It is clear that some of those who are  perceived  to  be
      homosexual have suffered to this extent, what  is  not  clear  is  how
      many. On the one hand it is likely that the most  public  and  violent
      attacks  will  be  reported,  whilst   on   the   other   those   who,
      understandably, decided not to complain to  the  police  may  also  be
      reluctant to risk the consequences of press or other publicity. Whilst
      past persecution is probative of current  risk  the  opposite  is  not
      necessarily the  case.   An  individual  who  has  not  suffered  past
      persecution may yet be at risk.  There is no clear  test  to  indicate
      when  the  threshold  may   be   crossed.   Homophobic   violence   is
      unpredictable.  The acceptance  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the
      absence of a sufficiency of protection is a vital factor.  A  man  who
      is perceived to be homosexual and, as a consequence, has suffered past
      persecution is, unless  there  has  been  a  material  change  in  his
      circumstances, likely to be at risk of persecution and infringement of
      his Article 3 human rights in Jamaica. A man who is  perceived  to  be
      homosexual but has not suffered past persecution may also be  at  risk
      depending on his particular circumstances including, for example,  the
      extent to which  it  is  believed  that  he  suffered  threats  before
      departure and will behave on his return.


  80. It is not likely that an individual who is at risk of  persecution  or
      infringement of his  human  rights  because  he  is  perceived  to  be
      homosexual will be able to obtain  protection  from  the  authorities.
      The ability to relocate safely was not fully argued before us. It  was
      effectively, although not specifically, conceded by the  Secretary  of
      State in this appeal.  It may be an issue which requires full argument
      or a definitive view from the Secretary of State.  Mr Sobers  evidence
      appears to suggest that it is not  readily  available  although  other
      material makes it clear that it does occur. For the purposes  of  this
      appeal we accept that the Secretary of State does not  seek  to  argue
      that internal relocation is available to this appellant.

  81. The original Tribunal made a material error of law.

  82. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

  83. The appeal is allowed on Article 3 human rights grounds





                                                                 P R Moulden
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge



