

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
| |HS (Long Residence - effect of IDI September 2004) Pakistan     |
| |[2005] UKAIT 00169                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 25 October 2005                      |                         |
|                                        |01 December 2005         |
|                                        |.........................|
|                                        |....................     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter - Senior Immigration Judge                        |
|Ms D K Gill - Senior Immigration Judge                            |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr  S  Rossier  of  the  Immigration  Advisory
      Service
For the Respondent:     Miss  M  Donnelley-Wells,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer


The provisions of IDI September 2004 do not  set  out  a  published  policy
providing a concession in the application of the  provisions  of  paragraph
276B(i)(b) of HC395 when assessing a claim based on long residence.  In the
absence  of  a  specific  transitional  or  other  saving   provision,   an
application is assessed under the rules as at the date of decision not  the
date of application.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is the reconsideration of an appeal by the appellant,  a  citizen
      of Pakistan, against the respondent's decision made on  20  June  2005
      giving directions for his  removal  following  a  decision  to  refuse
      indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long  residence.      The
      appeal  was  allowed  by  the  Immigration  Judge,  Mr   J   E   Camp.
      Reconsideration was ordered on 18 August 2005.


Background

2.    The appellant first arrived in this country in  about  1985  or  1986.
      There is no clear evidence as to the precise date.   The appellant has
      asserted that it  was  1985  but  when  he  subsequently  applied  for
      indefinite leave the date of May 1986 was given.   Whatever the  date,
      it is common ground that the appellant made  an  illegal  entry.    He
      obtained a visit visa at the High Commission  in  Delhi  but  accepted
      when interviewed in May 1999 that he had  intended  to  remain.     He
      also accepted that  he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  using  a  false
      passport.   The appellant stayed in the United Kingdom and by 1988  he
      was on the records of the  Inland  Revenue.     He  has  worked  as  a
      machinist in a variety of clothing factories.

3.    The appellant came to the attention of the  authorities  when  he  was
      stopped by the police in connection with a driving offence on  12  May
      1999.    He was interviewed by Immigration Officers on  13  May  1999.
      They were satisfied that the appellant was an illegal entrant  and  he
      was served with a form indicating that  he  was  a  person  liable  to
      removal.  The appellant claimed asylum.    This  was  refused  by  the
      Secretary of State in a letter dated 11 October 1999.    He  certified
      the claim as unfounded because the appellant was liable to be sent  to
      a designated country.   An appeal was submitted against this  decision
      on 25 November 1999 but subsequently withdrawn on 21 January  2000  as
      the appellant intended to submit an application to remain on the basis
      of his length of residence.

4.    This application is dated 8 November 2001 and  was  submitted  with  a
      letter from the appellant's representatives dated  19  February  2002.
      The application is date stamped as received on 2 April  2002.     This
      application was not decided until 20 June 2005.  It was refused on the
      basis that the appellant could not show 14 years continuous  residence
      by reason of the provisions of paragraph  276B(i)(b)of  HC  395  which
      provides that any period spent in the  United  Kingdom  following  the
      service of a notice of liability to removal should  be  excluded  when
      calculating whether there is 14 years continuous residence.    For the
      appellant to comply with requirements of the rules he  would  have  to
      have entered this country on or before 12 May 1985.    His application
      gave a date of May 1986 which was particularised as 17 May 1986 in the
      solicitor's letter of 19 February 2002.    It  was  the  Secretary  of
      State's view that the appellant had deliberately sought  to  evade  or
      circumvent immigration control by using forged documents.  Enforcement
      action had commenced on 12 May 1999.     The Secretary  of  State  was
      not satisfied that there were sufficient  compassionate  circumstances
      to justify the exercise of discretion outside the  rules.     He  took
      into account Article 8.  It was his view that  any  private  life  had
      been established when the appellant was  in  the  country  unlawfully.
      Removal would be proportionate.

The Hearing before the Immigration Judge

5.    The appellant appealed against this decision.  At the  hearing  before
      the Immigration Judge, the appellant gave oral evidence  that  he  had
      arrived in the United Kingdom in 1985 but he could  not  remember  the
      month.   He lived with his cousin-brother, his cousin's wife and their
      two daughters.   He had a father, brother and sister in India but  had
      no contact with them.   He had paid income tax and national insurance.
       He had never received benefits.   He regarded his cousin's family  in
      the United Kingdom as his own.  In cross-examination he said  that  he
      had no proof of the date of his arrival.    The date of  17  May  1986
      given in his solicitor's letter was an estimate.   He accepted that he
      had arrived in this country under  a  false  name  and  with  a  false
      passport.   The Judge accepted the submission made by  the  Presenting
      Officer that it was not certain that the  appellant  would  have  been
      accepted in 2001 as being within the provisions of the long  residence
      concession had his application then been dealt with  expeditiously  as
      it was not clear that he had been in the United Kingdom for  14  years
      at that date.   The judge commented that by the date of  decision  (20
      March 2005) there could be no doubt that the appellant had been in the
      United Kingdom for at least 16 years provided that there was no  event
      which "stopped the clock".   It was the respondent's  contention  that
      this happened by the enforcement action notified to the  appellant  in
      1999.  The judge noted that it was conceded  that  the  appellant  had
      been subject to removal directions in 1999 and commented  that  as  at
      the date of application it appeared that only a notice of intention to
      deport would have the effect of stopping time running.

6.    He held that new rules which did not apply at the date of  application
      should not be applied as at the date of decision.   They could not  be
      retrospective without specific provision to that effect.     He  found
      that at the date of decision the respondent should have considered the
      appellant to have been resident in the United Kingdom for at least  16
      years commenting that it would have been inequitable for an  applicant
      to be disadvantaged by delay on the part of the Home Office.  He noted
      the tension in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  Home  Office  policy  as
      expressed  in  IDI  September  2004   headed   "The   Long   Residence
      Concession".   It was his view that the  respondent's  current  policy
      was reflected by the IDI despite the apparently stricter  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules.  He referred  to  paragraph  6  of  the  IDI
      dealing with time spent following the service of notice  of  intention
      to deport which referred to each case being considered on  its  merits
      and to the length and quality of the overall period of residence being
      taken into account to go with all other relevant factors and  balanced
      against the need to maintain effective control.   He  found  that  the
      appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  since  at  least  1988  and
      possibly since 1985.  He had been continuously employed since 1994 and
      had lived with relatives and become part of their  close  family.   He
      said that this was an appeal where the requirements of  maintaining  a
      fair immigration policy weighed heavily.   The appellant  had  arrived
      in the United Kingdom illegally and done  nothing  to  regularise  his
      situation before he was arrested in 1999.    This had to  be  balanced
      under the IDI with the length and quality of  his  residence.     This
      exercise was similar to considering the  question  of  proportionality
      under Article 8.   It was the Judge's  view  that  the  appellant  had
      demonstrated that the balance was in his favour.   Further,  he  found
      that the appellant had a legitimate expectation that  his  application
      would be dealt with within a reasonable time on the basis  of  a  Home
      Office letter of 3 April 2002 which had indicated that his application
      might take "6 months or a little longer to deal with".  If it had been
      dealt with  within  that  time,  he  would  have  benefited  from  the
      concession.      The  judge  found  that  the  decision  was  not   in
      accordance with the law or the  Immigration  Rules.   The  appeal  was
      allowed on this basis.  The judge said that he need not  consider  the
      application of Article 8.   He directed that the appellant  should  be
      given indefinite leave to remain.

The Application for Review

7.    In the grounds it is argued that the Judge was wrong to hold that  new
      rules, which had not applied at the date of application, should not be
      applied as at the date of decision.    The  appeal  should  have  been
      determined on the basis of the rules in force at the date of  decision
      not the date of application.   It was not open to the judge to suggest
      that the Secretary of State's discretion should  have  been  exercised
      differently in the light of his comment that it was not  certain  that
      the appellant would have been accepted in 2001  as  being  within  the
      provisions of the concession, had  the  application  been  dealt  with
      expeditiously.   The  judge  was  also  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with  the  law.    Reconsideration  was
      ordered, the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  summarising  the  issues  as
      follows:

      1.    Whether the Judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's
           application for leave to  remain  should  have  been  determined
           under the terms of the respondent's long residence concession in
           force at the date of the application rather than under the terms
           of paragraph 276B of HC 395 as amended in force at the  date  of
           decision.


      2.   Whether he erred by concluding that the respondent's  discretion
           should have been exercised differently and

      3.    Whether he erred in concluding that  the  respondent's  decision
           was not in accordance with the law.


The Submissions

8.    Miss Donnelley-Wells submitted that the decision  should  be  made  in
      accordance with the rules as at the date of decision.    There were no
      transitional provisions to counteract the effect of paragraph 4 of  HC
      395.   Assuming the appellant to have entered the  United  Kingdom  in
      1986, he would only have completed about 13 years continuous residence
      when enforcement papers were served.    He fell outside the provisions
      of paragraph 276.   The appellant did not comply with the   rules  and
      no issue of discretion within the rules applied.   The decision was in
      accordance with the law.

9.    Mr Rossier submitted that there  was  a  current  policy  in  the  IDI
      September 2004 which relaxed the  requirements  of  the  rules.   Even
      assuming the rules applied as at the date of decision,  the  Secretary
      of State should have  considered  the  application  on  the  basis  of
      paragraph 6 of the IDI.   The immigration judge had been  entitled  to
      take these factors into account.   There had been unconscionable delay
      in making the  decision.    The  appellant  had  been  told  that  the
      decision would be made within 6 months or  perhaps  a  little  longer.
      In fact that there had been a delay of 3  years.    If  the  appellant
      could not succeed within the rules or the policy, the  length  of  the
      delay was such that removal would now be disproportionate.   He relied
      on the judgments of the Court of Appeal in Bakhtear Rashid [2005] EWCA
      Civ 744  and  Akaeke  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  947.   Where  the  delay  was
      unreasonable the appellant could still rely  on  it  even  if  he  was
      unable to show any specific prejudice.

Consideration of the Issues

      (i)   Which rules apply to the decision made on 20 June 2005

10.   The first issue is whether the decision made on 20  June  2005  should
      have been made in accordance with the rules then in force or those  in
      force as at the date of application.  The general principle is  clear:
      immigration appeals are to be decided in accordance with the rules  in
      operation at the date of decision.  It is provided by rule 4 of HC 395
      as follows:

            "These rules come into effect on 1 October 1994 and  will  apply
           to all decisions taken on or  after  that  date  save  that  any
           application made before 1  October  1994  for  entry  clearance,
           leave to enter or remain or  variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
           remain other than an application for leave by a  person  seeking
           asylum shall be decided under  the  provisions  of  HC  251,  as
           amended, as if these rules had not been made."


      This rule illustrates that the general principle  is  subject  to  any
      transitional provisions to the contrary.  The rule provides that  non-
      asylum claims made prior  to  1  October  1994  would  be  decided  in
      accordance with HC 251.   The rules have been subsequently amended  on
      a number of occasions but there has been no  provision  to  which  our
      attention has been drawn for transitional provisions  in  relation  to
      these  amendments.    The  rules  relating  to  long  residence   were
      introduced by HC 538 to take effect on 1 April 2003 but  it  does  not
      contain any transitional provisions.   In the course of submissions we
      referred the parties to McDonald's Immigration Law  and  Practice  6th
      Edition at paragraph 1.50 which reads as follows:

            "Where  changes  are  made  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is
           sometimes difficult to establish whether the old  or  new  rules
           apply.    The transitional provisions in the current  rules,  HC
           395, provide that applications extant prior to their coming into
           force will be decided under the previous  rules.     We  suggest
           that the same logic should apply with regard to the  amendments,
           so that applications made  before  the  amendments  take  effect
           should be dealt with under the  unamended  rules.     Any  other
           rule penalises  the  applicant  for  Home  Office  delays.   New
           editions of the  rules  often  contain  transitional  provisions
           which may give rise to problems of interpretation."


      Whether or not the same logic should apply to  subsequent  amendments,
      in our judgement in the absence of specific  transitional  provisions,
      the general principle set out in Rule 4 must apply  and  the  decision
      must be made in accordance with the rules as at the date of decision.

11.   It follows on this basis that the appellant's  application  could  not
      succeed under paragraph 276B by reason of the provisions of  paragraph
      276B(i)(b).   He is unable to show that  he  had  at  least  14  years
      continuous residence excluding any period spent following the  service
      of removal directions.   It is accepted that notice  of  liability  to
      removal was served in May 1999 and time stopped running at that point.



      (ii)  Have the rules been modified by the IDI of September 2004

12.   The second argument relates to the issue of  whether  the  rules  have
      been modified by the provisions of the IDI dated September 2004.   The
      Judge took the view the respondent's current policy was  reflected  by
      this  IDI  despite  the  apparently  stricter  requirements   of   the
      immigration rules.    He noted (rightly) that the IDI is  dated  after
      the amendment to the  rules  but  appears  to  have  been  drafted  in
      ignorance of the current rules as  paragraph  1  states  wrongly  that
      there is no provision within the rules for  a  person  to  be  granted
      indefinite leave to remain solely on the basis of the length of his or
      her residence, that the grant of indefinite leave is discretionary and
      that each case should be considered on its  merits.     This  document
      sets out what constitutes continuous residence and in paragraph  6  it
      considers time spent following the service of a notice of intention to
      deport.    This paragraph reads as follows:

            "Where a person has been served with a notice  of  intention  to
           deport account should be taken of the decision in  the  case  of
           Ofori.  This judgment held  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
           entitled to conclude that the extra period of  residence  gained
           by the appellant while pursuing his appeal should not  count  to
           wards the 14 years continuous residence of any legality required
           under the LRC.   However, each case should be considered on  its
           merits and the length and  quality  of  the  overall  period  of
           residence should still be taken into account, together with  all
           other  relevant  factors,  and  balanced  against  the  need  to
           maintain an effective control."


13.   The case referred to is R v SSHD ex parte Michael Ofori [1994] Imm  AR
      581.    This was an application for judicial review of  the  Secretary
      of State's decision to refuse an applicant  leave  to  remain  on  the
      basis of the  14  years  residence  concession.    The  applicant  had
      entered the United Kingdom on 9 January 1980 when he was granted leave
      to enter  and  remain  as  a  student  until  31  January  1986.    He
      overstayed and on 20 June 1991 applied for indefinite leave to remain.
         The application was refused and a  deportation  decision  was  made
      dated 22 July 1992, by which time the applicant had been in the United
      Kingdom for over 12 years.   He then appealed against  that  decision.
       An Adjudicator dismissed the appeal  and  the  Tribunal  subsequently
      refused leave.   The passage of time during these proceedings took the
      applicant beyond the 14 year milestone and he applied to stay  on  the
      basis of the policy then in force.

14.   McPherson J noted that the only reason the appellant had been able  to
      remain was because of the progress and processing of the procedures by
      which he was entitled to appeal against the deportation  order.     He
      regarded it as  outlandish  that  it  should  be  regarded  as  almost
      automatic that in those circumstances the applicant should be  allowed
      to remain.   He held that the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the extra period of residence while pursuing his appeals
      did not justify his benefiting from the concessionary policy.

15.   There is nothing to indicate in this  judgment  that  any  distinction
      should be drawn between someone subject to removal by  deportation  or
      removal as an illegal entrant.  There is no possible justification for
      any such distinction.    It happened to be a deportation  decision  in
      Ofori because the applicant had originally been granted leave to enter
      as a student.    The significant feature was that  the  applicant  was
      able to achieve 14 years residence by reason  of  the  length  of  the
      appeal  proceedings.    As  the  Judge  accepted,  the  appellant  was
      entitled to exercise his rights of appeal but he clearly took the view
      that it  would  be  a  very  unsatisfactory  result  if,  having  been
      unsuccessful in his appeal, the applicant  could  then  rely  on  time
      spent in pursuing unsuccessful appeal to establish a claim  under  the
      concession.

16.   This principle is recognised in paragraph 276B(i)(b)  which  draws  no
      distinction between the various types of enforcement procedure whether
      by removal directions or a notice of intention to deport.    There  is
      nothing in the case of Ofori to  suggest  that  any  such  distinction
      could properly or sensibly be made.  We cannot read paragraph 6 of IDI
      September 2004 as providing for any concession in  the  interpretation
      of paragraph 276B.   If anything it confirms the principle that period
      spent after notice of enforcement proceedings should not count towards
      continuous residence.   The advice that each case should be considered
      on its merits does not seem to us to add anything to the  factors  set
      out in paragraph 276B(ii).    In summary we are not satisfied that IDI
      September  2004  provides  any  material  qualification  by   way   of
      concession to the provisions of paragraph 276B.

      (iii) Legitimate Expectation

17.   The next issue is whether there was a legitimate expectation that  the
      appellant's application would be determined  in  accordance  with  the
      concession rather than the rules.    This claim is based on  the  fact
      that in response to the submission of his  application  the  appellant
      received a letter dated 25 February 2002 indicating that a case worker
      in the initial consideration unit would consider it within the next  6
      weeks and inform him of the decision or give a progress report.    The
      progress report came in the letter dated 3 April 2002 which  indicated
      that the matter was being passed to a case management  unit  and  that
      some cases were currently taking up to 6 months or a little longer  to
      deal with.   That was an optimistic estimate as the decision  was  not
      in fact made until June  2005.     Despite  this  wholly  unacceptable
      delay, we are not satisfied  that  these  letters  form  any  adequate
      foundation for a representation  or  assurance  that  the  application
      would be dealt with under the concession as opposed to  the  rules  in
      force at the date of decision.

18.         If we are wrong about that and the appellant was entitled  to  a
      decision made under the concession, we are not satisfied  that  it  is
      arguable that the decision would have  been  in  his  favour.     This
      argument is based on the assertion  that  under  the  concession  time
      would only stop running if a notice of intention to deport was served.
       We are not satisfied that any such inference can be drawn from  Ofori
      for the reasons we have already given.   There is no justification for
      an illegal entrant  being  in  a  better  position  than  someone  who
      initially made a lawful entry.   The concession  as  set  out  in  the
      letter dated 19 February 2002 from the appellant's solicitors reads as
      follows:

            "Although there  is  no  14  year  rule  as  such,  because  any
           concession  based  on  length  of  residence  is   outside   the
           Immigration Rules... once a person has  been  here  continuously
           for 14 years or more, they would normally be granted  indefinite
           leave to remain regardless of the fact that some or all of their
           residence was unlawful, provided that there were no other strong
           countervailing  factors  such  as  extant  criminal  record   or
           deliberate, positive blatant attempts  to  evade  or  circumvent
           Immigration  Control.    Each  case...  is  considered  on   its
           merits."


19.   We note that the Immigration Officer who interviewed the appellant  in
      May 1999 took the view the appellant's disregard for  the  Immigration
      Rules had been blatantly  demonstrated  both  in  the  mode  of  entry
      employed by deception together with the fact that no attempt had  been
      made to regularise his stay.    Taking this factor into  account  with
      the fact that the 14 year period was only subsequently  completed  due
      to making an application for asylum which was refused and a subsequent
      appeal withdrawn followed by  a  further  application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain, we are not satisfied that  in  fact  the  appellant's
      claim would have  been  successful  under  the  terms  of  the  policy
      existing before the rules were amended in April 2003.

      (iv)  Summary

20.   We are therefore satisfied that the Immigration Judge did err  in  law
      in his assessment of the application for indefinite leave to remain on
      the basis of long  residence.     The  application  should  have  been
      considered in accordance with the rules.   The Secretary of State  was
      right to refuse the application for the reasons he has set out in  his
      decision letter dated 20  June  2005.     As  the  appellant  did  not
      complete  14  years  continuous  residence  within   the   rules   the
      discretionary matters raised in Rule 276(b)(ii) did  not  fall  to  be
      considered and there was no discretion within the rules for the  Judge
      to review.   In so far as the Secretary of State has  decided  not  to
      exercise his discretion outside the rules there is no right of  appeal
      to the Immigration Judge  and  no  basis  for  an  argument  that  the
      Secretary of state failed to follow his own policy.  No case arises on
      the basis of a legitimate expectation.

      Article 8

21.   The decision letter dealt with Article 8.   The Judge  took  the  view
      in the light of his findings that he need not consider Article 8.   We
      heard submissions in this respect.   We accept that the appellant  has
      established private life.   Removal would amount  to  an  interference
      but would be in accordance with the law.   The  substantial  issue  is
      whether removal would  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
      maintaining an effective and rational immigration policy.    The  test
      is whether the appellant's circumstances are truly  exceptional  Huang
      [2004] EWCA Civ 105   In Akaeke, the Court of  Appeal  held  that  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal had not erred  in  law  by  dismissing  an
      appeal against an Adjudicator's  determination  that  removal  in  the
      particular circumstances of that  appeal  would  be  disproportionate.
      In that case the applicant had a separate claim to be allowed to enter
      under  the  rules.     There  was  no  reason  to  believe  that  that
      application would not be successful if made from abroad in  accordance
      with the rules.  The delay was against the  background  of  protracted
      efforts by the applicant's representatives to obtain a  decision.   At
      the conclusion of his judgment, Carnwath LJ noted that the facts  were
      very different from those in the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
      Strbac [2005] EWCA Civ 848.     In  that  case  the  Court  held  that
      administrative delay in the determination of an application may if  it
      proved to be substantial and to have brought  consequences  of  weight
      beyond the bare passage of time be a factor which a decision maker was
      obliged to consider.  But  that  factor  must  have  very  substantial
      effects if it was to drive a decision in the applicant's favour.

22.   We are not satisfied in the present case that the delay  has  had  any
      prejudicial  effect  upon  the  appellant  apart  from  extending  his
      unlawful stay in the United Kingdom.   He has not any  lost  right  to
      make a separate in-country application as in Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233
        The delay is not such as to make his circumstances truly exceptional
      as envisaged by the Court of Appeal in  Huang.   We  have  taken  into
      account the appellant's statements and the  submissions  made  on  his
      behalf.    The delay in taking enforcement action since 1999 has  been
      caused in part by the appellant's pursuit of his legal remedies  which
      were properly open to him and in part  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
      delay in making a decision.   Even  so,  we  are  not  satisfied  that
      removal can properly be categorised as disproportionate.

Decision

23.   For the reasons we have given we are satisfied  that  the  Immigration
      Judge did make a material error of law.    For  the  reasons  we  have
      given, we are  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
      decision to refuse indefinite leave to remain should be dismissed.





                                                                H J E Latter
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge
