








R (on the application of Watson) v (1) Secretary of State for the Home
Department and (2) First-tier Tribunal (Extant appeal: s94B challenge:
forum) [2018] UKUT 00165 (IAC)




                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


       Application for Permission to bring Judicial Review Proceedings




           The Queen on the application of Wellington Paul Watson
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                            First Respondent
                                     and

            First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                           Second Respondent


                          Mr Justice Lane, President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor






       Application for permission to bring judicial review proceedings


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms S  Naik  QC  and  Mr  B  Hoshi,  of  counsel,
instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant and  Mr  S
Kovats QC, of counsel, instructed by the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the first respondent, and there being no attendance on  behalf  of
the second respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 8 March 2018.



   1) Where an appellant's appeal has been certified under  section  94B  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the appellant has
      been removed from the United Kingdom pursuant to that certificate, the
      First-tier Tribunal is the forum for determining whether, in  all  the
      circumstances,  the  appeal  can  lawfully  be  decided,  without  the
      appellant being physically present in the United Kingdom.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal is under a continuing duty to monitor the  position,  to
      ensure that the right to a fair hearing is not abrogated. In doing so,
      the First-tier Tribunal can be  expected  to  apply  the  step-by-step
      approach identified in AJ  (s  94B:  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  questions)
      Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00115 (IAC).

   2) If the First-tier Tribunal stays the  appeal  proceedings  because  it
      concludes that they cannot progress save in a  manner  which  breaches
      the procedural rights safeguarded by Article 8, then it is anticipated
      the Secretary of State will promptly  take  the  necessary  action  to
      rectify this position. If this does not happen,  then  an  application
      for judicial review can be made to the Upper Tribunal to challenge the
      Secretary of  State's  decision  and  compel  him  to  facilitate  the
      appellant's return.

   3) If the First-tier Tribunal decides that the appeal process is  Article
      8 compliant, the Tribunal's substantive decision will  be  susceptible
      to challenge, on appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the ground that  the
      Tribunal was wrong so to conclude.



Judge O'Connor

Introduction

   1. This case raises issues as to the correct approach in  an  application
      for judicial  review  made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  challenging  the
      maintenance of a certificate issued by the Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department ("SSHD") pursuant to section 94B of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002 Act"), in cases where (i)  that
      certificate was issued prior to the Supreme Court's decision in Kiarie
      v SSHD; R (Byndloss) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 42; [2017] 1 WLR 2380 ("Kiarie
      and Byndloss"), (ii) the applicant was subsequently removed  from  the
      United Kingdom and (iii) the applicant has an extant appeal before the
      First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision,  made  prior  to  removal,
      refusing a human rights claim made on Article 8 European Convention on
      Human Rights ("ECHR") grounds.

 2. The applicant applies for permission to challenge  the  SSHD's  ongoing
    decisions, most recently documented in letters of the 22 December  2017
    and 10 January 2018, to:

      a) maintain the section 94B  certification  of  his  Article  8  human
         rights claim; and

      b) refuse to facilitate his return from Jamaica to  the  UK  in  order
         that he may engage in his  pending  appeal  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

 3. The  applicant  also  seeks  permission  to  challenge  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision of 15 January 2018 refusing to stay the hearing  of
    his appeal pending the final resolution of the instant application  for
    judicial review. The appeal is listed for hearing on the 25 and 26 June
    2018.

 4. By way of interim relief, the applicant  requests  an  order  that  his
    appeal proceedings before  the  second  respondent  be  stayed  pending
    resolution of this application.

 5. By way of substantive relief, the applicant seeks:

      i) An order quashing the section 94B certification of his human rights
         claim;




     ii) A declaration that the first respondent failed to lawfully consider
         the exercise of her discretion in  making  and/or  maintaining  the
         section 94B certification;



    iii) A mandatory order requiring the first respondent to reconsider  her
         decision on the section 94B certification in  accordance  with  the
         law;



     iv) A mandatory order requiring the first respondent to facilitate  and
         fund his return from Jamaica to the UK;



      v) A declaration that the first respondent  breached/or  continues  to
         breach his rights under Article 8 ECHR;



     vi) A declaration that the first respondent  breached/or  continues  to
         breach the rights of his children and/or failed to take account  of
         the children's best interests  in  making  and/or  maintaining  the
         section 94B certification;



    vii) An order quashing the decision of the second respondent refusing to
         stay  the  applicant's  appeal  pending  the  resolution  of  these
         judicial review proceedings;



   viii) Damages under section 8 Human Rights Act 1998.


Factual Background

Events pre-removal of the applicant from the United Kingdom

 6. The applicant was born on 3 August 1978 and is a national of Jamaica.

 7. His eldest son, RW, was born in the United Kingdom on 1 September  1997
    to SY.  On 13 May 2000 the applicant was refused  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor but was granted temporary  admission  until
    the following day.  He failed to report as required.   On  16  December
    2000 the applicant and SY married. They separated in 2003.

 8. In 2004 the applicant began a relationship with JH.   JW  was  born  of
    that  relationship  in  May  2008.   In  2006  the  applicant  made  an
    application to the SSHD for indefinite leave to remain as the father of
    RW, but such application was refused by the SSHD in November  2009.  An
    appeal against this decision was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 27 April 2010 and, thereafter, by the Upper Tribunal on 28 September
    2010.

 9. On 4 July 2013 the SSHD granted the applicant limited leave  to  remain
    in  the  United  Kingdom  for  30  months,  as  a  consequence  of  his
    relationship with JW - it being concluded  that  the  applicant  had  a
    parental relationship with JW and that it was not reasonable to  expect
    JW to leave the United Kingdom.   However,  on  13  February  2014  the
    applicant was convicted of supplying Class A controlled drugs  and  was
    sentenced to fourteen months' imprisonment.  This caused  the  SSHD  to
    serve notice on the applicant on  24  May  2014  of  his  liability  to
    deportation.  This notice alerted the applicant to the fact that he was
    required to submit any reasons why he  should  not  be  deported,  with
    documentary evidence in support where available.

10. In response, on 19 June 2014 the applicant raised a human rights  claim
    relying upon his relationship with his children and JH.  On 23 February
    2015, the SSHD made a decision to deport the applicant and also refused
    the applicant's human rights claim, detailed reasons  being  given  for
    the latter in a twelve-page decision letter of  the  same  date.   This
    decision letter concluded with a consideration of  whether  to  certify
    the applicant's human rights claim under section 94B of the  2002  Act,
    the following being said:

         "Consideration has been given  to  whether  your  Article  8  claim
         should be certified  under  Section  94B  of  the  2002  Act.   The
         Secretary of State has considered whether there  would  be  a  real
         risk of serious irreversible harm if you were to be removed pending
         the outcome of any appeal you may bring.  The  Secretary  of  State
         does not consider that such a risk exists in light  of  the  above.
         Therefore, it has been decided to  certify  your  Article  8  claim
         under Section 94B and any appeal you may bring can  only  be  heard
         once you have left the United Kingdom.   ...

         Appeal

         ...

         You may appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) against the decision to refuse  your  human  rights  claim
         under Section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.  You may  only  exercise  your
         right of appeal from outside the United Kingdom."

11. The applicant brought a challenge to the section 94B  certification  by
    way  of  judicial  review  proceedings  issued   on   24   March   2015
    (JR/3490/2015).  Within the confines of the judicial review proceedings
    he put forward further evidence supporting his Article 8  claim.   This
    led the SSHD to issue a supplementary decision letter on 30 April 2015,
    in which she refused to treat the further evidence  as  a  fresh  claim
    pursuant to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules, refused  to  revoke
    the deportation order and maintained the section 94B certification.  In
    relation to the latter decision the following was stated:

         "Your claims and evidence have  been  considered,  but  it  is  not
         accepted that you have demonstrated that removing you prior to  the
         hearing of any appeal against a decision to make you the subject to
         a  deportation  order  would  give  rise  to  a  risk  of   serious
         irreversible harm for  you,  your  children,  or  their  respective
         mothers."

12.  Permission  to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings  challenging  the
    decisions of 23 February and 30 April 2015 was refused on the papers by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 18 August 2015.  A decision on the oral
    renewed application for permission was subsequently stayed to await the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Kiarie  and  Byndloss.   Thereafter,  the
    matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 22 June 2016 and, after
    having heard Counsel for both parties, Judge Blum refused permission to
    bring  judicial  review  proceedings  on   the   basis   although   the
    certification decision was  unlawful  as  a  consequence  of  the  SSHD
    misdirecting herself to the appropriate legal consideration, it had not
    been demonstrated that such unlawfulness was arguably material  to  the
    outcome.  In so concluding Judge Blum found as follows:

         "(4)     The  human  rights  application  was  not  accompanied  by
             evidence that the partner or the  applicant's  children  could
             not continue their lives in the way they did when  he  was  in
             prison.  There  was  no  evidence  before  the  respondent  to
             suggest that the applicant's family  would  be  destitute,  or
             that their health  issues  require  his  presence  during  the
             period of his appeal, or that they would  be  unable  to  cope
             during his temporary removal  (I  note  that  the  applicant's
             partner was the sole  carer  for  their  daughter  during  his
             lengthy imprisonment).  There was no evidence that the  family
             would face any significant difficulties or hardship.  Although
             the daughter has congenital abnormalities  of  her  hands  and
             feet,  and  a  medical  letter  of  August  2010  stated  that
             extensive surgery was anticipated, there has as  yet  been  no
             surgery, nor is there any more up-to-date medical report."

13. In August 2016 the applicant  made  further  submissions  to  the  SSHD
    asserting, inter alia, that his relationship with JH  had  broken  down
    and that Social Services had  initiated  a  child  protection  case  in
    relation to both JW and the applicant's unborn child.

14. In a decision of 30  August  2016,  the  SSHD  refused  to  revoke  the
    applicant's deportation order but accepted that the further submissions
    amounted to a fresh human rights claim pursuant to paragraph 353 of the
    Immigration Rules.  The SSHD also gave consideration to section 94B  of
    the 2002 Act and, for reasons that run to 32 paragraphs, concluded that
    the claim should be certified thereunder.   Notice  was  given  to  the
    applicant of the SSHD's  intention  to  remove  him  to  Jamaica  on  7
    September 2016.

15. The applicant lodged an application for judicial review challenging the
    decision to remove him (JR/9647/2016).  By way  of  an  order  dated  5
    September 2016 Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  refused  to  grant  the
    applicant interim relief  in  the  form  of  a  stay  of  his  removal,
    identifying that he would have  a  right  of  appeal  from  abroad  and
    concluding that such  appeal  "is  an  effective  remedy".  The  papers
    currently before the Tribunal do not identify the final  resolution  of
    these proceedings, if there has been one. The  applicant  made  further
    submissions on the 6 September,  which  were  rejected  in  a  decision
    notice of the same date. He was removed from the UK  to  Jamaica  on  7
    September 2016.

Events post-removal

16. On 4 October 2016, the applicant submitted an appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the assistance of a pro-bono organisation.

17. Six weeks later the applicant's second son RW was born to  JH,  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The applicant has never physically seen RW.  The  next
    relevant event in time occurred on the 25 May 2017, the date  on  which
    the First-tier Tribunal provided notice that the applicant's appeal was
    to be heard before it on 17 August 2017.

18. The Supreme Court's decision in Kiarie and Byndloss was handed down  on
    14 June 2017.  The applicant instructed his present  solicitors  on  25
    July 2017 and on 4 August they sent a pre-action protocol letter to the
    SSHD challenging the lawfulness of his removal, ostensibly in  reliance
    on the  reasoning  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss.   On  the  same  date  an
    application was made to the First-tier Tribunal for an  adjournment  of
    the hearing listed for 17 August.

19. On 16 August 2017 the SSHD responded to the pre-action protocol letter,
    maintaining the certification of the applicant's human rights claim and
    refusing the request to facilitate his return to  the  United  Kingdom.
    On the same date, the First-tier  Tribunal  adjourned  the  applicant's
    appeal and listed it for a Case Management Review hearing on 25 October
    2017, a hearing that the First-tier Tribunal later adjourned of its own
    motion having identified the applicant's case as one which was to be  a
    video-link 'test case'. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  inform  the
    applicant's solicitors until 22  November  2017  that  the  applicant's
    appeal had been selected as a 'test case'. The appeal was listed for  a
    Case Management Review hearing on 13 December 2017, with the 15 January
    2018 being identified as the date of the substantive hearing. That date
    was subsequently converted into a Case Management Review hearing.

20. On 4 December 2017 the applicant applied for exceptional  case  funding
    from the Legal Aid Agency for his appeal.  Such application was granted
    on 15 January 2018. Prior authority for the applicant's  solicitors  to
    instruct a forensic psychiatric expert, an  independent  social  worker
    and an independent probation officer  was  granted  by  the  Legal  Aid
    Agency on 22 February 2018.

21. In the meantime,  on  12  December  2017  the  applicant  made  further
    submissions to the  SSHD  by  way  of  a  pre-action  protocol  letter,
    requesting the withdrawal of the  section  94B  certification  and  the
    facilitation of his return to the United Kingdom.  The  following  core
    assertions are made within this letter:

      i) The applicant has had significant difficulty in communicating  with
         his solicitors in the United Kingdom. He  lacks  computer  literacy
         and access to a computer.  This has required the solicitors to have
         to contact one of the applicant's relatives to get  in  touch  with
         the applicant, which has typically led to there being a  period  of
         between  two  and  three  days  between   seeking   and   receiving
         instructions.  It has typically taken between two and  three  weeks
         for the  applicant's  solicitors  to  receive  documentation  or  a
         signature on documentation requested of the  applicant.   Telephone
         calls are also  problematic  because  there  is  a  five-hour  time
         difference between the  UK  and  Jamaica.   In  any  event,  it  is
         difficult to take legal advice over the telephone or  by  email  on
         such complex legal issues.  The applicant has very basic  education
         and is often unable to understand advice given to  him.   There  is
         also a considerable cost involved in speaking with the applicant by
         telephone which is not reimbursed by the Legal Aid Agency.   It  is
         unreasonable to expect the  applicant's  solicitors  to  bear  such
         costs.

     ii) The applicant is unable to obtain the necessary expert/professional
         evidence required to pursue his appeal whilst  he  is  out  of  the
         country.   In  particular,  he  wishes  to  instruct   a   forensic
         psychiatrist, an independent social worker, and obtain a  probation
         officer's risk assessment and a Social  Services  child  protection
         assessment.  The relevant  experts/professionals  require  face-to-
         face contact with the applicant in order to assess him.

    iii) There are significant logistical  and  practical  issues  with  the
         applicant giving evidence by  video-link.   Providing  evidence  by
         video-link will hamper the quality of the evidence, a  matter  that
         the  applicant  is  anxious  about.   His  demeanour  and   general
         presentation will be highly important factors for the  Tribunal  to
         consider, which cannot be properly scrutinised through the  use  of
         video-link evidence.  In addition, there  are  concerns  about  the
         proposed video-link equipment and facilities  to  be  used  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal, since their quality is not known.

     iv) The fact that the applicant's human rights claim was not  certified
         as clearly unfounded means that he has an arguable case.

      v) The earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing  the  applicant
         permission to challenge the section 94B certificate is  irrelevant,
         given that it is predicated on the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
         in Kiarie and Byndloss which was  subsequently  overturned  by  the
         Supreme Court.

     vi) There is a strong  public  interest  in  returning  those  who  are
         unlawfully removed  from  the  UK  in  breach  of  their  protected
         fundamental rights, as this applicant was.

22. The application was  supported  by  two  witness  statements  dated  12
    December 2017, the first drawn in the applicant's name and  the  second
    authored by Sulaiha Ali, a solicitor  employed  by  Duncan  Lewis  with
    conduct of the applicant's case.

23. The SSHD  responded  by  way  of  a  letter  dated  22  December  2017,
    concluding that it was not appropriate to return the applicant  to  the
    UK to pursue his appeal and that the section 94B certificate  would  be
    maintained.  This prompted a further pre-action protocol  letter  drawn
    on the applicant's behalf, sent to the SSHD on 27 December  2017.   The
    SSHD responded to this by way  of  a  further  detailed  letter  of  10
    January 2018, once again finding "that there are no grounds on which to
    conclude that your client's section 94B certificate should be withdrawn
    or that he should be returned to the UK in  order  to  conduct  an  in-
    country appeal".

24. Both the letter of 22 December 2017 and that of  the  10  January  2018
    give consideration to the  specific  submissions  put  forward  in  the
    respective pre-action protocol letters.  The  later  of  these  letters
    addresses, inter alia, the relevance of the lawfulness of the  decision
    to remove the applicant, the earlier judicial review  proceedings,  the
    effect of the Supreme Court's decision  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss,  the
    asserted  practical  and  logistical  problems  for  the  applicant  in
    providing  effective   instructions   to   his   solicitors   and   the
    efficaciousness of video link evidence.

25. Moving on, as previously indicated the First-tier Tribunal held a  Case
    Management Review hearing on 15 January  2018,  presided  over  by  the
    President of the First-tier Tribunal and Resident  Judge  Campbell.   A
    statement from Ms Ali, dated 26 January 2018, sets  out  the  following
    material events from the day of the hearing:

          i) The applicant had been informed to attend the British  Embassy
             in Kingston at 9 a.m. (Jamaican time);




         ii) Ms Ali attended before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  along  with
             both leading and junior Counsel.  The applicant and his  legal
             representatives were afforded the opportunity to  undertake  a
             30-minute conference using the video-link, prior to the  start
             of the Case Management hearing. During this  time  there  were
             significant delays in the sound, which led to  lengthy  pauses
             between  questions  being  asked  of  the  applicant  and  his
             response.  The applicant had difficulty in  hearing  what  was
             being said by his representatives, and  questions  had  to  be
             repeated.



        iii) As to the events at the hearing itself, it is  said  the  same
             problems with the quality of the video link arose. The  judges
             were required to repeat themselves both at the outset  and  at
             the  close  of  the  hearing  when  addressing  the  applicant
             directly.  Ms Ali describes the picture quality as  "moderate"
             which, it is asserted, meant that it was very difficult to see
             the applicant's eyes and facial expressions and to assess  his
             overall demeanour. The bottom half of the applicant's face was
             not visible when he was speaking.



         iv) During the hearing there was a period during which the  video-
             link  froze,  which  initially  went   undetected.    It   was
             eventually noticed by Judge Campbell, when  he  addressed  the
             applicant but did not get a response.



          v) The applicant has since instructed Ms Ali that he  experienced
             a loss of sound on four separate occasions during the hearing.



26. It is asserted in  the  grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
    judicial review, although not mentioned in Ms Ali's  witness  statement
    or evidentially supported by any other documentation before us, that an
    application was made at the Case Management hearing for a stay  of  the
    appeal proceedings pending an outcome of  the  applicant's  application
    for judicial review, "on the basis it was unfair and not in  accordance
    with the overriding objective" of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules to proceed with an appeal in circumstances where the fairness and
    effectiveness of such appeal were the subject of challenge.   This,  we
    are told, was opposed by the SSHD. The First-tier Tribunal refused such
    application and thereafter made directions for the furtherance  of  the
    appeal. The First-tier's decision has not been reduced  to  writing  as
    far as we are aware.

27. The instant application for judicial review was lodged  on  29  January
    2018, on which date the President of the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) directed that the application  for  interim  relief
    and the application for permission to bring judicial review proceedings
    be considered by the Upper Tribunal at a hearing.



Legal Framework

Legislation

28. Section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007 provides that deportation of a
    foreign criminal i.e. a person who is not a British  citizen,  who  has
    been convicted of an offence in the UK and who has been sentenced to  a
    period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months  for  any  offence,  is
    conducive to the public good for the purposes of section 3(5)(a) of the
    Immigration Act 1971.  The  SSHD  must  make  a  deportation  order  in
    relation to such  a  person  (s.32  (4)),  subject  to  the  exceptions
    identified in section 33. One such exception  is  where  removal  would
    breach that person's rights under the ECHR (s.33 (2) (a)).

29. A person has a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) against a decision of the SSHD to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim (s.82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act). In the  ordinary  course  of
    events, that appeal must be brought from within the United Kingdom  and
    the appellant will remain within the United Kingdom for the duration of
    the appeal process (s.92(3) of the 2002 Act).

30. This is not true, however, when the SSHD has certified  a  claim  under
    specified provisions. One such provision is section  94B  of  the  2002
    Act, pursuant to which the SSHD may certify a human rights claim if she
    considers that removing  the  particular  individual  from  the  United
    Kingdom pending the outcome of any appeal would not be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Kiarie and Byndloss v SSHD


31. In the Kiarie and Byndloss litigation the senior courts  gave  detailed
    consideration to the approach to be  taken  to  an  assessment  of  the
    lawfulness of a section 94B certificate.

32. Both Mr Kiarie and Mr Byndloss were foreign offenders against whom  the
    SSHD had made deportation orders,  rejected  human  rights  claims  and
    certified those human rights claims pursuant to section 94B of the 2002
    Act. The Court of Appeal concluded that, in  common  with  her  general
    practice at the relevant time, the SSHD had  misdirected  herself  when
    considering whether to certify the human  rights  claims,  focus  being
    incorrectly placed on the question of  whether  the  applicants  would,
    before the exhaustion of the appeals  process,  face  a  real  risk  of
    serious irreversible harm if removed. It is now settled that  the  SSHD
    ought to have asked herself whether the applicant's  removal  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act.  Despite  accepting
    that the SSHD had misdirected herself  in  law,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    dismissed the substantive appeals having found, in both cases, that the
    error was immaterial on the basis that  had  the  SSHD  considered  the
    correct  question  she  would  inevitably  have  concluded   that   the
    applicants' removal pending the outcome  of  their  appeals  would  not
    breach either the substantive  or  the  procedural  aspects  of  rights
    afforded by Article 8.

33. In the Supreme Court emphasis  was  placed  on  the  procedural  rights
    protected by Article 8 and, in  particular,  the  question  of  whether
    there is an Article 8 compliant  system  in  place  for  out-of-country
    appeals. The Court found that the considerable  practical  difficulties
    that faced an out-of-country appellant meant that the  burden  fell  on
    the SSHD to establish that such an appeal would be effective  and  fair
    and, therefore, met the procedural requirements of Article 8.  It  held
    that the SSHD had not established this in either of  the  cases  before
    the Court.


34. Lord Wilson, with whom Baroness  Hale,  Lord  Hodge  and  Lord  Toulson
    agreed, gave the leading judgment. In paragraph 35 thereof, Lord Wilson
    identified the public  interest  in  removing  a  foreign  criminal  in
    advance of an appeal as being the risk that,  if  permitted  to  remain
    pending his appeal, the foreign criminal might take that opportunity to
    reoffend. It was further stated, however,  that  such  public  interest
    "may be outweighed by a wider public interest which runs the other way"
    e.g. "the public interest that, when we are afforded a right of appeal,
    our appeal should be effective".

Challenge to SSHD's decisions

Summary of Grounds

35. The applicant raises four grounds of challenge to the SSHD's decisions.
    By grounds 1 and 2 it is asserted that the  applicant's  appeal  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal  will  not  be  effective,  and  breaches  the
    procedural rights afforded to the applicant by Article 8  ECHR  (ground
    1) and the common law doctrine of procedural fairness (ground 2).

36. By ground 3 the applicant submits that  the  SSHD  failed  to  lawfully
    exercise her discretion to withdraw the section  94B  certificate,  for
    the reasons set out  in  grounds  1  and  2  and,  in  addition,  as  a
    consequence of the failure of the SSHD to  take  account  of  the  best
    interests of the applicant's children.

37. Ground 4 asserts that the applicant's removal,  and  ongoing  exclusion
    from the United  Kingdom,  disproportionately  breach  his  substantive
    article 8 rights.


Decision - Grounds 1 & 2 (Procedural Article 8 rights/ fairness)

38. We  take  grounds  1  and  2  together,  as  did  Ms  Naik  during  her
    submissions.

39. An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim, which has been legislated for by  Parliament,  must
    be "effective". Neither Article  8  nor  the  common  law  doctrine  of
    procedural fairness requires access to the best possible  procedure  on
    the appeal,  but  access  to  a  procedure  that  meets  the  essential
    requirements of effectiveness and fairness. What is effective and  fair
    must always be viewed in context, and will depend upon  the  facts  and
    circumstances of a particular case.


40. In paragraphs 60 to 74 of his judgment in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss,  Lord
    Wilson identifies a number of fact sensitive features of an applicant's
    claim that require addressing when consideration is being given to  the
    issue of whether an out-of-country appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    human rights claim is compatible with the  procedural  requirements  of
    Article  8.  We  gratefully  adopt  the  following  synthesis  of  that
    consideration, set out by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (President  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanson) in its recent decision of AJ (s94B:  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00115 (IAC)


        "First question

         The first question, addressed at paragraph 60 of the  judgment,  is
         whether the appellant will be able to secure legal  representation,
         which might have been available had the appellant remained  in  the
         United Kingdom, and whether the appellant  will  be  able  to  give
         instructions to his lawyer and receive advice from the lawyer, both
         prior to the hearing and during it.

         Second question

         The second question, addressed at paragraph 74 of the judgment,  is
         whether the appellant's absence  from  the  United  Kingdom,  as  a
         result of deportation or other removal pursuant to the section  94B
         certificate, is likely to present "difficulties  in  obtaining  the
         supporting professional evidence which ...  can  prove  crucial  in
         achieving its success".  One example given was  the  likelihood  of
         submitting evidence from a criminal appellant's probation  officer;
         "but, upon his deportation, his probation officer will have  closed
         his file and will apparently regard himself as no longer obliged to
         write a report about him".   Another  potential  problem  would  be
         where the appellant wished "to submit evidence  from  a  consultant
         forensic psychiatrist about [the  level  of  risk]"  posed  by  the
         appellant.  In cases concerning relationships with a child, partner
         or other family member in the United Kingdom,  an  appellant  "will
         not uncommonly adduce ...  a report by an independent social worker
         ... but a report compiled in  the  absence  of  a  social  worker's
         direct observation of the appellant  and  the  family  together  is
         likely to be of negligible value".

         Third question

         The third question concerns the need for  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant. Although in his judgment Lord  Wilson  dealt  with  this
         issue before turning to the two questions set out above,  it  seems
         to us that in many if not most cases the First-tier Tribunal should
         address those two questions first. This is  because  judicial  time
         and effort spent on determining the need for live evidence and  the
         likely availability and adequacy of a video link will be wasted  if
         the answer to one or both of the first two questions means that the
         appellant needs in any event to be in the United Kingdom  in  order
         for there to be a procedurally fair hearing of his appeal.

         Paragraph 61  of  Lord  Wilson's  judgment  highlights  the  issues
         regarding live evidence. It is in our view  significant  that  Lord
         Wilson did not say that every appellant who is abroad as  a  result
         of removal pursuant to section 94B must be given the opportunity to
         give live evidence. In this regard, it needs to be remembered  that
         entry clearance appeals have been  a  feature  of  the  immigration
         jurisdiction since the appellate system was created and it has  not
         hitherto been considered that such appeals have, since  the  coming
         into force of the Human Rights Act 1998 in 2000, been  procedurally
         unfair because the appellant is unable to give live evidence.

         Be that as it may, it is clear that the Supreme Court in Kiarie and
         Byndloss clearly considered section 94B cases give rise to the need
         to assess with care whether oral evidence  from  the  appellant  is
         required. The Court's expectation was  that,  in  most  cases,  the
         appellant's oral evidence  would  be  necessary  Nevertheless,  the
         question remains case-specific  and  will  be  for  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to decide.

         Fourth question

         The fourth and final question will be whether, if there is  a  need
         to hear live evidence from the appellant, doing  so  by  video-link
         will be satisfactory: see paragraphs 66 to  73  of  the  judgments.
         Lord Wilson was sceptical that such a link  would  be  functionally
         adequate.  His observations on that matter are, however, manifestly
         not findings of  law  or  irrefutable  findings  of  fact.  On  the
         contrary, at paragraph 102, Lord Carnwath could "see no  reason  in
         principle why use of modern video facilities should not provide  an
         effective means of providing oral evidence and  participation  from
         abroad, so long as  the  necessary  facilities  and  resources  are
         available".  Furthermore, as others have observed, hearing evidence
         by  video-link  is  a  growing  feature  of  United  Kingdom  legal
         proceedings. "

41. The decision of the Court of Appeal in R (Nixon  and  Another)  v  SSHD
    [2018] EWCA Civ 3, also provides important  guidance  relevant  to  any
    consideration as to  the  effectiveness  of  an  appeals  process.  The
    appellants therein, Mr Nixon and Mr Tracey, are foreign criminals  each
    of whom was deported from the United Kingdom after having had  a  human
    rights claim rejected and certified pursuant to section 94B of the 2002
    Act. Prior to their removal each brought a challenge by way of judicial
    review, inter alia, to the  SSHD's  decisions  certifying  their  human
    rights claims pursuant to section 94B. Permission was refused  in  both
    cases, as was an application made  by  Mr  Nixon  for  a  stay  of  his
    removal.

42. In his consideration of the subsequent applications for interim  relief
    and permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, Hickinbottom  LJ  said
    as follows, at [75]:


         "...  the  following  propositions  can   be   derived   from   the
         authorities.
         i) Where the Secretary of State rejects a human rights claim  of  a
         proposed deportee, an out-of-country  appeal  will  not  always  be
         ineffective in protecting the human  rights  involved.  Whether  it
         will be effective will depend upon the facts and  circumstances  of
         the particular case.
         ii) Where the Secretary of State precludes an in-country appeal, by
         (e.g.) certifying a human rights claim under section 94B,  that  is
         not necessarily unlawful; but  it  is  sufficient  to  establish  a
         potential interference  with  the  proposed  deportee's  article  8
         rights, such that a burden is imposed on the Secretary of State  to
         establish that that interference is  justified  and  proportionate,
         and that removal from the UK without waiting for an appeal  to  run
         its course strikes a fair balance between  the  adverse  effect  of
         deportation at that stage on relevant rights under  article  8  and
         the public interest. In particular, the  Secretary  of  State  will
         need to show that an out-of-country appeal  will  be  effective  to
         protect the article 8 rights in play.
         iii) Where an individual is deported on the basis  of  an  unlawful
         certificate, the court has a discretion as to  whether  to  make  a
         mandatory order against the Secretary of State to return him to the
         UK so that he can (amongst other things)  conduct  his  appeal  in-
         country. That discretion is wide, and there is  no  presumption  in
         favour  of  return,  even  where  certification  is  unlawful.  The
         exercise of the discretion will be  fact-sensitive.  However,  when
         assessing whether it is just and appropriate to  make  a  mandatory
         order for return of a deportee, the fact that that person has  been
         unlawfully deprived of an in-country appeal to which he is entitled
         under statute is the starting point and a factor  telling  strongly
         in favour of ordering his return.
         iv) It will be a highly material consideration if  the  deportation
         was lawful or apparently lawful, in the sense that, even if a human
         rights claim that  a  deportation  order  should  not  be  made  or
         maintained  has  been  unlawfully  certified,  the  individual  was
         deported on the basis of a deportation order that was  not  bad  on
         its face and was not, at the relevant  time,  the  subject  of  any
         appeal; and/or an application  for  a  stay  on  removal  had  been
         refused or the court had  directed  that  any  further  proceedings
         should not act as a bar to removal. On the other hand, it will also
         be material if the individual has been removed in  the  face  of  a
         stay on removal, or even if there is an active relevant  appeal  or
         judicial review in which the issue of a stay  on  removal  has  not
         been tested.
         v) The extent to which the individual's appeal  will  be  adversely
         affected if he is not returned  to  the  UK  will  also  be  highly
         relevant. It will be adversely affected if it is assessed that,  if
         he is restricted  to  bringing  or  maintaining  an  out-of-country
         appeal, that will be inadequate to protect the article 8 rights  of
         the individual and his  relevant  family  members.  The  continuing
         absence of the individual from the  UK  may  adversely  affect  his
         ability to present his appeal properly in a variety  of  ways,  for
         example   he   may   be   unable   properly   to   instruct   legal
         representatives; he may be unable to obtain effective  professional
         expert  evidence;  he  may  be  unable  to  give  evidence,  either
         effectively or at all. If the court  assesses  that,  even  if  the
         exercise would be more difficult than pursuing his  appeal  in  the
         UK, the deportee could effectively pursue his appeal  from  abroad,
         that is likely to be finding of great  weight  and  will  often  be
         determinative in favour of exercising the court's discretion not to
         make a mandatory order for return. On the other hand, if the  court
         assesses that he  could  not  effectively  pursue  an  appeal  from
         abroad, then that may well be determinative in favour of exercising
         that discretion in favour of making a mandatory order for return.
         vi)  In  addition  to  these  procedural  matters,  the  deportee's
         continuing absence from the UK may be a breach of article 8 in  the
         sense that he is deprived from being with his family, and they from
         being with him, pending the outcome of the appeal. Generally,  such
         a breach will not be irremediable. However,  in  addition  to  that
         being a potential substantive breach of article 8, it may result in
         his article 8 claim in the deportation case being undermined  on  a
         continuing basis, which may be a factor of some  importance.  These
         matters too may be relevant to the assessment of whether to make  a
         mandatory order for the deportee's return.
         vii) There is a public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals  -
         and in not returning foreign criminals who  have  been  deported  -
         although that may be a point of little weight  where  the  relevant
         individual would have had the right to remain in the UK during  the
         course of his appeal but for an (unlawful)  certificate.  There  is
         also a public interest  in  public  money  not  being  expended  on
         arranging for returning a deportee to this country  to  conduct  an
         appeal which could adequately and fairly be conducted from abroad."


43. Ms Naik submits that it is clear,  and  certainly  arguable,  that  the
    applicant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal will not be effective
    or fair. In support of this contention she places substantial  reliance
    on the evidence contained within the witness statements  drawn  by  the
    applicant and Ms Ali, referred to above.


44. Having considered the entirety of the assembled evidence for ourselves,
    we find that it cannot be said that such evidence, even arguably, leads
    to a  conclusion  that  the  appeal  process  would,  in  the  specific
    circumstances of this case, be such so as to breach the rights afforded
    by the procedural aspects of Article 8 ECHR or the common law  duty  of
    procedural fairness.


45. The applicant  has  instructed  legal  representatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has the benefit of public  funding,  both  in  the  instant
    proceedings and, more importantly, in the proceedings before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The witness statement from Ms Ali identifies that  there
    is  a  need  to  pre-arrange  a  convenient  time  for  the  taking  of
    instructions from the applicant by telephone, as a consequence  of  the
    time difference between Jamaica and the United Kingdom. The  solicitors
    must also remove restrictions on their telephony  system  in  order  to
    make such calls. It  is  asserted  that  it  is  unreasonable  for  the
    solicitor's firm to bear the significant cost of  these  calls  to  the
    applicant.  There is also difficulty in  contacting  the  applicant  by
    email, although procedures have been put  in  place  with  one  of  the
    applicant's relatives that allow for a response within 2-3 days. Whilst
    this evidence shows a degree of inconvenience it does not in  our  view
    show any impediment or obstruction to the applicant receiving effective
    legal advice and assistance.

46. Ms Naik further submitted that significant weight should be  attributed
    to the fact that the applicant and JH  have  now  separated,  asserting
    that in such circumstances the SSHD could not  rely  upon  the  counter
    argument that the applicant's interests will, to some extent, be looked
    after by his family members in the United Kingdom - for example, by the
    provision of information necessary to the assembly of the  professional
    evidence to be produced to  the  Tribunal.  The  difficulty  with  this
    submission is the absence of evidence before us supporting the  claimed
    lack of willingness by JH to assist in the assembling,  or  production,
    of such evidence. There is nothing to  indicate  that  the  applicant's
    solicitors have even written to JH inviting her, for example,  to  give
    her consent to an independent social worker engaging with her  and  her
    children, or inviting her to produce witness evidence in support of the
    applicant's appeal.


47. Lack of supporting evidence also pervades other aspects  of  Ms  Naik's
    submissions. There is no evidence  of  attempts  having  been  made  to
    obtain  relevant  information  from  the  probation  officer  who   was
    supervising the applicant prior to his removal, nor is  there  evidence
    from an independent probation officer as to  the  consequences  of  the
    applicant currently being outside the UK. In  this  latter  regard,  we
    have taken account of the evidence provided in 2015  by  Dr  Basu.  His
    report, which was  considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss, was a non-case specific description of  the  shortcomings  in
    preparing psychiatric evidence without face-to-face  contact  with  the
    person concerned. Dr Basu's report therefore does  not  relate  to  the
    instant applicant's circumstances. Assuming there is a genuine need for
    a psychiatric report on the applicant for  Article  8  purposes,  again
    there is no evidence before us as to the impact on  the  production  of
    such evidence of the applicant being  abroad,  nor  is  there  evidence
    relating to the possibility of  such  a  report  being  prepared  by  a
    professional witness based in Jamaica.

48. The applicant  wishes  to  provide  oral  evidence  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. We have little doubt that to do so would benefit his case. It
    is proposed that such evidence be  given  via  video-link.  Whilst  the
    evidence before us shows the unsatisfactory nature of the video-link at
    the case management hearing, that is not the last word on the  subject.
    There is cause for cautious optimism that between now and the  date  of
    the applicant's hearing - which is currently  listed  in  June  2018  -
    arrangements can be made which will provide  an  'effective'  means  of
    providing oral evidence. Those arrangements can  be  expected  to  take
    account of the difficulties  that  arose  during  the  case  management
    hearing.

49. Despite what we say above in relation to the lack of merit in grounds 1
    and 2, we do not propose  to  dispose  of  those  grounds  by  refusing
    permission to bring judicial review proceedings but, instead,  we  stay
    the application made on those grounds until  after  the  applicant  has
    exhausted his  appeal  rights  to  the  Tribunal.  As  Hickinbottom  LJ
    recognised in Nixon, staying the judicial  review  proceedings  ensures
    that the position can be promptly revisited if it transpires  that  an-
    out-of-country appeal will in fact be incompatible with the  procedural
    aspects of Article 8.


50. Although we recognise that there will  be  cases  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal in its judicial review capacity will be required to  determine
    the issue of whether an appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    section 94B case will be Article 8-compliant, without  waiting  to  see
    how matters unfold in the First-tier Tribunal, the present case  cannot
    be said at this point to be one of them.


51. The First-tier Tribunal is under a  duty  to  ensure  that  the  appeal
    process complies with the procedural rights afforded by Article 8  ECHR
    and the common law duty of fairness. It has specialist  judges  with  a
    wealth of contextualised experience and  understanding,  who  now  also
    have the benefit of the judgments in Kiarie and Byndloss, the  judgment
    of Hickinbottom LJ in Nixon and the guidance of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AJ.

52. The First-tier Tribunal can  be  expected  to  apply  the  step-by-step
    approach identified in Kiarie and Byndloss , synthesised in AJ.  If  it
    is concluded that an appeal cannot be 'effective' unless the  appellant
    is returned to the United  Kingdom,  then  the  proceedings  should  be
    stayed with written reasons explaining why such  a  decision  has  been
    reached. An appellant can waive his procedural rights; however,  before
    the First-tier Tribunal accepts this to be the case it  must  be  clear
    both as to the appellant's intentions and understanding of consequences
    of such a waiver. This, of course, has  its  own  difficulties  if  the
    applicant is abroad and is not legally represented.

53. If the First-tier Tribunal stays  the  appeal  proceedings  because  it
    concludes that they cannot progress save in a manner which breaches the
    procedural rights safeguarded by Article 8, then we anticipate that the
    SSHD will take the necessary action to rectify this position, promptly.
    If she does not, then  an  application  for  judicial  review  will  be
    appropriate at this stage. In the instant  case,  if  the  position  is
    reached whereby the  First-tier  Tribunal  concludes  that  the  appeal
    before it cannot be effective without the applicant being brought  back
    to the United Kingdom, the applicant is at liberty to apply to lift the
    stay in place in the instant proceedings.

54. If the First-tier Tribunal concludes that the appeal process is Article
    8 compliant, that renders grounds 1 and 2 in  the  instant  proceedings
    academic. Should the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion in this regard be
    in error, it would be open to the applicant to  seek  rectification  of
    this error by  appealing  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  final
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal disposing  of  the  appeal,  should
    that decision be adverse to the appellant, as occurred in AJ.


55. In our view, the First-tier Tribunal will  generally  be  in  a  better
    position to determine any factual dispute that may arise in relation to
    compliance with the procedural requirements of Article 8. If necessary,
    it could arrange a hearing at which evidence going to this issue  could
    be tested. It has long been acknowledged that although such  a  process
    can be accommodated in an application for judicial review,  it  is  not
    the forum best suited to such an approach

56. Furthermore, the circumstances underpinning an  assessment  of  whether
    the appeal process is effective  will  inevitably  be  the  subject  of
    change during the course of the proceedings. There may come a point  in
    time when the assembled evidence is such that an analysis thereof shows
    that an appeal will not be effective. However, those circumstances  may
    change. An obvious example of  this  is  where  there  is  a  technical
    difficulty  on  a  particular  occasion  which  prevents  an  appellant
    providing evidence by video-link, in a  case  where  such  evidence  is
    crucial, but it is immediately recognised what went wrong and that  the
    fault can be corrected. This fluidity can be more readily  accommodated
    by the First-tier Tribunal during the appeals process, rather  than  by
    the Upper Tribunal exercising  its  judicial  review  jurisdiction.  We
    would emphasise that we  are  not  sanctioning  a  protracted  process,
    during which the appellant remains  outside  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    First-tier Tribunal will be under a duty to  continue  to  monitor  the
    position, in order to ensure that the right to a fair  hearing  is  not
    abrogated.


57. We invited the parties' submissions at  the  hearing  on  the  proposed
    course of staying the challenge to the SSHD's decisions. Mr Kovats  was
    content with this approach but identified the SSHD's  preferred  course
    to be a refusal of permission.  Ms Naik strongly opposed such a course,
    drawing support from the following paragraph of Lord Wilson's  judgment
    in Kiarie and Byndloss:


         "65. ... Before this court the Home Secretary does not continue  to
         contend for the suitability of a  summons  under  rule  15(1).  She
         nevertheless suggests that the tribunal could, by direction, stress
         the desirability of the appellant's attendance before it and  that,
         were she thereupon  to  fail  to  facilitate  his  attendance,  the
         appellant could seek  judicial  review  of  the  certificate  under
         section 94B and, if  successful,  a  consequential  order  for  his
         return at least pending the appeal. But whether the tribunal could,
         or if so would, give such a direction in the teeth of a  subsisting
         certificate is  doubtful;  and  in  any  event  it  seems  entirely
         impractical  for  an  appellant  abroad  to  apply  first  for  the
         unenforceable direction and then for judicial review of any failure
         to comply with it."

58. With respect to Ms Naik's submissions, they fail to take cognisance  of
    the context within which Lord  Wilson's  observations  were  made.  The
    applicants in Kiarie and  Byndloss  were  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    seeking to challenge the section 94B  certification.  A  case  specific
    assessment by the First-tier  Tribunal  of  the  effectiveness  of  the
    appeal proceedings could not take place unless the applicants had  been
    removed and had subsequently brought an appeal. It is in  this  context
    that Lord Wilson made his observations. In the instant case a challenge
    to such certification has already been unsuccessful and  the  applicant
    has been removed. The appeal proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal
    are ongoing and, consequently, the duties and responsibilities on it to
    ensure the  proceedings  are  fair  and  effective  have  already  been
    engaged.


59. A further advantage in the approach we have taken in this case  is  its
    consistency with the approach recently taken by the Court of Appeal  in
    Nixon. Having first refused an application for interim  relief  in  the
    form of a mandatory order for the return of the appellant to the United
    Kingdom, Hickinbottom LJ  stayed  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal on certain of the grounds, for the following reasons:

         "86. Mr Nixon's appeal  is  due  to  be  heard  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on 6 March 2018. Although the Secretary of State  has  not
         submitted all of the evidence that she would wish to rely  upon  if
         she were required to prove the effectiveness of  an  out-of-country
         appeal in Mr Nixon's case,  Miss  Giovannetti  has  put  forward  a
         compelling case for there being some optimism and  confidence  that
         the steps that the Secretary of State is  taking  (e.g.  to  ensure
         appropriate video-link facilities are available to enable Mr  Nixon
         to give evidence from Jamaica) will be  sufficient  to  render  the
         appeal effective for the purposes of article 8. Indeed, Mr  Bedford
         frankly and with good grace accepts that they may do so; but he  is
         sceptical that, in the event, they will. In the  circumstances,  he
         urges me to grant permission  to  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
         Phillips J to refuse permission to proceed with the judicial review
         challenge to the section 94A  certification  -  or,  as  perhaps  a
         better  alternative,  to  grant  permission  to  proceed  with  the
         judicial review, and remit the matter to the  Administrative  Court
         for it to consider, on the basis  of  evidence  from  both  parties
         (including the Secretary of State as to  the  facilities  that  are
         generally  available  in  Jamaica  for  video-link  hearings  etc),
         whether an out-of-country appeal would be effective in  Mr  Nixon's
         case.
      1.  However, in the circumstances, I do not consider that it would  be
         sensible or appropriate to grant permission to appeal or permission
         to proceed with the judicial review of the certificate now.  In  my
         view, the clearly better course is to grant permission for Mr Nixon
         to re-amend his grounds to in the terms of Grounds 2 and 3, and  to
         stay the application for permission to appeal in respect  of  those
         grounds until after  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  determined  Mr
         Nixon's appeal and any appeal  from  that  determination  has  been
         dealt with. The First-tier  Tribunal  is,  in  my  view,  the  more
         experienced and appropriate forum for the determination of  factual
         issues such as those that arise in this case, notably the nature of
         the relationship between Mr Nixon, and his  wife  and  son.  It  is
         inherently better for that issue to be considered on the  basis  of
         the facilities that are in fact made available for  this  case,  as
         opposed  to  the  Administrative  Court  conducting  the   exercise
         hypothetically, on the basis of general evidence  provided  by  the
         Secretary of State. As I have indicated, there is reason  for  some
         confidence that the First-tier Tribunal will be in  a  position  to
         conduct an  effective  appeal.  Without  falling  into  the  heresy
         identified by the Supreme Court  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss,  it  is
         nevertheless worthy of note that the tribunal  will  of  course  be
         under an obligation to ensure the appeal is effective, and will  no
         doubt take appropriate steps to ensure that it is so.
      1.  If the appeal is effective  to  protect  the  relevant  article  8
         rights, then there will be no substance left in this appeal. In the
         event that the appeal  is  not  conducted  so  as  to  protect  the
         relevant article 8 rights effectively - or if  Mr  Nixon  considers
         that to be the case - then he will be able to return to this  court
         and press for permission to appeal or permission  to  proceed  with
         the judicial review. By that stage,  the  cases  to  which  I  have
         referred in paragraph 19 above, that have been set up for the First-
         tier Tribunal to deal with out-of-country appeals using  video-link
         facilities etc, will also have been determined. This court can then
         consider permission to appeal, if indeed matters requiring  further
         consideration by this court remain."


60. In relation to the second appellant (Mr Tracey) the Court dismissed the
    application for permission to appeal, the  difference  in  approach  to
    that taken in Mr Nixon's case being explained by the fact that,  unlike
    Mr Nixon, Mr Tracey had not lodged an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the refusal of his human  rights  claim,  the  possibility  for
    which had been open to him since the date of  his  departure  from  the
    United Kingdom.


61. For the reasons identified above, we stay consideration  of  grounds  1
    and 2.

Grounds 3 and 4

62. By grounds 3 and 4 the applicant brings challenge to decisions made  by
    the SSHD regarding the substantive rights safeguarded by Article 8.


63. The reality is that the submissions set out in ground 3 add nothing  to
    the  overarching  contention  that  the  applicant's,  and  his  family
    members', Article 8  substantive  rights  would  be  disproportionately
    infringed by his continued presence outside the United Kingdom  pending
    the resolution of his appeal. If the Applicant makes out  his  case  in
    isolation on ground 3, then the best he could hope to achieve would  be
    the quashing of the  SSHD's  decisions  to  maintain  the  section  94B
    certification and to refuse to return him to the United  Kingdom.  That
    would still leave the  section  94B  certification  in  place  and  the
    applicant  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom,  albeit  the  SSHD  would
    inevitably be required to reconsider such matters on a lawful basis. By
    ground  4,  the  applicant  seeks  resolution  in  his  favour  of  the
    underlying  human  rights  issue,  something  the  Upper  Tribunal   is
    specifically tasked with adjudicating upon in these  proceedings  (see,
    for example, R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v SSHD [2015] AC 945).

64. For this reason, we do not intend to devote any further judicial ink to
    the task of resolving the matters pleaded  within  ground  3,  save  to
    observe that both the applicant's letter of 12 December 2017  and  that
    of 27 December 2017 focus on the procedural aspects of  Article  8.  If
    there were  any  submissions  made  therein  aimed  at  seeking  a  re-
    evaluation of the section 94B certification by the SSHD on  substantive
    article 8 grounds, they are difficult to  identify.  Whilst  we  accept
    that the attachments to  those  letters  contain  evidence  capable  of
    infringing on a consideration of the substantive Article 8 issue,  this
    evidence was not emphasised in the application letters themselves.


65. Turning then to ground 4, as we have alluded to above the lawfulness of
    the original imposition of the section 94B  certificate  has  been  the
    subject of a judicial decision already - permission to  bring  judicial
    review proceedings being refused on the papers by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins and, on 22 June 2016 after an hearing, by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Blum in the terms  set  out  at  paragraph  12  above.  We  accept  the
    relevance of Judge Blum's  decision  having  been  made  prior  to  the
    Supreme Court's judgment in Kiarie and Byndloss, and thus the judge was
    guided by the Court of Appeal's statement of the law. In particular, we
    observe that the Supreme Court took issue with the  Court  of  Appeal's
    analysis of the nature and strength of the public interest that  is  in
    play in a case such as the instant one. We have applied the law as  the
    Supreme Court pronounced it to be.

66. The applicant has now been living outside of the United Kingdom for  18
    months.  For  reasons  that  are  obvious,  he  is   currently   in   a
    significantly better position to demonstrate the effects of his removal
    from the United Kingdom on his children and JH, than he  was  prior  to
    his removal at which time the effects of his absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom could only be asserted on a hypothetical and speculative basis.
    His second child, indeed, had not  even  been  born.  That  is  not  so
    anymore. The applicant now has the  benefit  of  being  able  to  bring
    forward evidence of the actual consequences of his removal as they have
    evolved in the past 18 months, and  assert  with  some  confidence  how
    those  consequences  will  further  manifest  themselves   during   his
    continued absence  from  the  United  Kingdom,  whilst  he  awaits  the
    exhaustion of the appeal process.

67. In these circumstances what is startling is the  poor  quality  of  the
    evidence before us going to this issue. There is no  dispute  that  the
    applicant's removal and his continued exclusion from the United Kingdom
    are an interference with his family life, and  that  such  interference
    engages Article  8.  The  issue  of  substance  before  us  is  one  of
    proportionality. The applicant's witness statement provides some detail
    of the nature of his current relationship with  his  children  and  JH,
    which is inevitably restricted given that the applicant  is  living  in
    Jamaica and his family are in the United Kingdom. We have no hesitation
    in accepting that the applicant is distressed by the current  state  of
    affairs. We also accept that it is likely to be in the  best  interests
    of all of the applicant's children that he lives in the United  Kingdom
    whilst his appeal is being determined, a matter  that  we  treat  as  a
    primary consideration. There is, though, no  evidence  as  to  how  the
    separation is currently affecting the children and, in  particular,  no
    evidence that either of the children is suffering particular harm as  a
    consequence of the applicant's absence, or that they would suffer  such
    harm during the period of  his  continued  absence  whilst  the  appeal
    process is ongoing.


68.  Having  balanced   the   applicant's   (and   his   family   members')
    circumstances, insofar as they are disclosed by the evidence before us,
    against the public interest in his exclusion for the  duration  of  the
    appeal process, we have no hesitation in  concluding  that  it  is  not
    arguable that such exclusion would be a  disproportionate  interference
    with the applicant's substantive Article 8 rights or the rights of  his
    family members.


69. Once again, however, we do not propose to dispose  of  this  ground  by
    refusing permission. This is not, as was the case for grounds 1 and  2,
    because it is more appropriate for the First-tier Tribunal to determine
    this issue. The First-tier Tribunal is  not  seized  of  the  issue  of
    whether  the  applicant's  absence  for  the  duration  of  the  appeal
    proceedings infringes the substantive rights protected  by  article  8.
    Rather, we see sense in taking this practical approach in circumstances
    in which we have already stayed the proceedings relating the procedural
    aspects of Article 8.


Challenge to the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


70. Given what we say above, the challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision refusing to stay the appeal proceedings pending the resolution
    of this application for judicial  review  is  plainly  not  capable  of
    success and we refuse permission in relation to it (ground 5).

Order

1.    The applicant's application for permission to  bring  judicial  review
    proceedings challenging the SSHD's decisions  maintaining  the  section
    94B certification and refusing to return the applicant  to  the  United
    Kingdom prior to the disposal of his appeal, is stayed.

2.     If  the  applicant  wishes  to  proceed   with   the   aforementioned
    application then he shall, within 21 days of the  ultimate  outcome  of
    his appeal to the tribunal, file an application  to  remove  the  stay,
    together with any proposed  amended  grounds  of  application  and  any
    further evidence upon which he wishes to rely. The SSHD  shall  respond
    to such application within 21 days. The matter will then be referred to
    the  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  consideration  and   any
    directions.

3.    The applicant's application for permission to  bring  judicial  review
    proceedings  challenging  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    refusing to stay the appeal proceedings before it, is refused.

4.    Liberty to Apply



Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor



Date: 31 March 2018
