

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Nkrumah (OFM - annulment of residence permit) Ghana [2011] UKUT 00163 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  25 February 2011                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       THE PRESIDENT MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McGEACHY


                                   Between

                             BRIGHT KOFI NKRUMAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     N O'Brien instructed by Josepth Thaliyan and Co
For the Respondent:    Lawrence Tarlow Senior HOPO


   1. Where a residence card has been issued in a passport on an application
      duly made it becomes a valid document if it  has  not  been  cancelled
      before it is communicated to the applicant.
   2. An application for a residence card cannot be lawfully refused it  has
      already been issued.
   3. A residence card may be revoked if it is  shown  that  was  issued  by
      mistake to someone not entitled to it.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is a national of Ghana born in 1970. He has  a  sister
      who was  born  in  Ghana  in  1966  but  is  now  a  national  of  the
      Netherlands.  The sister came to the United Kingdom in July  2003  and
      has been living in accommodation in Reading with the appellant. She is
      in employment. The appellant has studied here and says that his sister
      has supported him in this country and  continues  to  do  so  and  has
      previously sent remittances to his parents in Ghana and  that  he  was
      supported from  those  remittances   before  he  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom.


   2.   In 2008 the  appellant  applied  to  the  Home  Office  for  an  EEA
      residence card as a member of his sister's extended family within  the
      meaning of regulation 8(2) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006
      (the Regulations).

   3.   On the 21 October 2009 a residence card valid for five  years  until
      October 2014 was stamped in the appellant's passport. The passport was
      retained in the Home Office until December 2009 when it  was  sent  to
      the appellant with a letter stating that the application  was  refused
      and affording a right of appeal.

   4.    The appellant appealed the decision to refuse the residence permit,
      even though he had a residence permit that had not been  cancelled  or
      revoked in his passport. The IJ was  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence
      presented that the appellant was entitled to  a  residence  card.  The
      appeal was dismissed.

   5.    Before us, the submissions have focused on a short  point:  is  the
      residence card stamped in the passport a valid card unless or until it
      is revoked?

   6.    Mr Tarlow submitted that the grant of  a  residence  permit  was  a
      mistake; the mistake in this  case  must  have  been  obvious  to  the
      appellant who would have known that residence card  had  not  in  fact
      been granted because of the accompanying letter. Accordingly it  could
      not be said that there was a valid residence card  and  the  operative
      decision was the refusal.

   7.   We do not agree. The position was confusing but this was not a  case
      of two letters simultaneously issued and contradicting  themselves  as
      to whether a card would or would not be granted. Here a residence card
      was unambiguously stamped in the passport. The grant  of  a  residence
      card in extended family cases  is  a  matter  of  discretion  for  the
      Secretary of State.  By analogy with cases of leave to remain, where a
      residence card is issued, it takes effect  when  communicated  to  the
      applicant: see Rafiq v SSHD [1998] INLR 349 at 355 and  discussion  in
      McDonald Immigration Law and Practice (Eight  Edition)  at  4.31.  The
      fact that it may have been granted by  mistake  does  not  make  it  a
      nullity.  There  is  no   suggestion   that   it   was   obtained   by
      misrepresentation.

   8.    It would be possible to annul a residence card issued by mistake up
      to the moment when it is communicated.  It is clear that the residence
      card was stamped in the passport some two months before  the  date  of
      the refusal letter. If  that  was  an  administrative  error  and  the
      intention was to refuse  the  application,  in  our  judgment  it  was
      necessary  for  the  Home  Office  to  cancel  the   document   before
      communicating the refusal.

   9.    Once residence card has been issued  it  retains  its  validity  as
      authority to remain unless or until it expires, lapses  by  reason  of
      prolonged absence or is revoked under regulation 20. The Tribunal  has
      considered the circumstances when a residence card may be  revoked  in
      the case of Samsam v Secretary of State [2011] UKUT 00165 IAC heard on
      the same day as this appeal.

  10.  Accordingly we find that the failure of the IJ to  recognise  that  a
      residence card  had  been  validly  issued  and  communicated  to  the
      appellant was a material error of law. We set aside  the  decision  to
      dismiss the appeal and we remake it.

  11. The consequence of our conclusion on the  validity  of  the  residence
      card is that the refusal of the application was not in accordance with
      the law. In our judgment it is unlawful to refuse an application  that
      has already been granted without  first  cancelling  or  revoking  it.
      Cancellation without communication would have been effective to  annul
      the grant but this did not happen.

  12.  It is still open to the Secretary of State  to  cancel  Mr  Nkrumah's
      residence card if minded to do so. The previous grant of the residence
      card does not prevent revocation on the basis of a  demonstrated  lack
      of entitlement. Although the case law on other family  members  (OFMs)
      has given rise to some difficulty (see MR and ors (EEA extended family
      members) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 (IAC)), the jurisprudence of  this
      Tribunal establishes that pre-entry dependency is necessary  before  a
      person can qualify for the favourable  exercise  of  discretion  under
      regulation 8: see VN (Macedonia) [2010] UKUT  380  IAC  and  RK  (OFM-
      membership of a household-dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421.

  13. Dependency means financial support needed  to  meet  essential  living
      requirements: see SM  (India)  v  ECO  Mumbai  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1426
      applying the case of Lebon [1987]  ECR  2811.  If  the  evidence  does
      establish pre-entry dependency the appellant may qualify for the grant
      of the card if can  show  either  continued  dependency  or  continued
      membership of his sister's household.

  14.  For these reasons we remake the decision by:
        a. declaring that Mr Nkrumah is currently the holder of a residence
           card valid until  October 2014.
        b. setting aside the refusal of the residence card application.

             This appeal is allowed.



                               Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal





