

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 SL (Certificate of entitlement - holds a passport) Malaysia [2010] UKUT 164
                                                                       (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 4 May 2010                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                         Mr Justice Blake, President
                       Senior Immigration Judge Eshun


                                   Between

                                     SL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


For  the  purposes  of  the   regulations   relating   to   certificate   of
entitlements, a person who has  lost  a  passport  and  cannot  retrieve  or
produce it does not "hold" a passport.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a child born in the United Kingdom on 2  March  2006.
      On 10 October 2006 she was issued with a five year passport by the  UK
      Passport Agency describing her as a British citizen.  It seems that at
      the time of her birth her parents were settled in the United  Kingdom;
      her mother may herself be a British citizen but her father  remains  a
      citizen of Malaysia.  The appellant  herself  is  also  a  citizen  of
      Malaysia.   On 5  February  2008  she  was  issued  with  a  Malaysian
      passport valid for 5 years.


   2. On 11 July 2009 the  appellant's  father  reported  the  loss  of  the
      appellant's passport on a website called "www.virtualbumblebee.co.uk".
       The printout supplied of that report indicates that the passport  was
      lost when it was taken to a  photocopying  shop  in  Farnham,  Surrey.
      Details of  the  unique  reference  number  are  recorded.   From  the
      printout provided at the hearing it appears  that  the  website  is  a
      speedy way of identifying whether lost property has been recovered  by
      anyone and if it has not  a  speedy  way  of  reporting  its  loss  by
      selecting a police station to whom the loss can be reported.   Further
      investigation of the web site reveals the additional information  that
      it was developed by the Surrey police as a  means  of  reporting  lost
      property to the police. Reporting  property  stolen  requires  further
      formalities.

   3. On 16 July 2009 that is to say some five days  after  the  appellant's
      passport was reported lost,  the  appellant's  father  applied  for  a
      certificate of entitlement.  Under s. 3(9) of the Immigration Act 1971
      (as amended) a certificate of entitlement is one of the five means  by
      which a person seeking to enter the United  Kingdom  and  claiming  to
      have the right of abode there may prove it.  Under  s.  10(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  the
      Secretary of State may make provision by regulation for the issue of a
      certificate of entitlement.

   4. On 21 December 2006 the Immigration  (Certificate  of  Entitlement  to
      Right of Abode in the United Kingdom) Regulations 2006 (SI  2006/3145)
      came into force.  Regulation 6 provides as follows:

         "The certificate of entitlement  will  only  be  issued  where  the
         appropriate authority is satisfied that the applicant -


                a) has the right  of  abode  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
               Section 21 of the 1971          Act;
               b) is not a person who holds:
                   i) A United Kingdom passport describing him as a  British
                 citizen..."


   5. On 28 July 2009 the Home Office UKBA wrote to the  appellant  and  her
      father stating that on the evidence provided the application had  been
      refused. It pointed out that the Regulations had come into force on 21
      December 2006 and concluded:


          "As your daughter has a current  British  passport  issued  on  10
           October  2006  at  Peterborough  you  are   ineligible   for   a
           certificate of  entitlement  to  right  of  abode.   You  should
           produce your British passport/ID card as evidence of  you  right
           of abode."


   6.  On 10 August 2009 the appellant appealed this  decision  through  her
      father pointing out that her  UK  passport  had  been  lost  and  been
      reported lost prior  to  the  submission  of  the  application  for  a
      certificate of entitlement and, as she did not intend to reapply for a
      UK passport, she would not be able to prove her right of abode by  the
      production  of  such  a  passport.   The  appeal  was   heard   before
      Immigration Judge Bailey on the papers and promulgated on 30  December
      2009.


   7. At paragraph 5 of his decision  he  said  he  found  the  Respondent's
      refusal letter confusing and continued:-

           "I construe the refusal letter  as  being  a  rejection  of  the
           application in the absence of  a  passport  from  the  appellant
           describing her  as  a  British  citizen.   The  regulations  are
           unforgiving and do not make provision  for  passport  data  from
           other sources as being adequate.


           My interpretation of the situation is supported by  the  grounds
           of appeal in which the  appellant's  father  confirms  that  the
           appellant's UK  passport  has  been  lost.   That  assertion  is
           supported by a lost property confirmation in  which  the  father
           apparently reported the loss of his  daughter's  passport.   The
           appellant's father makes a somewhat strident view in his grounds
           for appeal or by stating that there is no intention  to  reapply
           for a UK passport for the appellant until she is eighteen  years
           of age.  I conclude in the absence of the passport the appellant
           cannot satisfy the requirements for a certificate of entitlement
           set out in the refusal letter and therefore the application  for
           certificate was refused by the Respondent in accordance with the
           law and this appeal must fail."

   8. Reconsideration of this  decision  was  granted  on  19  January  2010
      following grounds of appeal asserting that the  appellant  did  comply
      with the Regulations because her previous British passport  was  lost.
      For the reasons that follow we find a material error of law, will  set
      aside the decision and remake it on the evidence before us.


   9. In our judgment the IJ has misunderstood the issue in question and has
      focused his attention on the  wrong  part  of  the  Regulations.   The
      application was not  refused  because  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      provide a British passport but because she  had  already  been  issued
      with one.  The application form reveals that the appellant's Malaysian
      passport had been submitted and that was a sufficient compliance  with
      reg 4(a) of the 2006 Regulations, which the IJ may have  had  in  mind
      when making the comments he did.  What should have been the  focus  of
      the decision is whether on the facts of the case the appellant held  a
      British passport at the time of the refusal.

  10. Mr Parkinson for the Home Office submitted first  that  the  appellant
      held a passport because it had been issued to her.  Alternatively,  if
      the mere fact of issue was not enough to constitute holding it at  the
      material time, the evidence that the passport had been  lost  was  not
      satisfactory.

  11. As to the first submission, the ordinary meaning of the word 'hold' is
      to have possession or control of something.  The fact that one may  be
      entitled to a document is, in our judgment, plainly not sufficient  to
      result in the conclusion that a person so entitled already  holds  it.
      We conclude that there is no material difference in principle  between
      not applying for the passport that one was entitled to  in  the  first
      place, and not applying  for  a  replacement  passport  where  such  a
      passport has been lost.  In neither case can a passport be produced on
      demand to the Immigration  Officer  and  therefore  a  person  in  the
      appellant's position is incapable of proving the right of abode  by  a
      document other than a certificate of entitlement.

  12. There is no obligation on a dual  national  to  apply  for  a  British
      passport if travel can be  conducted  on  another  passport.   Equally
      there is no obligation  to  apply  for  an  identity  card  under  the
      Identity Cards Act 2006, which is another mode of proof,  the  wording
      of which would prevent issue of a certificate of entitlement under reg
      6 (b).

  13. We see no reason within  the  statutory  context  of  the  purpose  of
      certificates of entitlement, or the construction of  regulations  made
      under s. 10 of the 2002 Act, to  conclude  that  "hold"  has  anything
      other than its ordinary meaning. If it was  intended  to  confine  the
      issue of a certificate of entitlement merely to Commonwealth nationals
      with the right of abode this could be stated.

  14. Accordingly we conclude that a person who is not in  possession  of  a
      passport does not hold it.  On well established  principles  a  person
      may be in possession of a document,  even if it is not immediately  to
      hand, if he or she has control of it, but a  person  who  has  lost  a
      document and cannot retrieve it or produce it cannot said to hold what
      they do not have.


  15. We therefore reject Mr Parkinson's first submission and  turn  to  his
      second one.  In our judgment  no  point  was  taken  in  the  original
      refusal letter that it was not accepted as a matter of fact  that  the
      British passport had been lost in the manner set out in  the  internet
      report. There has been no indication hitherto before  the  hearing  of
      this appeal that the point was to be taken.  This is an  appeal  which
      was determined at first instance on the  papers  and  the  appellant's
      father relies on his written grounds and has not  appeared  before  us
      today.  It would be wrong to take a new point against him without  any
      notice.


  16. Moreover, from the passages cited from the IJ's decision it appears he
      accepted that the passport had  been  lost  and  that  was  a  finding
      reasonably open to him and one that we would not disturb without  good
      reason.  No good reason has been provided to us. There is no right  of
      appeal on points of pure fact.

  17.  Finally, since internet sites are publicly available we observe  that
      if the Respondent had been more curious about  the  virtual  bumblebee
      website he could have ascertained (as we have) that this was a website
      that Surrey police had promoted as a means of reporting lost property.
       We therefore consider that to adjourn this appeal simply  to  require
      the appellant's father to confirm that he reported  the  loss  to  the
      police would serve no useful purpose.

  18. In these circumstances, we conclude that the Respondent's decision was
      not in accordance with the law because it ignored the  fact  that  the
      appellant no longer held the passport that had previously been  issued
      to her.  No other reason exists as to why she  should  not  be  issued
      with a certificate of entitlement.  Contrary to the IJ's  findings  it
      was not disputed that she was eligible for it by reason of having  the
      right of abode.  She  satisfied  that  requirement  when  her  British
      passport had been issued in 2006 and there had been no material change
      of circumstances.

  19. We therefore allow this appeal and  direct  that  the  certificate  of
      entitlement be issued.



Signed











Mr Justice Blake

President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber








