
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ogunyemi (imprisonment breaks continuity of residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
00164 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March 2011                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR  JUSTICE SILBER
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                           SUNDAY ADEOLA OGUNYEMI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr  A Alabt of Peniel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr  K Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer


Time spent in prison however short is to be disregarded in  the  calculation
of the period required to obtain a permanent right  of  residence  with  the
consequence that that period has to start again on release.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision of Immigration Judge Neuberger promulgated on 15 December 2010
    by which he allowed  an  appeal  by  Mr  Sunday  Adeola  Ognyemi  ("the
    respondent") against the decision of the Secretary of State  issued  on
    22 September 2010. By that decision, the Secretary of State had refused
    to grant the respondent a residence card as confirmation of a permanent
    right  to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  requirements  of
    Regulation  15(1)(f)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ( "the Regulations").  The issue raised on this appeal
    is whether the time spent by the respondent in prison  for  a  criminal
    offence breaks "a  continuous  period  of  five  years"  which  is  the
    qualifying period for obtaining the  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom permanently under Regulation 15(1)(f) of the  Regulations.   We
    should also add that we are not concerned with any other issue such  as
    whether the respondent can be or should be deported because that is not
    a matter which is before us.

2.    Before  considering  submissions  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the
    statutory provisions. Regulation 15 which is the  significant  one  has
    the heading "Permanent right of residence". The  relevant  part  of  it
    states that:


         "(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
             United Kingdom permanently.


             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period
                  of five years
             ...


                  (f)  a person who


                      (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                           with these Regulations for a continuous period of
                           five years; and


                      (ii)     was, at the end of  that  period,  a  family
                           member who  has retained his right of residence."

     The Immigration  Judge  explained  that  the  respondent  was  born  in
    Nigeria and had entered the United Kingdom without leave  in  the  year
    2000.  He married a Dutch EEA national in September  2002  and  he  was
    granted permission to stay as a family member.  The marriage lasted for
    seven and a half years and the respondent and his wife were divorced in
    January 2010.

3.   On April 2006, the respondent had  been  sentenced  to  twenty  months'
    imprisonment for  using  a  false  instrument.   On  5  March  2010  an
    application had been made on behalf of the respondent  for a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right to reside in the United  Kingdom.  He
    applied as a non-European Economic Area national former  family  member
    of his Dutch wife. He sought a retained right of residence on the basis
    of having completed five years' residency  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations. The application  was  refused  on  the
    basis that the Secretary of State stated that the  respondent  had  not
    completed five years' residence in the United Kingdom.  The Immigration
    Judge recorded that he had heard evidence from the respondent  who  had
    stated that he had started a prison sentence on 30 August 2006  and  he
    was released on 3 January 2007 having spent a period of four months and
    three days in prison.  He also had  received  credit  for  thirty  days
    remand time and police custody time.  It is accepted on behalf  of  the
    respondent that if the period of time which  the  respondent  spent  in
    custody is ignored, he would not qualify for the residence  card  under
    Regulation 15(1) (f). Thus the issue is whether any time spent  by  the
    respondent in custody does not count towards the  five-year  period  of
    residence required for the acquisition of a permanent right.


4.    Mr  Alabt,  the  solicitor  for  the  respondent,  submitted  to   the
    Immigration Judge that while the Secretary of State relied on the Court
    of Appeal judgment in HR (Portugal) v the  Secretary  of  State  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 371 the Court of Appeal in that case had  ruled  that  it  was
    only a European Economic Area national who having been  convicted of  a
    crime and who was detained for a significant period of imprisonment who
    would be deemed not to be a resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    purposes of Regulation 21(4)(a).  The Immigration Judge explained  that
    the respondent's case before him stressed the importance of the time in
    prison being "a significant period".  This was  then  developed  by  Mr
    Alabt when he appeared in  front  of  the  Immigration  Judge  when  he
    submitted that the respondent had only been in prison for  four  months
    which could hardly be described as "a significant period".  It was said
    that the similar reasoning applied under Regulation 15(1)(f)  with  the
    consequence that the fact that the respondent  had been in  prison  for
    four months did not break his continuous period  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom which was required under the Regulations.

5.   The case for the Secretary of State is that any period of  imprisonment
    irrespective of its length broke the period necessary to qualify for  a
    residence card. The Immigration  Judge  explained  his  conclusions  in
    paragraph 10 of his decision where he said:

         "I have carefully considered the evidence of the appellant and  all
         the documents on the file and have paid special  attention  to  the
         Court of Appeal  judgment in the case of  HR  (Portugal).    Having
         considered all these matters carefully, I have  concluded  that  Mr
         Ibitayo did indeed make a correct submission in that this appellant
         had not served a substantial period in prison  but  was  there  for
         merely four months. Accordingly, such a  period  spent  in  prison,
         does not break the continuity of his stay in the United Kingdom and
         it is quite clear that he is indeed entitled to permanent right  of
         residence in the United Kingdom in accordance with  the  provisions
         of Regulation 15. Accordingly, I allow the appeal."

6.   The ground of appeal of the Secretary of State is that any  time  spent
    in prison breaks the continuity of the respondent's stay in the  United
    Kingdom.  It has also been said on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that the judge misapplied  the  case  law  of  HR  (Portugal)  when  he
    concluded that the mere fact that the respondent spent only four months
    in prison did not break the continuity of stay. It  is  also  submitted
    that subsequent cases such as the case to which we will  refer  shortly
    of the Tribunal in LG  & GC v Secretary of  State  [2009]  UKAIT  00024
    [2009] Imm. A.R. 691 shows that any period in custody breaks the  chain
    for the continuity of the stay.  It is common  ground  that  the  issue
    that has to be resolved by this Chamber is whether the  time  spent  in
    custody of just over four months breaks the chain so that it cannot  be
    said that  this  appellant  had  "resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of five  years"
    as set out in Regulation 15(1) (f).

7.   It is also necessary to deal with two points which have  been  made  on
    behalf of the respondent today of which the first is the point that the
    time of four months is not a substantial period and therefore does  not
    break the chain of causation.  Second, that as the previous cases  were
    deportation cases, they are  not  relevant  to  the  interpretation  of
    Regulation 15(1) (f).

8.   The first case to be considered is HR (Portugal) v Secretary  of  State
    in which HR, a citizen of Portugal, claimed  to  have  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 1992. Although he was in  possession  of  a  national
    insurance number, there was no evidence he had worked in this  country.
    He did, however, have  a  long  serious  criminal  record  and  it  was
    contended on  his behalf that because he had been in the United Kingdom
    for ten years but much of it in prison, he could be  deported  only  on
    imperative grounds of public security. The  Court  of  Appeal  rejected
    that submission and held that the time spent by HR in prison could  not
    count for that purpose.

9.   The case itself has limited value because of the narrow basis on  which
    it proceeded. The Court of Appeal approached HR's  case  on  the  basis
    that he was a person who "has  never  worked  here  and  has  evidently
    devoted his whole life to crime" in the words of Sedley LJ at paragraph
    44.  Very importantly, counsel for HR accepted that his time in  prison
    could not count for the purpose of establishing a  right  of  permanent
    residence which had to be legal residence, which is "for the purpose of
    availing himself of the rights and freedoms conferred by  the  Treaty".
    Indeed, he accepted the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal finding that HR
    never did satisfy that condition even when not  in  prison.   The  case
    advanced on behalf of HR was the requirement of a ten year  period  was
    different since Article 28.3(a) was not expressly subject to a  similar
    requirement of lawfulness. Therefore "residence" for  the  purposes  of
    Article 28.3(a) required no more than 10 years' physical presence  even
    if a significant part of that time had been spent in custody.

10.  The next case in which this matter was considered was  LG  &  CC  which
    was heard by the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal presided over  by  the
    Senor President, Carnwath LJ.  Early in the judgment he  repeated  what
    he had previously said when the LG (Italy) case was before the Court of
    Appeal (LG (Italy) v Secretary of State [2008] EWCA Civ 190) which  was
    that:

         "14... the 2006 Regulations have  introduced  a  new  hierarchy  of
         levels of protection, based on criteria of increasing stringency.


         (1)  A general criteria that  removal  may  be  justified  'on  the
             grounds of public policy, pubic security or public  health';


         (2)  A more specific criterion, applicable to those with  permanent
             rights of residence, that they may not be removed  'except  on
             serious grounds of public policy, or public security';

         (3)  The most stringent condition applicable to a person  'who  has
             resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  at
             least ten years prior to the relevant decision' who may not be
             removed except on 'imperative grounds of public policy'."

     Carnwath LJ pointed  out  that  the  Regulation  provided  no  further
    guidance on the meaning of those words.

11.  The Tribunal proceeded to consider  cases  such  as  HR  (Portugal)  to
    which we have referred and it concluded at paragraph 69:

         "For these reasons we conclude that there is nothing in  this  line
         of cases which would justify us from departing from  the  principle
         which was conceded and formed the starting-point for  the  decision
         in HR (Portugal).  We proceed on the basis therefore that  time  in
         prison does not count towards the five  year  period  of  residence
         required for acquisition of a permanent right."

12.  It is appropriate to stress at this  stage  that  the  wording  of  the
    Tribunal showed that this principle  was  of  universal  relevance  and
    application.  It did not mean that there  would  be  a  different  rule
    where the applicant was being liable to be deported from the  situation
    where he is seeking a residence card.  The matter came before the Court
    of Appeal again in the case of Valentine Batista v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ  896,  in  which  a  Portuguese
    national who had been convicted of various crimes for which he received
    lengthy sentences sought to avoid deportation on the  basis  he  had  a
    right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom on  account  of  his
    residence. The only reasoned judgment of the Court of Appeal was  given
    by Carnwath LJ  and  who  said  at  paragraph  12  in  connection  with
    Regulation 15:

         "It is now settled law following HR (Portugal) that time  spent  in
         prison does not count towards residence for these purposes."

    Again we stress two points about this.  First, he is saying  that  this
    rule is a matter of universal application not  limited  to  deportation
    cases and second he is not adopting or providing any  support  for  the
    test put forward by the Immigration Judge  that  the  period  spent  in
    custody only did not count towards residence if it was substantial.


13. The final case in which this matter was considered  was  the  conjoined
    cases of Caesar Carvalho v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    and Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Omar  Abdullah  Omar
    [2010] EWCA Civ 1406  in  which    two  appeals  were  listed  together
    because it appeared that they raised the same issue, namely the  extent
    to which time spent in prison may count towards a qualifying period for
    permanent residence under Regulation 15(1) (a) of the Regulations.  It,
    however, became clear during the course of the hearing that in the case
    of Omar Abdullah Omar, the issue that had to be determined  was  rather
    different.  What is important though in connection  with  the  Carvalho
    case is that there was nothing said  there  which  indicated  that  its
    approach only related to deportation cases.   Maurice Kay LJ  who  gave
    the first judgment in that case explained  at  paragraph  18  that  the
    submission that had been made on behalf of Carvalho was that his  right
    to permanent residence under  Regulation  15  was  not  broken  by  his
    imprisonment. That submission was  rejected  and  after  considering  a
    number of cases in the European Union as well  as  HR  (Portugal),  the
    conclusion of  Maurice Kay LJ appears at paragraph 27  where   he  said
    that:

         "What needs to be kept in mind is that a person in the position  of
         Mr Carvalho is not being deprived  of  a  fundamental  right  as  a
         result of his imprisonment. He simply  fails  to  qualify  for  the
         enhanced protection which is given to those who  have  spent  their
         time in the host State exercising Treaty rights."

14.  Again it is worth pointing  out  there  that  what  has  been  said  by
    Maurice Kay LJ was expressed to be of general application  and  it  was
    not limited to deportation cases, especially where he was talking about
    the enhanced protection that is in fact being  given.  The  only  other
    reasoned judgment was given by  Longmore LJ who agreed and  he  made  a
    number of comments about the length of time that has  to  be  spent  in
    prison for it not to qualify.  He explained that it had been  suggested
    on behalf of Carvalho that the court should face  up  to  the  question
    whether a short term of imprisonment on the  part  of  the  EEA  worker
    during his five years means the time needed to establish the  permanent
    right had to begin anew  after  his  time  in  custody  has  concluded.
    Longmore LJ said at paragraph 47:

         "In my view HR (Portugal) does, in reality, conclude that  question
         because, once one recognises the purpose of according to a worker a
         right permanently to reside in a EU state is  that  of  encouraging
         the integration of such workers into the  population  of  the  host
         state and that such  purpose  is  not  achieved  or  achievable  in
         prison, it must follow that a worker is not legally resident in the
         host state as an EEA worker during the period of  imprisonment  and
         that any period which includes that period of  imprisonment  cannot
         be part of the necessary 'continuous' period  for  the  purpose  of
         calculating the five years' continuous legal residence necessary to
         acquire the right permanently to reside here."

15.  Stanley Burnton LJ agreed but  this  passage  shows  clearly  that  the
    approach of Immigration Judge Neuberger  was  incorrect  in  suggesting
    that the critical feature was whether or not the imprisonment was for a
    substantial period.

16.  The position therefore is that it is quite clear from the cases that  a
    person who is sentenced to imprisonment is not to be regarded as living
    continuously in this country during the period when he  is  in  custody
    and that period has to be disregarded with  the  consequence  that  the
    five year continuous period starts  afresh.  We  believe  that  if  the
    authorities to which we have referred had  been  shown  to  Immigration
    Judge Neuberger, he would have reached the same conclusion as  the  one
    at which we have arrived.

17.  For these reasons the challenge by the Secretary of State succeeds  and
    we are required to remake the decision of the  Immigration  Judge.   We
    reverse his decision.  Accordingly the appeal is allowed.





Signed                                  Date 1 April 2011



The Hon Mr Justice Silber
Sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal


