





R (on the application of SS) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
("self-serving" statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC)



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON the APPLICATION OF
                                     SS
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                               - - - - - - - -

Ms A Walker, instructed by  Jein  Solicitors,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
applicant.

Mr J Anderson, instructed by the Government Legal  Department,  appeared  on
behalf of the respondent.

(1) The expression "self-serving" is, to a large extent, a protean one.  The
expression itself tells us little or nothing. What is needed  is  a  reason,
however brief, for that designation. For example,  a  letter  written  by  a
third party to an applicant  for  international  protection  may  be  "self-
serving" because it bears the  hallmarks  of  being  written  to  order,  in
circumstances  where  the  applicant's  case  is  that  the  letter  was   a
spontaneous warning.

(2) Whilst a statement from a family member is capable of lending weight  to
a claim, the issue will be whether, looked at in the round, it  does  so  in
the particular case in question. Such a  statement  may,  for  instance,  be
incapable  of  saving  a  claim  which,  in  all   other   respects,   lacks
credibility.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT
                               (13 March 2017)

JUDGE PETER LANE:

1.    The applicant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who claims to  be  in  need  of
    international protection, challenges the respondent's  decision  of  18
    September 2015,  rejecting  the  applicant's  further  submissions  and
    declining to treat them as a fresh asylum or human rights claim for the
    purposes of paragraph 353 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Permission  to
    bring the proceedings was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek,
    following a renewed permission hearing on 13 May 2016.

2.    The applicant's immigration history is, in essence,  as  follows.   He
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 November 2009.   His
    asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 4 December 2009  and  the
    subsequent appeal dismissed by an  Immigration  Judge  on  18  February
    2010.  The applicant made further submissions on 6 May 2010, which  the
    respondent rejected twelve  days  later.   On  15  September  2015  the
    applicant made further submissions, which were rejected in the decision
    under challenge.

3.    Immigration Judge Devittie promulgated his  determination,  dismissing
    the applicant's appeal, in February 2010, following a hearing at Taylor
    House.  The applicant told the judge that he was a Tamil from the north
    of Sri Lanka, whose brother had been  a  fighter  for  the  LTTE.   The
    applicant had not been actively involved with that organisation,  other
    than in minor capacities.  Whilst attempting  to  leave  by  boat,  the
    applicant had been arrested by the Sri  Lankan  Navy  on  suspicion  of
    being an LTTE member.  He was taken to an army camp and then handed  to
    the police, before being released.   The  applicant  made  his  way  to
    Vavuniya, where the applicant stayed with an uncle.  Whilst there,  the
    applicant was seized by  the  authorities,  questioned  and  beaten  on
    suspicion of  being  an  LTTE  member.   The  uncle  paid  a  bribe  to
    facilitate the applicant's release.

4.    Before the judge, the applicant's credibility was  challenged  by  the
    respondent, in the respondent's asylum refusal letter.   The  applicant
    answered questions about this at the hearing.

5.    Having heard the applicant,  the  judge  found  that  the  applicant's
    account was consistent with the background  evidence,  as  the  refusal
    letter had, in fact, acknowledged.  The judge found:-

      "The appellant has given a simple and  straightforward  account.   His
         evidence does not suggest that he  was  prone  to  exaggeration  as
         regards the core  of  his  account.   I  accept  the  core  of  his
         account".

6.    The judge, accordingly, made findings of fact that the applicant  came
    from a former LTTE stronghold; that his father had assisted the LTTE in
    the past; that the applicant's brother had joined  the  LTTE  and  been
    killed in action in January 2009; and that the applicant's  sister  was
    recruited by the LTTE in February of that year.  The judge believed the
    account  of  the  applicant's  leaving  by  boat  and  his   subsequent
    detention.  He also believed the  applicant's  account  of  his  second
    detention, whilst in Vavuniya, finding that "on this  occasion  he  was
    tortured".

7.    On the basis of the relevant country  guidance,  including  LP  [2007]
    UKAIT 00076 and AN & AS [2008] UKIAT 00063, the  judge  concluded  that
    the applicant was at real risk in his home area but that  he  would  be
    able to relocate to Colombo, without undue difficulty.

8.    Although Judge Devittie's determination  had  been  made  against  the
    background of the ending of the long internal conflict between the LTTE
    and the Sri Lankan Government, a comprehensive judicial analysis of the
    post-war landscape was not undertaken by the Upper Tribunal until 2013.
     In GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319, the Tribunal issued  comprehensive
    country guidance, replacing  relevant  guidance  in  all  earlier  such
    decisions concerning Sri Lanka.

9.    For present purposes, the core of the country guidance in  GJ  can  be
    stated as  follows.   Leaving  aside  certain  specialised  categories,
    individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka because they have, or are perceived to have, a significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora
    and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka,  are  in  general  at
    real risk of persecution or  other  serious  harm,  upon  return.   The
    Tribunal found that the authorities in Sri Lanka based  their  approach
    on "sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka
    and in the diaspora".  Those authorities are aware that many Sri Lankan
    Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and that "everyone in  the
    northern province had some level of involvement with  the  LTTE  during
    the civil war".  An individual's  past  history,  the  Tribunal  found,
    would be relevant "only to the extent that it is perceived by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as indicating a present  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government".

10.   Having set out the background, I turn to the  further  submissions  of
    the applicant.  In the applicant's witness statement of 4 August  2015,
    he said that he had learned from an acquaintance at a diaspora rally in
    May 2012 that his elder brother had risen within the ranks of the  LTTE
    and, at the time of his death, had been the personal bodyguard  of  the
    LTTE leader, Pirabhakran.  The applicant had heard from his parents  in
    2010 after they had been released from a camp for internally  displaced
    persons.   The  applicant's  father  told  the   applicant   that   the
    authorities had been enquiring after the applicant and paying visits to
    the family home searching for the applicant in April 2011 and  February
    2012.  In June 2013, two officers had appeared at the family home  with
    a photograph of the applicant at a rally in  London.   The  father  was
    arrested for lying to them and was severely beaten.  In December  2014,
    the applicant's parents received a letter from  the  GOSL  Intelligence
    Department, requiring them to surrender the applicant.  The family then
    made a complaint to the Human Rights Commission of Sri  Lanka  but  did
    not mention all of the incidents of  relevance,  owing  to  a  fear  of
    repercussions.

11.   The  applicant  said  that  his  United  Kingdom  diaspora  activities
    involved  lifetime  membership  of  the  British  Tamil   Forum,   with
    attendance at meetings and workshops;  participating  annually  in  the
    Mullivaikkal remembrance event on 18 May and the event for LTTE  heroes
    on 27 November; participating in a process organised by the  Tamil  Co-
    ordinating Committee UK; attending rallies, calling  for  a  change  of
    venue from Sri Lanka  for  the  then  upcoming  Commonwealth  Heads  of
    Government meeting and  for  the  suspension  of  Sri  Lanka  from  the
    Commonwealth; speaking to a conference organised by the  British  Tamil
    Forum and the All Party Parliamentary Group  for  Tamils;  attending  a
    meeting organised by the Tamil National Alliance,  when  the  applicant
    met TNA MPs; participating in  an  open  discussion  organised  by  the
    People's Democratic Forum; and participating in a torch relay  from  10
    Downing Street to Geneva in support of "Justice for Tamils".

12.    Along  with  the  applicant's  witness  statement,  the   submissions
    contained a letter from Mr Anton Punethanayagam, a lawyer in Sri Lanka,
    dated 23 July 2015.  The letter states that the lawyer  had  known  the
    applicant's father and his family as clients, since  March  2010.   The
    applicant's  parents  had  first  sought  Mr  Punethanayagam's   advice
    regarding their daughter, who had been arrested as an LTTE member.   On
    12 May 2011, the parents had come to him to say  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities had come to the family home just under three weeks earlier,
    looking for the applicant.  The lawyer said that if the  officers  came
    again, a complaint needed to be made to  the  local  MP  or  the  Human
    Rights Commission.  The applicant's father told  the  lawyer  that  the
    applicant was living in the United Kingdom.

13.   Mr Punethanayagam's letter continued by  stating  that  he  could  see
    from his file that he received a telephone call  from  the  applicant's
    father on 17 April 2012, stating that the authorities had come again to
    the family home in February of that year, telling the father  that  the
    applicant should "surrender  to  them".   Mr  Punethanayagam  gave  the
    father the same advice as before.

14.   In June 2013, the parents visited Mr Punethanayagam  again.   Officers
    had come to their house five days earlier and this  time  had  arrested
    the father and  taken  him  to  a  military  camp  where  he  had  been
    interrogated for three days.  The  father  told  the  lawyer  that  the
    authorities had shown the father photographs of the applicant and  said
    they believed the applicant was working for  the  LTTE  in  the  United
    Kingdom "and against the Sri Lankan Government".  The authorities  told
    the father that he should advise the applicant to "come  and  surrender
    himself in Sri Lanka".  The father  had  been  beaten  whilst  in  this
    detention.

15.   On 23 December 2014, the parents came once more, this time to show  Mr
    Punethanayagam a letter addressed to the father  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    Intelligence Department in Kilinochchi, requiring the surrender of  the
    applicant.

16.   The submissions included the original of the letter  from  the  office
    in Kilinochchi, with an English translation.  There was also  a  letter
    from the applicant's father.  This essentially deposed  to  the  events
    described in the lawyer's letter.  Finally, the applicant submitted  an
    original  letter  from  the  British  Tamil   Forum,   confirming   his
    membership, and an original card from the NLP, confirming membership of
    that  organisation,  together  with  a  number  of  internet   articles
    regarding the situation in Sri Lanka.

17.   After the respondent's decision rejecting the submissions as  a  fresh
    claim, the applicant submitted further material.  Amongst other things,
    this material sought to address in more detail matters in the  decision
    letter that had concerned the respondent, such as  the  fact  that  the
    lawyer's letter "is of poor quality [and] appears to be a copy".  There
    was considerable discussion at the hearing on  25  January  as  to  the
    admissibility of this new  material  in  the  context  of  the  present
    proceedings.  Mr Anderson, for the respondent, prayed in aid the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in R (Naziri & Others) [2015] UKUT 00437, in  which
    the  President  emphasised  the  undesirability  of   judicial   review
    proceedings being transacted "in circumstances where material  evidence
    on which the applicant seeks to rely has not  been  considered  by  the
    primary decision maker".  The President made it plain that there "is  a
    strong general prohibition in contemporary litigation  against  rolling
    review by the Upper Tribunal in judicial review proceedings".

18.   For her part, Ms Walker cited the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
    AK (Afghanistan) [2007] EWCA Civ 535, where such post-decision material
    had been taken into account.  I agree with Mr Anderson that  there  are
    features in AK which do not arise in the present case.  In  that  case,
    the post-decision materials had, it seems,  received  consideration  by
    the respondent, who had made  supplementary  decisions  in  respect  of
    them.  That is not the position here.  Furthermore, the court in AK was
    troubled by "what I am afraid can only be described as the abysmal  way
    in which the bundle has been prepared for this appeal", which  made  it
    "difficult to follow the correspondence in any  sort  of  chronological
    order" (Toulson LJ).

19.   In the circumstances, I declined to have regard to  the  post-decision
    materials.   No  doubt  anticipating  such  a   response,   Ms   Walker
    concentrated her oral and written submissions on  alleged  deficiencies
    in the letter of 18 September 2015.  Notwithstanding Mr Anderson's able
    attempts to defend the letter, I am entirely satisfied that Ms Walker's
    criticisms are sound.  For the reasons I shall give, the  letter  fails
    to apply the requisite anxious scrutiny and the  decision  it  contains
    must be quashed.

20.   I agree with Ms Walker that the basic failing of the  decision  letter
    is that it does not recognise  and  address  the  significance  of  the
    positive credibility findings made by  Immigration  Judge  Devittie  in
    2010.  In this regard, the respondent fell into precisely the same kind
    of error as was identified by the Court of Appeal in AK  at  paragraphs
    27 to 40: the new materials required to be looked at in  the  important
    context of positive credibility findings by a judge.

21.   Instead of this, the letter of 18 September  2015  did  no  more  than
    draw upon Immigration Judge Devittie's finding that the applicant would
    not be at real risk on return to Sri Lanka.  As we have seen,  however,
    those findings were  rooted  in  the  then  current  country  guidance,
    subsequently superseded by that in GJ.  Following GJ, the focus  is  on
    the perception taken by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  of  a  returning
    Tamil.

22.   Strikingly, the respondent's letter fails to engage at  all  with  the
    issue of the  United  Kingdom  diaspora  activities  described  by  the
    applicant in his witness statement.  The respondent  merely  looked  at
    the letter and card from, respectively, the BTF and the  NLP,  together
    with some photographs of the  applicant  attending  demonstrations  and
    rallies.  Counsel were in agreement that the respondent's  letter  had,
    of necessity, to address seriatim the various documents and  so  forth,
    comprising the  submissions;  but  Ms  Walker  is  right  to  say  that
    consideration must be given to the various  elements  "in  the  round".
    One searches in vain for any indication in the decision letter that the
    membership documents were considered in the light of and  by  reference
    to the very full description by the applicant in his statement  of  his
    diaspora activities.

23.   It was also a manifest failure  on  the  part  of  the  respondent  to
    connect that description of the diaspora activities with  the  evidence
    emanating from Sri Lanka, which was  that  the  authorities  there  are
    aware of those activities and are sufficiently  concerned  by  them  to
    harass the applicant's parents.

24.   The treatment in the respondent's decision  of  the  letter  from  the
    lawyer, Mr Anton Punethanayagam, is factually incorrect in saying  that
    the letter "does not refer  to  [the  applicant]  personally  but  your
    parents". As can be seen from my description of it, the lawyer's letter
    most certainly does refer to the applicant.

25.   There was  disagreement  before  me  as  to  the  obligations  of  the
    respondent concerning the country guidance decision of GJ.   Ms  Walker
    pointed out that this particular lawyer  had  been  identified  by  the
    Tribunal in GJ in positive terms:

         "143.    Mr Anton Punethanayagam is a barrister who  has  practised
                at the Sri Lankan Bar in both Colombo and Vavuniya  and  has
                represented about 3,000 persons detained under the PTA  over
                the last two decades.  His standing in the  legal  community
                in Sri Lanka is high."

26.   A footnote to paragraph 143 states that Mr Punethanayagam is,  amongst
    other things, President of the Vavuniya Bar Association and a member of
    the Bar Council and the Legal Aid  Committee  of  the  Sri  Lankan  Bar
    Association.  He is also a Magistrate and Justice of the Peace.

27.   Mr Anderson submitted that  the  respondent's  caseworkers  cannot  be
    expected to know such details in a country guidance decision.   It  is,
    however, in my view reasonable to expect the  respondent's  caseworkers
    to have read not just the country guidance findings but also the actual
    decision of the Tribunal  giving  the  country  guidance.   Apart  from
    anything else, reading the decision itself will often  reveal  valuable
    insights, such as how to apply the country guidance to the applicant or
    applicants in question.

28.   In any event, the treatment of the lawyer's  letter  in  the  impugned
    decision is, in its own terms, legally deficient.  Quite apart from the
    error to which I have made reference,  the  writer  contends  that  the
    lawyer's letter "is not sufficient enough to undermine the opinions  of
    your previous refusal  letter  and  the  findings  of  the  Immigration
    Judge".  The implication regarding the judge's  findings  is  perverse,
    given that the judge had found the applicant to be a witness  of  truth
    and that the  determination  of  risk  on  return  was  now  materially
    different.

29.   By the same token, the treatment of the letter  from  the  authorities
    in Kilinochchi is  legally  inadequate.   The  writer  says  that  this
    document "does not explain why [the  authorities]  will  want  you  now
    after releasing  you  on  both  occasions".   But  if  the  writer  had
    connected this document, as he or  she  should,  with  the  applicant's
    witness statement,  the  lawyer's  letter  and  the  statement  of  the
    applicant's father, then a reason would have presented itself.

30.   The decision letter criticised the letter from the applicant's  father
    as being "self-serving".  The expression "self-serving" is, to a  large
    extent, a protean  one.  The  expression  itself  tells  us  little  or
    nothing.   What  is  needed  is  a  reason,  however  brief,  for  that
    designation. For example, a letter from a third  party  may  be  "self-
    serving" because it bears the hallmarks of being written to  order,  in
    circumstances where the applicant's case  is  that  the  letter  was  a
    spontaneous warning.

31.   In the present case, the reasons given in the decision letter for  the
    father's letter being regarded as self-serving are because "it is  from
    your father and does not demonstrate how you as an individual will face
    fear or persecution upon your return to Sri Lanka".  The  first  reason
    falls foul of the point made at paragraph 28 of AK, where the Court  of
    Appeal criticised the respondent for stating that "an affidavit from  a
    family member cannot add probative  or  corroborative  weight  to  your
    client's claim".  A statement from  a  family  member  is,  of  course,
    capable of bearing weight. The issue  is  whether,  looked  at  in  the
    round, it does so in the particular case in question. For  instance,  a
    statement from a family member may  be  incapable  of  saving  a  claim
    which, in all other respects, lacks credibility. Whilst the pressure on
    the respondent's caseworkers can be great and  their  decision  letters
    are not in any sense to be construed as if they were  carefully-crafted
    pieces of legislation, I consider that this reason for the rejection of
    the father's letter displays a lack of anxious scrutiny.

32.   The second reason for rejecting the  letter  is  equally  ill-founded.
    On its face, the father was describing events in which the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were raiding the family home in order to find the applicant
    or to put pressure on his family to persuade the applicant to return to
    Sri Lanka.  Assuming for the moment (as one must for this purpose) that
    the letter is taken at face value, it must  be  obvious  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities' reasons for wishing the applicant to come back  are
    anything but benign.

33.   The respondent's own COI Report on Sri Lanka of August 2014  notes  at
    paragraph 2.2.2 that the "supply of intelligence to the security forces
    and immigration department may  extend  to  the  Tamil  diaspora  given
    allegations that members of the Karuna faction, and  Embassy  employees
    in the  European  Union  continue  to  supply  photographic  and  video
    evidence of Sri Lankans engaging in protest action".  At 2.2.3  we  see
    that "The state machine of Sri  Lanka  is  extremely  paranoid  and  is
    trying to contain any resurgence of [the  LTTE]   ...  The  authorities
    also extend their suspicions to acquaintances and relatives  of  former
    members of the LTTE.  According to several reports, people  who  return
    from abroad are often suspected of maintaining links with the LTTE  and
    are particularly threatened". None of this  features  in  the  decision
    letter.

34.   Drawing the threads together, I find that not  only  is  the  decision
    letter materially flawed for the reasons I have given, it is  also  not
    possible  to  conclude  that,  absent  those  flaws,  the  respondent's
    decision would have been bound (or even likely) to have been the  same.
    A hypothetical judge who accepted the applicant's account (and the  Sri
    Lankan evidence) as credible may well conclude that the applicant is at
    real risk, applying the current country guidance.

35.   My conclusions  mean  that  the  respondent's  decision  falls  to  be
    quashed.  It is, in these circumstances, immaterial whether  there  are
    discrete legal errors in the respondent's handling of the mental health
    issues raised by the applicant.  I do not, however, consider  that  the
    recent Grand Chamber case of Paposhvili v  Belgium  (App  No  41738/10,
    ECTHR  31/12/16)  would  itself  cause  any  relevant   part   of   the
    respondent's decision to be treated as invalid.   To  the  extent  that
    Paposhvili runs counter to binding domestic case law, the latter  must,
    of course, prevail at Tribunal level.  In  particular,  the  respondent
    properly addressed the applicant's risk of suicide, by reference to the
    judgments in J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

36.   The respondent's decision of 18 September 2015 is  quashed.   I  shall
    hear Counsel on the issue  of  costs,  in  the  absence  of  agreement.
    ~~~~0~~~~









