
[pic]
IAC-AH-SP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


  OR (Student: ability to follow course) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00166 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 October 2010                             |On 5 November 2010           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE PRESIDENT - MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                     Or

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M M Hossain, a legal representative from Hossain
                    Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

1.  The version of the rules in  force  on  6  February  2010  contained  no
general requirement that a student be able to follow the  course  for  which
he had been admitted.
2. The burden of  proof  as  to  change  of  circumstances  since  an  entry
clearance was granted lies on the respondent, and it  is  difficult  to  see
that it can be  discharged  without  some  evidence  of  what  the  original
circumstances were.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  19  October
    1989.  He has been given permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Monro dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
    decision to cancel his leave to enter the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  321A  of  the
    Immigration Rules because he had made false representations, failed  to
    disclose material facts for the purpose of obtaining leave or there had
    been such a change of circumstances since the leave was granted that it
    should be cancelled.

2.   The appellant applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom as  a  Tier
    4 (General) Student to study for a certificate in  business  management
    (level 3 NQF) at Westminster Academy in London.  The appellant  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 6 February 2010 with a passport containing the
    entry clearance.  An Immigration Officer attempted to question  him  in
    English but he  had  very  limited  knowledge  of  English,  difficulty
    answering the questions and could only say  "Westminster  Academy"  and
    "diploma in business management".  He showed a letter from  Westminster
    Academy indicating that he had been accepted for a one year course with
    successful completion leading to a diploma, advanced  diploma  and,  in
    the final year, an honours degree.

3.   The Immigration Officer was not satisfied that the appellant  qualified
    for entry clearance as a student and served Form  IS81  suspending  his
    leave and requiring him to  submit  to  further  examination.   He  was
    invited to take an English test and answered only nine percent  of  the
    questions correctly.  He was then interviewed in Bengali.

4.   The appellant had  arrived  on  a  Saturday  morning  and  was  granted
    temporary admission pending further enquiries.  The Immigration Officer
    spoke to a Ms  Ferreira  at  Westminster  Academy  who  said  that,  if
    necessary, the appellant would be offered  a  twelve  week  pre-session
    English course.

5.   The respondent considered that  the  appellant  had  not  been  granted
    leave on the basis of undertaking a pre-session English course and that
    as a result there had been a significant change in circumstances.  As a
    result his entry  clearance  was  cancelled  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 321A.

6.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by the judge on 10  May
    2010.  Both parties were represented, the appellant by Mr Hossain,  who
    appeared before us.  The appellant  attended  and  gave  evidence.   He
    tried to give  evidence  in  English  but  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant could not understand the questions and  he  continued  giving
    evidence through an interpreter.

7.   In his evidence the appellant said that he started the business  course
    at Westminster Academy on 15 February 2010 and an English  course  with
    the same academy on 12 March 2010.  He said that  he  could  understand
    the lectures, which were given in English.  He said  that  his  English
    was improving.  When the judge asked him how he could follow the course
    he said that he would engage a private tutor to help him.

8.   In paragraphs 23 and 24 of the determination the judge said:

         "23. It is not satisfactory that there is no record  before  me  of
             the English test administered to the appellant at the  airport
             and no copy of his application.  Despite the  inadequacies  of
             the documentation submitted for the respondent,  it  is  plain
             that the appellant did not understand questions put to him  in
             English at the hearing and I am in no doubt  that  he  is  not
             able to follow a  business  course  taught  in  English.   The
             contradictions in the documents from Westminster  College  are
             such that I cannot rely on them.  Although some of them stated
             that he would be following a  pre-sessional  English  language
             course, he said in evidence that he started the course  before
             he started the English classes: and in any event the principal
             stated in her email to Ms Foster that  the  college  does  not
             provide pre-sessional courses.  I find that the appellant  did
             not apply to enter the United Kingdom but  pursue  an  English
             language course prior to commencing a business course.


         24.  The entry clearance was cancelled under paragraph 321A on  the
             ground  that  there  had  been   a   significant   change   in
             circumstances.  I find that there has been such a  change;  in
             that he had sought entry clearance to study  on  the  business
             course; by the date of his arrival he was claiming that he was
             to attend a twelve week course in English prior to  commencing
             this course.  This was an entirely  different  situation  from
             the one presented by him on an application."

9.   The judge went on to consider the Article 8 grounds  before  dismissing
    the appeal both under the Immigration Rules  and  on  Article  8  human
    rights grounds.

10.  The appellant sought permission to appeal arguing that the judge  erred
    in finding that the relevant Immigration Rules included  a  requirement
    for the  appellant's  ability  to  follow  the  course  or  to  have  a
    particular level of command of the English language.  The grounds argue
    that all the appellant needed to show in order to  obtain  a  visa  was
    that he was entitled to the  required  points  under  the  points-based
    scheme.  It is argued that the judge's conclusions  are  insufficiently
    reasoned, that the respondent had failed to provide any evidence of the
    English language test taken by  the  appellant  on  arrival,  that  the
    appellant made no false representations  and  that  he  should  not  be
    penalised for any inconsistency in the correspondence from  Westminster
    Academy.

11.  Mr Hossain's submissions added little to the grounds.  He argued  that,
    even though the appellant's application was to study for a  certificate
    in  business  management  at  Westminster  Academy,  he  did  not  need
    permission to switch to another course, for example an English  course.
    There was no power for the Home Office to reconsider the basis  of  his
    application on arrival.  In reply to our questions, Mr Hossain withdraw
    this submission and accepted that  there  was  power  in  law  for  the
    Immigration  Officer  to  make  a  decision  of  this  type   in   some
    circumstances,  although  he  continued  to  argue  that  it  was   not
    appropriate for him to do so in this case.  Mr  Hossain  also  accepted
    that an Immigration Officer had power to carry  out  investigations  to
    discover whether such a decision should be made.   However,  he  argued
    that the Immigration Officer had no power to carry out an assessment of
    the appellant's command of the  English  language  because,  under  the
    points-based  system,  this  task  had  been  delegated  to  authorised
    institutions, such as Westminster Academy, who  were  trusted  to  make
    appropriate decisions.

12.   Mr  Hossain  submitted,  on  instructions,  that  the  appellant   was
    continuing with his studies at Westminster Academy both in English  and
    for the certificate in business management. Since the hearing  we  have
    received a letter from Mr Hossain in which he argues that if the  power
    of Immigration Officers to examine an individual with  entry  clearance
    on arrival in the UK is not limited "to see whether the appellant still
    meets the rule or conclude on any  material  change  in  circumstances"
    there will be a possibility of abuse of power.

13.  Mr Avery submitted that there was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    reasoning and that she reached conclusions  open  to  her  on  all  the
    evidence.  He asked us to uphold the determination.

14.   Before  the  points-based  system  came  into  force  and  before  the
    appellant made his application, paragraph 57 of the  Immigration  Rules
    included the provision that an applicant needed to show not  only  that
    he intended to follow an approved course but also that he was  able  to
    do so.  This might well include demonstrating a sufficient  command  of
    the English language.  It may be that this was what the  judge  had  in
    mind when she said, in paragraph 17 of her determination;  "the  appeal
    turns on the appellant's ability to  follow  the  course  on  which  he
    enrolled and the requirements of the college in relation to  additional
    language classes."  We find that, to the extent that the judge  applied
    a test of the appellant's ability to follow the  proposed  course,  she
    erred in law because this was not a  requirement  for  entry  clearance
    under the points-based system.  We also find that the  judge  erred  in
    law in reaching the conclusion that there had been a significant change
    in  the  appellant's  circumstances  which  justified   refusal   under
    paragraph 321A.  On the evidence this was not a conclusion open to her.



15.  The burden of proving the facts  for  the  purpose  of  paragraph  321A
    falls on the respondent.  It is self-evident that in order  to  show  a
    change in circumstances, the starting point or  original  circumstances
    needa to be established.  The respondent has failed to produce either a
    copy of the appellant's application form or the decision to grant him a
    visa.  We do not know what questions the appellant was asked or how  he
    answered them.  Whilst we accept that he probably said that  he  wished
    to attend Westminster Academy in London to study for a  certificate  in
    business management, we do not know what else might have been asked, or
    said, which might have qualified or shed further light on this.  We are
    not persuaded, and Mr Avery has not argued otherwise,  that  there  was
    anything in the application form which bore on the appellant's  command
    of the English language nor has it been suggested that at the  time  of
    the appellant's application the Immigration  Rules  included  any  such
    provision as were formerly in paragraph 57.

15.  Although the original immigration decision made reference to  them  the
    respondent  has  not  since  then  argued  that  false  documents  were
    submitted or false representations made.  It would have been  difficult
    to establish that false representations were made where the  respondent
    has been unable to produce a copy of the application form.  At no  time
    has there been any allegation that  the  appellant  submitted  a  false
    document.

16.  The same considerations apply to the case based on  a  material  change
    of  circumstances.  Unless  the  respondent  can  establish  that   the
    appellant had said  expressly  or  otherwise  that  he  has  sufficient
    English to be able to follow a business course straight away, we cannot
    conclude that the discovery in interview on arrival that  he  did  not,
    was a material charge of circumstance. Whilst we agree with  the  judge
    that there are conflicting elements in the  evidence  from  Westminster
    Academy, we find that neither this nor the rest of the evidence enables
    the respondent to establish that  there  has  been  such  a  change  in
    circumstances since the issue of the visa  that  it  should  have  been
    cancelled.

17.   It was open to the Immigration Officer to question  the  appellant  on
    arrival. Had there been such a change of circumstances since  the  visa
    was issued which had removed the basis  of  the  applicant's  claim  to
    admission then it would have been open to the  Immigration  Officer  to
    refuse him leave to enter and cancel his visa.  This  was  not  such  a
    case.

18.  It may be that the absence of an appropriate English language test  was
    a lacuna in the points-based system at  the  time  of  the  appellant's
    application.  The subsequent changes in the  Immigration  Rules  taking
    effect from 23 July 2010 which now require an applicant to  demonstrate
    knowledge of English equivalent to level B1 of the Council of  Europe's
    Common European Framework for Language Learning indicate that  this  is
    likely to have been thought to be the case.

19.   Having  found  that  the  judge  erred  in  law,  we  substitute   our
    determination allowing the appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.






Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
