

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|KA (draft-related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005] UKAIT|
|00165                                                             |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2005              |25 November 2005                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Mr H J E Latter (Senior Immigration Judge)                        |
|Mr A A Lloyd                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:
For the appellant: Mr C Yeo, Counsel, IAS (Tribunal Unit)
For the respondent: Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

This case, which updates the analysis of risk categories undertaken  in  IN
(Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00106,  gives
guidance on several issues. It confirms the  previous  Tribunal  view  that
returnees are not generally at risk. It reaffirms the view that  those  who
would be perceived as draft evaders or  deserters  would  be  at  risk.  As
regards persons of eligible draft age, this decision  explains  why  it  is
thought that the Eritrean authorities, despite regarding such persons  with
suspicion, would only treat adversely those  who  were  unable  to  explain
their absence abroad by reference to their past history. Reasons are  given
for slight modification to certain parts of the guidance  given  in  IN.  A
summary of conclusions is given at paragraph  113.  The  decision  is  also
reported for what  it  says  at  paragraphs  7-15  about  country  guidance
treatment of issues which go wider than the particular factual matrix of an
appellant's appeal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of Eritrea born on 19  August  1985.   She
      appeals against a determination of the Adjudicator, Mrs Susan Turquet,
      notified on 27 April 2004 dismissing her  appeal  against  a  decision
      refusing to grant further leave to remain and to give directions under
      s.10 of the Asylum and Immigration  Act  1999  for  removal  from  the
      United Kingdom.  (There had been an appeal against an earlier decision
      refusing to grant asylum. This had been dismissed by the  Adjudicator,
      Mr B. Watkins CMG, on 4 July 2002).

2.    Following the grant of  permission  to  appeal  made  on  2  September
      2004, her appeal came for hearing  on  27  May  2005  before  a  panel
      chaired by Senior Immigration Judge Mr C.P. Mather. By virtue  of  the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants  etc.)  Act  2004  that
      took effect as a reconsideration  hearing.  At  this  hearing  it  was
      decided that the Adjudicator had  materially  erred  in  law  "by  not
      considering the risk on return to a young female of draft age who  had
      never (effectively) been to Eritrea".  It was  noted  at  the  hearing
      that this was an issue  that  needed  clarifying  using  the  Tribunal
      Country Guideline case of  IN  (Draft  evaders  -  evidence  of  risk)
      Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00106 as a start-point.    Subsequent  to  the
      hearing the Tribunal issued a Notice  of  Directions  to  the  parties
      which in its relevant parts stated:

             'Issues for Reconsideration [as directed]


             No necessity for oral evidence as grounds have  not  contested
             the Adjudicator's findings on credibility.


             This case is being set down as  a  Country  Guidance  case  in
             which the issues on which the  parties  are  invited  to  make
             particular submissions are:


             1) Whether the CG case of IN continues to  adequately  reflect
                 current risk categories


             2)  Whether someone of eligible draft age but who has not been
                 to Eritrea would fall into a current risk category


             The case will not be joined with another.'

   3. The last sentence was intended to clarify that it had been decided not
      to go ahead with the suggestion raised at the hearing before Mr Mather
      of joining this case with another.

   4. At the hearing before us Mr Gulvin said he had only  learnt  of  these
      directions when Mr Yeo had contacted him  two  days  earlier.  He  was
      prepared, nevertheless, to accept that  they  had  been  sent  to  the
      parties and he was ready to proceed  with  the  case  and  assist  the
      Tribunal as far as he was able to in these circumstances. Mr  Yeo  had
      responded  to  the  directions  by  adducing  a  comprehensive  bundle
      containing inter alia, reports from four country experts  and  several
      items  of  background  evidence  post-dating  those  examined  by  the
      Tribunal in  IN (IN was heard on 2 February 2005).

5.     Nevertheless,  Mr  Yeo's  skeleton  argument  repeated   an   earlier
      application made to the Tribunal in a 28 September 2005 letter  asking
      that the directions be amended and the first direction be struck  out.
      Since it raises a point of some importance, we shall set out  what  he
      said in both places.  The  main  paragraphs  of  his  letter  were  as
      follows:

             'Given that the facts of this case do not match the directions
             that have been given, I ask that the  directions  are  amended
             and the first direction is struck out. In a report written  by
             the IAS on Country Guideline cases, IAS was  critical  of  the
             use of inappropriate cases to  determine  wider  issues.   The
             appellant in this case has no interest in arguing wider issues
             or presenting country information outside her own case and  as
             the appellant's representative  I  have  no  duty  to  do  so.
             Indeed, I feel that to do so would  compromise  my  overriding
             duty to my client by allowing the Tribunal  to  be  distracted
             from the key issues in  this  particular  case  and  confusing
             matters by introducing arguments that  are  irrelevant  to  my
             client. If the Tribunal does want to consider wider facts,  it
             would need to link this case  with  other  suitable  cases  in
             which those facts do arise.

             Should the directions not be amended, I will need to ask  that
             it is clearly recorded in the  final  determination  that  the
             appellant did not present arguments or  evidence  relating  to
             facts that did not arise in her own case.'

6.    The way the application was  put  in  the  skeleton  argument  was  as
      follows:

                    '2.6. It is submitted that this case is not appropriate
                 for designation as a Country Guideline case on issue (1) as
                 identified in the AIT's directions. The facts of IN  [2005]
                 UKIAT 00106 are very different to those of the  appellant's
                 case and the appellant therefore has no legal  standing  to
                 advance arguments  or  evidence  relating  to  those  wider
                 issues.  Had the AIT wanted to designate  this  case  as  a
                 Country Guideline case on issue  (1)  it  would  have  been
                 appropriate to link it with  other  cases  that  raise  the
                 issue  the  AIT  has  outlined  in  issues  direction  (1).
                 Without having taken that step it will hear no argument  on
                 those issues nor will evidence  be  presented  to  the  AIT
                 specifically relating to those issues that fall outside the
                 appellant's case. Issues direction (1) is  ultra  vires  as
                 the AIT cannot direct the appellant to prepare arguments or
                 submit evidence that are not immediately  relevant  to  her
                 case.  Rule 45(1) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
                 (Procedure) Rules 2005 explicitly limits the power to  make
                 directions  to  the  conduct  of  the  instant  appeal   or
                 application.


                      2.7.   In addition, the jurisdiction of  the  AIT  to
                 review IN is questionable. No evidence appears to have come
                 to  light to cast doubt on the correctness of the  guidance
                 in IN and the respondent has presented  no  fresh  evidence
                 in this case or, as far as the appellant's  representatives
                 are aware, in any other case,  to  dispute  those  findings
                 (nor any evidence  at  all  in  this  case).   Indeed,  the
                 evidence gathered by the  appellant  relating  to  her  own
                 individual facts which indirectly  relate  to  IN  suggests
                 that the situation has deteriorated.'

7.    We refused this request for several  reasons.  Firstly,  it  is  quite
      clear that the appellant`s case,  as put by Mr Yeo, relies in part  on
      general propositions about risk to persons affected by  the  draft  in
      Eritrea. She does not rely solely on evidence relating to herself, but
      also on evidence relating to persons affected by the draft  generally.
      Secondly, her grounds of appeal relied  heavily  on  a  January   2004
      UNHCR position paper entitled 'UNHCR Position on  Return  of  Rejected
      Asylum Seekers to Eritrea' which highlighted evidence  concerning  the
      fate of persons returned by Malta to Eritrea in 2002 and  posited   in
      the light of this evidence an  extremely  wide  risk  category  -  all
      Eritrean rejected asylum seekers.  Thirdly, Mr Yeo did not  object  to
      the directions relating to issue 2 ('whether someone of eligible draft
      age but who has not been to Eritrea would fall  into  a  current  risk
      category') and, even had directions been confined to this  issue,  its
      asessment necessarily required linkage being made to an overall set of
      current risk categories.

            We also reject Mr Yeo`s submission that we have no  jurisdiction
      to review IN.  This is a second-stage reconsideration hearing in which
      the relevant date for the assessment of risk is the  date  of  hearing
      before us: see R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982. Accordingly, we must have
      regard to any evidence placed before us concerning relevant changes or
      developments which have taken place in country conditions  in  Eritrea
      since the Country Guideline case of IN (as  well  as  to  more  recent
      evidence affecting the appellant's individual  circumstances).  It  is
      only by having regard to such evidence that we can decide whether  the
      appeal before us "depends upon the  same  or  similar  evidence"  (see
      April 2005 AIT Practice Directions para 18.2).  Only  if  we  were  to
      decide that the country guidance issues in this case  do  depend  upon
      the same or similar evidence, would we then be required by  para  18.2
      to continue to treat IN as authoritative in any subsequent  appeal  so
      far as it relates to the country guidance issues in question.

   8. In this regard, it is noteworthy that Mr Yeo himself expressly  sought
      to rely on a number of  post-IN items of background evidence, as  well
      as five expert reports, three of them written since  IN  -   one  from
      Michael  Ellman dated 14 October 2005, one from Dr  David  Pool,  also
      dated 14 October 2005, one from Dr June Rock dated  13  October  2005.
      Even the two reports from Dr John Campbell dated  24  January  and  31
      January  2005   respectively,  were  submitted  by  reference  to   an
      "updating" letter of 10 October 2005, which also authorised their  use
      for this appeal.  Although each of the  four  country  experts  places
      focus on the situation  of  the  individual  appellant,  in  order  to
      analyse this each of their reports addresses a range of general issues
      of risk on return to Eritrea. Mr Yeo`s impressive bundle of materials,
      therefore,  addressed a range of general  issues  including  the  most
      general of all - that of risk on return to failed asylum seekers.


 9.   In such circumstances it seems to us wholly disingenuous of Mr Yeo  to
      suggest that he was in fact confining himself to evidence specific  to
      this appellant.  His stance that he would not be adducing evidence  or
      making submissions based on issue of risk  in  Eritrea  at  a  general
      level and would confine himself to non-fresh  evidence  is  belied  by
      other parts of his submissions which do precisely that. In our view it
      was prudent of  Mr  Yeo  to  address  general  issues  affecting  this
      appellant and to do so by reference to fresh evidence. For him to have
      failed to address such issues and in this way would have  meant  doing
      his client a disservice. Paragraph 196  of  the  1979  UNHCR  Handbook
      reminds us that the duty to ascertain and evaluate  all  the  relevant
      facts is shared between the applicant and examiner.  A  representative
      has a duty to co-operate with and assist the Tribunal  in  seeking  to
      convene cases notified as raising important country issues.

 10.  We also discern a misconception on  the  part  of  Mr  Yeo  about  the
      purpose, logical basis and status of the Tribunal's  country  guidance
      system.  Its fundamental purpose is to  ensure  that  like  cases  are
      treated alike and that generally recurring factors relating to country
      conditions are the subject of  careful  and  authoritative  assessment
      periodically: see once again,  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.  Its
      logical basis consists in the need to consider each refugee appeal  in
      the context of the evidence as a whole: what was stated  in  the  1979
      UNHCR Handbook at paragraph 42 as the requirement that:


           "...The applicant's statements cannot, however, be considered in
           the abstract, and must be viewed in the context of the relevant
           background situation. A knowledge of conditions in the
           applicant's country of origin - while not a primary objective-
           is an important element in assessing the applicant's
           credibility".

11.   There must always be an assessment of the particular circumstances  of
      the individual case. But that assessment must be made in  the  context
      of the background evidence  relating  to  conditions  in  the  country
      generally. In almost every asylum or asylum-related case the  Tribunal
      is concerned with the   particular and the general. It is a matter for
      this Tribunal, not representatives, to decide when a case is  suitable
      for the giving of  country  guidance.  In  cases  where  the  Tribunal
      decides to focus particularly on general country issues, it will often
      seek to alert the parties about this and invite relevant evidence  and
      submissions. This is precisely what happened here.

12.   It is for the Tribunal to decide whether to make use of  the  evidence
      before it to make findings on issues relating to the  general  country
      situation or  relating  to  certain  categories  of  persons  in  that
      country.  Whilst  it  is  open  to  the  parties  (as  here)  to  make
      submissions about what  the  scope  of  issues  relating  to   country
      guidance are or should be, it  is  for  the  Tribunal  to  decide  how
      broadly or narrowly to draw them.

13.   Normally the Tribunal will not seek to set wide-ranging guidance  when
      the case before it concerns an issue affecting  a  small  category  of
      persons (e.g. a small tribe or a minor political party).  But that  is
      essentially a matter of judgment for the Tribunal and even here it may
      consider departing from normal practice if, for example, the  evidence
      before it deals comprehensively with the position of small  tribes  or
      small political parties in the overall   tribal or clan  or  political
      systems.

14.   Mr Yeo's  reference  to  a  factual  matrix  also  misunderstands  the
      jurisdictional status or basis of country guidance. Such guidance does
      not depend on the issues identified being raised by the particular set
      of facts relating to the individual  appellant.    The  jurisdictional
      basis is the need in the context of an individual appeal  to  make  an
      assessment of protection needs under the Refugee  Convention  and  the
      ECHR.

15.   It is Mr Yeo`s contention that the Tribunal  has  no  power  to  issue
      directions going beyond the particular facts of the appellant's  case.
      Even if that contention were not  beside  the  point,  it  involves  a
      misreading of the 2005 Procedure Rules.  He  is  right  that  rule  45
      focusses on directions relating to the instant appeal or  application.
      However this same rule accords to the Tribunal a wide power to conduct
      the hearing as it sees fit. Nothing  that  is  specified  in  rule  45
      excludes the Tribunal from identifying issues  it  wishes  parties  to
      address.

16.   Mr Yeo's skeleton  argument  also  included  an  application  that  we
      consider receiving oral evidence from  the  appellant.  In  developing
      this submission before us, he pointed out that the Adjudicator had not
      made clear or complete findings  on  the  nature  or  quality  of  the
      appellant's objections to performing military service.

17.   We  rejected  this  application.  The  notice  giving  directions  had
      stipulated that there was  no  necessity  for  oral  evidence  as  the
      grounds had not contested the Adjudicator's findings on the particular
      circumstances of the appellant. Nor had Mr Yeo applied  to  call  oral
      evidence prior to the day of the hearing. Whilst we said we would  not
      shut our mind to calling the appellant (if necessary  by  reconvening)
      should we reach a stage where we considered that justice required  it,
      in the   event we did not consider it appropriate  to  hear  from  the
      appellant.    We  had  before  us  her  previous  statements  and  her
      interview record, as well as the  findings  made  by  the  Adjudicator
      concerning those.   We also  had  an  up-to-date  statement  from  the
      appellant. These provide us with a sufficient basis to decide  on  the
      very limited issues of fact specific to her  as  an  individual  which
      arise in this appeal.

  18. One other preliminary comment we have concerns Mr Yeo's attempt in the
      grounds to rely on the very recent case of AA (Involuntary returns  to
      Zimbabwe) [2005] UKIAT 00144). Mr Yeo's principal point appeared to be
      that where there is strong evidence of serious human rights abuses  in
      a particular country, we should be slow to conclude that  such  abuses
      are not practised at the point of return. We do not consider it at all
      helpful to the task before us  to  have  regard  to   AA  in  the  way
      contended for by Mr Yeo.   AA has helpful things  to  say   about  the
      approach to 'real risk', but it plainly did not seek  to  establish  a
      general principle as to how risk should be assessed at  the  point  of
      return in countries with a poor human rights record. Its decision  was
      specific to the particular situation in Zimbabwe at the  time  of  the
      decision and must be read in that light.


  19. Subsequent to the hearing we became aware  of  two  further  items  of
      evidence. One was the Home Office Country of  Origin  Services  (COIS)
      Report on Eritrea for October 2005, the other was the promulgation  of
      a reported case by a differently constituted Tribunal panel, TA (draft
      evasion-citizenship-evidence required) Eritrea [2005] UKIAT 00155.  We
      wrote to  the  parties  inviting  them  to  make  submissions  on  the
      significance of these items. Neither chose to respond.


The Appellant's Case
 20.  At paragraphs 9-15 of her determination the Adjudicator  set  out  the
      appellant's case as follows:

            '9.  The Appellant's claim is set out in her Asylum  Statement,
                 Witness Statement, Further Statement and her evidence.


            10.    The Appellant  had  lived  with  her  parents  in  Saudi
                 Arabia.  Her mother died in 1995.  Her father worked  as  a
                 chauffeur for a Saudi family and, after her mother's death,
                 the Appellant was required to  undertake  domestic  duties.
                 She alleges that  she  was  ill-treated  and  abused.    In
                 October 2000, during [sic] her employer's son, Salim,  beat
                 her and pushed her with a  metal  bar.   As  a  result  the
                 Appellant had to have a kidney removed.   When  her  father
                 heard what happened, he was angry with Salim.  He said that
                 his daughter was not the family's servant and that he would
                 take her with him. They  immediately  had  the  Appellant's
                 father deported.  The family were saying that she should be
                 deported. The Appellant was scared of  this.   One  of  her
                 father's colleagues comforted her.  He smuggled her out  of
                 the house and took her to his relative's  house.   He  told
                 her that he would send her to a safer  place  and  arranged
                 for an agent to bring her to the United Kingdom.


            11.  Her father's friend told her that her father was an active
                 member of the ELF and that it was dangerous for  him  being
                 deported to Eritrea.  She could not return to Saudi  Arabia
                 because she was smuggled out  and  left  the  family.   She
                 could not go to Eritrea as she does  not  know  any  family
                 member  there.  She  would  be  drafted  to  join  military
                 service.  She could not do this because it is  against  her
                 religion for men and women to mix. She does not  speak  the
                 language very well, having left, when she was one.


            12.  In her witness  statement  the  appellant  said  that  she
                 joined the ELF UK branch in September 2003. She  wanted  to
                 continue her father's work. She had been told that she  had
                 to wait until she was  18  to  join.  She  attends  monthly
                 meetings, distributes leaflets and discusses ELF's aims and
                 policies  in  the  community  to  create  awareness.    She
                 contributes money. One of the other main reasons she joined
                 was to get some help to find her father.  She thought  that
                 the organisation could help her.


            13.  She now only has one kidney.  She sometimes has  pain  and
                 has to take medication.  She has had  to  go  Accident  and
                 Emergency with kidney pain. She has breathing problems. She
                 has been depressed and on medication.


            14.  She has achieved ESOL levels 1,2 and  3.   She  started  a
                 GNVQ foundation course in Leisure and Tourism. Her  3  year
                 course finishes in July 2004. She volunteered  to  work  at
                 Oxfam in  February  2004.  She  is  a  volunteer  with  the
                 Eritrean Muslim Community Association Supplementary  Sunday
                 School.


           15.   In her further statement she said that the main problem in
                military  service  is  that  men  and  women  have  to  live
                together. She has heard accounts of mistreatment  of  Muslim
                female recruits by male soldiers. Living in Eritrea would be
                very difficult as she has not lived there since she was  one
                year old. She only learnt  a  few  words  of  Tigrinia.  Her
                doctor has told her that she has an  allergy  and  has  been
                referred to the Ear Nose and Throat Department of a hospital
                in Whitechapel. She also has pain in  her  back  and  knees,
                probably caused by her domestic work in Saudi Arabia.'


21.   The Adjudicator did not find the appellant's  account  credible.  She
    said her start-point was the determination of the Adjudicator Mr  Brian
    Watkins who heard the appellant's asylum appeal.  She quoted  from  the
    latter's determination the passage: "There is  no  reason  whatever  to
    suppose that her father had a political opinion hostile to that of  the
    government of Eritrea, which would then impute the same opinion to  the
    Appellant." At paras 24-26 she then continued:

            'The only evidence relating to her political opinion  that  has
            now been put forward, which was not before the Adjudicator  [Mr
            Watkins], is that the Appellant now claims to have  joined  the
            ELF in London.  There is no evidence from  the  ELF  confirming
            this membership of her activities in the ELF.   The  membership
            card was issued on  15.2.2004.  The  Appellant  said  that  she
            joined, when she turned 18 and that the card  submitted  was  a
            renewal card.  She had got rid of the previous card.  She  said
            that she attends meetings and hands out leaflets. There  is  no
            confirmation of this from the London  or  national  branch.   I
            accept that the Appellant may have taken out membership.  I  do
            not find it was taken out before February of this  year.  I  do
            not find that she is involved at any significant level.  I find
            that becoming a member was  an  attempt  to  boost  her  asylum
            application.  I find it significant that she said one of her  2
            reasons for joining the ELF was so that they  could  trace  her
            father.  However she has not made any effort to do so. I do not
            find that her membership per se at this late stage persuades me
            that the conditions in Paragraph 334 will be satisfied. I  note
            the previous Adjudicator's  reference  to  a  lack  of  medical
            report relating to her injury resulting in a loss of a  kidney.
            There is no medical evidence before me.


           25. In addition to her alleged fear of persecution on account of
           her father's political opinions, she suggested that  she  had  a
           conscientious objection to military  service.   The  Adjudicator
           [Mr Watkins] found that the Appellant was not within the  narrow
           exemptions  in  Sepet  and  Bulbul.   Fear  of  persecution   or
           punishment for desertion or draft evasion does not constitute  a
           well-founded fear of persecution.


            26. I do not find that the claim that the Appellant has now put
           forward is sufficiently different from the  earlier  claim  that
           there is a realistic prospect of the conditions in Paragraph 334
           would be satisfied.  I am not satisfied that the  Appellant  has
           discharged the burden of proof  on  her  to  show  that  she  is
           entitled to the status of refugee.'


22.   She then turned to consider submissions from Counsel Ms  Quinn  about
      risks to returnees generally, based on the UNHCR  Position  Paper  on
      rejected asylum seekers to Eritrea. She also cited the Tribunal  case
      of F (Eritrea) [2003] UKIAT 00177. Turning back to the case in hand,
      she stated:

            "28. In the case before me the  Appellant  did  not  leave  her
                 country illegally. She left to live with her  parents,  who
                 were working in Saudi Arabia. I do not  find  she  has  any
                 significant political association.  She  is  not  of  mixed
                 ethnicity. She is not a draft evader or deserter. I do  not
                 find there is a real risk that she would  be  detained.   I
                 therefore find there is no real risk that she would  suffer
                 ill-treatment in detention. Her removal would not cause the
                 United Kingdom to be in breach of its obligation under  the
                 1951 Convention."

23.   She made similar findings in relation to Article 3.

24.   The grounds of appeal contended that the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
      failing to have regard to any of the new material  contained  in  the
      UNHCR report and in failing  to take proper account of the fact  that
      the appellant (unlike the claimant in F (Eritrea) who  had  completed
      his military service) had only recently become eligible for  national
      service.  On the strength of the UNHCR report it was  submitted  that
      the appellant should have been found to be someone at  real  risk  of
      being detained on return to Eritrea and, whilst  detained,  subjected
      to interrogation and  torture,  putting  the  UK  in  breach  of  its
      obligations under Art. 3. We have already recorded that these grounds
      were successful to the extent that the panel chaired by Mr Mather  at
      first-stage reconsideration found that the Adjudicator had materially
      erred in law by not considering risk on return to a young  female  of
      draft age who had effectively never been to Eritrea.

25.   No challenge was made to any of the Adjudicator's adverse credibility
      findings or other findings specific to the appellant's history.

26.   For the purposes  of  this  hearing  the  appellant  has  produced  a
      supplementary witness statement dated 14 October 2005. This reaffirms
      her previous statement but seeks to bring her history up to date.  In
      it she gives further details of her involvement with the ELF  in  the
      UK. She said she had joined in September 2003 for two  main  reasons:
      because she wanted to follow in her father's footsteps  and  continue
      what he had been doing and because she hoped and still hopes  to  get
      information about him and also keep herself informed about events  in
      Eritrea.  She said she went  to  ELF  meetings  every  two  to  three
      months.  She had also attended a demonstration outside  the  Eritrean
      Embassy in December 2004.  She recalled spotting a  big  film  camera
      inside the building on the first floor and people inside the  embassy
      as well. She also mentioned recently joining a group  called  EHDR-UK
      (Eritreans for Human and Democratic Rights).

27.   At paragraph 7  she states:-

            '7.  I have previously said that I would not undertake military
                 service in Eritrea. I am strongly opposed to  the  idea  of
                 mixed military service.  It  conflicts  with  my  religious
                 beliefs. I feel very strongly that the government is making
                 war for no reason other than to make war - it is absolutely
                 senseless and pointless and it achieves nothing. It  is  as
                 if they enjoy the blood, killing and violence and  that  is
                 why they do it. I am also  extremely  concerned  about  the
                 reports of rapes and abuse in the  military.  If  I  had  a
                 choice I would certainly not undertake military service.  I
                 am not opposed to defending my country, but I cannot  agree
                 with  the  conditions  of  service  and  the  reasons   for
                 fighting. I have thought about this a lot and I do not know
                 how I would react if they force me to do military  service.
                 I really strongly object to it and I would  like  to  think
                 that I would refuse but I really do  not  know  what  would
                 happen. I know what happens to people who do refuse  to  do
                 military service.'

Risk Factors
28.   Mr Yeo has submitted that the appellant would be at risk by virtue  of
      a combination of "general factors" and more specific risk factors.  It
      seems to us that by "general factors" Mr Yeo must  mean  general  risk
      factors; otherwise they do not advance his argument. Perhaps he  chose
      not to call them that in order to maintain his stance of objecting  to
      the Tribunal considering issue 1. Be that as it may, we shall set  out
      his arguments remaining as faithful as we can to his own wording.

29.   The 'general factors' he identified were: (1) that there is  currently
      a real risk of severe ill-treatment  to  persons  perceived  as  draft
      evaders (as found in IN at paragraph 37), a risk which  has  increased
      as a result of the worsening of the situation  in  Eritrea  since  May
      2005.  He made reference to a recent incident  in  which  families  of
      draft evaders were rounded up and ill-treated; (2)  that  there  is  a
      current real risk of ill-treatment  on  return  "irrespective  of  any
      perception as a draft evader".   This  contention  was  supported,  he
      said, by the expert  evidence  that  all  returnees  face  a  detailed
      questioning regime on return, and likely ill treatment in  the  course
      of  this  questioning;  and  (3)  a  risk  of  ill-treatment   through
      performing military service.

30.   In relation to each of these general categories, Mr  Yeo  argued  that
      the appellant's personal characteristics give rise to additional  risk
      factors.  Those he identified under  the  first  general  factor  were
      that:

      (i)   the appellant would be returned involuntarily with  no  Eritrean
           identity or travel documents;



      (ii)  she would have no way of proving that she did not leave to avoid
           military service and her questioners or  interrogators  may  not
           believe her explanation, for which she has no evidence;

      (iii) her failure to return to Eritrea earlier and  voluntarily  would
           be interpreted as  disloyalty:  the  skeleton  argument  stated:
           '[T]he appellant would have  severe  difficulty  explaining  her
           actions without reference to her actual reasons, which  are  her
           concern  about  her  father's  political  affiliation  and   her
           objections  to  military  service   on  religious  and   ethical
           grounds';

      (iv)  she objects to serving in the military on religious and  ethical
           grounds relating to Eritrean government policy - these may  come
           out under interrogation or intense questioning.

31.   In relation to what he called risk irrespective of any  perception  as
      a draft evader, Mr Yeo argued that the personal characteristics of the
      appellant which put her at additional risk were:

      (i)   return without full travel documents;

      (ii)  no identity documents, with  no  way  of  proving  her  Eritrean
           nationality;

      (iii) limited grasp of Tigrinya, one of the main languages;


      (iv)  problematic cultural attitudes she has picked up in  the  UK,  a
           free democracy, e.g. lack of deference, believing in freedom  of
           expression;

      (v)   being an  unmarried  young  woman  without  any  male  or  other
           relatives to support her or to complain on her  behalf:  'Sexual
           abuse of conscripts is widespread and the appellant would be  at
           additional risk because of the perception of their impunity  her
           isolation would give to potential  persecutors";

      (vi)  in the course of interrogation the appellant's attendance at ELF
           meetings and at the December 2004 demonstration may also come to
           light.

32.   The third  general  factor,  which  concerned  risk  of  ill-treatment
      through performing military service, was said  to  lead  to  increased
      risk for this appellant, by virtue of the  following personal factors:
      she is a young unmarried woman without family; she will stand out from
      other  conscripts by virtue of  her time in the UK and the  knowledge,
      education and cultural values she has acquired here;  she  is  someone
      who is opposed to  military service  and  is  a  Muslim  who  is  also
      opposed to the Eritrean government and police: 'if anyone is likely to
      be singled out for ill-treatment, it is her'.



The expert reports
33.   Before  turning  to  examine  and  assess  the  general  situation  in
      Eritrea, we need to make some comments about the evidence of the  four
      country experts placed before us. It will become clear in what follows
      that we draw heavily  on  these  reports  as  sources  of  information
      without fully accepting their own evaluation of that  information.  As
      the Tribunal  has  said  on  many  occasions,  we  have  to  make  our
      assessment by reference to the tests  contained  in  the  Refugee  and
      Human Rights Convention, which our  jurisprudence  has  summarised  as
      being one of real risk. In our view these reports do  not  make  their
      assessment by reference to the same tests. Furthermore, we  note  that
      on several key issues the evidence on which they base  their  opinions
      is much the same as that which has been placed before  us;  and  their
      opinions rely on inferences, not on any direct evidence.

34.   The first report in  the  bundle  is  from  Michael  P  D  Ellman,  an
      international human rights consultant and Officer of the Board of  the
      Federation Internationale des Ligues des Droits de l'Homme.  Dated  14
      October 2005, his report is written on the basis that the  appellant's
      account is true, which reduces its value to  us  since  there  was  no
      challenge in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Adjudicator's  (largely
      adverse) findings. There are several findings made in his  report  for
      which no explanation or reasoning is given. His report also lapses  at
      a key point into  exaggeration:  his  final  sentence  reads:  "It  is
      difficult to think of a case of anyone who would have more  reason  to
      fear persecution by reason of her race, her religion or her sex (as an
      unmarried Muslim woman)  were  she  to  be  returned  to  Eritrea  and
      admitted to the  country".  With  respect,  the  background  materials
      indicate that even taking the appellant's case at  its  highest  there
      are many Eritrean asylum seekers in more difficult circumstances  than
      this appellant.

35.   The next  report  is  from  Dr  David  Pool  from  the  Department  of
      Government, University  of  Manchester.  His  research  and  political
      interest in  Eritrea  have  taken  him  to  that  country  on  several
      occasions. He has published a variety  of  academic  articles  on  the
      Middle East and Africa. His succinct report of 14 October 2005  covers
      similar ground to the one he produced for the appeal in IN: see  paras
      24-25 of that determination. However, as regards the position of women
      we note that his view is at odds with the other country  experts:  the
      first line of his report appears to suggest that married women  (along
      with the medically unfit) have been  exempted  from  military  service
      since 1994 until the present. (This feature of his evidence  as  given
      in an earlier report of his was the subject of comment in the reported
      Tribunal case of HF (married women - exempt from draft) Eritrea [2005]
      UKIAT 00140)).

36.   The third report in the bundle is by Dr June Rock who is  a  freelance
      consultant  in  development  economics,  specialising   in   conflict,
      environmental, food and livelihood security with some 20 years applied
      research and policy experience in the Horn  of  Africa.  She  too  has
      visited the Horn of Africa region numerous  times.  She  is  presently
      under contract to the Swiss  Peace  Foundation  as  a  country  expert
      providing regular reports on  conflict  indicators  for  Ethiopia  and
      Eritrea. In a report dated 13 October 2005 she states that she has  no
      personal knowledge of the  facts  of  any  specific  individual  cases
      involving an Eritrean  returnee  of  conscription  age  who  fled  the
      country  in  early  childhood;   nevertheless   she   considers   that
      indiscriminate treatment of returnees as evidenced by the fate of  the
      Maltese and Libyan returnees indicates that all returnees of  eligible
      age will be perceived as draft evaders irrespective of age, gender and
      personal history.

37.   Finally there are the reports and accompanying update letter  from  Dr
      John Campbell of the School of  Oriental  and  African  Studies.  They
      include a lengthy report of 24 January 2005 which  we  understand  was
      before the Tribunal in IN: it relates to a different appellant but was
      produced in IN and now before us  with  his  permission.  This  report
      addresses a range of issues concerning the nature of military  service
      in Eritrea and the Government's treatment of draft evaders as well  as
      matters relating to citizenship. A  second  report  from  Dr  Campbell
      dated 31 January 2005 addresses  issues  relating  to  the  punishment
      experienced by draft evaders and deserters and whether it is  possible
      to  draw  a  meaningful  distinction  between  different  classes   of
      evaders/deserters. Paragraph 11  appears  to  endorse  the  surprising
      proposition that the Eritrean Government views its  entire  population
      within  the  eligible  age  range  as  draft  evaders.  We  find  this
      endorsement reduces the weight we can attach to his judgment, since it
      would entail acceptance that a very high proportion of the  population
      of Eritrea is at real risk of serious harm, a much  wider  proposition
      than he argues for elsewhere in his reports.  So far as his assessment
      of return issues is concerned, his reports illustrate, we think,  that
      even experts with great knowledge of  Eritrean  history  and  politics
      find it very difficult to ascertain precisely what happens to  persons
      who return individually and are driven as a result to rely  very  much
      on indirect inference.

38.   As regards Dr Campbell's update letter of 10 October  2005,  we  quote
      almost all of it in the body of this determination.

The general situation in Eritrea
39.   The Tribunal heard the case of IN in early February  2005.    We  have
      now to consider the significance of the evidence placed before us at a
      hearing in late October 2005 regarding recent developments in  Eritrea
      insofar as it impacts on issues of risk on return. We are grateful  to
      Mr Yeo in particular for adducing recent materials which  we  list  in
      the Appendix.

40.   Mr Yeo has argued that the overall effect of  these  materials  is  to
      show that things are getting worse:  'The key reason for deterioration
      appears to be heightening tension with  Ethiopia and the  government's
      desire to exercise greater control over the population'.

41.   It is clear that there has certainly been no  general  improvement  in
      the general country situation in Eritrea and that in certain  respects
      the  situation  has  deteriorated.  The  ruling  People's  Front   for
      Democracy Government  continues  to  operate  a  one-party  state.  No
      opposition activity or criticism is tolerated and no independent  non-
      governmental organisation or 'civil society'  is  allowed.  A  Special
      Court continues to convict defendants in secret trials without defence
      representation or the right to appeal. There are ongoing tensions with
      its neighbours, Ethiopia  and  Sudan:   the  government  continues  to
      support Ethiopian armed opposition groups fighting in Ethiopia as well
      as Sudanese armed opposition groups.  There  is  a  continuing  border
      dispute with Ethiopia which the UN Security Council fears could result
      in a new war. In an update letter of 10 October 2005 Dr John  Campbell
      states that since January 2005 "the situation  has  deteriorated".  He
      then summarises matters as follows:

      "1.     The  human  rights  situation  has  worsened  with  increasing
           numbers of people being arrested at the university, in churches,
           or on the street. These individuals have been  detained  without
           charge and are kept in secret locations.


        2.        Since  August,  the  Government  has  attempted  to  bring
           influence to bear on the international community:


                  (a) In August the Government told the US that it could  no
           longer operate its aid program in the country, despite the  fact
           that there is a major food shortage and the US is the  country's
           largest food aid donor. The order is related directly  [to]  the
           US criticism of the political situation.


                  (b) In August the authorities ordered the UN Peace Keeping
           force which monitors the border between Eritrea and Ethiopia  to
           cease the flights  of  helicopters.  The  Government  apparently
           believes that the international community has not put sufficient
           pressure on Ethiopia to resolve the dispute.


                  (c) The above move prompted the  UN  Security  Council  to
           warn both Eritrea and Ethiopia  against  reigniting  the  border
           war, unfortunately the UN`s warning seems  to  have  prompted  a
           statement to  the  UN  by  Eritrea  that  it  would  defend  its
           territorial integrity.


                  I am forced to conclude that the  authorities  in  Eritrea
           continue to pursue narrow political interests, namely staying in
           power, at the expense of its own citizens and in breach  of  its
           own draft constitution.  The  situation  remains  tense  in  the
           country,  individuals  suspected  of  evading  conscription  and
           indeed their families - members of  whom  will  have  previously
           served  in  the  armed  forces  -  are  being  arrested  without
           warrants, and held incommunicado in secret places of  detention.
           Furthermore, it is clear that the  unresolved  border  war  with
           Ethiopia, which the Government is  partly  responsible  for,  is
           being used as an excuse to maintain conscription and to continue
           in power."


Military service
42.   So far as developments affecting military service go,  we  would  also
      agree that the position has worsened somewhat from what it was at  the
      time of   IN.

43.   According to Amnesty International   in  a  July  2005  Urgent  Action
      report, there was a prison break-out in early June 2005 in which   161
      conscripts detained 'for military offences'  at  Wia  army  camp  were
      killed by armed guards. Amnesty International has reported  that  also
      in June 2005 there was an arrest of 250  wedding  guests  attending  a
      Protestant Christian wedding. 129 of them were imprisoned under severe
      conditions. Of these 121 had been identified as having  not  completed
      their military service  and  had  been  transferred  to  Wia  military
      training centre. Amnesty International, Voice  of  America  and  exile
      websites also highlight a mass round-up commencing  in  July  2005  of
      800 people in the southern Debub region. These  are  thought  to  have
      targeted the families of those  of military service age who  had  left
      Eritrea in the past few years without  exit visa or who had failed  to
      report for national service since 1994 or who  had  not  attended  the
      compulsory final school year located at Sawa military training camp or
      who  had absconded from the army.   Those  arrested  are  said  to  be
      detained in harsh conditions and at risk of torture or  ill-treatment.
       A  Reuters News article of  23  July  2005  headed  'Eritrea  rejects
      claims of mass arrests' juxtaposes reference to a government  official
      denying that round-ups had  taken  place  and  an  unnamed  diplomatic
      source from Asmara confirming the round-up had taken place.  The  same
      article states that 1 in 10 Eritreans are conscripted  or  serving  in
      the army.

44.   A further Reuter News article of 13 August 2005 describes  the  effect
      of an estimated 300,000 Eritreans in national service being to  reduce
      the workforce available for food production.    A  Missionary  Service
      News Agency (MSNA) (Italy) item of 14 September 2005  states  that  at
      least 2,000 Eritreans have abandoned their nation since the  start  of
      2005, fleeing to neighbouring  Ethiopia  claiming  to  be  victims  of
      persecution.  A local World Food Programme representative is quoted as
      saying that some  200-300 arrived each month in  Ethiopia,  being  for
      the most part young people between the ages of 18 to 30 that refuse to
      do their military service or flee claiming to have been the subject of
      political repressions. For the moment they are sheltered in a  refugee
      camp and 60km from the border between the two Horn of Africa nations.

45.   Further light is shed on the current situation  by  the  reports  from
      the four country experts. Michael P.D. Ellman, an international  human
      rights consultant,  confirms  in  his  14  October  2005  report  that
      conscription  was introduced for men and women between the ages of  18
      and 40 initially for a period of eighteen months,  later  extended  to
      two years, and finally 'indefinitely'.  Everyone is expected to enlist
      at 18;  schools are required to supply lists of their pupils for  this
      purpose - and the last year of school  is  meant  to  be  spent  at  a
      military training camp.  Anyone who does not enlist is considered as a
      draft evader and faces ill-treatment:

             'Children from the age of 14 (or  according  to  some  reports
             from the age of 10)  are  refused  exit  visas  to  leave  the
             country in case they do not return.'


             'Draft evaders' includes anyone who has  evaded  conscription,
             whether  by  failing  to  register,  deserting,   or   (having
             previously served) failed to answer a further call...'

46.   Drs Pool, Rock and Campbell make  similar  comments.  As  regards  the
      June 2005 prison breakout, Dr Rock states that there  are  unconfirmed
      reports that as many as 161 conscripts detained at Wia army camp  were
      killed.  Dr Rock also draws attention  to  the  Amnesty  International
      reference in its report  of  March  2004  to  a   'pattern  of  sexual
      violence' affecting female conscripts, including  rape  and  the  fact
      that 'female recruits were  selected  by   commanders  for  sex  under
      duress, through being threatened with heavy military duties  or  being
      sent to the battle front during the war,  or  to  a  remote  or  harsh
      posting, or being denied home leave.'  Dr Campbell states that:

             'Estimates  vary  as  to  what  percentage  of  the   national
             population has served in the armed forces ranging from  6%  to
             35%.  The latter estimate  probably  reflects  the  extent  of
             military call up from 1998'.

47.   Three other passages from Dr Campbell`s 24  January  2005  report  are
      pertinent here:

             'While initially denying that it  conscripted  children  below
             the age of 18, [the] government admitted that  this  may  have
             occurred as a  result  of  the  absence  of  systematic  birth
             registrations. Given the scale of recruitment and the creation
             [of] 'military schooling' for youth, it is not  clear  whether
             [they] are or are not conscripting school-age  children.  Thus
             in addition to using police sweeps, roadblocks  and  house  to
             house searches for deserters and draft evaders, the government
             also refuses to issue exit visas to adolescents  and  children
             as young as ten years of age apparently on  the  grounds  that
             they were  approaching the age  of  eligibility  for  national
             service [US State Department Report 2003].


             What categories of person are subject to conscription and  who
             is exempt?  The age for conscription has remained unchanged at
             18-40 years, as  has  the  penalty  for  attempting  to  evade
             conscription, i.e. 3 years imprisonment. However in  2002  the
             terms of  national  service  were  extended  indefinitely  and
             individuals who had already served and  been  discharged  were
             required to re-enlist. The effect of the  requirement  on  ex-
             soldiers to re-enlist would significantly  raise  the  age  of
             conscription (perhaps beyond the age of 50 which is final year
             for serving  in  the  reserves),  however  no  statistics  are
             available.


             Among these who were initially exempt  from  national  service
             were 'mothers', certain categories of workers, EPLF  veterans,
             the disabled, those with registered medical  certificates  and
             students.  However, in 2001 marriage no longer exempted  young
             women from military service, a situation which is said to have
             pushed some into having children in order to  be  exempted.  I
             have been unable to find specific information concerning which
              'workers' are exempt though this may apply to civil servants,
             teachers or health workers (if conscripted  these  individuals
             work  under  that  authority  of  the  military  and  for  low
             military wages).  There is no information concerning  how  the
             disabled and those with medical problems   are  assessed,  nor
             what conditions are  recognised  as  the  basis  for  claiming
             exemption.  Final year (11th grade) high school  students  and
             university students are required to  do  summer  work  service
             (often in harsh conditions, several students  died  from  heat
             prostration in 2001 while others were  beaten).   In  2003  an
             'extra final  year' was added to the school curriculum   which
             requires all students to  attend  military-style  training  at
             Sawa military base; at the end a small number are selected for
             higher education (where they have a  temporary  reprieve  from
             military service until they graduate) while  the  rest  go  to
             national service.

48.   Dr  Campbell's report also sets out information on  the  treatment  of
      female conscripts which he says is limited but tends  to  reflect  the
      view of Amnesty International  that  there  is  a  pattern  of  female
      conscripts are subject to sexual abuse. He notes  that  the  May  2004
      Amnesty International report ('You have no right to  ask')  says  that
      due to 'violent confrontations by Muslims, young Muslim women  are  no
      longer forcibly conscripted'. In fact the Amnesty International report
      in question is slightly more qualified. It  states:

             'Women played an  important  part  in  the  EPLF's  liberation
             struggle in both military and civilian roles and there was  an
             official commitment to gender quality in  the   EPLF  and  its
             social policies. This  was  reflected  in  the  terms  of  the
             national service after independence, which was established for
             men  and  women  equally,  although  there  was   considerable
             resistance to  female  recruitment  from  Muslim  communities,
             especially among the Afar of Dankalia region on  the  Red  Sea
             coast.   Resistance  on  the  grounds  of  religious   belief,
             cultural traditions and family  honour,  or  protecting  women
             from sexual harassment and violence in the army sometimes  led
             to violent confrontations during conscription  round-ups.  The
             government  appears  to  have  subsequently  stopped  forcible
             recruitment of young Muslim women in these areas.


             There was an official statement at the end of 2003 that  women
             were to be  demobilised  but  this  has  reportedly  not  been
             implemented.'

  49. One further item of relevance to the situation as regards  exit  visas
      and military service-related matters, including the position of  women
      of draft age is the  US  State  Department  Report  of  February  2005
      (covering 2004). Section 2 d on Freedom of Movement states:

                  "Citizens and foreign nationals were required to obtain an
           exit visa to depart the country. There were numerous cases where
           foreign nationals were delayed departure for up to 2 months,  or
           initially denied permission to leave, when they applied  for  an
           exit visa.  During  the  year,  the  Government  announced  that
           citizens who had left the country without  exit  visa  would  be
           allowed to return to the  country  without  legal  consequences;
           however, at year`s end, it was unclear  if  this  provision  had
           been implemented.


                  Citizens of national service age (men 18 to  45  years  of
           age, and women 18 to 27  years of age), Jehovah's Witnesses  ...
           and others who were out of favour with or seen  as  critical  of
           the Government were routinely denied exit  visas.  Students  who
           wished to study abroad often were unable to obtain  exit  visas.
           In addition, the Government frequently  refused  to  issue  exit
           visas to adolescents and children as young as 5  years  of  age,
           either on the grounds that they  were  approaching  the  age  of
           eligibility for national  service  or  because  their  diasporal
           parents had not paid the 2 percent income tax  required  of  all
           citizens residing abroad. Some citizens were granted exit  visas
           only after posting bonds of approximately $7,400 (10,000 nafka).




                  In general, citizens had  the  right  to  return;  however
           citizens had to show proof that they paid the 2 percent  tax  on
           their income  to  the  Government  while  living  abroad  to  be
           eligible for some government services on  their  return  to  the
           country. Applications to return from citizens living abroad  who
           had broken the law, contracted a serious contagious  disease  or
           had been declared  ineligible  for  political  asylum  by  other
           governments, were considered on a case by case basis".


50.   As regards women, this same 2005 report states:

                 "The law requires that women between the ages of 18 and  27
           participate in national service (see  Section  6c).  During  the
           year  efforts  to  detain  women  draft  evaders  and  deserters
           generally decreased compared to  previous  years.  According  to
           reports, some women drafted for national service were  subjected
           to sexual harassment and abuse.


                  During the year hundreds of women  were  demobilised  from
           national service due to age, infirmity, motherhood, marriage, or
           needs  of  their  families.  Once  demobilised  women  were  not
           required to serve in a government ministry".

Amnesty International's risk categories
51.   It is in order that we  set  out  something  more  about  the  Amnesty
      International materials since these are the most detailed to hand  and
      because its May 2004 report includes a summary of its view of  current
      risk categories. This report was before the Tribunal  in  IN,  but  we
      need to examine it more closely in order to  address  certain  matters
      raised by Mr Yeo. In a section  headed  'Eritrean  asylum  seekers  at
      risk', it states:

             "Amnesty International considers the following  categories  of
             people would be particularly at risk  of  arbitrary  detention
             (some  as  prisoners  of  conscience  who  have  not  used  or
             advocated violence), torture  and  ill-treatment  or  possible
             extra-judicial execution:


             *   members and supporters or  suspected  supporters  (at  all
             levels, not just those holding official positions) of the left
             or other groups in the armed Eritrean National Alliance;


             *   members and supporters of new political opposition  groups
             such as the EPLF-DP (now the EDP) or the  'democratic  reform'
             movement in general;


             *   journalists who have criticised the government;


             *   national service  conscripts  and  members  of  the  armed
             forces deserting from the army;


             *   people evading and refusing  conscription  on  account  of
             their opinions or beliefs;


             *    members  of  persecuted  minority   Christian   religions
             (especially Jehovah's Witnesses);


             *   Muslims suspected of links  with  armed  Islamism  or  ELF
             opposition groups - even without substantive evidence of  such
             involvement;


             *   people who had previously been  imprisoned  for  political
             reasons and  ignored  threats  to  desist  from  opposing  the
             government;


             *    anyone  known  or  suspected  to  have   criticised   the
             government or the President;


             *anyone suspected of disloyalty to the government  - even  the
             act of applying   for  asylum  abroad  would  be  regarded  as
             evidence of disloyalty and reasons to  detain  and  torture  a
             person returned to  Eritrea after rejection of asylum.


             In addition, two categories of  Eritrean affected by  the  war
             and continued tensions between Eritrea and Ethiopia  would  be
             at risk of human rights violations  if  forced  to  return  to
             Eritrea:


             *   those who wished to remain in or  return  to  Ethiopia  as
             Ethiopian citizens (after living there  for  all  or  most  of
             there lives and having no ties to  Eritrea) but [who] were  en
             masse denied this by Ethiopia and stripped of their  Ethiopian
             citizenship;


             *   those of mixed Ethiopian-Eritrean families (of which there
             are many):  families were broken up  by  the  expulsions  from
             Ethiopia during the war,  where  the  Ethiopian  spouse/parent
             stayed in Ethiopia in fear of the risk of moving  to  Eritrea,
             or where  marriage  to  an  Ethiopian  or  someone  of   part-
             Ethiopian descent might lead to their being refused  entry  to
             Eritrea, discriminated against  in  Eritrea  or  suspected  of
             having Ethiopian government links;   some  had  no  ties  with
             Eritrea and did not wish to become  Eritrean citizens.


             In early 2004 the Ethiopian government issued new  regulations
             for the tens of thousands  of  Eritreans  still  remaining  in
             Ethiopia.   These  regulations  would  allow  them   Ethiopian
             citizenship if they were not Eritrean citizens, or would grant
             them permanent non-citizen residence status  in   Ethiopia  as
             well as travel documents  and  business  permits,  except  for
             those who were outside Ethiopia for over a  year.  The  latter
             would  be  treated  as  non-citizens  for   the   purpose   of
             government employment but otherwise with the  same  access  to
             education and health  facilities  as  Ethiopian  citizens.  It
             remains to be seen how these regulations will be implemented.'

Our Conclusions
52.   In reaching our conclusions we have had regard to  a number of  items
      of evidence that were not before the Tribunal  in  IN,  including  the
      October 2005 expert reports and the February 2005 US State Department.
      In the light of the background evidence, we shall first of all address
      the three general risk factors identified by Mr Yeo  in  this  case  -
      factors, we note, which are raised in more or  less  similar  form  in
      many appeals lodged by asylum-seekers of Eritrean nationality.

Risk to Returnees perceived as draft evaders
53.   It was a central finding of the Tribunal in IN that persons  who  are
      perceived  as  draft  evaders  or  deserters  would  be  at  risk   of
      persecution or treatment contrary to Art. 3 on return: see para 44(i).
      We reaffirm that finding. From the evidence which has  been  submitted
      to us concerning the apparent killing of 161 conscripts who  attempted
      a prison break-out from Wia Army Camp in June 2005 and concerning  the
      imprisonment also in June 2005 of 121 wedding guests identified as not
      having completed their military service, it is clear that the  current
      regime remains committed to enforcing its compulsory national  service
      system in a highly punitive way.  The targeting  of  families  in  the
      southern Debub region appears to indicate an extension  of  repressive
      measures designed to deter families from facilitating efforts by their
      draft-age children  to  avoid  national  service.  The  draft  plainly
      continues to be used as an instrument for enforcing obedience  to  the
      institutions and ideology of the ruling People's Front for  Democracy.
      An extraordinary high percentage of the  population  -  around  10%  -
      remain in national service. This is in contrast to the situation prior
      to 1998 when only 3% of the population was in  national  service.  The
      official age band of 18-40 appears in practice to extend sometimes  to
      50, possibly even beyond.  The ruling party  seems  committed  to  the
      continuance of its current policy on national service, on a scale well
      beyond that which appears necessary in view of  the  continuing  tense
      border dispute with Ethiopia and that which appears warranted in terms
      of the level of food production required to avoid shortages.

Risks to Returnees
54.   Mr Yeo's second  general  category  was  returnees  "irrespective  of
      whether they would be perceived as draft evaders".   It  seems  to  us
      that he can only mean here to refer to the issue of risk to  returnees
      generally. In any event the issue of risk to  returnees  generally  is
      one we need to address, since it is raised in one shape or form by the
      analyses contained in several of the country reports before us and  is
      relied upon in a great many asylum appeals  brought  by  nationals  of
      Eritrea. Given two high profile  return-related  incidents  that  have
      occurred in Eritrea in recent years and the country's  generally  poor
      human rights record, it is quite understandable that this has been and
      continues to be raised.

55.   The appellant's case in IN was not argued on the basis that there  is
      a real risk for all returnees: see para 34. However, in order to reach
      conclusions on current risk categories, the panel  in  that  case  did
      find it necessary to advert to the issue and eventually to conclude at
      para 44 (vii) that the evidence did not establish a risk for returnees
      generally. That it eventually found it appropriate to make  a  finding
      on this issue though not  one  specifically  argued  before  it  makes
      perfect sense, since, potentially, if a risk were found to  exist  for
      returnees generally, all persons who were nationals of Eritrea and who
      had asylum claims would be entitled to succeed in  their  appeals  and
      there would be no point in going on to  attempt  identifying  narrower
      risk categories.
56.   In IN the Tribunal had before it considerable  evidence  relating  to
      the fate of the 223 persons  whom  Malta  had  returned  en  masse  to
      Eritrea in 2002 (see paras 19-20), and the fate  of  the  111  persons
      returned from Libya in July 2004 (see paras 21-22)  and  the  case  of
      several individuals returned from Djibouti (see para 23).

57.   The background evidence before us  also  covers  these  incidents  in
      great detail. The Amnesty International report of 25  May  2004  notes
      that some of the 232 Eritreans who were forcibly returned  to  Eritrea
      from Malta in 2002 continued  to  be  detained  incommunicado  without
      charge on the main Daklak Island in the Red Sea or at  other  military
      detention centres.  There is no mention in the evidence before  us  of
      any further incidents of mass return.

58.   We can see no reason to take a different view on this issue than  the
      Tribunal did in IN. Essentially the Tribunal's view  continues  to  be
      that although  the  Maltese  and  Libyan  mass  return  incidents  are
      particularly serious, we  do  not  consider  they  are  sufficient  to
      establish that there is a real  risk  of  serious  harm  to  returnees
      generally. Most returns to Eritrea continue, as far as we  are  aware,
      to take place on an individual or family basis, not on a  mass  basis.
      Given the extent to which human rights bodies have been able to obtain
      information about  what  is  happening  inside  Eritrea,  despite  the
      regime`s efforts to suppress  dissent  and  reportage  of  abuses,  we
      consider that if  individual  returnees  were  routinely  encountering
      serious harm or ill treatment, that fact would  have  been  identified
      and documented to a greater or lesser extent.


      It is right that we take note here that in its May 2004 report Amnesty
      International did list amongst its sub-categories of "Eritrean  asylum
      seekers at risk":

           "Anyone suspected of disloyalty to the government - even the act
           of applying for asylum abroad would be regarded as  evidence  of
           disloyalty and reasons to detain and torture a  person  returned
           to Eritrea after rejection of asylum".

60.   It is also right to note that a similar view  is  expressed  in   the
      country report from Michael Ellman when he states that: "The fact that
      she has claimed asylum in the UK, and  does  not  want  to  return  to
      Eritrea,  will  put  her  under  considerable  suspicion,  and  almost
      certainly result in her being regarded as a  draft  evader".  Dr  June
      Rock also seems to suggest it  may  be  a  relevant  factor  when  she
      writes:

             "Certainly the fact that she has claimed asylum in the UK  and
             clearly does not want to return to Eritrea will only  increase
             the level of suspicion to which  she  would  be  subjected  if
             returned there and is thus  one  reasons  why  she  would  now
             almost certainly be viewed by the Eritrean  authorities  as  a
             draft evader".

61.   However, neither the Amnesty International report nor Michael  Ellman
      nor Dr Rock cite any specific evidence in support of this view and  we
      do not think that there is sufficient substantiation  for  it  in  the
      background materials read as a whole. (Nor is it clear to us  why,  if
      Amnesty International believed there was such a broad  risk  category,
      they placed it in a list  of  categories  which  plainly  only  affect
      relatively limited numbers of persons.) We note too that the latest US
      State Department report indicates that the Eritrean authorities  would
      treat persons who have been declared ineligible for  political  asylum
      by other governments on a case by case basis.

Risk to Returnees of Eligible Draft Age
62.   It seems to us  that  the  category  Mr  Yeo  principally  wished  to
      identify as a risk category is less widely drawn than all returnees or
      returnees generally.  It is those of eligible draft age.

  63. Before deciding whether we accept there is such a risk  category,  we
      need to clarify (more than was done in IN) its ambit. What we set out
      immediately below is subject to qualification when it comes to female
      returnees of eligible draft age.


64.   We are prepared to accept on the basis  of  the  background  evidence
      before us that in the current Eritrean  context  those  who  would  be
      perceived as of eligible draft  age  cover  a  large  section  of  the
      population.             So  far  as  the  control  systems  used   for
      Eritreans in Eritrea are  concerned, it would seem  that the  category
      of those of eligible draft age currently covers nationals aged from 18-
      50 and that, in the case of those seeking to exit  the  country,  this
      can be extended to cover persons aged 5-50. Whilst  outside  the  exit
      context there is some reference to persons under 18  (child  soldiers)
      and persons over 50 being required to serve, it is not suggested  that
      this is a common occurrence.

  64. We also think that when it comes to considering how  the  authorities
      will regard returnees, they are likely to place significant focus  on
      whether such persons left Eritrea when they were approaching the  age
      of 18 or had recently passed  that  age.  We  say  this  because  the
      background evidence indicates that there is considerable attention to
      the need to ensure that persons below the age of 18 are not  able  to
      avoid  their  future  national  service  obligation  by  exiting  the
      country. We remind ourselves here of what was said by Michael  Ellman
      in his report (it is echoed by the other country experts):

            "Children from the age of 14 (or according to some reports from
            the age of 10) are refused exit visas to leave the  country  in
            case they do not return".


      The latest US State Department report even suggests that children  as
      young as five can be refused exit visas.

           However, what we have to focus is how the  Eritrean  authorities
      will perceive persons returning to Eritrea.

  66. However, it seems common sense to us that in  relation  to  nationals
      returning to Eritrea, the authorities  would  not  routinely  perceive
      persons below the age of 18 as being draft evaders, since  they  would
      be presenting themselves as nationals back in the country  in  advance
      of the formal requirement to register. Since it is not suggested  that
      persons over 50 are commonly required to do national service, we think
      that the effective age-range which is likely to be in the minds of the
      authorities who deal with persons returning to Eritrea is,  therefore,
      18-50.

67.    Given the relatively low life  expectancy  of  Eritreans,  which  we
      understand to be 60 or lower, the category we are looking  at  appears
      to comprise more than half of the entire male population as well as  a
      significant percentage of the female population.


68.   Mr Yeo submitted that persons who are perceived as of eligible  draft
      age would face interrogation or intense questioning on return.   That
      is attested to by all of the expert reports. Despite the lack of  any
      direct or specific evidence on this issue, we accept this submission.
       In our view it fits  with  everything  we  know  about  the  current
      Government`s obsession about ensuring that those  of  eligible  draft
      age perform their military service as and when required.

69.   Mr Yeo submitted further that the interrogation procedure adopted for
      returnees of eligible draft age is likely to be accompanied  generally
      by detention and ill-treatment. This submission is  supported  by  the
      country expert reports. However, it is  clear  that  the  latter  rely
      heavily (as did the January 2004 UNHCR Position paper, which has  been
      considered by the Tribunal in several country guidance cases) on  what
      is known to have happened to the Maltese and Libyan  returnees.  Given
      that  these  were  both  incidents  of  mass  returns,  in  which  the
      authorities were plainly  intent  on  demonstrating  a  clamp-down  on
      persons perceived as having fled Eritrea to avoid the draft, we do not
      consider it justified to infer from them that  the  same  approach  is
      taken to the potentially very  large  category  of  persons  returning
      individually who are simply of eligible draft age. It makes sense,  as
      we have said, to accept that such persons  would  face  interrogation.
      But it does not make sense, on our view, to infer that the authorities
      would seek to detain or ill-treat persons at  this  stage.  Given  the
      great importance the Eritrean authorities attach to  their  exit  visa
      system as a means of screening in  order  to  detect  potential  draft
      evaders, we consider it reasonably likely that their on entry  control
      system would reflect similar objectives. Hence we do  not  think  they
      would take steps to detain or ill treat returnees until after they had
      established such matters as whether the individual concerned had  left
      with an exit visa, whether he or she had already done national service
      or whether he or she had obtained an exemption. In our view it  defies
      common sense to suggest otherwise since we are told that those granted
      exit visas include EPLF veterans and persons  closely  connected  with
      the leadership.  A system which meant that returnees of draft age were
      routinely  subject  to  ill  treatment  would  entail  -   improbably-
      mistreatment  even  of  persons  highly  favoured   by   the   current
      Government.

70.   We consider that in such circumstances the background evidence viewed
      as a whole calls for a more  contextual  approach,  similar  to  that
      adopted by the Tribunal in IN at para 44  (ii),  when  it  summarised
      matters as follows:




           "(ii) There is no  material  distinction  to  be  drawn  between
           deserters and draft evaders. The issue  is  simply  whether  the
           Eritrean authorities will regard a returnee as someone  who  has
           sought to evade military service or as a deserter. The fact that
           a returnee is of draft age is not determinative.  The  issue  is
           whether on the facts a returnee of draft age would be  perceived
           as having sought to evade the draft by his or her departure from
           Eritrea. If someone falls within an  exemption  from  the  draft
           there would be no perception of draft evasion. If a  person  has
           yet to reach the age for  military  service,  he  would  not  be
           regarded as a draft evader: see paragraph 14 of AT.  If  someone
           has been eligible for call-up over a significant period but  has
           not been called up, then again that will normally  be  no  basis
           for a finding that he or  she  would  be  regarded  as  a  draft
           evader.  Those  at  risk  on  the  present  evidence  are  those
           suspected of having left to avoid the draft. Those who  received
           call up papers or who were approaching or  had  recently  passed
           draft age at the time they left Eritrea, may, depending on their
           own  particular  circumstances,  on  the  present  evidence   be
           regarded by the authorities as draft evaders. (emphasis added)"


71.   But in the light of the further evidence and submissions and our  own
      further reflection on these, we consider there is  a  need  for  three
      modifications to the guidance given in IN.

  72. Firstly, for reasons already adumbrated,  we  consider  that  in  the
      context of return, the age  range  for  those  considered  to  be  of
      eligible draft age will be 18- 50 (but see below on the  position  of
      female returnees). Within that age-band there is  a  real  risk  that
      persons will be perceived as draft evaders unless:

      (i)   they can be considered to have left Eritrea legally.  Regarding
           this subcategory, it must be borne in mind that  an  appellant's
           assertion that he left illegally will raise an issue  that  will
           need to be established to the required standard.  A  person  who
           generally lacks credibility will not be  assumed  to  have  left
           illegally.  We think  those  falling  into  the  "left  legally"
           subcategory will often include persons  who  are  considered  to
           have already done national service or to have got  an  exemption
           and  persons  who  have  been  eligible  for  call-up   over   a
           significant period but have not been called up. Conversely those
           falling outside this subcategory will often include persons  who
           left Eritrea  when  they  were  approaching  draft  age  or  had
           recently passed that age; or


      (ii)  they have not been in Eritrea since the start of the  war  with
           Ethiopia in 1998 (that  being  the  year  when  the  authorities
           increased dramatically the numbers required for call up and took
           the  national  service  system  in  a  much  more  authoritarian
           direction) and are able to show that there was no  draft-evasion
           motive behind their absence. This subcategory reflects our  view
           that the authorities would know that persons  who  left  Eritrea
           before the start of the war would not have had draft evasion  as
           a possible motive: we will return to this point  when  assessing
           the appellant`s particular circumstances; or


      (iii)       they have never been to Eritrea and are able to show that
           there was no draft-evasion motive behind any absence  of  theirs
           since 1998 when the war with Ethiopia began. In relation to this
           subcategory, we bear in mind that only nationals of Eritrea  are
           required to do national service and that if someone has not  yet
           obtained travel documents based on his (her) being  accepted  as
           an Eritrean national, there is  no  reason  to  think  that  the
           Eritrean authorities  would  see  him  (her)  as  having  evaded
           military service at a  time  when  he  (she)  had  not  formally
           acquired or been recognised as having Eritrean  nationality.  To
           this extent, we agree with the conclusions set out in TA  (draft
           evasion-citizenship-evidence  required)  Eritrea  [2005]   UKIAT
           00155.


  73. In general, therefore, a person aged between 18-50 (but see below  on
      female returnees)  is likely to be able to show he will be  perceived
      as a draft evader unless his situation falls into one or more of  the
      above three subcategories.

  74. However, in our view it remains the case that in relation to each  of
      the risk categories we have identified that assessment must depend on
      the particular circumstances. We cannot emphasise enough the need for
      specific findings on a person`s particular history and circumstances.
      It may be, for example, that a person who is of  eligible  draft  age
      will not need to establish very much more, at least if her or she  is
      still relatively young:  it  seems  to  us  that  the  focus  of  the
      repressive efforts of the authorities has principally been on persons
      round draft age or still in their 20s. In  the  specific  case  dealt
      with in IN, for example, the Tribunal made a specific finding that in
      the particular circumstances of  the  appellant's  case  he  was  not
      someone who could be said to fall into a category  which  would  mean
      the authorities would  not perceive him as a draft  evader.  However,
      we think something more must always  be  shown.  It  would  be  quite
      wrong, for example, for someone who in fact has obtained an exemption
      from military service, to succeed simply on the  basis  that  he  has
      shown he was of eligible draft age.

Risks to females of eligible draft age
75.   In IN the  Tribunal  found  at  para  44  (iv)  that:  "There  is  no
      justification on  the  latest  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  for  a
      distinction being made  between  male  and  female  draft  evaders  or
      deserters. The risk applies equally to both".

           We do not think there is any justification in departing from the
      guidance in IN arising from the risk to women of eligible draft age of
      sexual abuse. The  furthest  that  any  of  the  descriptions  in  the
      background materials go is what is set out in  the  May  2004  Amnesty
      International report, which refers to there being a  pattern  of  such
      abuse. In none of these materials, however, is it suggested that  such
      a  pattern  is  consistently  or  frequently   occurring.   The   only
      quantitative term used is "some".  Because  the  background  materials
      fall short of identifying a  consistent  pattern  of  gross,  mass  or
      frequent sexual abuse of female conscripts  we  remain  of  the  view,
      therefore, that  that they do not establish a real risk of such  abuse
      facing women conscripts  generally.

76.    Nor (subject to one caveat) do we think there is a  need  to  modify
      the guidance in respect of the age requirements.  As the Tribunal  has
      noted on previous occasions (e.g.  I  the  previous  country  guidance
      case, MA  (Female  draft  evader)  Eritrea  [2004]  UKIAT  00098)  the
      background materials have not been wholly consistent on  the  question
      of female age bands and that continues to be  the  case.  On  the  one
      hand, the US State Department Reports of February  2003  and  February
      2004 state that the age band for women is 18-27.  That  is  reiterated
      in the latest report of  February  2005.  On  the  other  hand,  UNHCR
      reports and the Home Office CIPU (now COI) reports on Eritrea continue
      to state the age-range as 18-40 by reference to Art 8 of the  Eritrean
      Proclamation on National Service No.82/1995: see for example the  Home
      Office COIS report, October 2005 para 6.90. However, there is  nothing
      to indicate that  the  extension  of  the  eligible  age  to  50  (and
      sometimes beyond) has had any significant application to women.

77.   We see a need to clarify more than was done in IN that women aged 18-
      40 are not as likely to have to perform military service as men.  From
      the expert evidence we have before us it would  seem  that  there  are
      important differentials. First of all,  estimates  such  as  they  are
      suggest that the ratio of women to men in national service  is  35%  -
      65%: that at least is the most recent  ratio  given  by  Dr  Campbell.
      Secondly, there have been policy fluctuations regarding married women.
      Prior to 2001 marriage exempted young  women  from  military  service.
      That then stopped. However, the government is reported  in  2003-4  to
      have  stopped  forcible  recruitment  of  young  Muslims  from  Muslim
      communities, especially among the Afar of Dankalia region on  the  Red
      Sea Coast (May 2004 Amnesty International report) and according to the
      US State Department report for February 2005 during 2004 "hundreds  of
      women were demobilised from national service due  to  age,  infirmity,
      motherhood, marriage or needs  of  their  families.  Once  demobilised
      women were not required to serve in a government ministry".

            We think, therefore, that women who  would  potentially  be  at
      real risk of being perceived as draft evaders   will  be  confined  to
      those who are   non-Muslim females aged between  18-40   who  are  not
      married or who are not mothers or carers. Furthermore such women  will
      only be actually at real risk of being perceived as draft  evaders  if
      their circumstances  do  not  bring  them  within  one  of  the  three
      subcategories identified in para 72 above.

Risk to those with conscientious objections to military service
78.   Thirdly, we consider that there is a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      treatment contrary to Art 3 for those with conscientious objections to
      military service. The point we make here  is  not  that  conscientious
      objection in itself gives rise to a real risk; that it  does  not  was
      settled by the Court of Appeal and the House of  Lords  in  Sepet  and
      Bulbul [2001] Imm AR 452(CA); [2003] 1 WLR 856. But  as  Lord  Bingham
      clarified in para 8 of the judgment of the  House  of  Lords  in  this
      case, it remains that there is compelling support for  the  view  that
      refugee status should be accorded  "...where refusal  to  serve  would
      earn grossly excessive  or  disproportionate  punishment...".  In  the
      present  Eritrean  context  the  nature  and  extent  of  a   person`s
      objections to military service  are  still  relevant  because  of  the
      established fact  that  the  authorities  react  oppressively  to  any
      refusal to perform military service. A judgment  has  to  be  made  in
      every  case,  therefore,  as  to  whether  a  person`s  objections  to
      performing military service are likely to be so entrenched or visceral
      as to lead them to refuse to do  it,  even  knowing  that  the  likely
      consequence will be ill treatment. This is a purely factual  question.
      Dr Campbell in his January 2005 report notes that among those who have
      been consistently harassed and detained for refusing  conscription  on
      grounds of conscientious objection are Jehovah Witnesses  and  members
      of the so  called  'Pentes'  (Pentecostal)  churches.  These  examples
      indicate that for someone to succeed on this  basis  he  or  she  will
      usually have to show  that  non-performance  of  military  service  is
      fundamental to their religious  faith  or  that  they  hold  unusually
      strong reasons of conscience.

Risk to Persons who undertake Military Service
79.   We come to Mr Yeo's third and final general category: risk to persons
      who undertake military service.

80.   As the Tribunal noted in IN, there is a sizeable body of evidence  to
      show that draft evaders and deserters are severely punished and  that
      such  punishments  are  disproportionate  to  the  offence   and   so
      constitute serious harm and/or treatment contrary to Art 3: see  para
      29 with reference to paras 16-28 of that  decision.   We  think  that
      finding remains justified. The further  evidence,  particularly  that
      set out by Dr Campbell in his 24 January 2005 report, highlights this
      state of affairs.

  81. The Tribunal in IN did not however, find  that  mere  performance  of
      national service in Eritrea gives rise to serious harm  or  treatment
      contrary to Art 3.  We are of the same view. Whilst there is evidence
      indicating that conscripts often face adverse conditions of  service,
      it falls short of suggesting that there is a  consistent  pattern  of
      gross, mass or frequent violations  of  the  basic  human  rights  of
      conscripts.

Our findings on the Appellant's particular circumstances
  82. We set out the appellant's case in some detail earlier so as  to  make
      clear the basis for the conclusions we now go on  to  make  concerning
      it. The Adjudicator made a number of adverse credibility findings  and
      these were not challenged  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  However,  in
      addition to more recent country background evidence  and  reports,  we
      now have before us further evidence from  the  appellant  intended  to
      update her activities in the UK and her current beliefs.  We  have  to
      consider this evidence in the context of her previous evidence and  in
      the light of the earlier assessments made of  it  by  Adjudicators  Mr
      Watkins and Mrs Turquet. We have to bear in mind that the appellant is
      only  required  to  prove  her  account  to  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood or by showing there are substantial grounds  for  believing
      it.

  83. We are not persuaded that the appellant's latest statement  casts  any
      significantly  different  light  on  her  overall  circumstances.  Mrs
      Turquet was prepared to  accept  that  the  appellant  had  taken  out
      membership of ELF in February 2004, but not at the  earlier  date  she
      claimed (September 2003). Mrs Turquet found that the appellant was not
      involved at any significant level and that becoming a  member  was  an
      attempt to boost her asylum application. In  reaching  these  findings
      she emphasised the fact that the appellant had  obtained  no  evidence
      from ELF confirming her membership or her activities in  the  ELF  and
      that, despite one or her two stated reasons for joining the ELF  being
      so they could help trace her father, she had not made any effort to do
      so. When we turn to look at the appellant's recent statement  we  note
      that, notwithstanding  these  observations  of  the  Adjudicator,  the
      appellant still has not furnished any confirmation from the ELF in the
      UK as to her membership or her activities. Although she  now  gives  a
      name of the assistant organiser who is said  to  effectively  run  the
      London branch, there is not even an accompanying  statement  from  him
      confirming his role or confirming the appellant's  claims  as  to  her
      involvement.  In our view the  appellant  has  had  ample  opportunity
      before now either to produce corroborative  evidence  to  support  her
      claims about her UK ELF activity or to explain why she  has  not  been
      able to do so.

84.   As for her further remarks about the importance  to  her  of  being  a
      member of ELF in the UK, we note that she essentially repeats what she
      said previously and she does not seek to disagree with  Mrs  Turquet's
      finding that she has not sought to make inquiries  or  have  inquiries
      made about her father. We consider that these remarks take matters  no
      further.

85.   The recent statement claims that she attended a demonstration  outside
      the Eritrean embassy in December 2004. Even assuming that is true,  we
      note that on her own account she was not a political activist and  did
      not play  any  particular  role  at  this  demonstration;  she  simply
      attended. Whether or not she was  amongst  those  possibly  filmed  by
      Embassy staff, we see no basis for considering that such  activity  on
      her part would place her at any kind of risk.  It is apparent that the
      current Ethiopian regime keeps a close watch on  political  dissidents
      and it is reasonable to infer that such watch is maintained abroad  as
      well as at home. However, we consider that it would make little  sense
      for the Eritrean authorities to take a blanket adverse  interest  even
      in persons with no significant  level  of  involvement  in  opposition
      groups and no history of political activism.

86.   So far as the appellant's mention of joining a  group  called  EHDR-UK
      (and her inclusion of  some  background  materials  relating  to  this
      group's aims and activities), we see no  reason  to  think  that  this
      should be seen in a different light from her involvement with ELF  and
      in our view similar considerations will apply to her activity (if any)
      in relation to this organisation.

 87.  We are aware  that  Amnesty  International  in  its  May  2004  report
      specifies  among  its  risk  categories  "members  and  supporters  or
      suspected supporters (at all levels, not just those  holding  official
      positions) of the left or other groups in the armed Eritrean  National
      Alliance", "members and supporters of new political opposition  groups
      such as the EPLF-DP (now the EDP) or the 'democratic reform'  movement
      in general". However, at least insofar as they relate to the issue  of
      real risk under the Refugee and Human  Rights  Conventions,  we  think
      these categories are more widely drawn than  the  background  evidence
      justifies. As the Tribunal has noted in AN (ELF-RC-low level  members-
      risk) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00300, although  there  is  evidence  to
      show the authorities have ill-treated oppositionists of all kinds  and
      at all levels, the main objects of their adverse attention  have  been
      prominent members or persons who are active.

88.   The appellant's recent statement also seeks to elaborate on her  views
      concerning military service.  She points out that whilst  she  is  not
      opposed to defending her country she cannot agree with the  conditions
      of service and the reasons for fighting. In addition she  is  strongly
      opposed to the idea of mixed military  service,  saying  it  conflicts
      with her religious beliefs.  She  is  extremely  concerned  about  the
      reports of rapes and abuse in the military.

89.   As regards this statement we note that it  largely  reiterates  points
      the appellant made in her SEF statement and points which  were  before
      Mrs Turquet.

90.   Mrs Turquet dealt very briefly with this  aspect  of  the  appellant`s
      claim, noting at para 25 that in  addition  to  her  alleged  fear  of
      persecution  on  account  of  her  father's  political  opinions,  the
      appellant suggested she had  a  conscientious  objection  to  military
      service. Mrs Turquet noted that the previous Adjudicator, Mr  Watkins,
      had found that the appellant was not within the narrow  exemptions  in
      Sepet and Bulbul (then at the Court of Appeal stage)

91.   It may be that Mrs Turquet should have said more about this aspect  of
      the appellant's claim but on the evidence before her,  she  was  quite
      entitled to conclude as she did. The grounds of appeal did  not  raise
      any point concerning the significance of the appellant's  views  about
      military service. Furthermore, and in any event, we  do  not  consider
      the  appellant  has  shown  she  has  had  or  has  any  conscientious
      objections to doing military service. She has consistently said she is
      not opposed to military service as such. Whilst she  has  consistently
      said she has concerns  about  mixed  military  service,  she  has  not
      suggested  anywhere  that  she  holds  fundamentalist  beliefs   about
      segregation of the sexes and the description  she  has  given  of  her
      activities  as  a  student  at  Hackney  Community  College  and   her
      involvement  with  Oxfam  and  with  the  Eritrean  Muslim   Community
      Association,  shows  she  has  been  able  to  cope  with  mixed   sex
      environments in the context  of  community  and  public  life.  It  is
      properly not suggested on her behalf  that  women  being  involved  in
      military activities is contrary to the Qu'ran. It seems to us that her
      views essentially amount to a - very understandable - dislike  of  the
      idea of having to do military service in the context  of  the  current
      system of national service operated in  Eritrea.  In  this  regard  we
      consider her views are in all likelihood shared by many young Eritrean
      women - Muslim and non-Muslim - faced with the prospect of  having  to
      do military  service.   In  view  of  our  finding  that  she  has  no
      conscientious objections to military service,  we  are  not  persuaded
      that on return, when she finds herself required  to  perform  national
      service, she would refuse to do.

Our Assessment of whether this appellant is at risk
 92.  In the light of these findings, we now turn to  Mr  Yeo's  submissions
      as to risks, based  on  a  combination  of  general  factors  and  the
      appellant's particular circumstances.

93.   As noted earlier, we remain of the  view  that  persons  perceived  as
      draft evaders or deserters would be at risk on return to  Eritrea.  As
      noted earlier, Mr Yeo advanced a number of reasons why  he  considered
      the appellant in this case would be perceived as a  draft  evader.  We
      shall consider each in turn and then their cumulative effect.

           "(i) The Appellant is of draft age and [is] being  involuntarily
           returned  from  abroad  with  no  Eritrean  identity  or  travel
           documents."

94.   We do not consider this is a  correct  description  of  the  basis  on
      which the appellant will be returned. As the  Tribunal  found  in  the
      Country Guideline case of FA (Eritrea-nationality) Eritrea  CG  [2005]
      UKIAT 00047, a national of Eritrea will not  be  returned  to  Eritrea
      unless he or she has been issued with travel documents by the Eritrean
      Embassy.

             "(ii) She has no way of proving that  she  did  not  leave  to
             avoid military service and her  questioners  or  interrogators
             may  not  believe  her  explanation,  for  which  she  has  no
             evidence".

95.   In submissions on this Mr  Yeo  highlighted  the  authoritarian  steps
      taken by the current regime  in  Eritrea  to  enforce  the  system  of
      compulsory military service, even in the face of growing evidence that
      it is unpopular, and is leading to significant numbers of young people
      fleeing the country, especially to Ethiopia and Sudan and  to  Western
      countries. In such circumstances, he argued, the Eritrean  authorities
      would be highly likely to impute evasive motives to this appellant and
      to consider that she had stayed out (or her family had kept  her  out)
      of the country in order to avoid the draft. However, on the  facts  of
      this case, it is first of all clear that  the  authorities  would  not
      think that the appellant's family left Eritrea with a view to  evading
      her future national service obligations. The appellant was born on  19
      August 1985 and she and her family left when she was one year old.  At
      that time Eritrea did not exist as an independent state (that did  not
      happen until 1993). According to the May  2004  Amnesty  International
      report, the new  EPLF  government  only  issued  regulations  to  make
      national service compulsory for all citizens in November 1991 and  the
      first intake of national service was not until 1994.  Furthermore,  it
      was only with the start of the war with  Ethiopia  in  1998  that  the
      approach taken by the authorities appears to have become heavy-handed.



96.   Mr Yeo suggested at one point  that  the  length  of  time  since  the
      appellant actually left would not help her, since she  would  have  no
      way of proving it, as she had not travelled  to  the  UK  on  her  own
      passport and she had not retained  any  identity  documents.  However,
      this overlooks that  it  is  reasonably  foreseeable  that  she  would
      receive a travel document from the Eritrean Embassy and that in  order
      to obtain this she will in all likelihood  have  to  give  particulars
      about where she was born, when she was last in Eritrea and  where  she
      has been since. We see no good reason  to  think  that  the  appellant
      would not be able to satisfy the Eritrean authorities as to  the  date
      on which she left and where she had been  since.  Her  time  in  Saudi
      Arabia could  be  proven  if  necessary  by  inquiries  of  the  Saudi
      authorities. There is nothing in the appellant's evidence  to  suggest
      that her parents` stay in Saudi Arabia was deliberately  prolonged  in
      order to protect her from having to return to  Eritrea  or  that  they
      (her father after her mother's death) had remained there  in  defiance
      of any Eritrean regulations. The appellant's account of  her  father's
      ELF involvement was not believed.

97.   The same basic particulars as to her history  would  be  available  or
      could be explained to the Eritrean authorities in Eritrea.  It is true
      that she would now be returning  as  someone  who  had  only  recently
      become of eligible draft age. But given the fact  that  the  appellant
      left a long time before any current concerns about draft  evasion  and
      desertion existed, it is not reasonably likely they would see her as a
      draft evader.

                    "iii)her failure  to  return  to  Eritrea  earlier  and
                 voluntarily would  be  interpreted  as  disloyalty:  '[T]he
                 appellant  would  have  severe  difficulty  explaining  her
                 actions without reference to her actual reasons, which  are
                 her concern about her father's  political  affiliation  and
                 her  objections  to  military  service   on  religious  and
                 ethical grounds'.


98.   What we have said in response to (ii) largely deals  with  this  point
      also. The appellant will be able to satisfy the  Eritrean  authorities
      as to why she had not returned earlier than she did. In this regard we
      cannot accept Mr Yeo`s submission that we should  find  she  would  be
      unable to explain her experiences in Saudi Arabia as regards the  work
      done by her father,  the  death  of  her  mother  and  her  subsequent
      problems with the Saudi family who employed her father, leading to her
      decision to come to the UK in September 2001.


99.   We do not consider that the failure of a  person  in  the  appellant's
      situation to return earlier would be  interpreted  as  disloyalty.  We
      note here that the appellant had not been found credible  in  relation
      to her father's claimed ELF involvement and she has failed to show she
      has conscientious objections to military service.  In  our  view  what
      would most matter  to  the  authorities  faced  with  someone  in  the
      appellant's position would be that she had now returned, had been able
      to satisfactorily explain her absence and was not refusing to  perform
      national service.

                        "(iv)  she  objects  to  serving  the  military  on
                 religious  and  ethical  grounds   relating   to   Eritrean
                 government policy - these may come out under  interrogation
                 or intense questioning".

100.  These contentions have already been dealt  with.  This  appellant  has
      not been found to have any significant level of involvement in the ELF
      and she has not shown she has any conscientious objections to military
      service.

101.  We turn next to Mr Yeo's submission that she would be at risk  through
      a combination or general risks she would face as a  returnee  and  her
      personal characteristics.


                "(i)   return without full travel documents".


102.  We have already explained that she would not be returned without  full
      travel documents.

      "(ii)  no identity documents, with no  way  of  proving  her  Eritrean
           nationality".

      Similarly, we have covered this point  above.

       "(iii)   limited grasp of Tigrinya, one of the main languages."

103.  We can find no adequate evidence to indicate that a limited  grasp  of
      Tigrinya would significantly  increase  the  level  of  risk  to  this
      appellant. Further, it would  appear  from  her  own  account  of  her
      activities in the UK, that she has taken steps to involve herself with
      the Eritrean community in the UK, something which is  likely  to  have
      involved her in having to communicate in some way with those who speak
      Tigrinya.

      "(iv) problematic cultural attitudes she has picked up in  the  UK,  a
           free democracy, e.g. lack of deference, believing in freedom  of
           expression."

104.  The appellant says herself that  she  is  not  a  political  activist.
      Given the fact  that  she  has  involved  herself  with  the  Eritrean
      community in the UK, we do not consider that ideas and values she  has
      acquired in the UK would lead  to  the  authorities  back  in  Eritrea
      taking an adverse view of her.

      "(v)  being an  unmarried  young  woman  without  any  male  or  other
           relatives to support her or to complain on her  behalf:  'Sexual
           abuse of conscripts is widespread and the appellant would be  at
           additional risk because of the perception of their impunity  her
           isolation would give to potential  persecutors".

105.  It has not been suggested to us, nor is there  any  concrete  evidence
      to indicate, that there would be a real risk of serious  harm  at  the
      point of return just because she is a young woman. The  point  Mr  Yeo
      presses here appears to have more force in the  context  of  Mr  Yeo's
      third main category of risk dealing with the conditions of service  in
      the military, which we deal with below.

                   "(vi)   in the course of  interrogation  the  appellant's
           attendance  at  ELF  meetings   and   at   the   December   2004
           demonstration may also come to light."

      We have  largely  dealt  with  this  point  already.  Given  that  the
      appellant's involvement has been  at  a  very  low-level,  we  do  not
      consider, even if such involvement came to light, that it  would  lead
      to the authorities viewing her adversely.

106.  The third main limb of Mr Yeo's  submission  was  that  the  appellant
      would be at risk through a combination of her general  position  as  a
      female conscript and her particular circumstances.

 107.  We  have  dealt  earlier  with  the  position  of  female  conscripts
      generally.

108.  So far as the appellant's particular circumstances are  concerned,  we
      would accept that her lack of family might slightly increase the  risk
      of adverse treatment in the military on return, assuming it was  known
      she did not have family members able to check up on her or complain if
      need be on her behalf. But we do not think it would increase it to the
      level of a real risk of serious harm. We have already found  that  the
      background materials fall short of identifying a consistent pattern of
      gross, mass  or  frequent  sexual  abuse  of  female  conscripts.  The
      appellant is someone who has established herself as an independent and
      self-aware adult, which would make her more likely than  otherwise  to
      be able to avoid potential situations of sexual abuse.

109.  As we have already explained, the appellant's account of the  strength
      of her involvement in ELF in the UK was disbelieved  and  it  has  not
      been accepted that she holds any conscientious objections to  military
      service.

110.  In assessing the appellant's particular circumstances  with  reference
      to our analysis of current risk categories, we  have  also  considered
      their cumulative effect. But we do not  think  that,  even  considered
      cumulatively, they lead us to take a different view than that set  out
      above.

112.  For the above reasons we have concluded that  (following  the  finding
      of a material error of law by the previous  panel),  the  decision  we
      should substitute for that of the Adjudicator is to dismiss the appeal
      on asylum and human rights grounds.


Summary of Conclusions

113.  We may summarise our conclusions as follows:

(a)   So far as previous Country Guideline cases on Eritrea  are  concerned,
      IN is now to be read together  with  the  modifications  and  updating
      contained in this  determination.  Our  guidance  supersedes  reported
      cases dealing with draft-related risk categories which have  pre-  and
      post-dated IN.

(b)   The Tribunal confirms the view taken in IN that persons who  would  be
      perceived  as  draft  evaders  or  deserters  face  a  real  risk   of
      persecution as well as treatment contrary to Article 3.

(c)   The Tribunal continues to take the view that returnees  generally  are
      not at real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3. We
      do not consider it has been substantiated that failed  asylum  seekers
      would be regarded by the Eritrean  authorities  as  traitors  and  ill
      treated in consequence.

   d) The Tribunal continues also to reject the contention that  persons  of
      eligible  draft  age  are  by  that  reason  alone  at  real  risk  of
      persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3.


   e) So far as men are concerned, the eligible draft age in the context  of
      return now appears to have extended to being 18-50 rather than  18-40.
      So far as women are concerned, we consider, despite some reservations,
      that we should continue to treat the eligible draft  age  category  in
      the context of return as  18-40.  We do  not  see  evidence  that  for
      women it is extended beyond 40.  We also think that  the  category  of
      females within the 18-40 age range who are potentially at real risk of
      serious harm does not extend to Muslim  women  or  to  women  who  are
      married or who are mothers or carers. In addition women will still not
      fall into an actual risk category if their  circumstances  bring  them
      within any of the three subcategories set out in (f).

(f)   Subject to the above, persons of eligible draft age  (defined  in  the
      context of return as being between 18 and 50 for  men  and  18-40  for
      women) are currently at real risk of persecution as well as  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 unless:

        i) they can be considered to have left Eritrea  legally.  Regarding
           this subcategory, it must be borne in mind that  an  appellant`s
           assertion that he left illegally will raise an issue  that  will
           need to be established to the required standard.  A  person  who
           generally lacks credibility will not be  assumed  to  have  left
           illegally.  We think  those  falling  into  the  "left  legally"
           subcategory will often include persons  who  are  considered  to
           have already done national service,  persons  who  have  got  an
           exemption and persons who have been eligible for call-up over  a
           significant period but have not been called up. Conversely those
           falling outside this subcategory  and  so  at  risk  will  often
           include persons who left  Eritrea  when  they  were  approaching
           draft age(18) or had recently passed that age; or


       ii)  they have not been in Eritrea since the start of the  war  with
           Ethiopia in 1998 (that  being  the  year  when  the  authorities
           increased dramatically the numbers required for call up and took
           the  national  service  system  in  a  much  more  authoritarian
           direction) and are able to show that there was no  draft-evasion
           motive behind their absence. This subcategory reflects our  view
           that the authorities would know that persons  who  left  Eritrea
           before the start of the war would not have had draft evasion  as
           a possible motive; or


      iii) they have never been to Eritrea and are able to show that  there
           was no draft-evasion motive behind their absence. If  they  have
           not yet obtained  formal  nationality  documents,  there  is  no
           reason to think they will be perceived as draft-evaders.

(g)   Nevertheless, even those of  draft  military  age  who  would  not  be
      considered at real risk of serious harm (because they come within  (i)
      or (ii) or (iii))  would  still  be  at  such  a  risk  if  they  hold
      conscientious objections to military service.  Given  that  the  issue
      here is a factual one of whether a person would refuse to  serve  even
      knowing that the likely consequence of refusal is  ill  treatment,  we
      think the reasons of conscience would have to be unusually strong.

(h)    Otherwise,  however,  the  Tribunal  does  not  consider  that   mere
      performance  of  military  service  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3.

(i)   We reiterate the point made in IN that the guidance given here is not
      intended to be applied abstractly: it remains that each case  must  be
      considered and assessed in the light  of  the  appellant's  particular
      circumstances. It may be,  for  example,  that  a  person  who  is  of
      eligible draft age, at least if he or she is still  relatively  young,
      will not need to establish very much more. However, we think  that  in
      all cases something more must be shown. It would be quite  wrong,  for
      example, for someone who  in  fact  has  obtained  an  exemption  from
      military service, to succeed simply on the basis that he has shown  he
      was of eligible draft age.   Persons  who  fail  to  give  a  credible
      account  of  material  particulars  relating  to  their  history   and
      circumstances cannot easily show that they would  be  at  risk  solely
      because they are of eligible draft age.

Signed:

             Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)

Approved for electronic distribution

                       Appendix: Background Materials

UNHCR position paper entitled 'UNHCR Position on Return of  Rejected  Asylum
Seekers to Eritrea' a January 2004
US State Department Report Feb 2004
Amnesty International Eritrea "Thousands of people held at  Adi  Abeto  army
prison",  9 November 2004
Amnesty International report ('You have no right to ask') 19 May 2004
CIPU Eritrea Report October 2004
Home Office Country of Origin Services report on Eritrea, October 2005.
United Nations Progress report of the  Secretary  General  on  Ethiopia  and
Eritrea, 16 December 2004
Human Rights Watch: World Report 2005: Eritrea,  13 January 2005
US State Department Report of February 2005 (covering 2004).
UNHCR Position on return of draft evaders to Eritrea, 11 March 2005
CIPU Eritrea Country Report, 10 May 2005.
Operational Guidance Note: Eritrea, Home Office, IND CIPU, Version 3.0  June
2005
Fresh Air, Interview, Michela Wong discusses the history of Eritrea and  her
book, "I Didn't Do It For You", 5 July 2005 (excerpt).
Amnesty International in a 28 July 2005 Urgent Action report 197/05.
Voice of America News, "Eritrea Reportedly  Detains  Relatives  of  Military
Service Evaders", 29 July 2005
Reuters News article of 23 July 2005 headed "Eritrea rejects claims of  mass
arrests"
Reuter News article of 13 August  2005  "Eritrean  food  security  uncertain
despite good rains"
Compass Direct (USA).  "Prisoners  from  Eritrea  Wedding  Round-Up  Mocked,
Beaten", 23 August 2005.
A Missionary Service News Agency (MSNA) (Italy) item of 14 September 2005

