

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on  the  application  of  Waqar)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (statutory appeals/paragraph 353) IJR [2015] UKUT 00169 (IAC)



|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 10th February 2015                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between


                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                                HIKMAT WAQAR

                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Ms S Akinbolu, counsel, for the applicant (instructed by M & K Solicitors)
Mr A Byass and Mr D Blundell, counsel, for the respondent (instructed by
Treasury Solicitor)

   1. The current statutory appeal regime requires a decision to be made  on
      a human rights claim. Without a claim and without a decision there  is
      no appeal.
   2. Where a claim has already been determined, submissions made subsequent
      to that require a decision as to  whether  they  amount  to  a  claim.
      Paragraph 353 of the  Immigration  Rules  provides  the  mechanism  to
      determine whether they amount to a claim the refusal of which  enables
      a right of appeal.
   3. The Immigration Act 2014 (Transitional and  Saving  Provisions)  Order
      2014/2928 brings those whose deportation decision  (which  includes  a
      decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order) was made after  10th
      November 2014 into the statutory scheme in the Nationality Immigration
      and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act   2014,
      irrespective of when they were convicted of a criminal offence.


                                  JUDGMENT


   1. The applicant is a foreign national offender who  entered  the  UK  in
      2007 at the age of 13. In 2008 he was convicted of five counts of rape
      involving some 30 to 40 separate  incidents  in  which  he  repeatedly
      raped a 7 year old boy. He was sentenced to four years detention in  a
      Young Offenders Institution and a two year extended period on licence.


   2. A deportation order was signed on 25th  June  2014  subsequent  to  an
      unsuccessful appeal against a decision to make  a  deportation  order.
      The  applicant  then  made  further  submissions  arguing   that   his
      deportation would result in a breach of his protected right to respect
      for family and private life. He relied, inter alia, upon the birth  of
      two children since the date of the determination  of  the  deportation
      appeal.

   3.  The  submissions  were  treated  as  an  application  to  revoke  the
      deportation order. That application was refused for reasons set out in
      a decision  dated  14th  November  2014,  supplemented  by  a  further
      decision on 28th November 2014. In those letters the  respondent  said
      that no right of appeal arose because the applicant's submissions  did
      not amount to a fresh claim.

   4. On 2nd December 2014 the respondent set directions for removal on  9th
      December 2014. The applicant commenced the instant proceedings on  5th
      December 2014 and also sought a stay on his removal. On  9th  December
      2014 UTJ Kebede ordered a stay on removal pending determination of the
      application for permission to bring a judicial review of the decisions
      of 14th and 28th November  2014,  or  until  further  order.  On  22nd
      December 2014 UTJ Coker refused permission on  the  grounds  asserting
      that the decision to refuse to revoke the  deportation  order  was  an
      appealable immigration decision because  the  Nationality  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 applied unamended  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014
      ("2014 Act"); she granted permission on the limited ground that it was
      arguable that the Immigration Act 2014 as it amends  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002 Act") may mean that if a  human
      rights claim is raised it must, unless certified, attract a  right  of
      appeal and that paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not
      operate as a gatekeeper preventing an appeal right.  A  copy  of  that
      decision is attached as Annex A.


      Summary of the issue between the parties


   5. The applicant's contention is that paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration
      Rules is now subsumed within the statutory provisions.  The  right  of
      appeal that is now defined by s82 2002 Act enables all  refused  human
      rights claims to have an appeal, such appeal rights only being limited
      if the claim is certified under s94 or s96. There is, it is  contended
      no requirement for  a  "categorisation"  step  because  the  statutory
      framework  now  provides  all  the  necessary  safeguards  to  prevent
      repetitious  or  unmeritorious  claims  being  pursued   through   the
      appellate system either within the UK, outside the UK or at  all.  The
      applicant contends that the amendment to s82 results in the respondent
      not having to make a separate immigration decision but she is  limited
      to consideration of whether the removal of the applicant would  breach
      his rights under the ECHR; having  made  such  a  claim  then  statute
      determines that he is thus entitled to  a  right  of  appeal  and  the
      respondent retains control over the location from which the  applicant
      may exercise such right of appeal as he may have. The applicant relies
      upon R (BA (Nigeria)) v SSHD [2010] 1  AC  444  and  submits  that  ZT
      (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] 1 W.L.R. 348 and R (ZA (Nigeria)) v SSHD [2011]
      QB 722 were predicated upon the "old"  construction  whereby  a  human
      rights claim did not give rise to a right of appeal per se but  rather
      the respondent was required to consider whether  or  not  to  make  an
      immigration decision which would then attract  a  right  of  appeal  -
      limited by s94 or s96 if considered appropriate.


   6. The respondent  contends  that  the  2014  Act  has  not  altered  the
      statutory  appealable  decision  regime  but,  albeit  radically,  has
      significantly reduced the adverse  decisions  that  have  a  right  of
      appeal. Although the  certification  process  (ss94  and  96)  remains
      available to the SSHD that is only where there has been a  claim  that
      has been refused. The paragraph 353 process remains in force to enable
      the categorisation of submissions and it is only  if  the  submissions
      are categorised as a claim that has been refused, is there an  appeal.
      The SSHD disputes that the decisions of  ZT  Kosovo  and  ZA  Nigeria,
      determined under legislation that has since been amended, support  the
      contention that paragraph 353 is now no longer in force for cases such
      as the instant case. She contends that  the  history  and  purpose  of
      paragraph 353 requires consideration in determining the various appeal
      rights that have been provided for over the years.


      Legislative background


   7. The Immigration Act 2014 amended Part 5 of the Nationality Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002. The whole of the 2014 Act has  not  been  brought
      into force. We have described the legislation and Rules in force prior
      to the commencement of the relevant sections of the 2014 Act as  "old"
      and those provisions as amended by the 2014 Act as "new" and set  them
      out in columns in Appendix B.


   8.  In R v SSHD, ex parte Onibayo [1996]  QB  768,  a  decision  made  in
      relation to an appeal under the now repealed  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Appeals Act 1993 ("1993 Act"), the SSHD contended that a person  could
      only make one claim for asylum. This was  rejected  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal, which held that a new or "fresh" claim  for  asylum  could  be
      made.  This  led  to  the  introduction  of  paragraph  346  into  the
      Immigration Rules. This was examined in by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Cakabay v SSHD (Cakabay No 2) [1988] Imm AR 176,  [1998] EWCA Civ 1116
      in which Schiemann LJ held:


             THE NEED FOR CATEGORISATION


             Before  turning  to  consider  these  two  questions  [how   a
             categorisation question is to be challenged] it is helpful  to
             indicate why the need for categorisation arises. What  follows
             is not substantially in dispute between the parties.
             The background to the problem is  the  desire  of  the  United
             Kingdom  to  abide  by  its  obligations  under   the   Geneva
             Convention.
             ....


             It is  manifest  that  if  a  state  acts  in  breach  of  its
             obligation  the  consequences  to  the   individual   can   be
             disastrous. Parliament has therefore provided in s. 6  of  the
             1993 Act that


                  "During the period beginning when a person makes  a  claim
                  for asylum and ending when the Secretary  of  State  gives
                  him notice of the decision on the claim,  he  may  not  be
                  removed from, or required to leave, the United Kingdom."


             Moreover Parliament has provided that the claimant may not  be
             removed from or required to leave the United Kingdom whilst he
             is pursuing the appellate process.
             The Statute makes no express provision as to  what  is  to  be
             done in the case of repeated claims for  asylum  by  the  same
             person. The second claim may be identical  to  the  first  ("a
             repetitious claim") or may be different ("a fresh claim").  It
             is  common  ground  that  a  fresh  claim  attracts  all   the
             substantive and procedural consequences of  an  initial  claim
             whereas a repetitious claim does not.
             In the case of a repetitious claim no more is required  to  be
             done: the first decision has ensured that the  United  Kingdom
             has complied with its obligations under the Convention. S.6 of
             the 1993 Act creates no inhibition on the claimant's  removal:
             the Secretary of State has on the occasion of his decision  on
             the first claim decided the repetitious claim. So far  as  the
             decision on the claimant's repetitious application  for  leave
             to enter is concerned, the claimant will be  told  that  leave
             has already been refused and that there is no need for any new
             decision.


   9. Although the 1993 Act has since been repealed, there is  reference  in
      Cakabay to the lack of express provision in the 1993 Act to what is to
      be done in the case of repeated claims for asylum by the same  person;
      this was covered by paragraph 346 Immigration Rules.


  10. Paragraph 346 was subsequently amended and replaced by  paragraph  353
      and considered by the House of  Lords  in  ZT  (Kosovo).  ZT  (Kosovo)
      considered the issue of 'where the SSHD  has  certified  a  claim  for
      asylum or human rights, how should she approach the  consideration  of
      further  submissions  made   by   the   claimant   from   within   the
      jurisdiction'. The House of Lords  held  that  there  was  an  ongoing
      requirement on the SSHD to consider further submissions in  accordance
      with paragraph 353 where an applicant or appellant remained in the UK.
      Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers said at paragraph 15:

             Where a claimant remains in this country after the refusal  of
             a  claim  that  has  been  certified  under  section  94,  the
             obligations of the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights Act
             leave the Secretary of State no alternative  but  to  consider
             further submissions....It seems more sensible for rule 353  to
             apply in this situation just as in other situations where  the
             secretary  of  State  is  called  upon   to   consider   fresh
             submissions.



  11. BA (Nigeria) then followed. This case concerned an  appeal  against  a
      decision to refuse to revoke a  deportation  order  and  whether  such
      appeal could be brought in country having  regard  to  whether  s92(4)
      2004 Act applies. Lord Hope gave the leading judgment:




             28.Parliament might, of course, have stood still and left  the
             matter to be dealt with under the Immigration  Rules.  But  it
             has not stood still. The experience of the  intervening  years
             has been taken into account. First, there were the  provisions
             against abuse in sections 73 to 77 of the 1999 Act. Now  there
             is a set of entirely new provisions in the 2002 Act.  As  Lord
             Hoffmann said in A v Hoare [2008] UKHL 6,  [2008]  1  AC  844,
             para 15, while there is a good deal of  authority  for  having
             regard in the construction of a statute to the way a  word  or
             phrase has been construed by the court  in  earlier  statutes,
             the value of  such  previous  interpretation  as  a  guide  to
             construction will vary with the circumstances.  In  this  case
             the phrase in question has remained,  in  essence,  unchanged.
             But the system in which it  must  be  made  to  work  is  very
             different. This is a factor  to  which  full  weight  must  be
             given.


             29. The new system contains a range of powers that enable  the
             Secretary of State or, as the  case  may  be,  an  immigration
             officer to  deal  with  the  problem  of  repeat  claims.  The
             Secretary of State's power in section 94(2) of the 2002 Act to
             certify that a claim is clearly unfounded, if  exercised,  has
             the effect that the person may not bring his appeal in country
             in reliance on section 92(4).  The power in section 96 enables
             the Secretary of State or an immigration  officer  to  certify
             that a person who is subject to a new immigration decision has
             raised an issue which has been dealt with, or  ought  to  have
             been dealt with, in  an  earlier  appeal  against  a  previous
             immigration decision, which has the  effect  that  the  person
             will have no right of appeal against the new decision.  It  is
             common ground that the present cases are not certifiable under
             either  of  these  two  sections.  Why  then  should  they  be
             subjected to a further  requirement  which  is  not  mentioned
             anywhere in the 2002 Act? It can only be read into the Act by,
             as Sedley LJ in the Court  of  Appeal  put  it,  glossing  the
             meaning of the words "a...claim" so as to  exclude  a  further
             claim which has not been held under rule 353  to  be  a  fresh
             claim: [2009] 2 WLR 1370, paras 20, 30. The court  had  to  do
             this in Ex p Onibiyo. But there is no need to do this now.


             30.It is not just that there is no  need  now  to  read  those
             words into the statute. As Mr  Husain  pointed  out,  the  two
             systems for excluding repeat claims are not  compatible.  Take
             the system that section 94 lays down for dealing  with  claims
             that the Secretary of State considers to be clearly unfounded.
             If he issues a certificate to that effect, the appeal must  be
             pursued out of country. But the claimant will have the benefit
             of section 94(9),  which  provides  that  where  a  person  in
             relation to whom a certificate under that section subsequently
             brings an appeal under section 82(1) while outside the  United
             Kingdom the appeal will be considered as if he  had  not  been
             removed from the United Kingdom.  He will have the benefit too
             of the passage in parenthesis in section 95, which provides:
                  "A person who is outside the United Kingdom may not appeal
                  under section 82(1) on the  ground  specified  in  section
                  84(1)(g)  (except  in  a  case  to  which  section   94(9)
                  applies)."


             31.If Miss Laing is right, the effect of  a  decision  by  the
             Secretary of State that  the  representations  that  a  person
             makes against an immigration decision of the kind
             mentioned  in  section  82(1)(k)  -  a  refusal  to  revoke  a
             deportation order - is not a  fresh  claim  will  be  that  an
             appeal against that decision must be brought out  of  country.
             But  the  interpretative  route  by  which  she  reaches  that
             position does not save that person from the exclusionary  rule
             in section 95, unless - which has not been done in these cases
             - the claims are also certified under section 94(2) as clearly
             unfounded.  The  ground  of  appeal  referred  to  in  section
             84(1)(g)  has  been  designed  to  honour  the   international
             obligations of the United Kingdom. To exclude claims which the
             Secretary of State considers not to be fresh claims from  this
             ground of appeal, when claims which he  certifies  as  clearly
             unfounded are given the benefit  of  it,  can  serve  no  good
             purpose. On the contrary, it risks undermining the  beneficial
             objects of the Refugee Convention which the court in  Onibiyo,
             under a legislative system which ha d no equivalent to section
             95, was careful to avoid.


             32.In my opinion Lloyd LJ in the Court of Appeal was right  to
             attach importance to this point: [2009] 2 WLR 1370, paras  39-
             40. As he said, the development of the legislative  provisions
             and the powers given to the Secretary of State  to  limit  the
             scope for in country appeals deprive Miss Laing's  submissions
             of the foundation  which  they  need.  There  is  obviously  a
             balance to be struck. The immigration appeals system must  not
             be burdened with worthless repeat claims. On the  other  hand,
             procedures that are put in place to address this problem  must
             respect the United Kingdom's international  obligations.  That
             is what the legislative scheme does, when section 95  is  read
             together  with  section  94(9).  It  preserves  the  right  to
             maintain in an out of country  appeal  that  the  decision  in
             question has breached international obligations. I would  hold
             that claims which  are  not  certified  under  section  94  or
             excluded under section 96, if rejected, should be  allowed  to
             proceed to appeal in-country under sections 82 and 92, whether
             or not they are accepted by the Secretary of  State  as  fresh
             claims.


             33.There is  no  doubt,  as  I  indicated  in  ZT  (Kosovo)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1  WLR  348,
             para 33, that rule 353 was drafted on the  assumption  that  a
             claimant who made further submissions  would  be  at  risk  of
             being removed or required to leave immediately if he does  not
             have a "fresh claim". That was indeed the case when this  rule
             was originally drafted, as there was no equivalent of  section
             92(4) of the 2002 Act. But Mr Husain's analysis has  persuaded
             me that the legislative scheme that Parliament has now put  in
             place does not have that effect.  Its  carefully  interlocking
             provisions, when read as a whole, set out  the  complete  code
             for  dealing  with  repeat  claims.  Rule  353,  as  presently
             drafted, has no part to play in the legislative scheme. As  an
             expression of the will of Parliament, it  must  take  priority
             over the rules formulated by the executive. Rule 353A  on  the
             other hand remains in place as  necessary  protection  against
             premature removal until  the  further  submissions  have  been
             considered by the Secretary of State.




  12. BA (Nigeria) was concerned with an appealable decision as  defined  by
      s82 of the 2002 Act then in force. The issue was  whether  the  appeal
      was suspensive  in  operation.  BA  claimed  that  ss94  and  96  were
      sufficient safeguards against abusive or  unmeritorious  claims.  BA's
      claim was conceded not to fall within either of those categories.  The
      court held that he should not be subject to a further hurdle to  cross
      which is what would happen if paragraph 353 were to  apply.  Therefore
      in a  case  where  there  is  a  right  of  appeal  ie  an  appealable
      immigration decision, where s94 or s96 do not apply then 353 does  not
      apply. It is the mere fact that a human rights claim has been made and
      refused that enables the appeal to be suspensive.


  13.  In ZA (Nigeria), the appeals raised the issue  whether  the  SSHD  is
      entitled to refrain from making an appealable immigration decision  in
      response to a human rights claim which  she  reasonably  concludes  is
      merely a repetition of an  earlier  claim  whose  rejection  has  been
      unsuccessfully challenged in a concluded appeal. The contention by the
      claimants in ZA (Nigeria) was that the provisions of  Part  5  of  the
      2002 Act (in force at that time ie prior to the 2014 Act)  had  either
      impliedly repealed paragraph 353 or it had been rendered of no further
      application. The SSHD contended that she was entitled  to  reject  and
      did not need to decide the purported renewed claim  as  it  relied  on
      substantially the same facts  as  the  earlier  rejected  claim.   The
      applicants  in  ZA  (Nigeria)  did  not  have  appealable  immigration
      decisions as defined by s82 of the 2002 Act, as did the  claimants  in
      BA (Nigeria) and ZT  (Kosovo).  Lord  Neuberger,  who  gave  the  lead
      judgment said

             "21. ...If rule 353 can be relied on, then  on  receipt  of  a
             purported renewed claim (which I shall refer to  hereafter  as
             "further submissions") the Secretary of State can decide  that
             it is not a "fresh claim", and then decline to make a decision
             on whether or not to refuse leave to enter etc; in that  event
             there would be no decision which could give rise to a right of
             appeal under s82, as explained in Cakabay v Secretary of State
             for the Home Department (Nos 2 and 3) [1999] Imm AR 176,  180-
             181, per Schiemann LJ. A decision under  rule  353  is  not  a
             decision to refuse the relief which  the  further  submissions
             seek: it is a decision that the  further  submissions  do  not
             amount to a fresh claim - ie that it is not a claim at all....
             .....
             23. I accept that it is obviously right  to  consider  whether
             sections 94 and 96 render rule 353 valueless: that, indeed, is
             the central point on the first issue. However, I consider that
             SM and ZA put their case on the point too  high.  First,  it
             overlooks the fact that Parliament has, albeit in  a  negative
             sense, approved subsequent amendments to the Rules,  which  do
             not include the deletion of rule 353. Further,  it  is  rather
             paradoxical  for  the  appellants  to  invoke  the   will   of
             Parliament when  the  most  recent  relevant  statute  clearly
             proceeds on the basis that  rule  353  is  in  force  and  has
             practical effect: on the  appellants'  case,  when  Parliament
             enacted section 53 of the 2009 Act, it was simply beating  the
             air.


             24. Perhaps more importantly, the issue  between  the  parties
             should not be determined simply by seeing whether sections  94
             and 96 can be interpreted so as to cover every application and
             purported application falling within rule 353. It  is  equally
             valid to consider whether they can be  construed  consistently
             with rule 353 continuing to have an independent effect.


             25. Section  94(2)  differs  from  rule  353  in  that  it  is
             concerned  with  hopeless,  or  "clearly  unfounded"   claims,
             whether original or renewed,  whereas  rule  353  covers  only
             purported renewed  claims,  i.e.  further  submissions,  which
             merely repeat previous rejected claims by the  same  claimant.
             So section 94(2), unlike rule 353, can apply  not  only  to  a
             renewed claim (or purported renewed claim)  but  also  to  the
             original claim made by a particular claimant. That, no  doubt,
             is the reason why section 94(2) envisages a claim to which  it
             applies being treated as  a  valid,  albeit  hopeless,  claim,
             which has to be considered on its merits: hence its  machinery
             involves the Secretary of State certifying that it is  clearly
             unfounded, so as to prevent an appeal. On the other  hand,  as
             rule 353 is  concerned  with  purported  claims  which  repeat
             earlier, rejected, claims, it envisages  that  such  purported
             claims are not to be considered or treated as claims at all.


             26. Section 94(2) therefore does not relieve the Secretary  of
             State from making a decision to refuse leave to enter or entry
             clearance in respect of a claim  which  she  considers  to  be
             "clearly unfounded": she must consider it on its merits,  and,
             having no doubt refused it, she is then entitled, by virtue of
             section 94(2), to prevent the claimant raising an appeal under
             section 82 by issuing a certificate. If she could rely on rule
             353, however, and she considered that the further  submissions
             she has received raise no  issues  other  than  those  already
             raised by an earlier, rejected, claim, she would neither  have
             to consider its merits  nor  formally  refuse  it:  she  could
             merely reject the submissions. Thus, rule 353 can be  operated
             as a sort of gatekeeper by the Secretary of State  to  prevent
             further submissions amounting  to,  or  being  treated  as,  a
             claim, thereby not getting into Part 5 territory at all.


             27. If further submissions on analysis merely repeat  a  claim
             which has already been made, it is a perfectly normal  use  of
             language to say that they do not really amount to a new claim,
             but should be treated as being no  more  than  an  attempt  to
             revive a previous unsuccessful claim.  Nonetheless,  I  accept
             that the description of a "clearly unfounded" claim in section
             94(2) is capable, as a matter of language, of being applied to
             such further submissions which,  on  analysis,  raise  no  new
             points over and above a previous,  rejected,  claim.  However,
             given that the 2002 Act was passed at a  time  when  rule  353
             existed, I would incline to the view that it was not  intended
             to apply to such further submissions which do not amount to  a
             fresh claim.


             28. Further, there appears to me  to  be  some  force  in  the
             contention  that  section  94(2)  is  unlikely  to  have  been
             directed to further submissions which do not raise new  issues
             over an earlier claim, when a claim which relies  on  evidence
             which should have been produced to support an earlier claim is
             expressly covered in the 2002 Act in section 96(1) (and claims
             which  included,   but   extended   further   than,   previous
             unsuccessful claims, were expressly covered in section 96(3)).
             However, I also accept that there is force in the  point  that
             Part 5 of the 2002 Act was intended to be a complete code.


             29. As for  section  96  itself,  subsection  (1)  is  clearly
             concerned with different territory from rule 353: the  section
             is directed to new points which could  and  should  have  been
             raised in  the  claimant's  original,  rejected,  claim  -  an
             administrative procedural equivalent of Ladd v Marshall [1954]
             1 WLR 1489 - whereas rule 353 is directed to points which were
             raised in  the  claimant's  original,  rejected,  claim  -  an
             administrative procedural equivalent of res judicata.  As  for
             the original section 96(3), it is of some interest, because it
             dealt expressly with renewed claims which  included  a  ground
             which was identical to that raised in a previous  claim  which
             had already been considered. It was complementary to rule  353
             as it concerned renewed claims which included such  a  ground,
             but, as I see it, also included other grounds  which  had  not
             been raised in a previous claim.  Section  96(3)  operated  by
             requiring such a renewed claim to be  considered  as  a  fresh
             claim, while enabling the Secretary of  State  to  prevent  an
             appeal on the previously raised ground. As mentioned, it tends
             to support the view that section 96, unlike section 94, is and
             was concerned with renewed claims which are defective  because
             of the existence and contents of a previous claim by the  same
             claimant.


             30. Accordingly, while there is plainly a substantial argument
             to the effect that the words of section 94(2) are wide  enough
             to catch further submissions which do not amount  to  a  fresh
             claim within rule 353, I would hold, at least in  the  absence
             of binding authority to the contrary, that it does not do  so.
             Section 94(2) is concerned to prevent appeals in  relation  to
             any  claim  (whether  original  or  renewed)  which  has  been
             considered and refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  its
             merits, where she concludes that the merits are so  weak  that
             the claim was "clearly unfounded". Rule 353  is  concerned  to
             prevent a purported renewed claim having to be  considered  on
             its merits and refused, where the Secretary of State considers
             that it is merely a repetition of a claim  which  has  already
             been made and refused. As for section 96(1), it  is  concerned
             with a different aspect of renewed claims from rule 353.


             31. Unless, as the appellants contend, there is a decision  of
             the Supreme Court which precludes such a conclusion,  I  would
             therefore, in agreement with the  Administrative  Court,  hold
             that it was, as a matter of principle, open to  the  Secretary
             of State to rely on  rule  353  in  relation  to  a  purported
             renewed claim. The appellants say that there is such  a  case,
             namely BA (Nigeria) [2010] 1 AC 444.
             ...
             41. In each of the two cases [BA(Nigeria)], in agreement  with
             the Court of Appeal, the majority of the Supreme  Court  (Lady
             Hale dissenting) held that it was not open to the Secretary of
             State to rely on rule  353.  It  is  thus  clear  that  in  BA
             (Nigeria) [2010] 1 AC 444, the  Supreme  Court  decided  that,
             where the Secretary of State receives further submissions,  on
             which she proceeds to  make  an  immigration  decision  within
             section 82, there will be an in-country right to appeal  under
             section 92(4) (unless the Secretary  of  State  has  certified
             under section 94(2) or section 96) and it is not then open  to
             the Secretary of State to invoke rule 353 in order to  contend
             that the further submissions did not amount to a claim at all.
             So, once further submissions are treated  as  amounting  to  a
             claim and the claim is decided by the Secretary of State,  the
             statutory code contained in the 2002 Act leaves  no  room  for
             rule 353.
             ....
             52. Mr Tam is plainly right in his argument  that  the  actual
             decision in BA (Nigeria) [2010] 1 AC 444 is  not  inconsistent
             with ZT (Kosovo) [2009] 1 WLR 348 or is not  determinative  of
             the present appeals in favour of the  appellants.  The  actual
             decision was that rule 353 had no further part to play for the
             purposes of section 92 (4)(a) once there was an appeal against
             an immigration decision. The question therefore is whether, in
             the light of the passages in the judgment of Lord Hope  relied
             on by the appellants, we should, as  Mr  Gill  and  Mr  Jacobs
             contend, conclude that a wider interpretation of the reasoning
             in BA (Nigeria) is appropriate, so that the binding ratio  is
             that rule 353 is effectively a dead  letter.  In  my  opinion,
             that contention,  which  I  might  very  well  otherwise  have
             accepted, is one which should be rejected on the  ground  that
             it is plainly inconsistent with the reasoning  and  conclusion
             of the House of Lords in ZT (Kosovo) [2009] 1 WLR 348.
             ....
             58. In all these circumstances, unless it is pellucidly  clear
             from the judgments in BA (Nigeria) [2010] 1  AC  444,  and  in
             particular  the  passages  relied  on  by  the  appellants  in
             paragraphs 29-33 in the judgment of  Lord  Hope,  as  set  out
             above, that the reasoning and conclusion in ZT (Kosovo) [2009]
             1 WLR 348 was being overruled it seems to me  that  we  should
             dismiss this appeal. Those passages  (and  in  particular  the
             words I have  emphasised)  undoubtedly  give  support  to  the
             appellants' argument, if read on their own.


             59. However, as with any observations contained in a judgment,
             one cannot properly interpret the passages other than in their
             factual and juridical context. Given all the  factors  I  have
             mentioned, I have reached the conclusion that what was said in
             those passages can, and therefore should at any rate  in  this
             court, be read as being confined to cases where  there  is  an
             appealable  immigration  decision.  Once  there  is   such   a
             decision, the  complete  code  contained  in  the  legislative
             scheme applies and rule 353 has no part to play.  However,  as
             decided in ZT (Kosovo) [2009] 1 WLR 348, rule 353 still has "a
             part to play": the Secretary of  State  can  decide  that  the
             further submissions are not a "fresh claim", in which case one
             does not enter the territory governed by the  "complete  code"
             of "the legislative scheme."

       Conclusion

  14. Paragraph 353 does not appear and is not alluded to in the legislative
      framework. It and its predecessor have never been alluded to. The  two
      systems exist alongside each other.  It  remains  in  the  Rules  and,
      despite the amendment of s82 of the 2002 Act from  20th  October  2014
      and despite there being amendments to the Rules since that date  there
      has been no amendment to paragraph 353. Although Ms Akinbolu submitted
      that the paragraph 353 process still applied  in  for  example  asylum
      cases and therefore the Rules could not be amended, this  is  not  the
      case. Had there been an intention that the paragraph 353 process would
      cease to apply in certain categories of cases  this  could  and  would
      have been set out in amendments to the Immigration Rules.


  15. Can paragraph 353 co-exist with the legislative  scheme?  Ms  Akinbolu
      submits not, because the  protections  that  exist  in  the  statutory
      scheme mean that paragraph 353 is no  longer  required  and  thus  the
      paragraph has been impliedly repealed or is of no  effect  and  should
      not be utilised.


  16. The current appeal scheme enables an appeal against a decision by  the
      SSHD refusing the applicant's human rights claim. There has  to  be  a
      claim and then a decision in order to enable an  appeal.  The  current
      scheme no longer enables an appeal  against  a  decision  refusing  to
      revoke a deportation order. The SSHD may, having decided to  refuse  a
      human  rights  claim,  thereafter  decide  whether   to   invoke   the
      certification process. Without a claim (and without a decision)  there
      is no appeal.

  17. The history of paragraph 353 and the jurisprudence is set  out  above.
      BA (Nigeria) was concerned with a decision, not whether there had been
      a decision. ZT (Kosovo) concerned the continuing responsibility of the
      respondent  to  consider  representations  made  whilst  an  applicant
      remained in the UK even though the initial claim had been refused  and
      certified - again there had been a decision and the issue was what  to
      do with submissions. ZA (Nigeria) confirmed that  the  respondent  was
      not obliged to  issue  an  appealable  immigration  decision  whenever
      further submissions were made.

  18. If the applicant is correct and  any  submission  made  amounts  to  a
      claim, the response to which is an  appealable  decision,  this  would
      result in an applicant being able to make numerous consecutive  claims
      that would result in numerous consecutive appeals.  Although  each  of
      those could be certified, the mere existence of such a scenario  would
      result  in  it  being  virtually  impossible  to  reach  finality.  BA
      (Nigeria) is not authority for the proposition that submissions amount
      to a claim and that the response to those submissions  is  a  decision
      within  the  meaning  of  Part  5.  The  current  statutory  framework
      continues to provide for unmeritorious claims to be  certified.  There
      is  nothing  in  this  framework  that  precludes  the  making  of   a
      categorisation decision; paragraph 353 remains in force.

  19. The current statutory appeal context requires a decision to be made on
      a human rights claim. Without a claim and without a decision there  is
      no appeal. Submissions that purport to be a human rights claim do  not
      without  more  trigger  a  right  of  appeal.  There  has  to  be   an
      intermediate step, a categorisation, namely "do the submissions amount
      to a claim at all". Paragraph 353 of the Rules provides the  mechanism
      to determine whether they amount to a claim; if not then the  decision
      does not amount to a decision to refuse a human rights claim.

  20. If  an  applicant  is  aggrieved  by  a  decision  not  to  categorise
      submissions as a claim, then s/he has  a  remedy  in  judicial  review
      proceedings. Where a claim has already  been  determined,  submissions
      made subsequent to that require a decision as to whether  they  amount
      to a claim. If determined to be a claim the decision  to  refuse  that
      claim will trigger a right of appeal, subject to certification. If the
      submissions are determined not to be a claim, as  here,  there  is  no
      decision and thus no right of appeal.

  21. For these reasons the claim must fail.

  22. The parties chose not to attend the handing down of this judgment  and
      no application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  has
      been made. We  are  however  required  by  rule  44  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to consider  whether  permission
      should be granted. We are satisfied that there is no arguable point of
      law capable of affecting the outcome of this judgment  and  permission
      to appeal is therefore refused.

        Costs

  23. If either party wishes to make an application as  regards  costs  such
      application, with submissions limited to 3  pages  of  A4,  is  to  be
      received by the Tribunal within 7 days  of  the  date  of  this  order
      failing which such an application will not be entertained.







                                    Date 25th March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker



ANNEX A

JUDGE Coker: The applicant entered the UK aged 13 in March 2007 and  claimed
    asylum.  He was refused asylum but granted discretionary leave until  1
    August 2010.  On 14 January 2008 he was convicted  of  five  counts  of
    rape against a child under the age of 13, the offences being  committed
    whilst the applicant himself was aged 13.  He  was  sentenced  to  four
    years' detention and two years extended licence.  On 9 December 2010 he
    was notified of a decision to deport under Section 35A of the 1971 Act.
     He appealed.  The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.  He
    was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal was
    dismissed by the Upper Tribunal.   The  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  an
    application for permission to appeal on 13 November 2013  and  an  oral
    hearing in front of the Court of Appeal refused him  permission  on  10
    March 2014.  The deportation order was  signed  on  24  June  2014.  He
    married BC in an Islamic ceremony in November 2012.  Child one was born
    on 4 August 2013, child two on 23  July  2014  and  a  third  child  is
    expected.  There has been close monitoring  from  social  services  and
    probation.

2.   He has appealed against conviction and that appeal was rejected by  the
    Court  of  Appeal.   The  Criminal  Convictions  Review  Committee  has
    accepted that there are issues that needed to be reviewed and they  are
    in the process of writing up that review.

3.   On 11 July 2014 the applicant made a request to revoke the  deportation
    order and set out a fresh claim submission.

4.   On 14 November 2014 the respondent asserted  that  the  representations
    did not amount to a fresh claim.   There  was  no  actual  decision  to
    refuse to revoke the deportation order but the letter states  that  the
    respondent considers deportation remains appropriate and proportionate.



5.   On 19 November 2014 there  was  a  request  for  a  review  and  on  28
    November 2014 the decision of 14 November 2014 was  maintained  by  the
    respondent.  The respondent said there were no compelling circumstances
    that would warrant revoking the deportation order.  Also, following the
    Immigration Act 2014 ("2014 Act"), consideration had been given  as  to
    whether the submissions amounted to  a  fresh  claim.   The  respondent
    stated that the decision made on 14 November 2014  concluded  that  the
    points now raised when taken together with  the  previously  considered
    material would not create a realistic prospect  of  success  before  an
    Immigration Judge.  Therefore it was not accepted that the  applicant's
    representations  met  the  test  set  out  at  paragraph  353  of   the
    Immigration Rules.   The  applicant  sought  permission  to  judicially
    review the removal directions.

6.   On 9 December 2014  Judge  Kebede  granted  a  stay  on  removal.   The
    applicant sought to amend his grounds seeking permission to  include  a
    challenge to the decision to  the  failure  to  enable  him  to  appeal
    against the refusal to revoke the deportation order signed on  24  June
    2014 on four grounds.

7.   Firstly, that the applicant was not caught by  the  amendments  to  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

8.   Secondly, that the decision to refuse to revoke the  deportation  order
    signed on 24 June 2014 was an appealable decision as defined by Section
    82(2)(k) of the 2002 Act and he thus had a right of appeal  exercisable
    in country.  The applicant in his skeleton specifically states that the
    treatment by the respondent of  the  representations  set  out  in  the
    letter of 11 July 2014 which were rejected by the respondent as a fresh
    human rights  application  with  reference  to  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules is not subject to challenge at this  stage.   Rather,
    it is submitted that the applicant has a current  human  rights  claim.
    Under the current legal provisions a deportation order may not now have
    been made and furthermore that because there is a current  CCRC  review
    his removal pursuant to the deportation  order  is  premature.   It  is
    submitted that in the  light  of  BA  (Nigeria)[2009]  2  WLR  1370  as
    affirmed by the Supreme Court [2009] UKSC 7, there is  no  need  for  a
    human rights claim to meet the considerations of paragraph 353  of  the
    Immigration Rules and thus absent certification the claim must  attract
    a right of appeal.

9.   The third ground is that if those two grounds  are  unsuccessful  there
    is in any event nothing in the 2014 Act that changes the effect  of  BA
    (Nigeria)and its interpretation.  It  is  submitted  that  if  a  human
    rights claim is raised it must, unless certified, attract  a  right  of
    appeal.

10.  Ground 4 is that on the basis the decision attracts a right  of  appeal
    the respondent has failed to comply with the  Notices  Regulations  and
    thus the decision is rendered invalid.

11.  Although no  formal  amended  grounds  have  been  produced,  reference
    instead being made to the grounds as set out in the  skeleton  argument
    dated 15 December 2014, the respondent has stated there is no objection
    to the proposed amendment and so the hearing before me today  proceeded
    on the basis of those four grounds.

12.  It was also agreed that if ground 1 fell then 2 and 4 would  also  fall
    and so in essence the hearing before me is first  of  all  whether  the
    applicant is caught by the amendments to the 2002 Act.  If  he  is  not
    and he is caught by the 2014 Act amendments to the 2002  Act  then  the
    change in the 2002 Act does not affect the relevance  of  BA  (Nigeria)
    which continues to be interpreted in the same way;  the  claim  is  not
    subject to a paragraph 353 Immigration Rules gateway test.

13.  The grounds upon which it is asserted that the decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke the deportation order are based on the construction asserted  by
    the applicant of the 2014 Act, Commencement Order No. 3 2014/ 2771 made
    on 15 October 2014 and the Transitional  and  Savings  Provision  Order
    2014/2928 made on 6 November 2014 coming  into  force  on  10  November
    2014. The applicant asserts that the provisions of the  2014  Act  with
    regard to deportation only apply to those who become a foreign criminal
    as defined by Section 117D of the 2002 Act on or after 20 October  2014
    i.e. if he had been convicted after 20 October 2014 and that those  who
    were convicted prior to that date are not subject to amended Part 5  of
    the 2002 Act.  Secondly  that  2014/2928  specifically  refers  to  and
    states that Commencement Order No. 3, Articles 9  and  10  continue  to
    apply and refers to deportation decisions taken after 10 November  2014
    and refers to those who are foreign criminals and  commences  the  2014
    Act to those people.  He asserts that both orders are  forward  looking
    and the only way to read them that is non-contradictory and together is
    to consider a person who is a foreign criminal against whom a  decision
    is taken after 10 November means those  who  become  foreign  criminals
    after 20 October.

14.   Both  orders  refer  to  saved  provisions  and  relevant  provisions.
    Relevant provisions include those that amend the 2002 Act  and  include
    Section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 removals,  Section  82  2002
    Act amendments, Section 92 2002 Act amendment (the place from which  an
    appeal  may  be  brought).   The  saved  provisions  operate  to   stop
    particular amendments applying to,  for  example,  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration Act 1999, Section 62 of the 2002  Act  in  connection  with
    detention and the way in which Part 5 appeals of the 2002 Act operate.

15.  Article 9 of the No.3 Commencement Order reads insofar as is relevant:


         "Notwithstanding the commencement of the relevant  provisions,  the
         saved  provisions  continue  to  have  effect,  and  the   relevant
         provisions do not have effect, other than so far as they relate  to
         the person set out respectively in Articles 10...."


16.  So the  saved  provisions,  i.e.  the  unamended  2002  Act  provisions
    continue to have effect and the relevant provisions do not have  effect
    other than insofar as they  relate  to  Article  10.   The  Article  10
    persons referred to in Article 9 are Article 10(a)

     a person ("P1") who becomes a foreign criminal within  the  definition
    in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act on or after 20 October 2014; ....

17.  The respondent reserves her position as to  whether  the  applicant  is
    correct in his interpretation that Article 9 and 10 mean  that  Section
    117D of the 2002 Act only applies to those convicted after  20  October
    2014 but she asserts that even  if  that  is  correct,  the  effect  of
    2014/2928 is that deportation decisions, which is  defined  to  include
    decisions to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order,  made  after  10
    November 2014 fall within the 2002 Act as amended by the 2014  Act  and
    thus a decision to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  order  is  not  an
    appealable decision.

18.  The 2014/2928 Order confirms that the  relevant  and  saved  provisions
    have the same meaning as in the No.3 Commencement Order.  Article 2  of
    the 2014/2928 Order reads:

         "(1) The saved provisions continue to have effect and the  relevant
             provisions do not have effect other than -


             (a)   in  accordance  with  articles  9,  10  and  11  of  the
                  Commencement Order;


             (b)  in  relation  to  a  deportation  decision  made  by  the
                  Secretary of State on or after 10 November 2014 in respect
                  of -
                  (i)a person, ("P"), who is a foreign criminal  within  the
                  definition in Section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act...."


19.  The structure of Commencement Order No.3 appears to be consistent  with
    a reading that those who were convicted or  subject  to  a  deportation
    decision prior to 20 October 2014 are subject  to  the  unamended  2002
    Act, i.e. they would have a right of appeal if the decision came within
    the unamended section 82 definition.  This appears consistent with  the
    explanatory note which reads, where relevant:

         "The persons referred to in article 10 are a  person,  ("P1"),  who
         becomes a foreign criminal under section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act on
         or after 20 October 2014... The effect of the saving  provision  is
         that only the persons in articles 10 and 11 will be subject to  the
         new appeals provisions in Section 82(2),  as  inserted  by  Section
         15(2) of the 2014 Act, which provide a right of appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal where a person's protection  claim  or  human  rights
         claim has  been  refused,  or  their  protection  status  has  been
         revoked."


     Obviously however because the  Secretary  of  State  has  reserved  her
    position on this I did not hear argument on that and I make no decision
    on this.

20.  Section 117D(2) reads so far as relevant:

         "In this part 'foreign criminal' means a person -


         (a)  who is not a British citizen;


         (b)  who has been convicted in the UK of an offence and


         (c)  who -
             (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
             twelve months.

21.  I am satisfied that 2014/2928 plainly brings  those  whose  deportation
    decision was made after 10 November 2014  into  the  new  scheme.   The
    scheme is plainly set up to remove rights of appeal  from  those  whose
    rights of appeal were, it seems,  arguably  preserved  by  Commencement
    Order No.3.  Article  2(1)(b)of  2014/2928  refers  to  "is  a  foreign
    criminal" within the definition of Section 117D and 117D  refers  to  a
    person who "has been convicted" in the UK of  an  offence  compared  to
    Commencement Order No.3 article 10(a) which refers to those who  become
    a foreign criminal on or after 20 October  2014.   This  applicant  was
    already a foreign criminal prior to 20 October 2014.  He did not become
    a foreign criminal on 10 November or 20 October.   This  interpretation
    of the 2014/2928 Order is consistent with the  explanatory  note  which
    says, in so far as relevant:

         "This  Order  expands  the  circumstances  in  which  the  relevant
         provisions have effect so that they  have  effect  in  relation  to
         deportation decisions made by the Secretary of State in relation to
         people who are foreign criminals within the definition set  out  in
         Section 117D(2)"


    Deportation decision is defined to include  a  decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order.


     Consequently, I am satisfied it is not arguable that the applicant  has
    a right of  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  the
    deportation order. He is subject to the 2002 Act as amended by the 2014
    Act.

22.  Ground 2 and ground 4 therefore fall.

23.  As far as ground 3 is concerned, I am satisfied  that  it  is  arguable
    that the 2014 Act as it amends the 2002 Act may mean that  if  a  human
    rights claim is raised it must, unless certified, attract  a  right  of
    appeal and that paragraph 353 Immigration Rules does not operate  as  a
    gateway to an appeal right. It is arguable this applicant has  a  right
    of appeal against a decision to refuse his human rights  claim.   So  I
    grant permission on that ground and that ground only.

    Costs reserved
     ~~~~0~~~~

Appendix B

|"OLD (Nationality, Immigration  |"NEW (As amended by Immigration |
|and Asylum Act 2002 in force    |Act 2014)"                      |
|immediately prior to the        |                                |
|commencement of the Immigration |82Right of appeal to the        |
|Act 2014)"                      |Tribunal [effective from 20th   |
|                                |October 2014]                   |
|82 Right of appeal: general     |                                |
|                                |(1)A person ("P") may appeal to |
|(1)Where an immigration decision|the Tribunal where-             |
|is made in respect of a person  |(a)the Secretary of State has   |
|he may appeal to the Tribunal.  |decided to refuse a protection  |
|                                |claim made by P,                |
|(2)In this Part "immigration    |(b)the Secretary of State has   |
|decision" means-                |decided to refuse a human rights|
|(a)....,                        |claim made by P, or             |
|(b).....,                       |(c)the Secretary of State has   |
|(c)....,                        |decided to revoke P's protection|
|(d)....,                        |status.                         |
|(e)....,                        |(2)For the purposes of this     |
|(f)......,                      |Part-                           |
|(g)......,                      |(a)a "protection claim" is a    |
|(h)......                       |claim made by a person ("P")    |
|(i).....,                       |that removal of P from the      |
|(ia)......,                     |United Kingdom-                 |
|(ib)......,                     |(i)would breach the United      |
|(j)......, and                  |Kingdom's obligations under the |
|(k)refusal to revoke a          |Refugee Convention, or          |
|deportation order under section |(ii)would breach the United     |
|5(2) of that Act                |Kingdom's obligations in        |
|                                |relation to persons eligible for|
|                                |a grant of humanitarian         |
|                                |protection;                     |
|                                |(b)P's protection claim is      |
|                                |refused if the Secretary of     |
|                                |State makes one or more of the  |
|                                |following decisions-            |
|                                |(i)that removal of P from the   |
|                                |United Kingdom would not breach |
|                                |the United Kingdom's obligations|
|                                |under the Refugee Convention;   |
|                                |(ii)that removal of P from the  |
|                                |United Kingdom would not breach |
|                                |the United Kingdom's obligations|
|                                |in relation to persons eligible |
|                                |for a grant of humanitarian     |
|                                |protection;                     |
|                                |(c)a person has "protection     |
|                                |status" if the person has been  |
|                                |granted leave to enter or remain|
|                                |in the United Kingdom as a      |
|                                |refugee or as a person eligible |
|                                |for a grant of humanitarian     |
|                                |protection;                     |
|                                |(d)"humanitarian protection" is |
|                                |to be construed in accordance   |
|                                |with the immigration rules;     |
|                                |(e)"refugee" has the same       |
|                                |meaning as in the Refugee       |
|                                |Convention.                     |
|92 Appeal from within United    |92 Place from which an appeal   |
|Kingdom: general                |may be brought or continued     |
|                                |[effective from 20th October    |
|(1)A person may not appeal under|2014]                           |
|section 82(1) while he is in the|(1)This section applies to      |
|United Kingdom unless his appeal|determine the place from which  |
|is of a kind to which this      |an appeal under section 82(1)   |
|section applies.                |may be brought or continued.    |
|(2)This section applies to an   |(2)In the case of an appeal     |
|appeal against an immigration   |under section 82(1)(a)          |
|decision of a kind specified in |(protection claim appeal), the  |
|section 82(2)(c), (d), (e), (f) |appeal must be brought from     |
|and (j).                        |outside the United Kingdom if-  |
|(3).......                      |(a)the claim to which the appeal|
|(3A)......                      |relates has been certified under|
|(3B)......                      |section 94(1) or (7) (claim     |
|(3C)......                      |clearly unfounded or removal to |
|(3D).....                       |safe third country), or         |
|(4)This section also applies to |(b).....                        |
|an appeal against an immigration|Otherwise, the appeal must be   |
|decision if the appellant-      |brought from within the United  |
|(a)has made an asylum claim, or |Kingdom.                        |
|a human rights claim, while in  |(3)In the case of an appeal     |
|the United Kingdom, or          |under section 82(1)(b) (human   |
|(b).....                        |rights claim appeal) where the  |
|                                |claim to which the appeal       |
|                                |relates was made while the      |
|                                |appellant was in the United     |
|                                |Kingdom, the appeal must be     |
|                                |brought from outside the United |
|                                |Kingdom if-                     |
|                                |(a)the claim to which the appeal|
|                                |relates has been certified under|
|                                |section 94(1) or (7) (claim     |
|                                |clearly unfounded or removal to |
|                                |safe third country) or section  |
|                                |94B (certification of human     |
|                                |rights claims made by persons   |
|                                |liable to deportation), or      |
|                                |(b)......                       |
|                                |Otherwise, the appeal must be   |
|                                |brought from within the United  |
|                                |Kingdom.                        |
|                                |(4)In the case of an appeal     |
|                                |under section 82(1)(b) (human   |
|                                |rights claim appeal) where the  |
|                                |claim to which the appeal       |
|                                |relates was made while the      |
|                                |appellant was outside the United|
|                                |Kingdom, the appeal must be     |
|                                |brought from outside the United |
|                                |Kingdom.                        |
|                                |(5)In the case of an appeal     |
|                                |under section 82(1)(c)          |
|                                |(revocation of protection       |
|                                |status)-                        |
|                                |(a)the appeal must be brought   |
|                                |from within the United Kingdom  |
|                                |if the decision to which the    |
|                                |appeal relates was made while   |
|                                |the appellant was in the United |
|                                |Kingdom;                        |
|                                |(b)the appeal must be brought   |
|                                |from outside the United Kingdom |
|                                |if the decision to which the    |
|                                |appeal relates was made while   |
|                                |the appellant was outside the   |
|                                |United Kingdom.                 |
|                                |(6)If, after an appeal under    |
|                                |section 82(1)(a) or (b) has been|
|                                |brought from within the United  |
|                                |Kingdom, the Secretary of State |
|                                |certifies the claim to which the|
|                                |appeal relates under section    |
|                                |94(1) or (7) or section 94B, the|
|                                |appeal must be continued from   |
|                                |outside the United Kingdom.     |
|                                |(7)Where a person brings or     |
|                                |continues an appeal under       |
|                                |section 82(1)(a) (refusal of    |
|                                |protection claim) from outside  |
|                                |the United Kingdom, for the     |
|                                |purposes of considering whether |
|                                |the grounds of appeal are       |
|                                |satisfied, the appeal is to be  |
|                                |treated as if the person were   |
|                                |not outside the United Kingdom. |
|                                |(8)Where an appellant brings an |
|                                |appeal from within the United   |
|                                |Kingdom but leaves the United   |
|                                |Kingdom before the appeal is    |
|                                |finally determined, the appeal  |
|                                |is to be treated as abandoned   |
|                                |unless the claim to which the   |
|                                |appeal relates has been         |
|                                |certified under section 94(1) or|
|                                |(7) or section 94B."            |
|                                |                                |
|94 Appeal from within United    |[with effect from 20th October  |
|Kingdom: unfounded human rights |2014]                           |
|or asylum claim                 |(1)Section 94 (appeal from      |
|                                |within the United Kingdom) is   |
|(1)This section applies to an   |amended as follows.             |
|appeal under section 82(1) where|(2)In the heading, for "asylum" |
|the appellant has made an asylum|substitute "protection".        |
|claim or a human rights claim   |(3)For subsections (1) to (2)   |
|(or both).                      |substitute-                     |
|(1A)A person may not bring an   |"(1)The Secretary of State may  |
|appeal against an immigration   |certify a protection claim or   |
|decision of a kind specified in |human rights claim as clearly   |
|section 82(2)(c), (d) or (e) in |unfounded."                     |
|reliance on section 92(2) if the|(4)In subsection (3)-           |
|Secretary of State certifies    |(a)for "an asylum claimant or   |
|that the claim or claims        |human rights" substitute "a";   |
|mentioned in subsection (1)     |(b)for "subsection (2)"         |
|above is or are clearly         |substitute "subsection (1)".    |
|unfounded.                      |(5)In subsection (6A) for "an   |
|(2)A person may not bring an    |asylum claimant or human rights"|
|appeal to which this section    |substitute "a".                 |
|applies in reliance on section  |(6)In subsection (7), for the   |
|92(4)(a) if the Secretary of    |words from the beginning to     |
|State certifies that the claim  |"certifies that" substitute "The|
|or claims mentioned in          |Secretary of State may certify a|
|subsection (1) is or are clearly|protection claim or human rights|
|unfounded.                      |claim made by a person if".     |
|(3)....                         |(7)In subsection (8)(b), at the |
|(4)....                         |end insert "or with the United  |
|(5)....                         |Kingdom's obligations in        |
|(5A)....                        |relation to persons eligible for|
|(5B)......                      |a grant of humanitarian         |
|(5C)....                        |protection".                    |
|(5D)....                        |(8)Omit subsection (9).         |
|(6)....                         |                                |
|(6A)...                         |                                |
|(7)A person may not bring an    |[insert after s94A, with effect |
|appeal to which this section    |from 28th July 2014]            |
|applies in reliance on section  |94BAppeal from within the United|
|92(4) if the Secretary of State |Kingdom: certification of human |
|certifies that-                 |rights claims made by persons   |
|(a)it is proposed to remove the |liable to deportation           |
|person to a country of which he |(1)This section applies where a |
|is not a national or citizen,   |human rights claim has been made|
|and                             |by a person ("P") who is liable |
|(b)there is no reason to believe|to deportation under-           |
|that the person's rights under  |(a)section 3(5)(a) of the       |
|the Human Rights Convention will|Immigration Act 1971 (Secretary |
|be breached in that country.    |of State deeming deportation    |
|(8)In determining whether a     |conducive to public good), or   |
|person in relation to whom a    |(b)section 3(6) of that Act     |
|certificate has been issued     |(court recommending deportation |
|under subsection (7) may be     |following conviction).          |
|removed from the United Kingdom,|(2)The Secretary of State may   |
|the country specified in the    |certify the claim if the        |
|certificate is to be regarded   |Secretary of State considers    |
|as-                             |that, despite the appeals       |
|(a)a place where a person's life|process not having been begun or|
|and liberty is not threatened by|not having been exhausted,      |
|reason of his race, religion,   |removal of P to the country or  |
|nationality, membership of a    |territory to which P is proposed|
|particular social group, or     |to be removed, pending the      |
|political opinion, and          |outcome of an appeal in relation|
|(b)a place from which a person  |to P's claim, would not be      |
|will not be sent to another     |unlawful under section 6 of the |
|country otherwise than in       |Human Rights Act 1998 (public   |
|accordance with the Refugee     |authority not to act contrary to|
|Convention.                     |Human Rights Convention).       |
|(9)Where a person in relation to|(3)The grounds upon which the   |
|whom a certificate is issued    |Secretary of State may certify a|
|under this section subsequently |claim under subsection (2)      |
|brings an appeal under section  |include (in particular) that P  |
|82(1) while outside the United  |would not, before the appeals   |
|Kingdom, the appeal shall be    |process is exhausted, face a    |
|considered as if he had not been|real risk of serious            |
|removed from the United Kingdom.|irreversible harm if removed to |
|                                |the country or territory to     |
|                                |which P is proposed to be       |
|                                |removed."                       |
|                                |                                |
|96 Earlier right of appeal      |[with effect from 20th October  |
|                                |2014]                           |
|(1)An appeal under section 82(1)|(1)Section 96 (earlier right of |
|against an immigration decision |appeal) is amended as follows.  |
|("the new decision") in respect |                                |
|of a person may not be brought  |(2)In subsection (1)-           |
|if the Secretary of State or an |                                |
|immigration officer certifies-  |(a)in the opening words, for the|
|(a)that the person was notified |words from the beginning to     |
|of a right of appeal under that |"brought" substitute "A person  |
|section against another         |may not bring an appeal under   |
|immigration decision ("the old  |section 82 against a decision   |
|decision") (whether or not an   |("the new decision")";          |
|appeal was brought and whether  |                                |
|or not any appeal brought has   |(b)in paragraph (a), omit       |
|been determined),               |"immigration";                  |
|(b)that the claim or application|                                |
|to which the new decision       |(c)in paragraph (b) for "matter"|
|relates relies on a matter that |substitute "ground";            |
|could have been raised in an    |                                |
|appeal against the old decision,|(d)in paragraph (c) for "matter"|
|and                             |substitute "ground".            |
|(c)that, in the opinion of the  |                                |
|Secretary of State or the       |(3)For subsection (2)           |
|immigration officer, there is no|substitute-                     |
|satisfactory reason for that    |                                |
|matter not having been raised in|"(2)A person may not bring an   |
|an appeal against the old       |appeal under section 82 if the  |
|decision.                       |Secretary of State or an        |
|(2)An appeal under section 82(1)|immigration officer certifies-  |
|against an immigration decision |                                |
|("the new decision") in respect |(a)that the person has received |
|of a person may not be brought  |a notice under section 120(2),  |
|if the Secretary of State or an |                                |
|immigration officer certifies-  |(b)that the appeal relies on a  |
|(a)that the person received a   |ground that should have been,   |
|notice under section 120 by     |but has not been, raised in a   |
|virtue of an application other  |statement made under section    |
|than that to which the new      |120(2) or (5), and              |
|decision relates or by virtue of|                                |
|a decision other than the new   |(c)that, in the opinion of the  |
|decision,                       |Secretary of State or the       |
|(b)that the new decision relates|immigration officer, there is no|
|to an application or claim which|satisfactory reason for that    |
|relies on a matter that should  |ground not having been raised in|
|have been, but has not been,    |a statement under section 120(2)|
|raised in a statement made in   |or (5)."                        |
|response to that notice, and    |                                |
|(c)that, in the opinion of the  |                                |
|Secretary of State or the       |                                |
|immigration officer, there is no|                                |
|satisfactory reason for that    |                                |
|matter not having been raised in|                                |
|a statement made in response to |                                |
|that notice.                    |                                |
|(4)In subsection (1) "notified" |                                |
|means notified in accordance    |                                |
|with regulations under section  |                                |
|105.                            |                                |
|(5)Subsections (1) and (2) apply|                                |
|to prevent a person's right of  |                                |
|appeal whether or not he has    |                                |
|been outside the United Kingdom |                                |
|since an earlier right of appeal|                                |
|arose or since a requirement    |                                |
|under section 120 was imposed.  |                                |
|(6)In this section a reference  |                                |
|to an appeal under section 82(1)|                                |
|includes a reference to an      |                                |
|appeal under section 2 of the   |                                |
|Special Immigration Appeals     |                                |
|Commission Act 1997 (c. 68)     |                                |
|which is or could be brought by |                                |
|reference to an appeal under    |                                |
|section 82(1).                  |                                |
|(7)A certificate under          |                                |
|subsection (1) or (2) shall have|                                |
|no effect in relation to an     |                                |
|appeal instituted before the    |                                |
|certificate is issued.          |                                |
|                                |                                |
|113 Interpretation              |[with effect from 20th October  |
|                                |2014]                           |
|(1)In this Part, unless a       |(1)Section 113 (interpretation) |
|contrary intention appears-     |is amended as follows.          |
|"asylum claim" means a claim    |                                |
|made by a person to the         |(2)In subsection (1)-           |
|Secretary of State at a place   |                                |
|designated by the Secretary of  |(a)in the definition of "human  |
|State that to remove the person |rights claim"-                  |
|from or require him to leave the|                                |
|United Kingdom would breach the |(i)after "Kingdom" insert "or to|
|United Kingdom's obligations    |refuse him entry into the United|
|under the Refugee Convention,   |Kingdom";                       |
|....                            |                                |
|"human rights claim" means a    |(ii)omit "as being incompatible |
|claim made by a person to the   |with his Convention rights";    |
|Secretary of State at a place   |                                |
|designated by the Secretary of  |(b)at the appropriate places    |
|State that to remove the person |insert-                         |
|from or require him to leave the|                                |
|United Kingdom would be unlawful|""humanitarian protection" has  |
|under section 6 of the Human    |the meaning given in section    |
|Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public |82(2);"                         |
|authority not to act contrary to|                                |
|Convention) as being            |""protection claim" has the     |
|incompatible with his Convention|meaning given in section 82(2)";|
|rights,                         |                                |
|"the Human Rights Convention"   |                                |
|has the same meaning as "the    |""protection status" has the    |
|Convention" in the Human Rights |meaning given in section 82(2)";|
|Act 1998 and "Convention rights"|                                |
|shall be construed in accordance|                                |
|with section 1 of that Act,     |(c)....                         |
|.....                           |                                |
|"immigration rules" means rules |(d)in the definition of         |
|under section 1(4) of that Act  |"immigration rules", for "that  |
|(general immigration rules),    |Act" substitute "the Immigration|
|"prescribed" means prescribed by|Act 1971".                      |
|regulations,                    |                                |
|"the Refugee Convention" means  |(3)Omit subsection (2).         |
|the Convention relating to the  |                                |
|Status of Refugees done at      |                                |
|Geneva on 28th July 1951 and its|                                |
|Protocol,                       |                                |
|.........                       |                                |
|(2)A reference to varying leave |                                |
|to enter or remain in the United|                                |
|Kingdom does not include a      |                                |
|reference to adding, varying or |                                |
|revoking a condition of leave.  |                                |
|                                |                                |
|Immigration Rules, Paragraph 353|Immigration Rules, Paragraph 353|
|of HC395 as amended; in force   |of HC395 as amended; in force on|
|immediately prior to 20th       |and after 20th October 2014     |
|October 2014                    |                                |
|                                |                                |
|353. When a human rights or     |353. When a human rights or     |
|asylum claim has been refused or|asylum claim has been refused or|
|withdrawn or treated as         |withdrawn or treated as         |
|withdrawn under paragraph 333C  |withdrawn under paragraph 333C  |
|of these Rules and any appeal   |of these Rules and any appeal   |
|relating to that claim is no    |relating to that claim is no    |
|longer pending, the decision    |longer pending, the decision    |
|maker will consider any further |maker will consider any further |
|submissions and, if rejected,   |submissions and, if rejected,   |
|will then determine whether they|will then determine whether they|
|amount to a fresh claim. The    |amount to a fresh claim. The    |
|submissions will amount to a    |submissions will amount to a    |
|fresh claim if they are         |fresh claim if they are         |
|significantly different from the|significantly different from the|
|material that has previously    |material that has previously    |
|been considered.                |been considered.                |
|The submissions will only be    |The submissions will only be    |
|significantly different if the  |significantly different if the  |
|content:                        |content:                        |
|(i) had not already been        |(i) had not already been        |
|considered; and                 |considered; and                 |
|(ii) taken together with the    |(ii) taken together with the    |
|previously considered material, |previously considered material, |
|created a realistic prospect of |created a realistic prospect of |
|success, notwithstanding its    |success, notwithstanding its    |
|rejection.                      |rejection.                      |
|This paragraph does not apply to|This paragraph does not apply to|
|claims made overseas.           |claims made overseas.           |
|353A. Consideration of further  |353A. Consideration of further  |
|submissions shall be subject to |submissions shall be subject to |
|the procedures set out in these |the procedures set out in these |
|Rules. An applicant who has made|Rules. An applicant who has made|
|further submissions shall not be|further submissions shall not be|
|removed before the Secretary of |removed before the Secretary of |
|State has considered the        |State has considered the        |
|submissions under paragraph 353 |submissions under paragraph 353 |
|or otherwise.                   |or otherwise.                   |


