
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL






   WR (Student: "Regular Attendance"; "Maximum Period") Jamaica [2005] UKAIT
                                                                       00170


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at: Field House                              |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|on :  16 August 2005                               |                        |
|                                                   |....05 December 2005..  |

                                   Before

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Miss E Arfon-Jones (Deputy President)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Cobham of Andrews, Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer.

(1) Paragraphs  60(iv)  and  57(ii)(b)  impose  separate  requirements:  the
former relates to  the  design  of  the  course  itself  whilst  the  latter
requires proof of actual attendance that is sufficient to meet  the  demands
of undertaking the course; (2) Paragraph 60(vi) refers to the  total  period
of leave not the total period spent in studying.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 January 2001 and  was
      granted leave to enter as a student  until  31  January  2002.    With
      appropriate extensions of leave, she undertook various  short  courses
      relating to beauty therapy and associated activities up to June  2003.
      On 28 July 2003, the Appellant applied for an extension of  her  leave
      to remain in the UK as a student in order to undertake  a  Diploma  in
      Computer Studies at  the  School  of  Computing  &  Business  Studies,
      Brixton Road London which was to commence in September  2003  and  run
      until August 2004.


   2.  On 3 March 2004, the Secretary of State refused her application under
      paragraph 62, with reference to  paragraph  60(iv),  of  Statement  of
      Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 of 1994 on the basis that she had
      failed to produce satisfactory evidence of regular attendance  on  the
      computer studies course which had begun in the interim.  The Secretary
      of State relied upon a letter from the School of Computing &  Business
      dated 27 February 2004 which indicted that, although the Appellant was
      registered on the computer course, she had not attended  any  part  of
      it.


   3. The Appellant appealed against that refusal and, following a  hearing,
      in a determination promulgated on 25 February 2005, an Adjudicator (Mr
      JP Griffin) allowed her  appeal.    The  Adjudicator  had  before  him
      evidence, which he accepted, that the Appellant had  changed  computer
      courses in October 2003 to one run by  the  Computer  Training  Centre
      (CTC) in Cannock.   He accepted that the Appellant  had  notified  the
      Home Office and the Home Office had contacted  the  wrong  institution
      for  an  attendance  record.   The  Appellant  produced  a  record  of
      attendance which showed that she had attended 42 out of  the  required
      108 times at CTC.  The Adjudicator accepted this  and  concluded  that
      the Appellant satisfied paragraphs 60 and, by incorporation, 57 of  HC
      395.


   4. The Secretary of State was granted leave to appeal to the  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal on the basis that the Adjudicator had erred in law  in
      his determination.


   5. By virtue of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc)
      Act 2004 (Commencement No 5 and Transitional  Provisions)  Order  2005
      (SI 2005/565), the grant of permission takes effect as  an  order  for
      reconsideration of the Appellant's appeal before the  AIT  limited  to
      the grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted.


   6. The Tribunal is required  to  approach  this  reconsideration  in  two
      stages.  First, we must decide whether the Adjudicator's determination
      discloses a "material error of law".  Second, if it does we must go on
      and substitute a fresh decision, deciding on the basis of the evidence
      whether to allow or dismiss the appeal.


      Material Error of Law


   7. It will be helpful if at the outset we set out the relevant provisions
      in HC 395 which deal with extension of leave as a student  so  far  as
      they arise in this case.


   8. An extension of stay may only be granted if  the  applicant  satisfies
      paragraph 60 which,  whilst  setting  out  specific  requirements  for
      extensions of leave, also incorporates all the requirements for  leave
      to enter set out in paragraph 57.    For our  purposes  the  important
      requirements are those in paragraph 60(ii) and (iv):


           "60. The requirements for an extension of stay as a student  are
           that the applicant:...


           (ii) meets the requirements for admission as a student  set  out
           in paragraph 57(i)-(vi);...


           (iv) can produce satisfactory  evidence  of  regular  attendance
           during any course which he has already begun; or any course  for
           which he has enrolled in the past;...".


   9. Paragraph 57(ii)(b) requires that the applicant is able and intends to
      follow


           "a weekday full-time course involving  attendance  at  a  single
           institution for a minimum of 15 hours  organised  daytime  study
           per week of a single subject or directly related subjects;..."


  10. For the Secretary of State, Ms Brown submitted  that  the  adjudicator
      had fallen into error in paragraph [15] of his determination  and  she
      drew our attention, in particular, to the following sentence:


           "It is not clear whether the 40% attendance equates to 15  hours
           per week and  unfortunately  no  enquiries  were  made  on  this
           point."


  11. Ms  Brown  submitted  that  this  confused  two  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules: first, the requirement in paragraph 57(ii)(b)  that
      the Appellant should be able and intend to follow a weekday  full-time
      course with a minimum of 15 hours study per week  and,  secondly,  the
      requirement in paragraph 60(iv) that for  an  extension  of  stay  the
      Appellant should produce satisfactory evidence of  regular  attendance
      at a course on which  she  is  registered.    It  was  wrong  for  the
      Adjudicator to conclude that the  Appellant's  40%  attendance  (being
      42/108 attendance) had anything to do with the first  requirement  and
      it was perverse of him to conclude that this evidence established  the
      requirement in paragraph 60(iv) of "satisfactory evidence  of  regular
      attendance".


  12.  Mr  Cobham,  who  represented  the  Appellant,  submitted  that   the
      Adjudicator had looked at the case in the round and, on the  basis  of
      all the evidence, his decision was supported by the evidence  and  not
      perverse.


  13. We accept Ms Brown's submissions.


  14. First, it is clear to us that in paragraph [15] of  his  determination
      the  Adjudicator  has  confused  the  two  distinct  requirements   in
      paragraphs 57(ii)(b) and 60(ii).  He may well have been led to this by
      the fact that in the Notice of Decision, the Secretary  of  State  did
      rely upon paragraph 57(ii) but in the subsequent Explanatory Statement
      dated 5 May 2004 only referred to paragraph 60(iv) and the absence  of
      satisfactory evidence of regular attendance at the  computing  course.
      We did not understand Ms Brown to doubt that both the computing course
      at the School for Computing & Business and the  CTC  course  satisfied
      the requirement as to hours of study.  She was right not to do so, the
      documents before us from the two institutions make clear  that  weekly
      attendance for these courses was 17 and 18/20 hours respectively.


  15. It is, in our view, absolutely clear that  the  '15  hours  per  week'
      requirement and the 'regular attendance' requirement  cannot  properly
      be run together.  The former is a requirement relating to  the  design
      of the course independent of any  student's  actual  attendance.   The
      latter is a requirement relating  to  a  student's  actual  attendance
      within the parameters set by the course itself.


  16. Second, by virtue of his conclusion that paragraph 60  was  satisfied,
      the Adjudicator must have been satisfied that the evidence before  him
      was in terms of paragraph 60(iv)  "satisfactory  evidence  of  regular
      attendance" on the computing course the Appellant was studying.   That
      evidence was of attendance on 42 out  of  108  occasions  -  which  he
      calculated at 40% attendance.


  17. Mr Cobham submitted that the record of attendance was wrong due to  an
      administrative error.  He told us that the Appellant's representatives
      had written to CTC in June of this year to seek clarification but  had
      not received a reply.  We are not surprised.  As the Tribunal  pointed
      out to Mr Cobham at the hearing, the documents show that CTC closed in
      June 2004.   We note that at the original hearing the  Appellant  told
      the Adjudicator that her attendance record was due to  the  fact  that
      CTC had insufficient computers and so when they were  being  used  she
      went home (paragraph [9] of the determination).  The Adjudicator seems
      to have accepted this explanation when he stated that he found her  to
      be a truthful witness (para [12] of the determination).   There  would
      appear to be a discrepancy between what  the  Appellant  said  at  the
      original hearing and Mr Cobham's explanation  offered  on  her  behalf
      before us.  Mr Cobham did not  seek  to  elaborate  further.   In  the
      result, there is insufficient to displace  or  question  the  evidence
      from CTC that the Appellant attended the computer course for which she
      was registered on 42/108 occasions between  September  2003  and  June
      2004.


  18. Did the Adjudicator err in law in considering this evidence sufficient
      to establish that the Appellant had produced "satisfactory evidence of
      regular attendance" at the course?


  19. What is meant by the phrase "regular attendance" in  paragraph  60(iv)
      of the Immigration Rules?  We were not referred to any case  law,  nor
      are we are aware of any, which would assist in discerning its meaning.
       Does  the  phrase  requires,  in  effect,  "frequent"  attendance  or
      "satisfactory" attendance or, as the  word  "regular"  might  suggest,
      "attendance on a recurring pattern  or  period"?    In  one  sense,  a
      person may regularly attend a  course  but  do  so  infrequently,  for
      example by attending on every Monday but on no other days of the week.
        We  do  not  consider  that  this  would  fulfil  the   requirement.
      Attendance characterised merely by a standard period or interval,  but
      which is infrequent, is not sufficient.


  20. It is important to notice that the requirement of "regular attendance"
      in paragraph 60(iv) is a companion requirement for extension of  leave
      to that of "evidence of satisfactory progress" in paragraph  60(v)  of
      the Rules.  In  substance  these  two  requirements  are  looking  for
      satisfactory attendance and satisfactory progress respectively.   With
      that it mind, it seems to us  that  the  word  "regular"  is  used  in
      paragraph 60(iv) in the same sense as "regularity" when it is used  to
      describe  an  event  happening  often  as  in  "the  same  examination
      questions  came  up  with  unfailing  regularity".    What   must   be
      established, in our view, is attendance that  is  sufficiently  often,
      habitual or frequent in order to meet the demands of  undertaking  and
      completing the particular course.    The evidence of actual attendance
      must be considered in each case and  assessed  in  the  light  of  the
      meaning of "regular" we have described.  No  mathematical  formula  or
      hard-and-fast percentage of attendance will necessarily determine this
      issue for every case, although as a matter of commonsense the  greater
      the attendance (albeit falling short of  100%  attendance),  the  more
      likely it will be that the Rule is satisfied.


  21. Looking at the evidence relied upon by the Adjudicator we are left  in
      no doubt that the  evidence  of  40%  attendance  could  not  possibly
      satisfy the requirement of establishing "regular attendance".  It was,
      in the sense we have interpreted the Rule, "irregular" attendance  and
      could only be understood as such.  The Adjudicator's  conclusion  that
      paragraph  60(iv)  was  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  him  was
      perverse.


  22.  For  these  reasons,  we  are  satisfied   that   the   Adjudicator's
      determination discloses a material  error  of  law.   We  move  on  to
      consider what decision we should substitute.

      Decision on Reconsideration

  23. The Appellant must satisfy the Tribunal on a balance of  probabilities
      that the  requirements  of  the  relevant  immigration  Rules,  namely
      paragraph 60 (read with paragraph 57) are met.


  24. It is clear from our conclusion in paragraph  21  above  that  on  the
      evidence that was before  the  Adjudicator  the  Appellant  could  not
      establish that she satisfied paragraph 60(iv) of the Rules.


  25. At the hearing, the Tribunal  reminded  the  parties'  representatives
      that the reconsideration was governed by section 85(4) of the 2002 Act
      and, as the  Tribunal  pointed  out  in  LS  (post-decision  evidence;
      direction; appealability) Gambia [2005] UKAIT 00085, this  means  that
      post-decision change of circumstances  must  be  taken  into  account.
      Whilst there are a number of issues that may have to  be  resolved  in
      future cases in respect of the proper application of section 85(4)  to
      in-country immigration appeals, in this case its application is clear.
        The Appellant must establish on the facts at  the  date  of  hearing
      that she satisfies paragraph  60  (read  with  paragraph  57)  of  the
      Immigration Rules.


      Paragraph 60(iv)


  26. As a consequence, Mr Cobham relied upon the Appellant's attendance  at
      the Croydon College CIS Intranet in 2003/2004 on a NVQ3 Beauty Therapy
      course.  An attendance record dated 4 May 2005 was sent to the AIT  by
      facsimile from the Appellant's  representatives  the  day  before  the
      hearing (15 August 2005).  Attached to this is a certificate dated  30
      November 2004 certifying that the Appellant  had  passed  the  NVQ  in
      Beauty Therapy at level 3.  Mr Cobham was unsure whether the  document
      had been sent to the Home Office.


  27. We  were  surprised  to  see  this  document.   At  no  point  in  the
      proceedings had it previously been suggested that  the  Appellant  was
      attending a course on Beauty Therapy at  the  Croydon  College  during
      2003/2004.  Her application to the Secretary of State was to undertake
      a computer course at the School of Computing and Business  and  before
      the Adjudicator she relied upon the self-same course albeit undertaken
      at CTC.  Yet, it would appear from this documentation that at the time
      she was studying at CTC she was also studying for the NVQ3 at  Croydon
      College which she successfully completed sometime  in  the  summer  of
      2004.


  28. We were not provided  with  details  of  this  course.   However,  the
      document setting out the Appellant's attendance record  does  indicate
      there are 9 modules to the course held between Tuesday and Friday  and
      gives their durations.  If they  were  studied  contemporaneously  the
      course does satisfy paragraph 57(ii)(b), namely a  "weekday  full-time
      course involving attendance ... for a minimum of  15  hours  organised
      study per week of...directly related subjects".   We  are  content  to
      accept that it does for the purposes of this  appeal.   We  also  note
      that the Appellant's attendance at the various elements  of  the  NVQ3
      course ranges between 45% and 100% with all but one in excess  of  70%
      and of those 6 in excess of 80%.  Her average  attendance  was  80.54%
      with unauthorised attendance stated to be 10.12%.   Despite  the  late
      appearance of the evidence, for which no explanation was proffered  by
      Mr Cobham, there is no reason to doubt its authenticity.   We  do  not
      agree with Ms Brown's submission that this evidence is insufficient to
      satisfy the Rule. It seems to us that the  consistency  of  attendance
      for 8 of the 9 modules for the duration of the course does  amount  to
      "satisfactory  evidence  of   regular   attendance"   satisfying   the
      requirement in paragraph 60(iv).


  29. There is also other evidence in the file relevant to this issue.   The
      same facsimile bundle contains a "Student Performance Review" dated 27
      May 2005 from the City College of  Technology  (formerly  CTC).   This
      shows that between September 2004 and May 2005, the Appellant  studied
      a Diploma in Information Technology at  that  College.   Clearly  this
      relates to matters arising after the Secretary of State's decision but
      must be taken into account by virtue of section 85(4) of the 2002 Act.
       The  progress  report  is  positive  and  indicates  the  Appellant's
      attendance on the course was 90%.  Mr Cobham was unable to assist  any
      further on this document and could not say whether the  Appellant  had
      completed the course.  Be that as  it  may,  the  Appellant  certainly
      plans to move on: she has been  accepted  upon  a  2  year  Foundation
      Degree  in  Spa  Management  at  Warwickshire  College   International
      beginning in September 2005.


  30. We are satisfied on the basis of this evidence that  at  the  date  of
      hearing the  Appellant  has  established  "regular  attendance"  on  a
      relevant  course  and,  therefore,  she  fulfils  the  requirement  in
      paragraph 60(iv) of HC 395.


      Paragraph 60(vi)


  31. Paragraph 60(vi) of HC 395 requires the Appellant to prove that she


           "would not, as a result of an extension of stay, spend more than
           4 years on short courses  (ie  courses  of  less  than  2  years
           duration, or longer courses broken off before  completion);  ...
           ".


  32. Ms Brown submitted that the Appellant failed  under  paragraph  60(vi)
      because, having arrived on 6 January 2001, she had now been in the  UK
      studying for more than four years on short  courses.    She  submitted
      that the total period of study was to be taken as  the  calendar  year
      and not restricted to the (shorter) academic year in which the  course
      was studied.  Mr Cobham submitted that account should be taken only of
      periods of time when the Appellant was actually studying and, on  that
      basis, she had not completed 4 years of study.


  33. The Secretary of State did not rely on paragraph  60(vi)  in  refusing
      the Appellant's application.  He could not have done  so  because,  at
      that time, on no view could it be said that the Appellant  would  have
      been here for more than 4 years if her leave was extended.  The  point
      only arises because of section 85(4) and the Tribunal's obligation  to
      consider the facts at the date of hearing and  the  Tribunal  must  be
      satisfied that the Appellant  now  fulfils  the  requirements  of  the
      Rules.  Although the point was not taken before, Mr Cobham was able to
      deal with the issue on the basis of the evidence that was  before  the
      Tribunal.


  34.  Having  looked  carefully  at  the  documentation,  the  Tribunal  is
      satisfied that the Appellant has spent something in the  order  of  44
      months studying on short courses since arriving in the UK  in  January
      2001.  We put it in this way because it is impossible to be precise on
      the documentary evidence but it is clearly less than 4  years,  ie  48
      months.  Therefore, if Mr Cobham is correct in the  interpretation  he
      urged upon us,  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirement  in  paragraph
      60(vi).


  35. Taken literally, the phrase "spend more than 4 years on short courses"
      is consistent with Mr Cobham's submission.  It could be interpreted to
      mean  time  actually  spent  studying  on  short  courses.   Such   an
      interpretation, however, has the potential to  create  evidential  and
      other difficulties when calculating the relevant period of time "spent
      ... on  short  courses".   It  would  require  the  decision-maker  to
      calculate in months, weeks and even days the total time spent studying
      on short courses.  That might well  be  taken  to  include  recognised
      holiday breaks during the courses but perhaps not to include  holidays
      or breaks in study between courses.  It would also  have  the  curious
      result that an individual would  be  more  likely  to  succeed  in  an
      application or appeal if, during the periods of her leave, she were to
      maximise spent time not studying, providing always  that  she  studied
      enough to satisfy the other requirements of the rules.


  36. In our view, these difficulties could not have been intended  and  are
      avoided  if  a  different  interpretation  is  adopted.   The  correct
      approach when applying paragraph  60(vi)  is  as  follows.   Paragraph
      60(vi) is designed to restrict or limit the Appellant's leave to enter
      (or remain) in the UK as a student on short courses to a  total  of  4
      years.   The  requirement  is  concerned  only  with  an  individual's
      immigration status as a student on short  courses  and  not  with  the
      minutiae of calculating time actually spent studying.


  37. The Appellant has been in the UK with leave to study since  6  January
      2001 apart, it would seem, from a 2 week  period  in  October/November
      2002.  Her leave which would  have  run  out  on  1  August  2003  was
      extended by virtue of section 3C, Immigration Act 1971.  At  the  date
      of hearing, this means that she has been in the UK with leave for more
      than 4 years.  As a consequence, the Appellant has failed to establish
      the requirement for extension of her leave to remain as a student  set
      out in paragraph 60(vi).


  38. Lest it be thought that the effect of section 85(4) and the passage of
      time before the appellant's appeal was heard is that the Appellant has
      been disadvantaged, in fact the reality of this case  is  that,  as  a
      result of the appellate process, the Appellant has already  undertaken
      the course (and indeed others) for which she applied for leave  on  28
      July 2003.


      Conclusion


  39. The Appellant has failed to establish on a  balance  of  probabilities
      that she meets the requirements of paragraph 60 (read  with  paragraph
      57) of HC 395.   The Secretary of State's decision  is  in  accordance
      with the relevant Immigration Rules.


      Decision


  40. For the reasons we have given, we conclude that the Adjudicator made a
      material error of law and we substitute a  fresh  decision  dismissing
      the appeal.
















Professor A Grubb
Senior Immigration Judge
Dated              26.11.05
