
IN THE ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

at Hatton Cross

 KS (Allegations by respondent: proof required?) Pakistan [2005] UKAIT 00171

Heard:      02.11.2005
Signed:     02.11.2005
Sent out:   21.11.2005


             NATIONALITY, IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACTS 1971-2004


Before:
                       John Freeman (a senior immigration judge)
                             and
                       David Taylor (an immigration judge)

Between:

                                  appellant
and:
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
                                 respondent

Mr NA Bajwa (Bajwa & Co, Barking) for the appellant
Mr K Norton for the respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This case is reported on the question of what  weight  is  to  be  given  to
allegations in  a  notice  of  refusal,  where  particulars  and  supporting
evidence have neither been supplied nor asked for.



   This is an appeal under the 2002 Act by a citizen  of  Pakistan  against
   refusal of a student visa on 8  March  2004.  The  grounds  for  refusal
   dispute the appellant's eligibility on ability and intention  to  follow
   the course, and pay his way on it  without  recourse  to  employment  or
   public funds. The reasons given are:

   You have supplied a package of documents  (bank  statement;  to  support
   your application from Kotli. We have received the exact  same  documents
   in this office from over 40 applicants in the  previous  2  weeks.  They
   were in the same format and contained the  same  grammatical  errors.  I
   know that these documents are being produced solely for the  purpose  of
   this application. I put this to you  at  interview  and  eventually  you
   admitted that you sought these documents from your father after you  had
   applied for the course. You continued to insist that the documents  were
   genuine.

   This transparent attempt at  forgery  seriously  undermine  your  entire
   application. I am therefore not satisfied that you are able to meet  the
   costs of the  course  and  maintain  and  accommodate  yourself  without
   recourse to employment or public funds.

2. No supporting evidence or further particulars were given with the notice
   of  refusal; nor were they asked for in the notice of appeal, signed  by
   Mr Bajwa, which reads simply "The decision is against the  evidence  and
   contrary to law and Tribunal's decisions". A  bundle  of  documents  was
   filed by Mr Bajwa on 29 September: they are the kind normally  filed  in
   support of applications of this kind,  without  any  reference  to,  let
   alone dealing with the other applications which formed  the  subject  of
   the entry clearance officer's allegation of forgery. In particular,  the
   affidavit by  the  appellant's  father  (p  10)  represents  the  normal
   supporting affidavit by a financial sponsor: although it refers  to  the
   maker's post at the bank, it says nothing about any documents for  which
   he might (or might not) have been responsible.

3. The appeal came on for hearing  on  4  October  before  Mr  WP  Scobbie,
   immigration judge: at 1500 another case was still in progress, and  this
   one was adjourned  for  the  entry  clearance  officer  to  produce  the
   interview record. Nothing seems  to  have  been  said  about  any  other
   details which might have been required. The  interview  record,  as  the
   notice of  refusal had already made clear, consisted in a refusal by the
   appellant to admit that  the  documents  produced  had  been  forgeries,
   followed by his saying that his own father,  as  manager  of  the  local
   branch of the National  Bank  of  Pakistan,  had  been  responsible  for
   assembling them. It was duly faxed on 18 October.

4. The one real issue before us, as  we  established  at  the  outset,  was
   whether the documents originally produced in support of this application
   were forgeries: Mr Bajwa realistically conceded that he could  not  hope
   to succeed on this appeal if they were. The next question was  how  that
   was to be established, one way or the other, and who  was  to  have  the
   burden of doing so. Mr Bajwa argued that, since the Home Office had made
   the assertion, it was for them to prove it; and a mere assertion did not
   prove itself. He did not suggest, when pressed, that the entry clearance
   officer was obliged  to  give  full  disclosure  of  all  the  other  40
   applications and their supporting documents; but he argued that a sample
   one should have been chosen for the purpose.

5. Mr Norton, on the other hand, argued that the  entry  clearance  officer
   was not in the position of an ordinary party in a civil  case,  each  of
   whose assertions required to be  proved  by  evidence.  We  should  have
   regard to his position, and assume that  he  would  take  a  responsible
   approach to his duties, and not make allegations of forgery without  any
   evidence to support them; in fact we should  treat  his  allegations  as
   evidence in themselves - though Mr  Norton  accepted  that  further  and
   better particulars and supporting evidence would certainly  need  to  be
   given if asked for.

6. The primary rule in immigration cases is that it is  for  the  applicant
   (and the appellant, if he gets that far) to establish that he  qualifies
   for admission under the relevant rule. Normally that will be a  question
   of producing credible evidence that his personal situation complies with
   its requirements. This however is a case of a different kind, where  the
   issue does not turn  on  the  appellant's  evidence  in  isolation,  but
   depends on whether it ought to be accepted as genuine in  the  light  of
   the forgery allegation.


7. Mr Bajwa argued by way of example that, if the Home Office had suggested
   that the  appellant  was  disqualified  from  admission  by  a  previous
   deportation order, then it would be up to them to produce  that  and  so
   establish their case on the point. This would of course be easy for them
   to do, and we should expect them to do it without any argument. It  does
   not however answer the  question  of  how  the  Home  Office  should  be
   expected to prove their claims (if the burden is on them to do so), in a
   case of this kind. Clearly it would be unrealistic in  the  extreme  for
   the full papers in the 40 or more other cases also to be filed  in  this
   one. One or more sample cases  might  have  been  chosen,  as  Mr  Bajwa
   suggested;  but  filing  the  evidence  in  one  case  would  leave  any
   resemblances to the other 39 just as unproven as if no evidence had been
   filed at all. It could not however reasonably have been  suggested  that
   the case should be dealt with on appeal on  the  basis  of  its  claimed
   resemblance to one other, without any reference to the other 39.

8. In our view, the allegations of forgery  made  by  the  entry  clearance
   officer do have to be given some evidential value.  Without  particulars
   or supporting evidence, that value will not be a high one; but they  are
   not mere assertions by an ordinary civil claimant, but statements  by  a
   person in an official position about  something  very  much  within  his
   responsibilities. Whether they were borne out by the facts is of  course
   something we should make our own independent decision on; but  there  is
   evidence of forgery before us which in our view  at  least  required  an
   answer on the part of the appellant.  We  took  time  to  consider  this
   question, and then told the parties our  view  on  it,  giving  them  an
   opportunity to make any representations they wished as to whether  there
   was any answer to the forgery allegation.

9. As we have already seen (at 2), the documents filed  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant provide no answer at all to  the  allegation  of  forgery.  Mr
   Bajwa, when pressed on this, pointed out that the interview  record  had
   only recently been received, and that the  recent  earthquake  had  made
   communication  with  Azad  Kashmir  (the  appellant's   home   province)
   particularly difficult. He was inclined to argue that the allegation  of
   40 similar cases came as a surprise, and had to be reminded that it  had
   been clearly made in the notice of refusal as long ago as 8 March  2004.
   The contents of the interview can have come as no surprise to anyone  on
   the appellant's side, and we do not think  any  recent  difficulties  of
   communication have any real relevance to this case.

10. The  central  question  is  whether  Mr  Bajwa  for  the  appellant  was
   entitled, rather than asking for particulars or supporting evidence,  or
   putting the Home Office to any other form of proof,  simply  to  by-pass
   the forgery allegations,  on  the  basis  that  they  lacked  supporting
   detail; and to allow the  previous  hearing  to  be  adjourned,  without
   making any reference  to  that  as  an  additional  problem.  Given  the
   implications of the allegations to anyone in  the  appellant's  father's
   position, we should have expected considerable anxiety on  his  part  to
   see details of them, so that the truth could be established as  soon  as
   possible.

11. The conclusion we have reached is that there is no answer of  any  kind,
   other than a reassertion (in the documents filed on 29 September) of the
   genuineness of the appellant's own case, to the forgery allegations.  In
   our view that is nowhere  near  an  adequate  answer,  because  it  does
   nothing to deal with  the  Home  Office  case  of  (to  put  it  mildly)
   suspicious similarity between the documentation in this and  40  similar
   cases: this amounted to a serious allegation against the appellant  (and
   a very serious one against his father, if he was who  he  said  he  was,
   which clearly called for a direct answer. We do not  consider  that  the
   appellant has established the genuineness of his own case on the  issues
   between him and the Home Office.

Appeal
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman
                                        approved for electronic distribution

