
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Hydar (s 120 response; s 85 "new matter": Birch) [2021] UKUT 00176 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 March 2021                              |                              |
|Additional written submissions on 9 and 20    |18 June 2021                  |
|April                                         |                              |
|2021                                          |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                 JAMIL HYDAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, counsel, instructed by TTS
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

(1) Where, in the course of a human rights appeal under section 82(2)(b)  of
the 2002 Act, P responds to a notice served by the Secretary of State  under
section 120 of that Act by raising a matter that is of  a  different  origin
than P raised as a human rights ground under  section  84(2)  for  resisting
removal,  section  86(2)(b)  requires  the  Tribunal   to   determine   that
"different" matter. Thus, a protection issue or (where it still applies)  an
EU rights issue will need to be determined by  the  Tribunal  alongside  the
human rights issue.

Section 85(5): "new matter"

(2) A matter of the kind described  in  paragraph  (1)  is  a  "new  matter"
which, by reason of section 85(5,) may not be  considered  by  the  Tribunal
unless the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

(3) Section 85(5) applies to both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
Tribunal. The finding to the contrary in Birch (precariousness and  mistake;
new matters) [2020] UKUT 86 (IAC); [2020] Imm AR 873 was made  per  incuriam
the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Alam & others v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ
960; [2012] Imm AR 974 and is not to be followed.


                        DECISION ON PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 1. We have both contributed substantively to this decision.

 2. The appellant is a British Protected Person, born in  Sierra  Leone  in
    1976.  He entered the United Kingdom in 1997 and was granted indefinite
    leave to remain in October 2003.  The appellant committed a  number  of
    criminal offences, beginning in 1999.  In 2007, he was convicted of two
    counts of robbery  and  one  count  of  attempted  robbery.   Following
    proceedings in the Court of Appeal,  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to
    imprisonment for six years.  On 23 July 2018,  the  respondent  decided
    that the appellant should be deported from the United Kingdom.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Before  that
    Tribunal, the appellant did not pursue his protection appeal.  Instead,
    he relied solely on Article 8 of the  ECHR,  based  on  his  subsisting
    parental relationship with his daughter, born in 2008, who is a British
    citizen whom the appellant was  supporting.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The   respondent   obtained
    permission to appeal against that decision and, on 14 April  2020,  the
    Upper Tribunal (McGowan J and UTJ Blundell) set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, retaining the matter in the Upper Tribunal for
    the decision in the appeal to be re-made de novo.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    made an anonymity order in respect of the  appellant's  daughter,  with
    the result  that  no  report  of  the  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly indentify her.

 4. On 28 September 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell  sat  to  hear  the
    submissions and evidence on  the  re-making  of  the  decision  in  the
    appeal.  At that hearing, the appellant sought to raise, for the  first
    time, his potential entitlement to  a  derivative  right  of  residence
    (DRR) under regulation 16 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.  Directions were issued for the  respondent  to  file
    and serve a written notice, stating whether she sought to contend  that
    the appellant's entitlement to DRR  was  a  "new  matter",  within  the
    meaning of section 85(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002; and, if so, whether the respondent  would  be  prepared  to  give
    consent under section 85(5) to the matter being considered by the Upper
    Tribunal.  The  appellant  was  directed  to  file  and  serve  written
    submissions in response.

 5. Following the filing of these written submissions,  the  present  panel
    sat on 31 March 2021 to consider them and the parties' oral submissions
    on the "new matter" issue.  At the March  hearing,  it  became  evident
    that, within the "new matter" issue, there is a prior question; namely,
    whether the Upper Tribunal  should  follow  Birch  (Precariousness  and
    mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT 86 (IAC); [2020] Imm AR 873, where it
    was held that section 85(5) does not apply to the Upper Tribunal,  with
    the result that it  is  unnecessary  for  that  Tribunal  to  have  the
    respondent's consent before it can consider a "new matter".  The  panel
    was, however, also addressed on a question that needs to  be  addressed
    before one can embark on the "new matter" issue;  namely,  whether  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  have  jurisdiction  to
    consider an EEA ground of appeal in a human rights appeal under section
    82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act.

 6. On 31 March, the Upper Tribunal concluded that it would be assisted  by
    further written submissions on the following:-

    (i)  The jurisdictional issue - whether the First-tier Tribunal and the
         Upper Tribunal have jurisdiction  to  consider  an  EEA  ground  of
         appeal in a human rights appeal;

    (ii) The "new matter" issue - in the event of an affirmative answer  to
         (i), whether an EEA ground of appeal, in  a  human  rights  appeal,
         constitutes a "new matter" for purposes of section 85 of  the  2002
         Act;

    (iii)    The "Birch" issue - assuming an affirmative  answer  to  (ii),
         whether section 85 applies to proceedings  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         and, in particular, whether Birch was decided per incuriam; and

    (iv) The "consent" issue - assuming an  affirmative  answer  to  (iii),
         whether the respondent would give consent for the EEA matter to  be
         considered by the Upper Tribunal in re-making the decision  in  the
         appeal.

 7. We received further submissions on these issues from Ms  Cunha  and  Mr
    Youssefian.  We are very grateful to both of them for these, and  their
    earlier written and oral submissions.

 8. Before addressing the issues, it is necessary to set out a  significant
    amount of legislative material, beginning with the 2002 Act.




    The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

         "PART V

         APPEALS IN RESPECT OF PROTECTION AND HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIMS

         Meaning of "the Tribunal"

         81.

         ...

         In this Part "the Tribunal" means the First-tier Tribunal.

         82.  Right of appeal to the Tribunal

             (1)  A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-

         ...

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human
                      rights claim made by P.

         ...

         84.  Grounds of appeal

         ...

             (2)  An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights
                  claim) must be brought on the ground that the decision  is
                  unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         ...

         85.  Matters to be considered

             (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
                  treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any
                  decision in respect of which the appellant has a right  of
                  appeal under section 82(1).

             (2)  If an appellant under section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
                  under section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any  matter
                  raised in the statement  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
                  appeal of a kind listed in section 84 against the decision
                  appealed against.

             (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section
                  120 whether the statement was made  before  or  after  the
                  appeal was commenced.

             (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1)...  against  a  decision
                  the Tribunal may consider ... any matter which  it  thinks
                  relevant to the substance of the decision, including ... a
                  matter arising after the date of the decision.

             (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless
                  the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal  consent  to
                  do so.

             (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if-

                  (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
                      section 84, and

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously  considered
                      the matter in the context of-

                      (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                      (ii) a statement made by the appellant under  section
                           120.

         86.  Determination of appeal

             (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1) ...

             (2)  The Tribunal must determine-

                  (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal ..., and

                  (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.

         ...

         104. Pending appeal

             (1)  An appeal under  section  82(1)  is  pending  during  the
         period-

                  (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

                  (b)  ending when it is finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                      abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

             (2)  An appeal under section 82(1) is not  finally  determined
                  for the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-

                  (a)  an application for permission to appeal under section
                      11 or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
                      2007 could be made or is awaiting determination,

                  (b)  permission to appeal under either of  those  sections
                      has  been  granted  and  the   appeal   is   awaiting
                      determination, or

                  (c)  an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or 14 of
                      that Act and is awaiting determination.

             (3)  ...

             (4)  ...

             (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a  person  while
                  he is in the United Kingdom shall be treated as  abandoned
                  if the appellant is granted leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom (subject to subsection (4B)).

             (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far as
                  it is brought on a ground specified in section 84(1)(a) or
                  (b) or 84(3) (asylum or humanitarian protection) where the
                  appellant-

                  (a)  ...

                  (b)  gives notice, in accordance with  Tribunal  Procedure
                      Rules, that he wishes to pursue the appeal in so  far
                      as it is brought on that ground.

         ...

         109. European Union and European Economic Area

             (1)  Regulations may provide for, or make provision about,  an
                  appeal against an immigration decision taken in respect of
                  a person who has or claims to have a right  under  any  of
                  the EU Treaties.

             (2)  The regulations may-

                  (a)   apply  a  provision  of  this  Act  or  the  Special
                      Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68)  with
                      or without modification;

                  (b)  make provision similar to  a  provision  made  by  or
                      under this Act or that Act;

                  (c)  disapply or modify the effect of a provision of  this
                      Act or that Act.

             (3)  In subsection (1) "immigration decision" means a decision
                  about-

                  (a)  a person's entitlement to  enter  or  remain  in  the
                      United Kingdom, or

                  (b)  removal of a person from the United Kingdom."

             NB. Section 109 was repealed, with savings (SI  2020/1309)  by
             the  Immigration  and  Social   Security   Co-ordination   (EU
             Withdrawal) Act 2020 with effect from IP  completion  day,  as
             defined in the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020.

         ...

         113. Interpretation

             (1)  In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears-

         ...

          "human rights claim" -

         (a)  means a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State at  a
             place designated by the Secretary of State that to remove  the
             person from or require him to leave  the  United  Kingdom   to
             refuse him entry into the United  Kingdom  would  be  unlawful
             under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c.  42)  (public
             authority not to act contrary to Convention)

         ...

         PART VA

         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR; PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS

         117A.    Application of this Part

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts-

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  section
                        117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         ...

         PART VI

         IMMIGRATION PROCEDURE

         ...

         120. Requirement to state additional grounds for application

             (1)  Subsection (2) applies to a person ("P") if-

                  (a)  P has made a  protection  claim  or  a  human  rights
                      claim,

                  (b)  P has made an application to enter or remain  in  the
                      United Kingdom, or

                  (c)  a decision to deport or remove P has been or  may  be
                      taken.

             (2)  The Secretary of State  or  an  immigration  officer  may
                  serve a notice on P requiring P  to  provide  a  statement
                  setting out-

                  (a)  P's reasons for wishing to enter  or  remain  in  the
                      United Kingdom,

                  (b)  any grounds on which P should be permitted  to  enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom, and

                  (c)  any grounds on which P should not be removed from  or
                      required to leave the United Kingdom.

             (3)  A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat  reasons
                  or grounds set out in-

                  (a)  P's protection or human rights claim,

                  (b)  the application mentioned in subsection (1)(b), or

                  (c)  an application to which  the  decision  mentioned  in
                      subsection (1)(c) relates.

             (4)  Subsection (5)  applies  to  a  person  ("P")  if  P  has
                  previously been served with a notice under subsection  (2)
                  and-

                  (a)  P requires leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
                      Kingdom but does not have it, or

                  (b)  P has leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
                      only by virtue of section 3C of the  Immigration  Act
                      1971  (continuation  of  leave  pending  decision  or
                      appeal).

             (5)  Where P's circumstances have changed since the  Secretary
                  of State or an immigration officer was last made aware  of
                  them (whether in the application  or  claim  mentioned  in
                  subsection (1) or in a statement under subsection  (2)  or
                  this subsection) so that P has-

                  (a)  additional reasons for wishing to enter or remain  in
                      the United Kingdom,

                  (b)  additional grounds on which P should be permitted  to
                      enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or

                  (c)  additional grounds on which P should not  be  removed
                      from or required to leave the United Kingdom, P must,
                      as  soon  as  reasonably   practicable,   provide   a
                      supplementary statement to the Secretary of State  or
                      an  immigration   officer   setting   out   the   new
                      circumstances and the additional reasons or grounds.

             (6)  In this section-

              "human rights claim" and "protection  claim"  have  the  same
             meanings as in Part 5; references to "grounds" are to  grounds
             on which an appeal under Part 5 may be  brought  (see  section
             84)."




    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016

         "General interpretation

         2.-  (1) In these Regulations-

             ...

             'EEA decision' means a decision under these  Regulations  that
             concerns-

             (a)  a person's entitlement  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
                  Kingdom;

             (b)  a person's entitlement to be issued with or have renewed,
                  or  not  to  have  revoked,  a  registration  certificate,
                  residence  card,  derivative  residence   card,   document
                  certifying permanent residence or permanent residence card
                  (but does not include a decision that an  application  for
                  the above documentation is invalid);

             (c)  a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or

             (d)  the cancellation, under  regulation  25,  of  a  person's
                  right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  does  not
                  include a decision to refuse to  issue  a  document  under
                  regulation 12(4) (issue of an  EEA  family  permit  to  an
                  extended family member), 17(5) (issue  of  a  registration
                  certificate to an extended family member) or 18(4)  (issue
                  of a residence card  to  an  extended  family  member),  a
                  decision to reject an application under  regulation  26(4)
                  (misuse  of  a  right  to  reside:  material   change   of
                  circumstances),  or  any  decisions  under  regulation  33
                  (human rights considerations and interim orders to suspend
                  removal) or 41 (temporary  admission  to  submit  case  in
                  person).

         ...

         Derivative right to reside

         16.- (1) A person has a  derivative  right  to  reside  during  any
             period in which the person-

                  (a)  is not an exempt person; and

                  (b)  satisfies each of the criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                      paragraphs (2) to (6).

             (2)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of an  EEA  national;
                      and

                  (b)  the EEA national-

                      (i)  is under the age of 18;

                      (ii)  resides  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                           sufficient person; and

                      (iii)    would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
                           Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for
                           an indefinite period.

             (3)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  any of the person's parents ("PP") is an EEA national
                      who resides or has resided in the United Kingdom;

                  (b)  both the person and PP reside or have resided in  the
                      United Kingdom at the same time, and  during  such  a
                      period of residence, PP has  been  a  worker  in  the
                      United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  the person is in education in the United Kingdom.

             (4)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)   the  person  is  the  primary  carer  of  a   person
                      satisfying the criteria in paragraph (3) ("PPP"); and

                  (b)  PPP would be unable to continue to be educated in the
                      United Kingdom if the person left the United  Kingdom
                      for an indefinite period.

             (5)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of a British  citizen
                      ("BC");

                  (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or
                      in another EEA State if the person  left  the  United
                      Kingdom for an indefinite period.

             (6)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is under the age of 18;

                  (b)  the person does not have leave to  enter,  or  remain
                      in, the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act;

                  (c)   the  person's  primary  carer  is  entitled   to   a
                      derivative right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom
                      under paragraph (2), (4) or (5); and

                  (d)  the primary carer would be prevented from residing in
                      the United Kingdom if  the  person  left  the  United
                      Kingdom for an indefinite period

         ....

         Appeal rights

         36.- (1) The subject of an EEA decision  may  appeal  against  that
             decision under these Regulations.

         ...

             (10) The provisions of, or made under, the 2002  Act  referred
             to in Schedule 2 have effect for the  purposes  of  an  appeal
             under  these  Regulations  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   in
             accordance with that Schedule.

         ...




         Regulation 36

         Schedule 2

         Appeals to the First-Tier Tribunal

         1.   The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act  have
             effect in relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the
             First-tier Tribunal as if it were an appeal against a decision
             of the Secretary of State under section 82(1) of the 2002  Act
             (right of appeal to the Tribunal)-

             section 84 (grounds of appeal), as though the  sole  permitted
             grounds  of  appeal  were  that  the  decision  breaches   the
             appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect  of  entry
             to or residence in  the  United  Kingdom  ("an  EU  ground  of
             appeal");

             section 85 (matters to be considered), as though-

             (a)  the references to a statement under section  120  of  the
                  2002 Act include, but are  not  limited  to,  a  statement
                  under that section as applied by paragraph 2; and

             (b)  a "matter" in  subsection  (2)  and  a  "new  matter"  in
                  subsection (6) include a ground of appeal of a kind listed
                  in section 84 of the 2002 Act and an EU ground of appeal;

             section 86 (determination of appeal);

             section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and

             section 106 and any rules made pursuant to that section.

         2.-  (1) Section 92(3) of the 2002 Act  has  effect  as  though  an
                  additional  basis  upon  which  an  appeal  under  section
                  82(1)(b) of that Act (human rights claim appeal)  must  be
                  brought from outside the United Kingdom were that-

                  (a)  the claim to which that appeal relates arises from an
                      EEA decision or the consequences of an EEA  decision;
                      and

                  (b)  the removal of that person from  the  United  Kingdom
                      has been certified under regulation 33 (human  rights
                      considerations  and   interim   orders   to   suspend
                      removal).

             (2)  Section 120 of the 2002 Act applies to a person ("P")  if
                  an EEA decision has been taken or may be taken in  respect
                  of P and,  accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
                  immigration officer may by notice require a statement from
                  P under subsection (2) of that section,  and  that  notice
                  has effect for the purpose of section 96(2)  of  the  2002
                  Act.

             (3)  Where section 120 of the 2002  Act  so  applies,  it  has
                  effect as though-

                  (a)  subsection (3) also provides that a  statement  under
                      subsection (2) need not  repeat  reasons  or  grounds
                      relating  to  the  EEA   decision   under   challenge
                      previously advanced by P;

                  (b)  subsection (5) also applies where P does not  have  a
                      right to reside.

             (4)  For the purposes of an appeal brought under section 82(1)
                  of the 2002 Act, subsections (2) and (6)(a) of section  85
                  (matters to be considered) have effect as  though  section
                  84 included a ground of appeal that the decision  appealed
                  against  breaches  the  appellant's  right  under  the  EU
                  Treaties in respect of entry  into  or  residence  in  the
                  United Kingdom.

         3.    Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  made  under  section  22  of  the
             Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  have  effect  in
             relation to appeals under these Regulations."

         NB. The 2016 Regulations were revoked, with savings (SI  2020/1309)
         by  the  Immigration  and   Social   Security   Co-ordination   (EU
         Withdrawal) Act 2020 with effect from IP completion day, as defined
         in the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020.



Issue (i)

 9. Mr Youssefian seeks to rely upon paragraph 2(4) of Schedule  2  to  the
    2016 Regulations, which provide that, for the  purposes  of  an  appeal
    brought under section 82(1), subsections (2) and (6)(a) of  section  85
    have effect as though section 84 included a ground of appeal  that  the
    decision appealed breaches the appellant's right under the EU  Treaties
    in respect of entry or residence in the United Kingdom.  Mr  Youssefian
    points to the distinction between the  apparently  unlimited  scope  of
    paragraph 2(4), and that of paragraph 1 of Schedule  2,  which  applies
    various provisions of the 2002 Act (including section 85), but only "in
    relation to  an  appeal  under  these  regulations  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal".

10. Mr Youssefian's submission requires a close analysis of Schedule 2  and
    regulation 36(10), which  provides  for  Schedule  2  to  have  effect.
    Regulation 36(10) makes it plain that the provisions of  the  2002  Act
    referred to in Schedule 2 are to have effect "for the  purposes  of  an
    appeal under these Regulations to the First-tier  Tribunal  ...".   The
    words "under  these  Regulations"  suggest  that,  notwithstanding  the
    difference between paragraphs 1 and 2(4) of Schedule 2,  as  identified
    by Mr Youssefian, the entirety of Schedule 2 is intended to apply  only
    to appeals under the 2016 Regulations.   Any  such  appeal  has  to  be
    brought against an EEA decision.  There is  no  such  decision  in  the
    present case.

11. A closer reading of Schedule 2,  however,  indicates  that  this  broad
    submission cannot be correct.  Paragraph 2(2) is concerned with section
    120 of the 2002  Act.   Section  120  requires  a  person,  in  certain
    circumstances, to provide the  Secretary  of  State  with  a  statement
    setting out that person's reasons for wishing to enter or remain in the
    United Kingdom, together with any grounds on which that  person  should
    be so permitted, and any grounds on which  the  person  should  not  be
    removed  or  required  to  leave.   The  obligation  arises  where  the
    Secretary of State serves a notice requiring the  person  concerned  to
    provide such a statement.

12. The basic way in which section 120 works in a human rights appeal under
    section 82(1) of the 2002 Act is that, where  the  person  has  made  a
    statement under section 120, the Tribunal is obliged by  section  85(2)
    to consider any matter raised in  the  statement  which  constitutes  a
    ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84  as  capable  of  being
    brought in an appeal against the respondent's  decision.   In  a  human
    rights appeal, the sole ground is specified in section  84(2);  namely,
    that the refusal of the human rights claim is unlawful under section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Section 85(2) imposes upon the  Tribunal
    a specific duty of consideration, in addition to the  discretion  which
    the Tribunal is given by section 85(4),  whereby  on  an  appeal  under
    section 82(1), the Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks  is
    relevant to the substance of the appealed decision, including a  matter
    arising after the date of that decision.

13. In the light of this description, it is evident that paragraph 2(2)  of
    Schedule 2 to the 2016  Regulations  cannot  merely  apply  to  appeals
    against  EEA  decisions  that  are  specifically  brought  under  those
    Regulations.  Paragraph 2(2) refers to an EEA decision  that  has  been
    taken "or may be taken in respect of P".  Those words in our view  make
    it clear that paragraph 2 of Schedule 2  must  have  been  intended  to
    operate additionally in cases where there has not been an EEA decision,
    but there could be, and where a human rights (or protection) appeal may
    be underway.  A person who has received a refusal  of  a  human  rights
    claim, and who has a right of appeal against that decision on the  sole
    statutory ground the decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  1998
    Act, may be served with a section 120 notice, which requires the person
    not only to state why (if such be contended) they have  a  human  right
    not to be removed from the United Kingdom, or to be  allowed  to  enter
    it, but also that they have a right under the EU Treaties in respect of
    entry into or residence in the United Kingdom, which would be  breached
    by removing the person from the United Kingdom.

14. If paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 2 were  to  operate  only  where  an  EEA
    decision had been made  by  the  respondent,  it  would  be  anomalous,
    compared with the way in which section 120 operates in other  contexts.
    There has never been any suggestion, so far as we  are  aware,  that  a
    section 120 notice does not enable a person to respond by  raising  for
    the first time matters that constitute a protection  claim,  where  the
    only decision so far made (and being appealed)  is  the  refusal  of  a
    human rights claim (and vice versa). Indeed, one  of  the  purposes  of
    section 120 is to require a tribunal to adjudicate upon the totality of
    a person's reasons for resisting removal.  In the case of human  rights
    and protection appeals, section  85(2)  produces  that  requirement  by
    correlating the "matter" raised in the response statement with  one  or
    more of the grounds of appeal mentioned in section 84(1), which between
    them cover the  entire  range  of  both  protection  and  human  rights
    appeals.  Once the relevant "matter" in the statement is  raised  as  a
    ground of appeal, section 86(2)(b) requires the Tribunal  to  determine
    it, irrespective of the  fact  that  there  is  also  other  matter  of
    different origin comprising a separate ground of appeal.

15. We can see  no  reason  for  reading  section  85(2),  as  modified  by
    paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 2, in any different way.  The DRR  under  EU
    law exists  independently  of  any  decision  of  the  respondent,  the
    documentation  provided  by  her  to  the  individual  being  merely  a
    recognition of the right, not its conferral.  There is, accordingly, in
    the course of a human rights appeal, no conceptual bar to a section 120
    statement raising an EEA reason for resisting removal, in the same  way
    that there is  no  such  bar  to  raising  matters  that  constitute  a
    protection claim, even though there has been no decision  to  refuse  a
    protection claim.

16. Just as the protection ground arising from the section 120 notice in  a
    human rights appeal does not have to be decided by the Tribunal through
    the prism of section 84(2), neither does the EU ground.   The  Tribunal
    will approach the EU ground, as it would if there had been  an  adverse
    EEA  decision,  which  the  appellant  was  appealing  under  the  2016
    Regulations.

17. Ms Cunha accepts on behalf of the respondent that, where such a section
    120 statement has been made, the EU matter falls for adjudication.  She
    submits, however, that it constitutes a "new matter" for  the  purposes
    of section 85(6), with the result that the consent of the respondent is
    required before it may be raised.  We shall deal with  that  submission
    under issue (iv).

18. It follows that we reject Mr  Youssefian's  submission  that  paragraph
    2(4) of Schedule 2 has any wider ambit than in relation to section  120
    notices and statements.  There is, nevertheless, still an argument that
    may lead to the same conclusion; namely, that in a human rights  appeal
    where no section 120 statement has been made, advancing  an  EU  right,
    the Tribunal can nevertheless consider the significance for that appeal
    of the appellant having an EU right to enter or remain.   The  argument
    depends upon section 85(4) which, as  we  have  seen,  confers  on  the
    Tribunal discretion to consider any matter that it thinks  relevant  to
    the substance of  the  decision  to  refuse  the  human  rights  claim.
    Although  the  point  was  touched  on  in  Mr   Youssefian's   written
    submissions, it was not explored further at the  hearing  and  we  have
    decided not to express a concluded view on it at this stage.

19. What we have said so far is predicated on the important assumption that
    regulation 17 of the 2006 Regulations continues to provide a  potential
    right to reside in the United Kingdom, on a derived  basis,  after  the
    United Kingdom's exit from the EU on 31 December 2020.  We have to  say
    that an examination of the EU withdrawal legislation, in particular  SI
    2020/1309, does not suggest that the appellant can rely on a DRR in the
    present appeal.  Paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to that SI does not  provide
    that regulation 17 (as opposed to provisions  regarding  non-derivative
    rights) continues to apply after the time and date on  which  the  2016
    Regulations were revoked for all purposes.  That is so, even  where  an
    appeal under the 2016 Regulations is pending, which, of course, is  not
    the case here.  The precise position will need to be considered at  the
    substantive hearing (see below).



Issue (ii)

20. There can be no question that raising the DRR issue during the currency
    of the human rights appeal  proceedings  constitutes  a  "new  matter",
    whereby the respondent's consent is  needed  before  the  Tribunal  can
    consider it. So much is plain from paragraph 2(4) of Schedule 2 to  the
    2016 Regulations. But, quite apart from that provision,  it  cannot  in
    our view be seriously contended that raising an EU  right  in  a  human
    rights appeal is insufficiently discrete to constitute  a  new  matter,
    which the Tribunal may not consider unless the respondent has given her
    consent.  The extent of the consideration and decision-making that  the
    respondent requires to undertake in order to deal with  the  EU  rights
    ground will, plainly, affect the respondent's decision as  to  consent,
    including the time taken in order to reach such a decision.






Issue (iii)

21. In Birch, the Upper Tribunal addressed  the  question  of  whether  the
    restriction in section 85 on considering a "new matter" applies to  the
    Upper Tribunal:-

         "20.  Before  the  hearing  the  appellant's  representatives   had
              attempted, without success, to persuade the  respondent  that
              leave should now be granted for that reason.  At the  hearing
              Mr  Melvin's  position  was  that  the  appellant's   current
              position as a person who had spent twenty years in the United
              Kingdom was a "new matter", which we  were  not  entitled  to
              consider unless he gave us permission to do so.  He relied on
              s 85(4)-(6) of the 2002 Act:


         ...


         21.  Mr Melvin's argument would, we think, have  some  purchase  if
             this question had arisen before the First-tier Tribunal, or if
             we were to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the
             decision to be re-made.  While  the  matter  remains  in  this
             Tribunal, however, the prohibition on the consideration of  "a
             new matter" does not apply.


         22.  The reason for that is that in s 81 of the 2002 Act the phrase
             "the Tribunal" is defined for the purpose of the ensuing  Part
             (including s 85) as  meaning  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
             phrase specifically does not apply to the Upper Tribunal.   No
             other legislation  to  which  our  attention  has  been  drawn
             suggests that the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to  be  considered  as
             falling within  that  definition,  even  when  determining  an
             appeal begun under s 82 (which continues in the Upper Tribunal
             as an "appeal under s  82",  rather  than  under  the  appeals
             provisions of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007:
             see LB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ).  The provisions of s
             8[5](4) are  not  needed  to  enable  the  Upper  Tribunal,  a
             superior court  of  record,  to  take  relevant  matters  into
             account, so it cannot be said that  without  acceding  to  the
             restriction in subsection (5) this  Tribunal  could  not  take
             anything into account at all.


         23.  Furthermore, it is clear that in general procedure before  the
             Upper Tribunal is not identical to that before the  First-tier
             Tribunal: there are two different sets of Procedure Rules; and
             the Upper Tribunal alone has the powers given by s 25  of  the
             2007 Act.  Although s 12(4)(a) of the 2007 Act  provides  that
             on an appeal the Upper Tribunal may make any decision that the
             First-tier Tribunal could make, there is  no  suggestion  that
             the route to a decision, or the reasons for the decision,  are
             confined to  those  that  would  be  open  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal; and paragraph (b) of  that  subsection  specifically
             provides that the Upper Tribunal may make  "such  findings  of
             fact as it considers appropriate".


         24.  We therefore reject the argument that we cannot take  the  new
             matter into consideration.  The passage  of  time  is  clearly
             relevant to the determination of this appeal as it now  stands
             before us.  Whatever might have been the substantive merits of
             the appellant's case before the expiry of twenty  years  since
             her arrival in the United Kingdom, the position  now  is  that
             she meets the substantive requirements of the Rules  entitling
             her to a grant of leave.  For that  reason,  and  that  reason
             only,  we  consider  that  in  her  case  it  would   not   be
             proportionate to remove her from the United Kingdom. "


22.  In  an  unreported  case  (PA/03850/2017  (V)("SMM"),  which  we  give
    permission to cite, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb held  that,  whilst  the
    reasoning in Birch was persuasive, he was bound by the judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal in Alam & Others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 960; [2012] Imm AR 974 to hold that  section
    85(4) and (5) encompass both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, with the result that the latter is subject to the requirement
    to obtain the consent of the respondent before it may consider  a  "new
    matter" in an appeal.  Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb considered  that  the
    panel in Birch had not been referred to Alam and that its  decision  on
    this issue was, accordingly, arrived per incuriam.

23. For the respondent, Ms Cunha urges us to adopt the same  approach.   Mr
    Youssefian submits  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  erred  in  his
    analysis of what the ratio decidendi of Alam comprises.

24. The issue in Alam was whether section 85A of the 2002 Act applied  when
    a decision is re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  Section 85A was  repealed
    by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   It  precluded  the   Tribunal   from
    considering evidence  adduced  by  an  appellant,  in  certain  defined
    circumstances.  The Court of Appeal  considered  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Shahzad (s 85A: commencement) [2012] UKUT  81  (IAC),
    where it was held that the effect of the  commencement  order  bringing
    into  force  amendments  to  section  85  of  the  2002  Act  and   the
    introduction of  section  85A  of  that  Act  was  such  that  the  new
    provisions applied  only  in  relation  to  applications  made  to  the
    Secretary of State on or after 20 May  2011.   For  our  purposes,  the
    relevant part of the Tribunal's decision in Shahzad is as follows:-
         "Issue D
         48.  Next, Mr Malik submits that s85 does not apply to  proceedings
             before the Upper Tribunal at all because it is concerned  with
             appeals brought under s82 of the 2002 Act whereas  the  appeal
             before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  brought  under  s11  of  the
             Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  This argument can
             be disposed of shortly.  Section 12(4) of the 2007  Act  makes
             clear that if the Upper Tribunal does set aside  the  decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal and re-make it then  its  power  is
             to:
                  "... make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal could
                  make  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal   were  re-making  the
                  decision..."
             It is plain, therefore, that s85A does apply equally where the
             decision is remade by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal.  Further
             support for that conclusion, if it were needed, is to be found
             in the words of Moses LJ  recently  in  LB  (Jamaica)  v  SSHD
             [2011] EWCA Civ 1420:
             "... it seems to me impossible to confine the construction  of
             what is meant by an appeal under section 82(1) to an appeal to
             the First Tier Tribunal..." "

25. The issue in LB (Jamaica) was whether an appeal from the Upper Tribunal
    to the Court of Appeal fell to be treated  as  abandoned,  pursuant  to
    section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act, because, after the grant of permission
    to appeal to that court,  the  respondent  had  granted  the  appellant
    indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   Relying  upon  the
    reference in section 104(4A) to an "appeal under  section  82(1)",  the
    appellant submitted that an appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  against  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal was under section 12 of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and was, therefore, not an appeal under
    section 82(1).  As is evident from paragraph 48 of Shahzad,  the  court
    rejected that submission.  At paragraph 12,  Moses  LJ  held  that  the
    reference to an appeal under section 82(1) in section 104(4A) had to be
    read with the identification of the period during which an appeal under
    section 82(1) remains pending, as identified in section 104(1) and (2),
    since section 104(2) identified the period during which the appeal  was
    not finally determined by specific  reference  to  the  period  pending
    final determination of an appeal to the Court of  Appeal.   It  was  in
    those circumstances that Moses LJ concluded, at paragraph 13, that:-

         "... it seems to me impossible to confirm the construction of  what
         is meant by an appeal under section 82(1) to an appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal without incorporating within it  those  circumstances
         identified in the earlier part  of  the  same  section,  namely  an
         application for permission to the Court of Appeal that is  awaiting
         determination or permission to appeal and the  period  until  final
         determination of that appeal."

26. In Alam, the court said:-

         "39. Mr. Malik submitted that the exceptions in section 85A related
             to appeals under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.  The right  to
             appeal from the Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal  was  conferred
             by section 11(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
             2007, so the Upper Tribunal's power to hear fresh evidence was
             not  constrained  by  section  85A.    This   submission   was
             considered by the Upper Tribunal in Shahzad as  Issue  D:  see
             paragraph 14 of the Upper Tribunal's determination.  The Upper
             Tribunal rejected  the  submission  in  paragraph  48  of  its
             determination.   On  this  issue,  I  agree  with  the   Upper
             Tribunal."

27. At paragraph 40, the court agreed with the Upper Tribunal that  support
    for its finding could be found in  the  judgment  of  Moses  LJ  in  LB
    (Jamaica).  The court held that the approach taken in LB  (Jamaica)  to
    the meaning of "an appeal under section 82(1)" applied with equal force
    to the provisions of section 85A.

28. Against this less than pellucid background, Mr Youssefian submits  that
    the ratio in Alam is as follows.   Where  an  appeal  originates  under
    section 82(1) of the 2002 Act, it will continue to be an  appeal  under
    that provision, including when an appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  made
    pursuant to section 11 of the 2007 Act.   Section  82(1)  continues  to
    apply to the Upper Tribunal proceedings because those proceedings (even
    though conducted through section 11) remain "an  appeal  under  section
    82(1) of the 2002 Act".  It was only to that extent that  Sullivan  LJ,
    giving the judgment of the court at paragraph 40, held that "an  appeal
    under section 82(1) applies with  equal  force  to  the  provisions  of
    section 85A".  This is  the  extent  of  the  ratio  in  Alam.   In  Mr
    Youssefian's words: "that is it.  Nothing more and nothing less".

29. As can be seen from the above, however, LB (Jamaica) was invoked by the
    Upper Tribunal in Shahzad merely in support of its substantive  finding
    that section 85 applies to the Upper Tribunal because section 12(4)  of
    the 2007 Act makes it clear that the Upper  Tribunal's  power,  on  re-
    making a decision, is  to  "make  any  decision  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could make if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  re-making  the
    decision".  It is with that finding that the court in Alam agreed  with
    the Upper Tribunal and on  which  it  founded  its  own  decision  (see
    paragraph 39 of its judgment).  Just as the Upper Tribunal had done  in
    Shahzad, the argument based on LB (Jamaica)  was  merely  used  by  the
    court in support of that conclusion.

30. Accordingly, we consider that the ratio  of  Alam  is  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal's powers, on re-making, are circumscribed by section 12(4)  of
    the 2007 Act.

31. It will be noted that at paragraph 23  of  Birch,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    believed that "there is no suggestion that the route to a decision,  or
    the reasons for the decision, are confined to those that would be  open
    to the First-tier Tribunal", as opposed to the actual decision.  Whilst
    it was open to the Upper Tribunal in Birch to  decline  to  follow  the
    reasoning in Shahzad, the fact that it is this reasoning  which  formed
    the ratio of the Court of Appeal's decision on ground 2 in  Alam  means
    that the conclusion in Birch was per incuriam.  It may be that Alam was
    itself decided per incuriam, in that the court appears not to have been
    directed to section 81 of the 2002 Act, which specifically defines "the
    Tribunal" as "the First-tier Tribunal" for the purposes of  Part  V  of
    the 2002 Act. But this does not mean that the Upper Tribunal is free to
    depart from Alam.  As Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb held at  paragraph  85
    of SMM:-

         "The doctrine of precedent does not entitle  a  court  or  tribunal
         lower in the judicial hierarchy to depart from an otherwise binding
         decision of a court or tribunal higher in the judicial hierarchy on
         the basis that the latter decision was reached  per  incuriam  (see
         Cassell & Co Ltd v Broome and Another [1972] AC 1027)."



Issue (iv)

32. This means that, assuming the appellant  has  made  a  statement  under
    section 120 that  raises  the  EU  rights  issue,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    requires the consent of the respondent to  consider  the  "new  matter"
    comprising the ground that it would be a disproportionate  interference
    with the appellant's Article 8 rights because the appellant has (or, at
    least, had) a DRR under the 2016 Regulations.  Ms  Cunha  has,  in  her
    post-hearing  written  submissions,  confirmed  that   the   respondent
    consents to the consideration of this matter.

33. In Jaff (s 120 notice; statement of  additional  grounds)  [2012]  UKUT
    396, the Upper Tribunal held that a statement in response to a  section
    120 notice may be made at any time, including up to (and perhaps at the
    time of) the hearing of the appeal. In Jaff,   the  appellant  had  not
    made anything that could be categorised as a statement but  had  simply
    included evidence of his relationship with an EEA partner in his appeal
    bundle. In the present case, by contrast, the appellant had been served
    with a section 120 notice in 2013, the significance of which was  drawn
    to his attention at paragraphs 93 and 94 of the  respondent's  decision
    of 23 July 2018.  The appellant filed and served  written  submissions,
    in advance of the appeal hearing, setting out in detail why he said  he
    had a DRR. We find that this constituted a statement for  the  purposes
    of section 120.

34. The conclusions on the preliminary issues are, accordingly, as follows:-



    (i)  The jurisdictional issue:  The Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction  to
         consider the  EU  rights  ground,  as  the  ground  was  raised  in
         accordance with section 120 of the 2002 Act;

    (ii) The "new matter" issue:  In a human rights or  protection  appeal,
         the raising of a ground by means of a section 120 statement that an
         appellant has a right to remain in the United Kingdom, by reference
         to an EU right, is a "new matter" within the meaning of section  85
         of the 2002 Act;

    (iii)    The "Birch" issue:  Birch was decided per incuriam  the  Court
         of Appeal's binding judgment in Alam,  with  the  result  that  the
         Upper Tribunal requires the respondent's consent to consider a "new
         matter" when re-making a decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the
         2007 Act;

    (iv) The "consent" issue:  The Secretary of State has given consent for
         the "new matter" to be considered.

35. The appeal will now be listed for a substantive hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.







                               Mr Justice Lane


                               14 June 2021




                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber



