

|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Asylum and Immigration Tribunal                                   |
|BK and Others (Spouses: Marriage-meaning of 'subsisting') Turkey  |
|[2005] UKAIT 00174                                                |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|Heard at Field House                                              |
|Heard on: 28 November 2005 |        |Determination issued:       |
|Prepared  6 December 2005  |        |13 December 2005            |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Ms C Jarvis                                                       |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|Dr J O de Barros                                                  |
|Mr C P O'Brian                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellants                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Entry Clearance Officer Ankara                                    |
|Respondent                                                        |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Hooper of Counsel instructed by Wilson and Co.
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Johnson, Home Office Presenting Officer

This case is reported for what we say about the meaning of 'subsisting' in
relation to marriage within Part 8 of the Immigration Rules HC395, Family
Members. A marriage is subsisting for the purposes of these Rules if it has
been lawfully entered into and has not thereafter been lawfully dissolved
or annulled.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Respondent appeals against the  determination  of  an  Immigration
      Judge, (Mr A C B Markham David) who in a determination  issued  on  14
      April 2005, allowed the Appellants' appeals on all grounds against the
      Respondent's decision made on 13 July 2004 to refuse  to  grant  entry
      clearance to the UK as the spouse and children  of    [      ],  their
      husband and father respectively, who  is  their  sponsor,  for  family
      reunion and settlement, the sponsor being recognized as a  refugee  in
      the UK.


   2. The history if the matter is this. The  Appellants,  all  citizens  of
      Turkey, whose dates of birth are given as 8 August  1963,  6  December
      1987, and 15 March 1996 respectively, applied for entry  clearance  on
      13 April 2004. The first Appellant was interviewed on  13  July  2004,
      following which the applications were refused for the reasons set  out
      in the notice of decision, namely that the  first  Appellant  had  not
      shown that she was married to a person granted asylum in the  UK,  nor
      that each of the parties to the marriage  intends  to  live  with  the
      other as his or her spouse and that the marriage is subsisting.

Summary of the Immigration Judge's Findings


   3. The Immigration Judge found, for the reasons set out at paragraphs 22-
      30, that the Appellants' evidence was to be regarded as  credible  and
      reliable and that satisfactory explanations had been provided for  the
      doubts and concerns of the Respondent, which had  been  understandable
      in the light  of  the  information  that  was  presented  to  him,  in
      particular the completed asylum statement of evidence  form  in  which
      the sponsor or his advisers had ticked a  box  describing  himself  as
      single. Further, the first Appellant did not have  with  her,  at  the
      time of interview, documentary evidence to provide to support some  of
      her claims about the relationship, and some of  the  information  that
      she gave at interview with the  Respondent  was  different  from  that
      given by the sponsor in relation to the sponsor's journey to the UK.


   4. The Immigration Judge received further oral and documentary  evidence,
      including documentary evidence relating to the marriage (including the
      marriage and family book), and the children of  the  family.  He  also
      received as oral evidence  from  the  sponsor,  his  brother  and  two
      cousins. All the evidence sufficed to satisfy him on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that the Appellants had  made  good  their  applications
      under the Immigration Rules. He also had the benefit of seeing a  long
      letter from the first Appellant to the sponsor, which he found  to  be
      genuine and cogent evidence of a genuine marriage and supportive of an
      intention on the part of the parties to the marriage to live  together
      permanently as husband and wife.

   5. He found that the first Appellant and  the  sponsor  were  married  in
      Turkey on 5 June 1991, and that there was no doubt, as at the date  of
      application, date of decision and date of hearing, that  the  marriage
      was subsisting. He found that a marriage is subsisting if it has  been
      lawfully entered into and has not thereafter been  lawfully  dissolved
      or annulled.

   6. There are two children of the family, the second Appellant  being  the
      daughter of the  first  Appellant's  first  marriage  which  ended  in
      divorce. The second child is a son,[      ], born  on  15  March  1996
      (the third minor Appellant). It seems, although it is unclear, that he
      is a formal appellant in these proceedings. We say that it is  unclear
      because the appeal forms do not seem to be in the  court  bundles  and
      there is little or no mention of him save at paragraphs 28 and  29  of
      the Immigration Judge's determination, when he  finds  that  [       ]
      falls within the requirements of paragraph 352D of HC 395.  The  point
      is to an extent academic given that he had also found in favour of his
      mother and older sister, and that  the  grounds  of  appeal,  strictly
      speaking, relate only to the first Appellant. Before us, Ms Hooper was
      under the impression  that  she  was  appearing  only  for  the  first
      Appellant, although she later agreed that she was instructed on behalf
      of the second Appellant also.


   7.  However, noting that the notice of decision of the Respondent was  to
      the First Appellant by name and her children, and the notice of appeal
      to the Immigration Judge is in the name of  the  first  Appellant  and
      children, we treat him here, in this appeal by the Respondent,  as  an
      Appellant before us.

   The Grounds of Appeal


   8. The grounds of appeal lodged by the Respondent are, in  summary,  that
      the Immigration Judge has erred in law in his definition of subsisting
      marriage (see paragraph 5 above : that a marriage is subsisting if  it
      has been lawfully entered into and has not  thereafter  been  lawfully
      dissolved or annulled).


   9. It is submitted that the Immigration Judge has provided  no  basis  in
      law for his definition. This failure, it is submitted, amounts  to  an
      error in  law  which  renders  his  decision  fatally  flawed.  It  is
      submitted that the definition given by him is too broad and  fails  to
      address the  issue  that  a  marriage  is  a  continuing  process  and
      partnership and not purely a  contractual  undertaking  which  remains
      extant if not dissolved.


  10. The order for reconsideration was made by Mr R Chalkley on 11 May 2005
      on 8 August 2005, in which he states  that  the  grounds  disclose  an
      arguable error of law on the part of the Immigration Judge,  since  it
      might be suggested that, despite the fact that  a  marriage  has  been
      lawfully entered into, it is  not  subsisting  if,  for  example,  the
      parties had not lived with each other, seen each other  or  spoken  to
      each other for several years.


   Submissions

  11.  Mr  Johnson  submitted  that  Paragraph  281(iii)  was  the  relevant
      Paragraph of HC395, and that it was clear from a reading of  the  Rule
      that it was necessary to show the future intention of the  parties  to
      the marriage to live together  as  husband  and  wife,  and  that  the
      marriage was subsisting. It was all part of the same sub-paragraph and
      both needed to be satisfied. Ms Hooper interjected  that  the  correct
      Paragraph of HC395 when dealing with family reunion for the spouse  of
      a refugee was Paragraph 352A (iv). We agree. In relation to  the  sub-
      paragraph in question, the wording is the same as that in  281  (iii).
      Paragraph 352D is the relevant Paragraph so  far  as  the  second  and
      third Appellants are concerned. Although, as we have indicated,  there
      is no  challenge  to  the  decisions  in  respect  of  the  two  minor
      Appellants.


  12. Mr Johnson  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  definition  of
      'subsisting' was too wide and that 'subsist' meant more than that  the
      marriage 'exists'. It meant, he ventured, that the marriage must  have
      some life, there must be something more than mere legal existence.

  13. Mr Johnson  was  unable  to  produce  any  authority  to  support  his
      proposition, nor did he develop his argument further,  other  than  to
      say that if 'subsist' did not have the meaning that he had  given  it,
      then it would include marriages in which the relationship  had  broken
      down and that could not be right.


  14. Mr Johnson added that doubt had been  cast  upon  the  nature  of  the
      relationship, and that the Immigration Judge was not entitled  on  the
      evidence to find that it was a genuine marriage and that  the  parties
      intended to live together. As the Immigration Judge had wrongly  found
      that the marriage was subsisting, then he had had no power to go on to
      decide that the parties intended to live together.


  15. We asked the parties to examine with us Paragraph 6 of the Immigration
      Rules HC395, which deals with matters of interpretation of the  Rules.
      The Rules are silent as to  the  meaning  of  'subsisting'.  They  do,
      however, deal  with  intention  to  live  together,  which  is  to  be
      demonstrated by 'a clear commitment from both parties that  they  will
      live together permanently in the UK immediately following the  outcome
      of the application in question or  as  soon  as  circumstances  permit
      thereafter'.


  16. Ms Hooper submitted that the Immigration Judge did not fall into error
      of law at all. She submitted that it was possible to  intend  to  live
      together without there being any subsisting marriage. One could intend
      to live with another permanently as husband and wife even if  not  yet
      married. Once the marriage had been lawfully contracted, then it would
      be  a  subsisting  marriage,  until  dissolved  or  annulled,  as  the
      Immigration Judge had found. There was  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
      suggest that this was ever anything but  a  genuine  marriage,  albeit
      that it may have gone through a difficult patch.

  17. If Mr Johnson were right, Ms Hopper submitted, then that  would  leave
      decision makers having  to  decide  upon  the  meaning  of  more  than
      'existing' in law, in each case.

  18. Even if the Immigration Judge were wrong in the precise wording of his
      definition of 'subsisting', this is not a material error as it is  not
      capable of making any difference to the outcome.

  19. Mr Johnson in reply said that it was  for  the  Immigration  Judge  to
      decide upon the character of the marriage when deciding whether it was
      subsisting. He submitted that the threshold would be  a  minimal  one,
      that it would be a question of  fact  for  the  Immigration  Judge  to
      decide.


  20. At the conclusion of  the  hearing  we  indicated  that  we  were  not
      persuaded that the Immigration Judge had fallen into material error of
      law. We now give our written reasons for so finding.

Consideration and Findings

  21.  We  remind  ourselves  that  when  hearing   a   case   by   way   of
      reconsideration, the Tribunal must first decide  whether  or  not  the
      determination discloses a material error of law. It is only where that
      question is answered in  the  affirmative  that  it  is  open  to  the
      Tribunal to go on to consider what relief, if any, should be  granted,
      and whether or not fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.

  22. We have before us all the evidence that  was  before  the  Immigration
      Judge, including the Home Office Bundle and the Appellant's bundle.

  23. It is plain that when dealing with reconsideration,  the  Tribunal  is
      obliged to confine itself to the matters  raised  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal. Here the issue is whether  the  Immigration  Judge  materially
      erred in law in defining 'subsisting' as he did.

  24. We find that we prefer the submissions of Ms Hooper, which  we  concur
      with and adopt. We find that the enquiry into the 'character'  of  the
      relationship, as Mr Johnson put it, is to be conducted  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer, other first instance  decision  maker,  or  by  the
      Immigration Judge on appeal, at the point when considering whether the
      parties to the marriage intend to live together. We find  that  it  is
      the answer to that question that is informed by matters going  to  the
      nature and quality of the  relationship.  We  find  support  for  that
      interpretation  in the use of the word  'intention'  of  the  parties,
      which indicates an examination of what is in the minds of the  parties
      at material times, and consideration as to whether their  actions  can
      inform the findings and conclusion as to  their  intentions.  In  this
      case, that is exactly what the Immigration Judge did.

  25. He noted that there had been a difficult patch since the parties  have
      been apart due to the sponsor's having claimed asylum. He  found  that
      it was clear that the enforced separation had caused problems. He went
      on to analyse and weigh the evidence that he received,  and  he  found
      that despite those difficulties, it had been shown on balance that the
      parties intended  to live together in accordance with the Rules, as at
      the date of application, decision, and as at the date of hearing. That
      aspect of his decision is not the subject of the grounds of appeal  to
      this Tribunal, and it is not for us to examine it further. We just add
      for completeness that we take the view that it was open to him to find
      as he did in this regard.

  26. We pointed out to the parties that  the  grounds  had  not  sought  to
      challenge the finding that the parties intend to  live  together,  nor
      had it been argued that because the Immigration Judge's definition  of
      'subsisting' was wrong, he was not entitled to embark upon the enquiry
      into the question whether the parties to the marriage intend  to  live
      together. It followed, in our view,  that  it  was  not  open  to  the
      Respondent to seek to raise that at the hearing.

  27. Further, we took the view that the Rule is written as it  is  for  the
      reason that the first question to be answered is whether each  of  the
      parties to the marriage intends to live permanently  with  the  other.
      The second question, that of whether the marriage is  subsisting,  is,
      in our view, by way of a double-check in relation to the legal  status
      of the relationship, that is to say its framework, as opposed  to  the
      nature and quality of the substance of the relationship. For our  part
      we find that it is not arguable that the Immigration Judge can be said
      to have erred in considering that aspect before coming  to  the  words
      that follow the word 'and'  in  352A(iv)  to  which  Mr  Johnson  drew
      attention, in the second aspect of sub-paragraph (iv) of 352A.

  28. We find that there is no support, whether in any jurisprudence, or  in
      the content of the Rule itself, for the meaning of the word 'subsists'
      that Mr Johnson contends for. Nor is there support for the  test  that
      he suggests in order to show that a marriage subsists. It is difficult
      to conceive how such a test could operate. As Ms Hooper put it,  would
      there be a requirement to  show  on  balance  that  the  parties  were
      'desperately in love', or would 'just putting up with one another' do?
      It is also difficult, we consider, to conceive  what  the  purpose  of
      such a test would be, as it would be bound, in our view, to  cover  an
      examination of many if not all of the same or similar matters to those
      considered in the first part of  the  sub-paragraph.  It  would  be  a
      double hurdle in effect, contained in Rules intended to promote family
      reunion.


  29. We note that the Concise Oxford Dictionary,  ninth  edition,  at  page
      1389 defines subsist as: 'keep oneself alive; be kept alive; remain in
      being; exist; be attributable to; provide sustenance for.'

  30. Thus, the ordinary meaning of the word includes the  meaning  'exist'.
      Mr Johnson sought to argue that it meant more  than  this.  Again,  we
      find that there is no support for his argument  to  be  found  in  the
      ordinary meaning of the word.


  31. We find that once having conducted the enquiry into the  intention  of
      the parties  so  far  as  their  commitment  to  the  relationship  is
      concerned, the second part of  the  Rule  requires  enquiry  into  the
      question whether the marriage continues to  exist  in  law.  This,  we
      suggest, completes the enquiry into the relationship, so  that  it  is
      shown to have both the genuine substance of a committed  relationship,
      with the intention that it should continue and be demonstrated through
      cohabitation, and the legal framework required to enable it to  exist,
      or subsist, in law.

  32. This is not the place in which to embark upon a consideration  of  the
      law relating  to  marriages,  whether  contracted  under  domestic  or
      foreign law, and their continuing validity. Suffice  it  to  say  that
      352A (i) requires the first Appellant to show  that  she  is  lawfully
      married to a person recognized as a refugee in  the  UK.  The  enquiry
      here is first as to whether an applicant  has  lawfully  contracted  a
      marriage, and second as to whether the marriage in question  is  to  a
      person recognized as a refugee in the UK.  The Immigration Judge found
      in her favour in that regard (see paragraph 5 above).

  33. The enquiry to be conducted at the second  aspect  of  paragraph  352A
      (iv), following the word, 'and', is that into the question whether the
      marriage shown to have been lawfully entered into  at  (i)  has  since
      been lawfully terminated or not. It is for an  Appellant  to  show  on
      balance that it has not.

  34. We find that the place for the enquiry as to whether a marriage is one
      of convenience or is a mere shell, which we take to be the issue  that
      is exercising the Respondent, is pursuant to the  examination  of  the
      intention of the parties and of the  outward  manifestation  of  their
      commitment to one another and to the relationship.


  35. For our part, on the basis of  the  evidence  and  the  argument  here
      received, we are in agreement with the Immigration  Judge  insofar  as
      the definition of 'subsisting' is concerned, and we find that  he  did
      not fall into error of law.

  36. Further, even if we  are  wrong,  and  'subsisting'  has  the  meaning
      contended for by Mr Johnson, we find that this would not amount  to  a
      material error of law by the Immigration  Judge  as  the  marriage  is
      genuine and the parties intend  to  live  together  permanently,  with
      their two children,  the  second  and  third  Appellants.  Mr  Johnson
      accepted that he could not argue successfully that it was not open  to
      the  Immigration Judge to find as he did  in  relation  to  the  first
      aspect of sub-paragraph (iv).


  37. It follows, for all the foregoing reasons, that whilst the grounds  of
      appeal were found to be arguable when the  order  for  reconsideration
      was made, the Respondent has failed to show that the Immigration Judge
      fell into any material error of law. In the circumstances we  are  not
      entitled to go on to consider what if any relief should be granted  to
      the Respondent. It has not been shown that there  is  any  basis  upon
      which  the  Tribunal  may  interfere  with  the  Immigration   Judge's
      determination. We are not able to identify  any  material  mistake  of
      fact leading to unfairness.


   Decision

  38. For all the reasons set out above, it has  not  been  shown  that  the
      Immigration Judge fell into material error of law. We therefore  order
      that the determination of the Immigration Judge shall stand.


  39. For clarity we note that the Immigration Judge allowed the  appeal  of
      each Appellant and  he  directed  that  entry  clearances  be  granted
      forthwith.

  40. There was no challenge in the grounds of appeal to  his  decisions  in
      respect of the two child appellants.  As  this  family  has  now  been
      separated for a considerable period, we expect the Respondent to  deal
      with the matter without any delay.





Catriona Jarvis
Senior Immigration Judge
Date: 6 December 2005




Paragraph 38 of this determination has been amended pursuant to the slip
Rule; that is Rule 60 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)
Rules 2005.

Dated this 14th day of December 2005



Catriona Jarvis
Senior Immigration Judge
