
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention: respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT  00170
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 September 2013 & 15 December 2014       |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                 UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN (On both dates)
              UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER (On 15 December 2014)

                                   Between

                               nhan thi nguyen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy of Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     (on 19 September 2013)
                    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (on 15 December 2014)


The duties of a signatory to the Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings include responsibility towards a  victim
of historical trafficking into the country  from  which  they  later  travel
(untrafficked) to the signatory state.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal comes before the Tribunal as a consequence  of  a  remittal
    by the Court of Appeal subsequent to  a  previous  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  In a statement of reasons the parties' agreement as to
    the terms of the remittal are set out.  These were:

         "To consider the issue of whether it was safe  and  reasonable  for
         the appellant and her children to relocate  within  Vietnam,  given
         her changed circumstances", and


         "In accordance with the requirement under section 55  of  the  2009
         Act to treat the children's interests as a  primary  consideration,
         to  undertake  a  more  comprehensive  examination  of   what   the
         children's circumstances would be if they returned to Vietnam  with
         their mother".

2.   The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  Her evidence before the First-
    tier Judge was that her parents had died  and  she  subsequently  lived
    with her grandparents.  She then went to work in Hanoi and her employer
    there suggested she could travel  abroad  where  she  could  make  more
    money, and he arranged for her to go to Hungary.  In  Hungary  she  was
    taken, locked up and raped and thereafter forced to  engage  in  sexual
    activities for the payment of money.  During this time she became close
    to a security guard and saved enough money and with his help managed to
    escape with a friend of his who provided her with a false  passport  in
    order to travel to the United Kingdom.

3.   She arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2009,  with  a  false
    passport and was dropped off at the Leeds Railway Station.  She  had  a
    relationship with a man who was kind to her and this lasted until March
    2010.  She discovered that she had become pregnant and  he  kicked  her
    out of the house.  She went to stay with a lady who took  pity  on  her
    and during this time she was visited by a friend of the person she  was
    staying with and she began relying on him  more  and  more  and  had  a
    relationship with him.  He had been put  down  as  the  father  of  her
    child.  Subsequently she met another person through a friend and became
    pregnant by him, had another child and as a result of this incident  he
    left her.  She did not want to return to Vietnam as the  gang  who  had
    arranged for her travel would be after her for money and she would  not
    feel safe there and she sought asylum in the United Kingdom.

4.   The judge accepted that she had been taken to Hungary and  through  her
    employer had been abused there.  He did not accept that she would be at
    serious risk of being  persecuted  upon  return  to  Vietnam  and  also
    dismissed the appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

5.   The claim before the Upper Tribunal on 19 September 2013  proceeded  by
    way of submissions only.  Mr Lingajothy argued that the  appellant  had
    been trafficked for sexual exploitation.  She went initially to Hungary
    and then to the United Kingdom.  Her children had both been born in the
    United Kingdom and their fathers were unknown so that paternity was  in
    question.  Mr Lingajothy referred to what was set out in  his  skeleton
    argument about Article 4 of the Human Rights Convention and  the  Anti-
    Trafficking Convention of 2005.  The facts of this case fell within the
    United Kingdom's obligations to the appellant.

6.   Mr Lingajothy argued that a number  of  the  facts  of  the  case  were
    similar to those in Rantsev (Application No. 25965/04) 7 January  2010,
    where there had been held to be a failure to protect a trafficked woman
    in Cyprus.  The  evidence  indicated  that  none  of  the  anti-slavery
    provisions or human rights safeguards in the United  Kingdom  had  been
    ratified by Vietnam.  Mr Lingajothy relied on  what  was  said  in  the
    Country of Origin Information Report  (COIR)  of  April  2012  and  the
    bundles previously put in.  As regards the COIR he relied  particularly
    on paragraphs 22.35 and 22.37.  There was an Article  4  obligation  in
    respect of a risk of re-trafficking if she returned  to  Vietnam.   The
    traffickers had expected to gain from her.  She might be  a  vulnerable
    person on return with two children.  The nature of the obligation under
    Article 4 was protection.  The state of transit, the  state  of  origin
    and the state of destination were all states with a duty to protect.

7.   As regards the children again reference was made to section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  as  set  out  in  the
    skeleton.  It was a question of the best  interests  of  the  children.
    The Tribunal was referred to  the  appellant's  statutory  declaration.
    She had been to the Vietnamese Embassy.  She had gone to obtain ID  and
    even that was denied and it was an open and shut case.  That  was  only
    one element of the matter however.  It would be argued on behalf of the
    Secretary of State that nationality could come from either parent,  but
    the appellant had been told something other than  that.   A  number  of
    embassies  did  not  treat  their  nationals  favourably  when  abroad,
    especially when asylum had been sought, so not much  weight  should  be
    attached to that.  It was a question of whether  they  would  be  given
    passports.  The appellant and the children could not be returned to  an
    uncertain future.  There was every indication of a lack  of  protection
    on return.  She had  been  found  to  be  credible  and  to  have  been
    trafficked.  There were legal and moral obligations and someone's life,
    particularly with children, could not be second-guessed.

8.   In his submissions Mr Saunders argued that, although the appellant  had
    been trafficked from Vietnam to Hungary, she had not been trafficked to
    the United Kingdom for sexual or  other  exploitation.   She  had  been
    helped to come to the United Kingdom to  rescue  her  from  that  fate.
    After her arrival here she  had  not  been  involved  in  any  kind  of
    exploitation.  She had had two relationships and had given birth to two
    children.  Article 4 applied to trafficking.  The  case  in  EK  [2013]
    UKUT 00313 (IAC) had been put on the basis  first  that  the  appellant
    there had been trafficked into the United Kingdom and within the United
    Kingdom and also that by virtue of the Anti-Trafficking Convention  the
    United Kingdom assumed protective and remedial obligations extending to
    medical assistance and recovery.  In  that  case  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had neglected to give EK, a domestic worker, a leaflet  telling
    her her rights and this had triggered the United Kingdom's obligation.

9.   If one assumed that the duty had been  triggered,  the  United  Kingdom
    could not advise as the  appellant  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and had not identified herself to the  authorities  for  some
    time.  She had seen a psychiatrist in September 2011.  He had  assessed
    her as suffering from depression but that her condition fell short of a
    diagnosis  of  post  traumatic  stress  disorder.   It  was  not  clear
    therefore what help she needed that the United Kingdom was  obliged  to
    offer her.  Nor was it clear whether  she  had  taken  up  any  of  the
    recommendations made by Dr Gupta.  He had recommended that  the  report
    go to her GP.  It was unclear how the United Kingdom could take  things
    further and the evidence was lacking to show a failure to do so.  There
    was no indication of any other obligations.   In  Rantsev  the  Cypriot
    police had failed to handle the case properly and investigate  properly
    and hence the case.  There was no  shortcoming  in  the  Home  Office's
    conduct in this case in respect of the appellant's  trafficking  to  an
    intermediary country.  There  was  nothing  in  her  evidence  to  show
    trafficking or sexual abuse here.

10.  On the citizenship point, the appellant  had  gone  to  the  Vietnamese
    Embassy.  It was not known what the nature of her approach to them  was
    and what information she had given.  It was in  her  interests  to  say
    they would not document her.  Mr Saunders referred to the document that
    he had put in setting out the law on Vietnamese  nationality.   It  was
    clear from Article 16 that nationality could  be  derived  from  either
    parent.  It was clear that the Vietnamese authorities were  willing  to
    look at evidence.  The appellant should be able to get a  copy  of  her
    Vietnamese birth certificate.  There was no question of  her  birth  or
    ancestry  being  in  doubt.   The  Tribunal  should  not  accept   that
    establishing nationality would be closed to her or her children.

11.  As regards the situation to which they would  return  in  Vietnam,  the
    Tribunal was referred to the refusal letter, particularly at paragraphs
    26 and 28 and the matters set out there concerning internal relocation.
     Vietnam was a large, populous country.  Measures had been taken to  do
    something about trafficking.  Clearly it  occurred,  but  the  evidence
    showed that there were systems in place.  The appellant was not  wanted
    by the authorities so returning on documents would not  necessarily  be
    known to the traffickers.  She was a young woman and healthy as far  as
    was known.  The only medical evidence was two years old.   It  did  not
    show she could not work.  It was a mere possibility, and  no  more,  of
    her coming to the traffickers' attention.

12.  In respect of the  Article  8  issues,  her  own  stay  here  had  been
    relatively short.  She had  failed  to  identify  anything  beyond  the
    duration  of  her  stay  to  render  her  private  life  deserving   of
    protection.  The children had been born respectively in  December  2010
    and November 2011.  They were therefore not in a position to have their
    own opinions as to what was best for them.  The Tribunal was  asked  to
    assume it was in their best interests to stay in the United Kingdom but
    that was premised on the assertion of a lack of  safety  for  them  and
    their mother in Vietnam.  There was no freestanding section 55 claim in
    the sense that there was no evidence to support it.  The children  were
    very young.  It could be assumed they were happy at  nursery  but  that
    was all.  Their best interests were to remain with  their  mother.   It
    would not be unsafe for her  to  return  to  Vietnam.   There  were  no
    obligations  on  the  United  Kingdom  arising  from  her  having  been
    trafficked some years ago to Hungary.  The appeal should be dismissed.

13.  By way of reply in the respect of the EK issue Mr  Lingajothy  referred
    to paragraph 3 at page 2 of his skeleton.  The appellant was leading  a
    near-normal life in the United Kingdom and had been receiving treatment
    but that would not be so if she was removed.  Rantsev set out the ambit
    of protection and the United Kingdom fell within  that.   The  Tribunal
    was invited to look at her witness statement in regard to the matter of
    contention that she had not  been  sexually  exploited  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She had two children by two different  fathers  and  did  not
    know them.  It should be considered what that told us.  She  might  not
    be volunteering information about certain matters.

14.  With regard to Article 8 there was family life with  the  children  and
    also the issue of physical  and  moral  integrity  in  respect  of  her
    private life.  This had a lot of force.  The Tribunal was  referred  to
    what was said at page 13  of  the  psychiatrist's  report.   There  was
    enough in that report as to the consequences and  the  effects  of  her
    having been trafficked and the impact on her future  rehabilitation  in
    Vietnam.  With regard to protection and what was said  in  the  refusal
    letter, Mr Lingajothy pointed to paragraph 22.35 of the COIR again.  He
    noted from the  previous  paragraph  that  domestic  violence  was  not
    criminalised in Vietnam.  There was the case law on medical  treatment.
    Protection was required to  be  sufficient.   It  was  argued  that  in
    Vietnam there was no sufficiency of protection for the appellant  as  a
    trafficked woman.  She came within a social group.  There was reference
    in the skeleton to the case of AZ with respect to  Thai  women.   There
    had been a lack of the necessary protection and  it  would  breach  the
    state's obligations to return her.  As regards  the  children  and  the
    documents, she was within a  social  group  and  seeking  international
    protection and although she did not wish the protection of Vietnam  the
    UK was requiring her to do so.  That impacted on our obligations.   The
    appeal should be allowed.

15.  The determination was reserved.

16.  Subsequent to the hearing, it became  clear  that  there  had  been  no
    submissions on the question of whether  the  United  Kingdom  owes  any
    obligation under the Anti-Trafficking Convention to a  person  such  as
    the appellant who, though she was  a  victim  of  previous  trafficking
    (from Vietnam to Hungary), had not  been  trafficked  into  the  United
    Kingdom, whence she came  from  Hungary.   The  hearing  was  therefore
    reconvened to hear argument on the point, with final submissions  being
    made on 15 December 2014 when Judge Allen was joined  by  Judge  Coker,
    subsequent to a number of adjournments following brief hearings  on  13
    November 2013 and 29  April  2014.   There  was  no  objection  to  the
    addition of Judge Coker to the panel.

17.  A new issue was raised  in  an  addendum  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statements, dated 12 November 2013.  With reference  to  the  man  with
    whom she initially stayed in the United Kingdom she said  that  he  had
    kept trying to force her to have sex with him, left  her  once  without
    food and money for two days and, after his return raped her, leading to
    her pregnancy, and eviction by him when he learned  of  her  condition.
    Thereafter the  appellant  was  accepted  into  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism, was given the 45 days rest period as prescribed by the Anti-
    Trafficking Convention and was interviewed in September 2014.  In  that
    interview she said that a security guard, Nguyen, helped her  to  leave
    Hungary by introducing her to Mr Tuan, with  whom  she  stayed,  living
    normally, for about twenty days.  Mr Tuan gave her a passport and  told
    her to follow a white man, who gave her an air ticket and she went with
    him to the United Kingdom.  He left her at a railway station.  She  had
    been given the number of a Mr Long, and she called him and he took  her
    to Birmingham.  He threatened  her  and  eventually  she  submitted  to
    having sex with him.  After that he treated  her  very  well,  and  she
    thought he was not a bad man, although he had kept her  locked  in  his
    flat, threatened her and raped her.   When  he  learned  that  she  had
    become pregnant he wanted her to have an abortion.  She refused, and he
    pushed her over.   About a month later she left the flat, as he  wanted
    her to leave, and she stayed initially with a Ms Thuy whom she met at a
    station, and thereafter with friends  of  Ms  Thuy's.   She  left  them
    shortly before her baby was born and went to live with Mr Cuu.   He  is
    her current partner (though they do not live together) and  the  father
    of her other two children.

18.  At the hearing on 15 December 2014 Mr Duffy referred us to  a  decision
    that had been made on 11 December 2014 in which it was accepted by  the
    Competent Authority that the appellant had been trafficked from Vietnam
    to Hungary, but, on account of discrepancies in what she said, did  not
    accept that she had  been  trafficked  into  the  United  Kingdom  from
    Hungary.

19.  With regard to the specific matter in respect of which the  appeal  had
    been re-opened, Mr Duffy referred to the respondent's guidance entitled
    "Victims of Human Trafficking - Competent Authority Guidance", which is
    valid from 24 October 2013.  Two particular paragraphs  were  relevant,
    set out at page 60 of the guidance.  There it was said  that  a  person
    who  claimed  to  have  been  trafficked  or  exploited  overseas   who
    subsequently travelled to the UK of their  own  accord  independent  of
    their alleged trafficker was unlikely to  be  considered  a  victim  of
    trafficking for the purposes of the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention,  but
    since it was possible that such a person who had  fled  to  the  United
    Kingdom to escape a trafficking situation would still be traumatised by
    their experience, and unless the case met Dublin  II  arrangements  and
    another European Union Member State was taking responsibility  for  the
    case, the Competent Authority was required to offer the victim help and
    protection in the United Kingdom under the Anti-Trafficking Convention.



20.  The issue of risk on  return  had  been  dealt  with  at  the  previous
    hearing.  The respondent did not dispute that the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked into Hungary, but there was a dispute as to whether she  had
    been trafficked into the United Kingdom due  to  discrepancies  in  her
    evidence.   It  was  accepted   that   the   respondent's   trafficking
    obligations were engaged as there was  no  Dublin  II  point,  and  she
    engaged with the NRM.  She had  had  enough  time  for  the  period  of
    reflection.  On her account she had been  trafficked  into  the  United
    Kingdom several years  ago  and  there  is  no  indication  of  ongoing
    treatment being required.  Further, it was accepted that she  had  been
    trafficked into Hungary.  No further period of leave was needed.

21.  In his submissions Mr Lingajothy referred to the  appellant's  addendum
    to her witness statement in which she said she had been trafficked into
    the United Kingdom as well as having been trafficked into Hungary.  The
    Tribunal was asked to look at the comprehensive interview records.  She
    had been trafficked into Hungary and into the United Kingdom.  The case
    fell within Article 10 of the Anti-Trafficking Convention.

22.  Mr Duffy said that the respondent did not accept the account of  having
    been trafficked into the United Kingdom bearing in mind  the  questions
    and answers at interview.  She had changed her  evidence.   This  might
    not matter, as it was accepted she had been trafficked into Hungary and
    was dealt with under the NRM.   There  was  nothing  to  be  gained  by
    quibbling on this point.  The trafficking from Vietnam to  Hungary  was
    indicative of gang involvement  whereas,  on  her  later  account,  the
    trafficking from Hungary to  the  United  Kingdom  was  the  action  of
    individuals and was not on the basis of prostitution or  false  labour.
    The trafficking relevant to risk on return was from Vietnam to  Hungary
    and not Hungary to the United Kingdom.

23.   Mr  Lingajothy  argued  that  Article  12  of   the   Anti-Trafficking
    Convention was engaged and the Secretary of State could not  avoid  her
    responsibilities.  There  were  legal  and  moral  obligations  on  the
    respondent if the appellant was trafficked from Hungary to  the  United
    Kingdom but not to the same extent if she had only been trafficked from
    Vietnam to Hungary.  The decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  EK  was
    applicable bar one point in that there  the  person  had  come  to  the
    United  Kingdom  voluntarily,  but  otherwise  they   were   comparable
    situations.

24.  The appellant had the right to  be  protected  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because  she  had  been  trafficked  here  and  this   gave   rise   to
    responsibilities under Article 4 of the Human Rights Convention as  had
    been argued previously.  She had been brought to the United Kingdom and
    later exploited.  The Tribunal was referred to the  psychiatric  report
    about the  ongoing  counselling  help.   The  responsibilities  of  the
    Secretary of State under  the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention  and  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention  were  engaged.   There
    was an asylum argument also because of her circumstances in the  United
    Kingdom.

25.  With regard to Article 3, a fear of return  to  Vietnam  existed  where
    the gangs operated and could target her.  She now had  three  children,
    all of whom had been born in the United Kingdom, and that was a further
    factor on  return.   The  children  were  not  entitled  to  Vietnamese
    nationality.  They had gone to the Vietnamese  Embassy  and  were  told
    they did not qualify straight away: also it was a matter of risk as she
    was a victim of trafficking and had three children by different fathers
    and she would be ostracised and they could be seen as a  social  group.
    The best interests of the children required to be considered.  She  had
    given good reasons for not going to the police.  The respondent was not
    relying on Dublin II.  This was a very strong case  and  the  appellant
    was a victim of trafficking.

26.  Mr Duffy by way of response argued that it was accepted that the  Anti-
    Trafficking  Convention  was  engaged.   There  were  two   trafficking
    decisions, the first in 2011 and now the 2014 decision.  The change  in
    evidence was of relevance.  There was though no dispute  that  she  had
    been trafficked and the question is what was the decision under appeal,
    and it was to remove an illegal entrant and asylum being an issue.   It
    was a question of risk on return and that  had  been  dealt  with.   It
    might be argued that the decision was not in accordance with the law if
    it had not been dealt with.  It was  unclear  whether  the  trafficking
    decision was appealable to the Upper Tribunal and it could be a  matter
    of judicial review.  Articles 12 and 14  of  the  Convention  had  been
    applied.  Under the latter she  would  obtain  a  residence  permit  if
    successful on referral to the NRM but the criteria  under  the  Article
    were with reference  to  her  personal  situation  or  co-operation  in
    criminal proceedings. There had not been shown to be  an  ongoing  need
    for treatment and she was not helping the police with their  enquiries.



27.  The Competent Authority had  said  no  with  regard  to  the  residence
    permit requirement.  The Convention left it up to them whether  it  was
    necessary.  That could be looked at in the  context  of  Article  3  or
    Article 8.  The Competent Authority had not received up-to-date medical
    evidence and that was one reason for this decision.  It was  not  known
    what ongoing treatment the appellant was receiving and whether  or  not
    it would be available in Vietnam.  Mr Duffy relied on the  decision  of
    the Competent Authority on that and the conclusion that  there  was  no
    need for a residence permit for either reason.

28.  Risk on return had been dealt with at the previous  hearing.   For  the
    sake of completeness Mr Duffy had put  in  the  most  recent  US  State
    Department Report and the most recent Operational  Guidance  Note.   It
    should be noted that the father of two of the children  was  Vietnamese
    with no status in the United Kingdom and that muddied the issue  as  to
    whether the appellant would return as a lone  mother.   There  were  no
    removal directions for him but he was her partner and as father of  two
    of the children he could help.

29.  With regard to the children the point was taken about  the  authorities
    and their response but two of the children had a Vietnamese father  and
    a Vietnamese mother so it would  be  odd  if  they  would  be  rendered
    stateless on the basis of being born outside Vietnam.  In fact Mr Duffy
    was of the view that the fathers of all three children were Vietnamese.
     It was not likely to be a long-term problem.  The appellant would  not
    be removed without the children.  Questions of nationality were  to  be
    resolved on the basis of the balance of probabilities.

30.  As regards the question whether the threshold was the same for  Article
    3 for the appellant bearing in mind any risk of  ill-treatment  because
    of the trafficking, it needed to be taken into account.  It was part of
    the assessment of risk on return.  There were  factors  that  made  her
    more vulnerable and if she was at risk from the  traffickers  then  she
    would succeed.  There was no similar case from other authorities  about
    return for a person who had been trafficked.   The  matter  had  to  be
    assessed in light of her vulnerability.

31.  As regards any ongoing need for  medical  treatment  and  whether  that
    gave  rise  to  Article  3  or  Article  8  issues  as  it  arose  from
    trafficking, it was a factor in her favour and was true of  anyone  who
    was vulnerable and greater weight on her side of the  scales  would  be
    accorded to it.

32.  By way of reply Mr Lingajothy argued that although there were no  cases
    of trafficking to Vietnam it was relevant to take  into  account  cases
    from China and Thailand as relevant in regard  to  south-east  Asia  in
    respect of the question of  risk.   On  the  issue  of  the  children's
    nationality, the first child did not have the same father as the  other
    two and it seemed according  to  the  appellant  that  that  child  had
    British nationality and  the  issue  of  paternity  had  been  explored
    earlier.  This created more questions than answers.  That  child  could
    have the right of abode in the United Kingdom.  The Vietnamese had said
    they did not confer nationality on children born outside Vietnam if the
    father was not Vietnamese.  Nationality was acquired via the father.

33.  With regard to the argument that there was no  ongoing  responsibility,
    there were issues under Article 12  concerning  education  and  medical
    treatment etc. but there  was  more.   There  was  a  question  of  her
    treatment and rehabilitation which was ongoing and reference  was  made
    to the counsellor's letter that had been put  in.   There  had  been  a
    psychiatric report provided to the First-tier  judge  where  there  was
    reference to the appellant demonstrating suicidal ideation.  She was  a
    vulnerable person.  There were obligations  under  the  Convention  and
    moral obligations to protect someone in her position.

34.  We reserved our determination.

35.  We consider first the trafficking issue.

36.  We have set out in an Appendix the relevant  provisions  applicable  in
    this case.  They are Article 4 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and particular provisions of the Council of Europe Convention on
    Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CAT).

37.  In Rantsev the Court of Human Rights concluded that trafficking  within
    the meaning of Article 3(a) of the Palermo Protocol and Article 4(a) of
    the Anti-Trafficking Convention, falls within the scope of  Article  4.
    The Court said that Article 4 imposed a positive obligation  on  Member
    States to put in place an appropriate  legislative  and  administrative
    framework to ensure the  practical  and  effective  protection  of  the
    rights of victims or potential victims of trafficking.   In  Rantsev  a
    violation of Article 4 was held to have occurred  in  that  there  were
    significant  weaknesses  in  the  general  legal   and   administrative
    framework and in Cypriot immigration policy, which had the result  that
    the regime in Cyprus did not afford practical and effective  protection
    against trafficking and exploitation

38.  As part of the United Kingdom implementation  of  the  Anti-Trafficking
    Convention, a national referral  mechanism  (NRM)  was  established  in
    April  2009.   This  consists  of  first  a   "multi-agency   Competent
    Authority" which is a central point of contact for bodies such  as  the
    police and local authorities who may encounter victims of  trafficking.
    The second element comprises linked but separate Competent  Authorities
    to deal with situations where trafficking  is  raised  as  part  of  an
    asylum claim or in the context of other immigration  processes.   There
    is reference at page 5 of the Home Office guidance  to  which  we  have
    referred above to the particular Competent Authorities, one  being  the
    UK  Human  Trafficking  Centre  (UKHTC)  which  deals  with  all  cases
    involving a UK or EEA national and acts as the first point  of  contact
    for referrals,  and  the  Home  Office  Competent  Authority  which  is
    concerned with situations where trafficking is raised  as  part  of  an
    asylum claim or in the context of another immigration process.

39.  In the respondent's  letter  to  the  appellant  of  11  December  2014
    detailed consideration was given to her case and it was  concluded,  as
    noted above, that she had been  trafficked  from  Vietnam  to  Hungary.
    However it was not accepted that  she  had  been  trafficked  into  the
    United Kingdom from Hungary, bearing in mind the discrepancies  in  her
    evidence in that regard.  It was noted that the  explanation  she  gave
    for this was:

         "because  the  Home  Office  asked  me  simply  whether  I  had   a
         relationship with him or not.  I said yes and later asked whether I
         agree or not.  I said yes.  They  didn't  ask  me  more  in  detail
         whether he forced me or not.  It is true I  got  relationship  with
         him because I thought if I have a good relationship he will have  a
         good feeling about me."

40.  It was noted that at interview on 20 July 2011  when  explicitly  asked
    whether this man had in any way forced her to have  sex  with  him  she
    responded, "no it was consensual".  This  answer  was  not  amended  or
    clarified for over two years.  Consideration was also given to a report
    from Ashiana [not  further  identified  in  the  decision  letter,  but
    assumed to be a reference to the Ashiana Network, which  provides  help
    with issues around domestic violence] which  provided  a  self-reported
    account  by  the  appellant  and  an  explanation  for  her   seemingly
    inconsistent description of her treatment  by  this  man.   The  letter
    writer considered that whilst this explanation was  plausible  she  had
    not provided evidence to the required standard of proof to substantiate
    the claim of having been exploited in the United  Kingdom.   We  agree.
    The clear and significant discrepancy in the appellant's evidence leads
    us to conclude that the more recent assertion, that she was  trafficked
    into the United Kingdom and ill-treated, is opportunistic, and the true
    account of events is the one she gave originally.

41.  Consideration was also given  to  whether  it  was  necessary  for  the
    appellant to have a period of leave in the United Kingdom as  a  victim
    of human trafficking.  There was no information to suggest that she was
    assisting with a  human  trafficking  investigation.   As  regards  her
    personal circumstances, the report  from  Ashiana  said  that  she  had
    chosen to access counselling which would commence at her GP practice on
    17 October 2014, but despite further requests being made to Ashiana and
    the appellant's solicitor as to whether she had actually  entered  into
    counselling, whether the counselling was specifically addressing trauma
    relating  to  her  exploitation  and  the  required   length   of   any
    counselling, no information had  been  received.   As  such  there  was
    insufficient evidence to afford her leave on account  of  her  personal
    circumstances at the time.

42.  The point was made by Mr Duffy that  any  challenge  to  this  decision
    might have to be by way of judicial review if it were not to be  argued
    as a decision not being in accordance with the law.  Insofar as we have
    jurisdiction to deal with this matter on a statutory appeal and bearing
    in mind that the point has not been pleaded, we would consider that  it
    has not been shown that the decision is not in accordance with the  law
    as the respondent has considered the relevant criteria as to whether or
    not leave should be granted and has come to a conclusion to  which  she
    was clearly entitled to come.  The relevant requirements of  the  Anti-
    Trafficking Convention have been observed  by  the  respondent  in  the
    decision as a whole, and there can be no  arguable  challenge  to  that
    decision.

43.  On the specific question of whether or not the Convention extends to  a
    situation such as this where a person in the appellant's position is an
    historical victim of trafficking rather  than  having  been  trafficked
    into the United Kingdom, we note Mr Duffy's submission with  regard  to
    page 60 of the respondent's guidance concerning  people  who  had  been
    exploited overseas and the fact that the respondent,  unless  it  is  a
    Dublin II (or now  Dublin  III)  case,  considers  that  the  Competent
    Authority must offer the victim  help  and  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Convention.  However in the previous paragraph it  is
    said that a person who claims to  have  been  trafficked  or  exploited
    overseas and subsequently travels to the United Kingdom  of  their  own
    accord, independent of their alleged trafficker, and passes  through  a
    number of countries on the way, is unlikely to be considered  a  victim
    of trafficking for the purposes of the  Convention,  because  they  are
    likely to be far removed from that trafficking situation and  therefore
    very unlikely to benefit from being considered under the Convention.

44.  Although the discretion thus set out, and exercised by  the  respondent
    in this case goes some way, we consider that it  does  not  answer  the
    point of law which we identified as  the  reason  for  reconvening  the
    hearing.  In our view the responsibilities of the respondent under  the
    Convention extend beyond the person who has been trafficked  into  this
    country to the victim of historical trafficking into the  country  from
    which they later travelled into the United Kingdom.   It  seems  to  us
    that that is a proper reading of the terms of the Convention.

45.   We  derive  support  for  this  conclusion   from   remarks   of   the
    Administrative Court in Atamewan [2013] EWHC 2727 (Admin).   That  case
    was concerned with the question, as set  out  at  paragraph  1  of  the
    judgment: 'what is the extent of the Secretary of  State's  obligations
    in respect of a person who was the subject of human trafficking to  the
    UK and in the UK... but who was then able to escape her  servitude  and
    who has, comparatively speaking, lived a more normal life since  then'.
    The 2010  version  of  the  respondent's  guidance  was  in  issue,  in
    particular, for our purposes, pages 23-24 of the guidance, which  dealt
    specifically with the situation where a Competent  Authority  believes,
    at the reasonable grounds stage of the consideration, that someone  has
    been the victim of trafficking but also concluded, on the facts of that
    case, that the person 'is no longer  in  need  of  the  protection  and
    assistance offered by [CAT] because the individual's circumstances have
    changed so much since the trafficking occurred'.

46.  Aikens LJ, with whom Silber J agreed, held that  this  passage  in  the
    guidance was based on a misinterpretation  of  Articles  4,  10(2)  and
    13(1) of CAT.  The use of the present tense in Article 4(e)  was  used:
    "in the sense that the person concerned  has  attained  the  status  of
    'victim' of trafficking because he is someone who is or  has  been  the
    subject of any form of "trafficking" as defined in Article  4(a)  (para
    70).  The word 'victims' in the heading to Article  10  must  mean  the
    same as in Article 4(e): so it meant anyone who is  presently,  or  has
    been, the victim of trafficking.   There  was  nothing  in  Article  13
    (contrary to the view expressed in the guidance) to  warrant  the  view
    that Article 13 contracts some of the provisions in Article  10(2)  and
    12.  Article 13 is intended to apply to victims of trafficking who  are
    allegedly present in a Party's territory or  who  are  legally  present
    with a short-term  residence  permit,  the  obligation  then  being  to
    provide a minimum 30 day period of 'recovery and reflection'.  The last
    two sentences of Article 13(1) confirm the general obligation  set  out
    in Article 10(2) that  when  a  Party  has  concluded  that  there  are
    'Reasonable Grounds' that the person is a victim, then that Party  must
    authorise the person concerned to stay  in  its  territory  during  the
    'recovery and reflection period'.  To take  an  extreme  case,  even  a
    person who was trafficked to  the  United  Kingdom  30  years  ago  and
    thereafter managed to create a new life for himself would, if  he  then
    came forward and claimed he was the victim of trafficking, be  entitled
    to the benefit of the Article 10(2) process of deciding  whether  there
    were 'Reasonable Grounds' for believing he was trafficked.

47.  This reasoning, in our view, is clearly applicable to a person  in  the
    situation of the appellant, who  is  equally  a  victim  of  historical
    trafficking, albeit outside the United Kingdom.  Although Atamewan  was
    concerned with the situation of an  historical  victim  of  trafficking
    into the United Kingdom,  the  analysis  of  the  Convention,  and,  in
    particular what is said about Article 10(2), seems to us to  favour  an
    interpretation of the United Kingdom's  responsibility  which  includes
    duties owed to a person in the appellant's position.   The  wording  of
    the second sentence of Article 10(2): "Each party shall ensure that, if
    the competent authorities have reasonable grounds  to  believe  that  a
    person has been the victim of trafficking in human beings...." does not
    limit the obligation to a person who was a victim of  trafficking  into
    that particular state.  The object of the Convention, at least in part,
    is to enable identification of and assistance to,  trafficking  victims
    and where, as in this case, that did not  occur  in  the  country  into
    which the victim was trafficked, it would defeat the protective purpose
    of the Convention if the Article 10(2) duty did not extend to the state
    to which the victim subsequently moves.

48.  However, that does not advance  the  appellant's  case.   The  relevant
    matters have been  given  appropriate  consideration  in  the  decision
    letter of 11 December 2014 in light of the acceptance that as this  was
    not a Dublin II case, help and protection were required to  be  offered
    under  the  Convention.   What  we  have  to  say  above  concerns  the
    respondent's legal responsibilities in a case where we might  otherwise
    decide that her responsibilities under the Convention were engaged.

49.  An issue of significance in this case is clearly the  question  of  the
    situation that the appellant would face  on  return  to  Vietnam.   The
    refusal  letter  quotes  at  length  from  the  US   State   Department
    Trafficking in Persons Report on Vietnam of 2010 which  refers  to  the
    Vietnamese government sustaining some efforts  to  protect  victims  of
    transnational sex trafficking and outlines additional victim protection
    plans in its new anti-trafficking law, though it was said that  it  did
    not make sufficient efforts during the  year  to  identify  or  protect
    victims of labour trafficking or internal trafficking and  had  yet  to
    employ systematic procedures nationwide  to  identify  proactively  and
    effectively victims of trafficking among vulnerable populations.  There
    is reference to significant deficiencies in the  referral  system  that
    exists, though  there  are  three  trafficking  shelters  in  Vietnam's
    largest urban areas that provide counselling and vocational training to
    female sex trafficking victims but the government lacks  the  resources
    and technical expertise to support shelters adequately.

50.  Mr Lingajothy referred to paragraphs 22.35 to 22.37 of the COIR.   This
    refers to a Freedom House Report of  2011  stating  that  thousands  of
    women each year are trafficked internally  and  externally  and  forced
    into prostitution.   There  is  reference  to  a  2007  report  of  the
    International Federation for  Human  Rights  that  the  persistence  of
    trafficking in women and girls and the exploitation of prostitution are
    issues of concern for the committee.  Mr Lingajothy  also  referred  to
    the point at paragraph 22.34 that domestic violence is not criminalised
    in Vietnam.

51.  The appellant left Vietnam in 2008.  The respondent has made the  point
    that Vietnam is a large country of some 90 million people with a number
    of large cities in it.  If the appellant were able to return, a  matter
    to which we shall have to return, she would not  be  a  person  of  any
    adverse interest to the government, and the chance of coming across her
    traffickers  is  very  slight.   The  Anti-Trafficking  Convention  and
    Article 4 do not suggest that a victim of trafficking  is  unreturnable
    to the country from which they were trafficked.  We consider  that  she
    has not shown that she faces a real risk of ill-treatment on return  to
    Vietnam, whether on account of her previous experience as a  victim  of
    trafficking or otherwise.

52.  She would return to Vietnam as a single mother with  three  very  small
    children. There is no witness statement from Mr Cuu.  He does not  have
    status in the United Kingdom, according to the appellant (Q118  of  the
    September 2014 interview).  The appellant's evidence is that  they  are
    partners, though they do not live together.   It  is  entirely  unclear
    whether he would accompany the appellant and the children  to  Vietnam.
    It has not been shown  that  the  background  evidence  indicates  that
    returning without her partner and with the children would place her  at
    risk of breach of her Article 3 rights or that even if she is a  member
    of a particular social group of  trafficked  women  from  Vietnam,  she
    faces a real risk of harm on that account.  It is  speculative  and  no
    more to suggest that she would face a real risk of  coming  across  her
    previous traffickers or that as a woman in the circumstances  in  which
    she would return she faced a real risk of being trafficked  by  someone
    else.  We do not understand it to have been suggested that she would be
    unable to make contact again with her brothers,  born  respectively  in
    1989 and 1991, or with her sister born in 1993.  There is evidence,  in
    the US State Department Report of 2010, referred  to  in  paragraph  50
    above, to support the respondent's conclusion in  the  decision  letter
    that there is a sufficiency of protection provided by  the  authorities
    in Vietnam.  Accordingly we find that she has not shown a real risk  on
    return to Vietnam of persecution or a breach of her human rights.

53.  As regards the medical evidence, the appellant saw  a  psychiatrist  in
    September 2011.  He assessed her as suffering from depression,  falling
    short of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. It was  said  that  she  would
    benefit from being  prescribed  psychotropic  medication,  following  a
    discussion with her GP in the first instance, and  that  her  treatment
    plan might require a further assessment from her local Community Mental
    Health Team.  The most recent report is in a letter from  Mr  Baker,  a
    counsellor at the Flowers Health Centre in Sheffield.  It is  dated  12
    December 2014.  Mr Baker has  been  treating  the  appellant  since  17
    October 2014.  He says that she is  currently  subject  to  flashbacks,
    debilitating headaches, nightmares and broken sleep, all of  which  are
    symptomatic of  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder,  and  which  severely
    hamper her attempts to create a normal life.  She  has  also  indicated
    that she has thoughts of suicide.

54.  The appellant has made a statutory declaration concerning a  visit  she
    made to the Vietnamese Embassy on 28 August 2013 at which time she said
    she was told that the Vietnamese granted citizenship through  paternity
    so therefore her children could  not  obtain  citizenship  because  the
    nationality of their father is unascertainable or  unknown.   It  seems
    from her evidence that both the fathers are Vietnamese.  She said  that
    she did not have any contact with her siblings or grandmother  and  she
    did not know where they were and did not have any paperwork in relation
    to her nationality including absence of proof of addresses in  Vietnam.
    She has provided a document from the embassy stating that  she  is  not
    eligible to obtain a Vietnamese passport or travel documents as she  is
    lacking any of the listed types of documents.

55.  Mr Saunders produced a copy  of  the  law  on  Vietnamese  nationality.
    Article 16 states that a person born  inside  or  outside  Vietnam  has
    Vietnamese nationality if either of their parents at the time of  their
    birth has Vietnamese nationality. We consider that this  is  preferable
    evidence to what was said by the appellant, i.e. what she says she  was
    told as recorded in the statutory declaration, and accordingly it  will
    be possible for her to  pass  on  the  Vietnamese  nationality  to  her
    children, according to this provision.  As  regards  the  documentation
    required to be produced in order to prove Vietnamese nationality,  that
    is set out at Article 11.   One of the following  is  required:  first,
    birth certificate, people's  identity  card,  Vietnamese  passport,  or
    decision permitting the naturalisation in Vietnam  or  adoption.   This
    essentially coincides with the wording of the document produced by  the
    appellant from the Embassy which refers to providing a copy of  excerpt
    of the Presidential Decree  granting  the  holder  Vietnamese  citizen,
    current or previous Vietnamese passport, current  or  previous  Vietnam
    identity card, birth certificate or excerpts of birth register.

56.  We agree  with  the  respondent  that  it  should  not  be  beyond  the
    appellant's abilities to obtain a birth certificate or excerpt  of  the
    birth register.  She has not said that she does not know where she  was
    born, and there can, we think, properly be assumed to be  a  record  of
    that and for that to be identified  and  submitted  to  the  Vietnamese
    authorities.  On the evidence we do not accept that  the  appellant  is
    unable to provide documentation proving her Vietnamese nationality  and
    as a consequence enabling her and her children to obtain  documentation
    enabling them to return to Vietnam.

57.  The best interests of the children  clearly  are  a  primary,  not  the
    primary consideration in assessing the situation under Article 8.  They
    are a family and would return as a family.   Mr  Lingajothy  makes  the
    point that part of  Article  8  private  life  is  physical  and  moral
    integrity, and that must of course be borne in mind  in  assessing  the
    proportionality of removal.  The appellant  was  clearly  treated  very
    badly while in Hungary and that is bound to  have  left  its  mark,  as
    noted by Dr Gupta in his report.  It seems that only very recently have
    the recommendations for further assessment been taken up, as  evidenced
    by the brief report from Mr Baker.  Undoubtedly it would  be  difficult
    and problematic for her to return to Vietnam  having  experienced  what
    she did as a result of the trafficking to Hungary, and returning  as  a
    single woman with three small children (on the assumption that  Mr  Cuu
    does not return with them) and with the  symptoms  to  which  Mr  Baker
    refers. The interests of the state in maintaining effective immigration
    control have to be placed into the balance against the interests of the
    appellant and of her children.  Their best interests are clearly to  be
    with her.  We consider that the balance in the proportionality exercise
    favours the maintenance of immigration control over  the  interests  of
    the appellant and her children (whose best  interests  are  in  staying
    with her) in remaining in the United Kingdom.

58.  This appeal is therefore dismissed on all grounds.






Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

                                 APPENDIX 1


European Convention on Human Rights

Article 4:  Prohibition of slavery and forced labour

1.   No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.

2.   No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.

3.   For the purpose of this article the term 'forced or compulsory labour'
    shall not include:

    (a)  any work required to be done in the ordinary course of detention
         imposed according to the provisions of Article 5 of this Convention
         or during conditional release from such detention;


    (b)  any service of a military character or, in case of conscientious
         objectors in countries where they are recognised, service exacted
         instead of compulsory military service;


    (c)  any service exacted in case of an emergency or calamity
         threatening the life or well-being of the community;


    (d)  any work or service which forms part of normal civic obligations.


                                 APPENDIX 2



Relevant provisions of the Anti-Trafficking Convention: [Articles 4, 10,
    13]
    Article 4 - Definitions
    For the purposes of this Convention:
    (a)      "Trafficking in human  beings"  shall  mean  the  recruitment,
         transportation, transfer, harbouring  or  receipt  of  persons,  by
         means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion,  of
         abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power  or  of  a
         position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments
         or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control  over
         another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall
         include, at a minimum, the  exploitation  of  the  prostitution  of
         others or other forms of  sexual  exploitation,  forced  labour  or
         services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
         removal of organs;
    (b)      The consent of a victim of "trafficking in  human  beings"  to
         the intended exploitation set forth in  subparagraph  (a)  of  this
         article shall be irrelevant where any of the  means  set  forth  in
         subparagraph (a) have been used;
    (c)       The  recruitment,  transportation,  transfer,  harbouring  or
         receipt of a  child  for  the  purpose  of  exploitation  shall  be
         considered "trafficking in human beings"  even  if  this  does  not
         involve any of the means set forth  in  subparagraph  (a)  of  this
         article;
    (d)  "Child" shall mean any person under eighteen years of age;
    (e)   "Victim"  shall  mean  any  natural  person  who  is  subject  to
         trafficking in human beings as defined in this article.
    Article 10 - Identification of the victims
    1.   Each Party shall provide its competent  authorities  with  persons
        who  are  trained  and  qualified  in  preventing   and   combating
        trafficking in human beings, in identifying  and  helping  victims,
        including children, and shall ensure that the different authorities
        collaborate with each  other  as  well  as  with  relevant  support
        organisations, so that victims can be  identified  in  a  procedure
        duly taking into account the special situation of women  and  child
        victims and, in appropriate cases, issued  with  residence  permits
        under the conditions provided for in  Article  14  of  the  present
        Convention.
    2.   Each Party shall adopt such legislative or other measures  as  may
         be necessary to identify victims as  appropriate  in  collaboration
         with other Parties and relevant support organisations.  Each  Party
         shall ensure that, if the  competent  authorities  have  reasonable
         grounds to believe that a person has been victim of trafficking  in
         human beings, that person shall not be removed from  its  territory
         until the identification process as victim of an  offence  provided
         for in Article 18 of this Convention  has  been  completed  by  the
         competent authorities and shall likewise ensure  that  that  person
         receives the assistance provided for in Article  12,  paragraphs  1
         and 2.
    3.   When the age of the victim is uncertain and there are  reasons  to
         believe that the victim is a child, he or she shall be presumed  to
         be a child  and  shall  be  accorded  special  protection  measures
         pending verification of his/her age.
    4.   As soon as an unaccompanied child is identified as a victim,  each
         Party shall:
         (a)  provide for representation of the child by a  legal  guardian,
             organisation  or  authority  which  shall  act  in  the   best
             interests of that child;
         (b)  take the necessary steps to  establish  his/her  identity  and
             nationality;
         (c)  make every effort to locate his/her family when this is in the
             best interests of the child.
    Article 13 - Recovery and reflection period
    1.   Each Party shall provide  in  its  internal  law  a  recovery  and
         reflection period of at least 30 days, when  there  are  reasonable
         grounds to believe that the person concerned is a  victim.  Such  a
         period shall be sufficient for the person concerned to recover  and
         escape the influence of traffickers  and/or  to  take  an  informed
         decision on cooperating with the competent authorities. During this
         period it shall not be possible  to  enforce  any  expulsion  order
         against him or her. This provision  is  without  prejudice  to  the
         activities carried out by the competent authorities in  all  phases
         of the  relevant  national  proceedings,  and  in  particular  when
         investigating and prosecuting the offences concerned.  During  this
         period, the Parties shall authorise the persons concerned  to  stay
         in their territory.
    2.   During this period, the persons referred to in paragraph 1 of this
         Article shall be entitled to the measures contained in Article  12,
         paragraphs 1 and 2.
    3.   The Parties are not bound to observe this  period  if  grounds  of
         public order prevent it or if it is found  that  victim  status  is
         being claimed improperly.

