
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


       SA (In-country appeal; human rights; other grounds) Bangladesh [2005]
                                                                 UKAIT 00178


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing:  8 November 2005
                         Date Promulgated: 16 December 2005

                                   Before:

                 Mr L V Waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Miss S J Muthusagaran, Turner, Miller &
Higgins Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

Where an appellant has an in-country right of  appeal  under  section  92(4)
because he has made  a  human  rights  or  asylum  claim,  the  Tribunal  is
required to consider and determine any ground of appeal  listed  in  section
84 which is properly raised by the appellant, including that  the  Secretary
of State's decision was "otherwise not in accordance with the law".


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He seeks reconsideration of
     the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr R  Whiting,  dismissing,  on  human
     rights grounds, his appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
     taken on 20 April  2004  to  remove  him  as  an  illegal  entrant  to
     Bangladesh.  Permission to appeal to the IAT having been given  on  11
     March 2005, that grant takes effect as an  order  for  reconsideration
     before the AIT under the transitional provisions.

  2. The Appellant married [ ] a British citizen on 11 January 1992.   They
     are first cousins and the marriage was arranged.  In  April  1992,  he
     applied for entry clearance to join his wife in this country but  that
     application was refused under the (then) 'primary purpose'  rule.   He
     appealed and his appeal was eventually (and finally) dismissed  by  an
     Adjudicator in March 1994 with permission to Appeal to the IAT refused
     in May 1995.  Not content with the outcome, the Appellant entered  the
     UK illegally in November 1995 and lived with his  wife  and  her  five
     children from a previous marriage.  In May 1999, he applied for  leave
     to remain on the basis of his marriage  but  on  20  April  2004  that
     application was refused by the Secretary of State and  he  was  served
     with the notice of a decision to remove  him  as  an  illegal  entrant
     which is the decision the subject of this appeal.

  3. In his appeal to the Adjudicator, the Appellant could not rely on  the
     'spouse' rule in paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395) as he
     did not have extant leave to enter or remain.  Instead, he relied upon
     his right to private and family life under Article 8 of  the  European
     Convention and also upon the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
     failed to consider his case under DP3/96, the Home  Office  policy  on
     removal in marriage cases.  The  Adjudicator  accepted,  as  had  been
     conceded, that at the date of the hearing the appellant's marriage was
     genuine and subsisting.  Nevertheless, he dismissed the appeal setting
     out in a careful and detailed judgment his reasons for concluding that
     the Appellant's removal would not be  disproportionate  under  Article
     8(2), taking into account DP3/96.  However, the Adjudicator  concluded
     that he had no jurisdiction to consider whether the Secretary of State
     had acted "otherwise not in accordance with the law" in failing  -  as
     undoubtedly he had - to  consider  DP3/96  directly  in  reaching  his
     decision to remove the Appellant as an illegal entrant.  Although  the
     Grounds of  Appeal  challenged  both  the  Adjudicator's  decision  on
     Article 8 and on the jurisdiction point, the  Vice  President  granted
     leave only on the latter issue, regarding the  Adjudicator's  decision
     on Article 8 as plainly correct.   We are restricted to that ground of
     appeal by Rule 62(7) of the 2005 Procedure Rules.

     The issue

  4. Miss Muthusagaran, who appeared on behalf of the Appellant,  submitted
     that the Adjudicator had been wrong in law to exclude the  Appellant's
     challenge to the Secretary of  State's  decision  on  the  ground   of
     appeal in section 84(1)(e) of the  2002  Act  that  the  decision  was
     'otherwise not in accordance with the law'.  She submitted  that  once
     an Appellant had an in-country right of appeal under section 92 of the
     2002 Act because he had made a human rights claim, he could rely  upon
     any ground set out in section 84 of the Act and was not restricted  to
     challenging the decision on human rights grounds alone.

  5. Somewhat to our surprise, Mr Avery, who represented the  Secretary  of
     State, sought an adjournment during the course of his  submissions  in
     order to take instructions on the Secretary of  State's  position  and
     the implications of a decision in favour of the Appellant on the scope
     of an appeal following a human rights claim.  We saw no basis for such
     an adjournment.  It has been clear that this was a point in  the  case
     since, at the  latest,  the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator  on  20
     November 2004 and the point in the case since the grant of  permission
     to appeal on 11 March 2005.  Mr Avery was not, in our view, in any way
     inhibited in the submissions that he could  make  on  an  issue  which
     turns upon the correct interpretation of Part V of the 2002 Act.   We,
     therefore, refused the application and continued the hearing.

     The scope of an in-country appeal

  6. Part V of the 2002 Act governs appeals to the AIT.  For these purposes
     the important provisions are to be found in sections 82,  84  and  92.
     We will also have to consider the relevant parts of sections 85 and 86
     later.

  7. We begin with section 82(1) which states:

           "(1) Where an immigration decision  is  made  in  respect  of  a
           person he may appeal to the Tribunal."


  8. Subsection (2), paragraphs (a)-(k)  then  sets  out  the  "immigration
     decisions" which may be appealed to the AIT.  (Although  not  relevant
     to this appeal, there is also the so-called 'upgrade appeal' on asylum
     grounds only in section 83 and appeals against EEA  decisions  falling
     within the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000,  SI
     2000/2326.)

  9. Section 84 sets out a number of grounds - (a) to (g) - upon  which  an
     appeal against an immigration decision falling within section 82  must
     be brought.   So  far  as  relevant  to  this  appeal,  section  84(1)
     provides:

           "(1) An  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
           decision must be brought on one or more of the following grounds
           - ...


                 (e) that the decision is otherwise not in  accordance  with
                 the law; ...


                 (g) that removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
                 in consequence of the immigration decision would breach the
                 United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention
                 or would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
                 Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the   appellant's
                 Convention rights. ...".

 10. What sections 82 and 84 do not  indicate  is  whether  an  appellant's
     appeal may be brought whilst he is in the UK  or  only  after  he  has
     left.  That issue is determined by section 92 which is relied upon  by
     Mr Avery and which, so far as it is relevant to this appeal,  provides
     as follows:

           "92. Appeal from within United Kingdom: general


           (1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he  is  in
           the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which  this
           section applies.


           (2) This section applies to an  appeal  against  an  immigration
           decision of a kind specified in section 82(2)(c), (d), (e),  (f)
           and (j)....


           (4)This section also applies to an appeal against an immigration
           decision if the appellant -
                 (a) has made an asylum claim, or human rights claim,  while
                 in the United Kingdom, or
                 (b) is an EEA national or a member of the family of an  EEA
                 national and makes a claim to the Secretary of  State  that
                 the decision breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under  the
                 Community Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in
                 the United Kingdom.".

 11. The wording of section 92 is plain: a person may not appeal against an
     "immigration decision" under the 2002 Act whilst in the United Kingdom
     unless section  92  applies.   By  virtue  of  section  92(2)  certain
     immigration  decisions  are  always  appealable  from  within  the  UK
     (subject to certification on a 'clearly unfounded' basis under section
     94).   These are decisions: to refuse a certificate of entitlement, to
     refuse  to  extend  leave,  to  curtail  existing  leave,  to   revoke
     indefinite leave to remain and to make a deportation order (s82(2)(c),
     (d), (e), (f) and (j) respectively).  Other decisions  falling  within
     section 82(2) may only be appealed from within the UK if the appellant
     has made an 'asylum claim' or  'human  rights  claim'  as  defined  in
     section 113 (s92(4)(a)), or where he makes a claim relying on  his  EU
     rights as an EEA  national  or  family  member  (s92(4)(b)).   Removal
     decisions against illegal entrants and overstayers or  their  families
     fall within this latter category of decisions.

 12. In this case, the appellant appeals a decision to  remove  him  as  an
     illegal entrant.  That  is  an  immigration  decision  falling  within
     section 82(2)(h).  As such, it is not a  decision  that  comes  within
     section 92(2) as one which automatically generates an in-country right
     of appeal.   It  is,  however,  accepted  by  both  parties  that  the
     appellant made a 'human rights claim' and so,  by  virtue  of  section
     92(4)(a), he has an in-country right of appeal.

 13. Mr Avery relied upon section 92(4) and submitted  that  the  Appellant
     could only rely on human rights grounds in this appeal.  The appellant
     is limited to the ground (or grounds) in section 92(4) which give rise
     to the appeal being in-country.  Other grounds could (if at all)  only
     be raised once the appellant had left the UK.

 14. In our judgment, this is not the correct interpretation  of  the  2002
     Act.  First, Mr Avery's submission  fails  to  recognise  the  logical
     framework provided by Parliament in Part V.  Sections 82, 84 and 92 of
     the Act address discrete issues governing  appeals  to  the  AIT:  (1)
     defining what decisions are appealable (s 82); (2) stating the grounds
     upon which such an immigration decision may be challenged (s 84);  and
     (3) defining whether or not that appeal  may  be  brought  whilst  the
     individual is in the UK (s 92).  Each section has a distinct  role  in
     governing appeals to the AIT.  The sections must, of course,  be  read
     cumulatively but they function separately.  Section 92 does not define
     the grounds upon which an appeal may be brought.  That is obvious  for
     decisions falling within section 92(2) which makes no reference to any
     matter which could conceivably be thought of as a "ground" of  appeal.
     But, it is no less true for appeals which  can  only  be  brought  in-
     country by virtue  of  section  92(4),  as  in  this  case.   Once  an
     appealable decision falling within  section  82  has  been  made,  the
     function of section 92 is solely to determine whether there is an  in-
     country right of appeal against that  decision.   What  "grounds"  the
     appellant may rely upon in that appeal (whether in-country or not)  is
     then determined by section 84.  There is nothing in section  84  which
     limits the grounds upon which a particular "immigration decision"  may
     be challenged on appeal,  apart  from  restricting  'upgrade  appeals'
     under section 83  to  asylum  grounds  only.   Otherwise,  any  ground
     properly brought before the AIT may be relied upon.

 15. Second, section 92 represents Parliament's intention to  restrict  in-
     country appeals  to  certain  kinds  of  case  -  whether  to  certain
     immigration decisions (s92(2)) or to any immigration decision where an
     asylum, human rights or EEA claim has been made (s92(4)(a)  and  (b)).
     Otherwise, the appellant may be removed forthwith and may only  appeal
     after he has left the UK.  That, in our view, is a crucial  guide  for
     us in interpreting the 2002 Act.  If an appellant  has  an  in-country
     appeal and cannot be removed until the appeal is  finally  determined,
     commonsense suggests that all the  bases  for  his  challenge  to  the
     immigration decision should be considered in that one appeal.  We  see
     no merit in Mr Avery suggestion that the appellant should be  left  to
     raise a second appeal based upon these "other"  grounds  once  he  has
     left the UK.  Indeed, we are far from  persuaded  that  the  appellant
     could  have  a  second  (out-of-country)  appeal  against   a   single
     immigration decision.   In our judgment, once the appellant has an in-
     country right of appeal because he has made a claim, such as  a  human
     rights claim, we see no reason why that appeal should be  in  any  way
     restricted so as to exclude any ground within section 84 upon which he
     properly wishes to rely.

 16. Third, as Miss Muthusagaran submitted, the 'one  stop'  provisions  of
     the 2002 Act require the Tribunal to consider  any  ground  of  appeal
     specified in section 84 which is properly raised by an Appellant.

 17. The lynch-pin of the  'one  stop'  provisions  is  section  120  which
     requires an appellant, when served with a notice  in  writing  by  the
     Secretary of State, to state any grounds "additional" to those in  his
     application which he claims entitles him to enter, remain or not to be
     removed from the United Kingdom.   If an appellant does not  state  an
     additional ground upon which he could rely, he runs the  risk  of  two
     adverse consequences.  First, he will not be  allowed  to  raise  that
     ground in an appeal unless  the  Tribunal  permits  him  to  vary  his
     grounds of appeal under Rule 14 of the Procedure Rules.  Secondly,  if
     the appellant subsequently raises a ground in a further application to
     the Secretary of  State  that  he  should  have  raised  earlier,  the
     Secretary of State may issue a certificate under section  96  removing
     any right of appeal against an  immigration  decision  following  that
     further application.

 18. Thus, an appellant who, for example, has made a human rights or asylum
     claim is invited to state "additional"  grounds  for  challenging  the
     immigration decision. We note that  in  this  case  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision letter dated 20 April 2004 addressed to the appellant
     contains just such a notice (at page  4)  and  the  Notice  of  Appeal
     states that the appellant relies on DP3/96.

 19. An "additional" ground having been set out, sections 85(2)  and  86(2)
     of the 2002 Act, instruct the Tribunal what it must do.  Section 85(2)
     provides:

           "(2) If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under
           section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any  matter  raised  in
           the statement which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind
           listed in section 84(1) against the decision appealed  against."
           (our emphasis)

 20. Subsection (3) goes on to state that the section 120 statement may  be
     made before or after the appeal has been commenced.

 21. The Act could not be clearer and  it  is  in  mandatory  terms  -  the
     Tribunal "shall consider" any matter raised which constitutes a ground
     of appeal under section 84.  The requirement is without limitation  or
     restriction.  Section 86(2) adds further weight to this  by  requiring
     that  what  must  be  "considered"  by  the  Tribunal  must  also   be
     "determined" by it.  Section 86(2) provides:

           "(2) The Tribunal must determine -
                 (a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or not
                 by virtue of section 85(1)), and
                 (b) any matter which section 85 requires it  to  consider."
                 (our emphasis)

 22. The combined effect of these provisions puts beyond doubt any argument
     that the Tribunal is restricted to determining an appeal only on human
     rights grounds or asylum grounds or  EEA  grounds,  whichever  is  the
     basis under section 92(4)  for  the  appeal  being  in-country.    The
     mandatory requirements of sections 85(2) and 86(2) lead  to  only  one
     conclusion.  In an in-country appeal against an  immigration  decision
     under section 82, the Tribunal is required to consider  and  determine
     any ground of appeal listed  in  section  84  properly  raised  by  an
     appellant before the Tribunal, including (as in this  case)  that  the
     Secretary of State's decision was "otherwise not  in  accordance  with
     the law" on an Abdi basis (D S Abdi [1996]  Imm  AR  148)  because  he
     failed to consider an applicable policy such as DP3/96.

 23. The position under the 2002 Act is, therefore,  different  from  human
     rights and asylum appeals governed by the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
     1999.  There, it is clear from the statutory wording, and as was  held
     by the IAT, that an appeal under section 65 on  human  rights  grounds
     (or under section  69  on  asylum  grounds)  is  restricted  to  those
     particular grounds  and  an  appellant  cannot  also  argue  that  the
     decision was "not in accordance with the law" (e.g. A (Jamaica) [2003]
     UKIAT 00083).

     Conclusion

 24. The Adjudicator erred in  law  in  failing  to  consider  whether  the
     Secretary of State's decision to remove the appellant  as  an  illegal
     entrant was "otherwise not in accordance with the law".  Initially, Mr
     Avery submitted that any error of law was not material as  DP3/96  was
     not applicable to the appellant and, in any event, the Adjudicator had
     taken it into  account  when  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the
     Appellant's removal under Article 8(2).  Ultimately, Mr Avery accepted
     that if we were against him on the issue of the scope of  the  appeal,
     the appeal should be allowed so that  the  Secretary  of  State  could
     consider the application of DP3/96 to the Appellant.   He was right to
     concede this.   The appellant is entitled to have his case determined,
     inter alia, on the basis of the Secretary of State's  marriage  policy
     in removal cases set out in DP3/96 which, in principle, is  applicable
     to him.   Although,  in  paragraph  9  of  his  decision  letter,  the
     Secretary of State makes some reference  to  matters  which  might  be
     relevant to DP3/96, he does not  articulate  and  apply  the  detailed
     elements of his policy.   It is for the Secretary of  State,  and  not
     the Tribunal, to determine  the  application  of  the  policy  to  the
     appellant's circumstances.   The only proper course is, therefore, the
     one accepted by Mr Avery.

     Decision

 25. For the above  reasons,  we  conclude  that  the  Adjudicator  made  a
     material error of law in his determination.

 26. We substitute a decision allowing the appeal to the  extent  that  the
     appellant's application is outstanding before the Secretary  of  State
     to consider the application of DP3/96.







                                                           PROFESSOR A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
