





Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 | |
|Heard at: Field House, London                                     |
|Heard on: 29 November 2005 |        |Determination issued:       |
|                           |        |15  December 2005           |
|OM (Children: settlement - cross border movement) Jamaica [2005]  |
|UKAIT 00177                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Before:                                                           |
|Mr G Warr                                                         |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|Ms C Jarvis                                                       |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|Respondent                                                        |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Gibbons of Counsel instructed by French and Co.
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart Home Office Presenting Officer

Cross border movement of children must be demonstrably lawful. In
particular where a child is being separated from one parent or other adult
carer who holds parental responsibility in law. See the Immigration Rules
HC395, as amended, Part 8:  Children Paragraphs 296 - 316F.  This
determination considers entry into and stay in the UK of children, for
settlement, and specifically  the implied  requirement to show that the
cross border movement in question has taken or will take place with the
written consent of the parent in question, the order of a court or other
appropriate measure. In particular, consideration is given to Paragraph
298(d) of HC 395:





' one parent is present and settled in the UK, and there are serious and
compelling family or other considerations which make the exclusion of the
child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's
care'.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Respondent, who appeals the decision of an
      Immigration Judge, [      ], issued on 15 July 2005, to allow the
      Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision made on 11 May
      2005 to refuse to vary the Appellant's leave to enter or remain in the
      United Kingdom (UK), under Paragraph 322(9) of HC395.


   2. The history of the matter is this. The Appellant, whose date of birth
      is given as [XXXX]1994, is a national of Jamaica. She last arrived in
      the UK on 17 July 2004, with a visit entry clearance issued in New
      York and valid from 13 July 2004 to 13 January 2005. She was given
      leave to enter as a visitor.

   3. On 6 January 2005, the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK
      as the dependant daughter of her mother,[      ], who has leave to
      remain in the UK until 30 July 2006 as the spouse of a person present
      and settled in the UK.

   4. The Respondent requested that supporting documentary evidence be
      lodged, and although there was one response, there was no response to
      the requests of 8 February and 11 April 2005. As a result, when the
      Respondent considered the application, he took the view that the
      Appellant had failed to produce, within a reasonable time, documents
      or other evidence required by the Respondent to establish her claim to
      remain in the UK under the Immigration Rules. He was therefore not
      satisfied that the Appellant had shown that she met the requirements
      of the Rules to remain in the UK as the dependant child of her mother
      and step-father, and her application was refused.

   5. On appeal to the Immigration Judge, the Respondent could find no
      reason to reverse his decision. He noted that an allegation of breach
      of Article 8 rights was made. He takes the view that the state has the
      right to control the entry of non-nationals into its territory, and
      that Article 8 does not provide an individual with choice as to where
      they enjoy their private and family life. There was nothing that he
      could see from the evidence that indicated that the decision would
      breach the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

   6. The Immigration Judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant's mother
      and step-father, and received some documentary evidence from, and sent
      by the Appellant's paternal grandmother who is the United States of
      America (USA), which is where the Appellant was residing, with her
      father, before she came to visit her mother in the UK. The Appellant
      did not attend court given her young age. Nor did she attend the
      hearing before us.

   Summary of the Findings of the Immigration Judge

   7. The Immigration Judge found the Appellant's mother and step-father to
      be 'very credible' and accepted their evidence in its entirety. His
      findings of fact are not entirely clear as they are made by reference
      back to the recital of the evidence rather than in specific separate
      terms, which is never satisfactory as a method of fact finding. Not
      least because it is soften the case that what is accepted is no more
      than that a witness has given evidence to the best of their knowledge
      and genuine belief, as opposed to clear, sharp findings of primary
      fact. In summary, what is accepted, as opposed to found, appears to be
      as follows.

   8.  The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on [      ]1994, in
      Kingston, to [      ] and [      ]. In the year 2000, the Appellant
      went with her father and paternal grandmother, [      ], to live in
      the USA. It seems that [      ]already lived in the USA and that the
      Appellant's mother had accepted her offer to have the Appellant live
      with her. It is said that the Appellant has a 'green card' and has the
      right to reside in the USA, although the Immigration Judge does not
      make any specific finding, in terms, about that.

   9. It appears that the relationship between the Appellant's biological
      parents was very short-lived, but that her paternal grandmother
      nevertheless wished to assist her father in taking responsibility for
      her upbringing and well-being. According to a letter from the
      Appellant she did not wish to leave her mother and go to the USA and
      she was unhappy about the move. Her mother was unable, it seems, for
      reasons that are not entirely clear from the determination, to
      continue to care for the Appellant at that time.

  10. The Appellant's mother continued with her life in Jamaica and entered
      into another relationship with a [      ], by whom she has a son.

  11. In 2002 the Appellant's mother came to the UK as a visitor to see an
      aunt. The aunt decided to send her to college. In July 2003 she met [
          ] and the two were married o 13 August 2003. The Appellant's half-
      brother, [      ], came to the UK to join his mother and step-father
      in 2003 (we note that his status in the UK is unknown).

  12. The Appellant visited her mother and other family in the UK between
      June and September 2003. The Appellant told her mother that she was
      not happy because she was afraid of her dad who was asking funny
      things. He had hit her and the police had been called.

  13. The Appellant's mother states that she was told through telephone
      calls to the sister of the Appellant's father that the father was
      mentally ill and was suffering with a drug related illness. She was
      also apparently told that the grandmother, [      ], could no longer
      take care of the Appellant due to her increasing age and failing
      health.

  14. One Sunday, the Appellant's mother telephoned the paternal grandmother
      and told her that she would take the Appellant to live with her in the
      UK. The paternal grandmother agreed as she was having problems.

  15. We note that instead of making an application for the Appellant to
      join her for settlement, a visit application was made, and the
      Appellant duly arrived, as a visitor, on 17 July 2004 (the Immigration
      Judge appears to mistakenly refer to June at 16(q)).

  16. It is said that the Appellant told her mother that she did not want to
      go back to the USA as her father hit her and was abusive. Her
      grandmother was unable to help because of her age and ill health. Her
      father was hospitalized for a drug-related illness and is in a
      rehabilitation centre.

  17. The Appellant's mother and step-father wish to have her to live with
      them. They are both working and can afford to have her. Documents were
      produced to support the claimed financial position. Her mother's
      mother, brother and sister are also living in the UK and can help with
      the care of the Appellant.  (We note that the evidence in support in
      this regard is not recited by the Immigration Judge so that it is
      impossible to know whether it showed on balance that maintenance and
      accommodation requirements are met).

  18. The Appellant has since 13 September 2004 been attending school in the
      UK at [      ] Primary and is settled there, according to a letter
      dated 2 December 2004 from the school.

  19. The Appellant's mother stated that she had been sending money to the
      USA for her upkeep in the sum of �100.00 but did not have receipts.

  20. It had not been possible to obtain the written consent of the
      Appellant's father to her living in the UK. It had not been possible
      to obtain full reports on his medical condition from the hospital.
      There was a letter from the paternal grandmother to say why she could
      not continue to look after the Appellant due to age and infirmity. She
      did not have any court order or other legal responsibility for the
      Appellant.

  21. The Immigration Judge noted a letter from the Appellant in which she
      said that she was physically abused by father who had spent time in
      jail and who had a mental illness. She preferred to live with Mum.

  22. There is a letter dated 9 June 2004 from the Florida Department of
      Children and Families, addressed to the paternal grandmother, stating
      that the Appellant's father had recently been admitted to the Florida
      State Hospital. There is also what appears to be a hospital admission
      notice dated 6 September 2004. (We take the view that it is in fact
      dated 9 June 2004 as the date is normally written in that way in the
      USA, and that would marry with the date of the letter).

  23. The Immigration Judge found, in relation to paragraph 322 that it was
      unreasonable of the Respondent to require the Appellant to produce a
      form of written consent from her father to her being taken from his
      care in the USA, to reside in the UK with her mother, or, in the
      alternative a court order to that effect.

  24. He further found that it was unreasonable to expect the Appellant to
      obtain a hospital report about her father's current condition and
      prognosis. It was apparent from information already received that he
      had a mental illness and had been admitted to hospital. In addition,
      it was unreasonable to request a letter from the Appellant's paternal
      grandmother stating why she cannot care for her.

  25. The Immigration Judge found that these items of evidence were not
      needed in order to find in favour of the Appellant. He found that she
      had met all the requirements of Paragraph 298 of HC395. She was
      joining one parent, present and settled in the UK and there are
      serious and compelling family or other considerations which make the
      exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been
      made for the child's care.

  26. The Immigration Judge finds that although there are relatives in both
      the USA and Jamaica who could care for the Appellant, there are no
      relatives willing to do so and that there are other considerations
      which make her exclusion undesirable.

  27. Insofar as Article 8 ECHR is concerned, the Immigration Judge finds
      that the matter turns on the issue of proportionality and that the
      circumstances are so exceptional as to demand an outcome different to
      that arrived at by the Respondent.


The Grounds of Appeal


  28. The Respondent applied to the AIT for an order for reconsideration.
      That application was considered and an order was made by Richard
      Chalkley on 1 August 2005. He found that it was arguable that the
      Adjudicator had fallen into material errors of law. In summary,
      permission was granted in relation to the following points :

      . The Immigration Judge had erred at paragraph 54, and he had then
        gone on to speculate at 57 in relation to the treatment the
        Appellant's father has received or is still receiving as a result.


      . He appears to have erred in law in reversing the burden of proof at
        59, and by failing to properly explain how the Appellant's
        circumstances amount to being exceptional within the sense intended
        by the Court of Appeal in Huang and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
        105.






   Consideration and Findings


  29.  We  remind  ourselves  that  when  hearing   a   case   by   way   of
      reconsideration, the Tribunal must first decide  whether  or  not  the
      determination discloses a material error of law. It is only where that
      question is answered in  the  affirmative  that  it  is  open  to  the
      Tribunal to go on to consider what relief, if any, should be  granted,
      and whether or not fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.

  30.  We have before us all the documentary evidence that was before the
      Immigration Judge, as well as a skeleton argument from Ms Gibbons.


  31. We considered all the evidence with care, in the light of the oral
      submissions from both parties which we have recorded in full in our
      record of proceedings. Having heard initial argument going to the
      matter of whether the Immigration Judge fell into material error of
      law, we invited the parties to further address us on the assumption
      that we were to find such an error. Ms Gibbons submitted that the
      proper course would be a complete re-hearing of the evidence which
      would allow the Appellant an opportunity to provide fresh evidence. We
      indicated that the Appellant had already had considerable time in
      which to produce further evidence but had not done so. We noted that
      there was no suggestion before us of any relevant developments and
      indicated that it was difficult to see what proper purpose such a
      further hearing could serve.

  32. In relation to the Article 8 aspect, Ms Gibbons submitted that the
      Appellant would feel uncomfortable if removed to Jamaica, and did not
      want to go to the USA for the reasons given in her letter and those
      advanced by her mother on her behalf.

  33. At the conclusion of the hearing we reserved our decision, which we
      now give, with our reasons, which we are able to give without
      rehearsing all the submissions in detail, for reasons which will
      become apparent.  We are persuaded that the Immigration Judge did fall
      into material error of law and we now set out those reasons.

  34. We remind ourselves that when considering the burden of proof in this
      case, that burden rests with the Appellant and that the standard of
      proof is that of the balance of probabilities.

  35. We take the view that the matter of the cross border movement of minor
      children is of the utmost importance. We find that it is implicit in
      the law and the Immigration Rules, through both domestic and
      international treaty law, that is it in the public interest, not least
      insofar as concerns the maintenance of fair immigration control; the
      prevention of crime and disorder and the economic well-being of the
      country, to ensure that public policy is that such cross border
      movement only takes place with scrupulous adherence to the relevant
      law, domestic, foreign, so far as domestic law permits, and
      international. It must also be ensured that the welfare of the child
      is a primary concern so that such movement is shown to be in the best
      interests of the child. Further, there must be no unlawful breach of
      the rights of any other properly interested party. This would of
      course include, but not be limited to, the rights of a biological
      parent.

  36. In so finding we note that the purpose of the particular Rules in this
      regard is to facilitate family reunion and family life. However, the
      Rules cannot be interpreted as permitting this purpose to be achieved
      through the breach of other law, unless that is so stated in terms, in
      the law, which it is not. We have in mind, for example, the 1950
      European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
      Freedoms (ECHR), and in particular Article 8, the right to respect for
      private and family life, home and correspondence as incorporated into
      domestic UK law by the Human Rights Act 1998. As required by Section 3
      (1) of the Human Rights Act 1998, so far as it is possible to do so,
      primary legislation and subordinate legislation must be read and given
      effect in a way which is compatible with the Convention rights.

  37. There are other laws, including international treaties, relating to
      the cross border movement of children and to the recognition of orders
      made in the courts of other countries, including the family courts,
      which would also resonate here. For example, the Immigration Rules, at
      Paragraph 316D, set out specific requirements to be met by a child
      seeking limited leave to enter the UK with a view to settlement as a
      child for adoption under the Hague Convention.

  38. It is common knowledge that an individual's relationship with his or
      her parents is of the most fundamental importance to the nature and
      quality of that person's daily existence, throughout his or her life,
      and to the ability to make life choices and to succeed in education,
      employment, and the making of relationships with others. To remove the
      Appellant from the USA to the UK is a very important step in her young
      life. If in so doing, her links with her father were to be severed
      permanently without her knowledge, and without the knowledge of a
      court or other body charged with protecting the interests of children
      such as the Appellant, this would adversely affect the ability of the
      Appellant to make and maintain contact with her father at a future
      date, should she so choose; as well as her ability to successfully
      come to terms with the proposed enormous changes.  The interests of
      the Appellant are not paramount in an immigration case, unlike the
      interests of children who are settled in the UK, but are nevertheless
      important and to be fully taken into account when considering and
      deciding cases such as these.

  39. In that light, we find that there is no support for Ms Gibbon's
      contention that it is unreasonable, or too onerous, to require the
      Sponsor to show that she has legal responsibility for the Appellant
      under the law of the USA or the UK, and that she has the written valid
      consent of the father, or the order of a court in the USA or UK,
      permitting the removal of the Appellant permanently from the
      jurisdiction, to the UK. The evidence before us reveals that there has
      been little or no attempt to approach the father about these matters,
      whether directly by the mother, or through a lawyer, doctor, social
      worker, or his own mother.

  40. We find that to permit the Appellant to leave the jurisdiction of the
      USA to take up permanent residence in the UK without the formal
      consent of the father, or an order of the appropriate family court in
      the USA or UK, would be unlawful. We find that there is to be implied
      into the clause 'and there are serious and compelling family or other
      considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
      suitable arrangements' for the child's care, under sub-paragraph (d)
      of paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules, a requirement to
      demonstrate, on balance, that the person with whom a child is to
      settle, is entitled in law to remove the child from the jurisdiction
      in which he or she has been living, and to have the child join him or
      her permanently in the UK.

  41. We find that there is a similar implied requirement at Paragraph
      298(c), where one parent has to show that she or he has had sole
      responsibility for the upbringing of the child. Likewise, at 298(b)
      where one parent is dead, there is an implicit requirement to prove
      that death to the required standard as well as to show that the adult
      seeking to bring the child to the UK, is the remaining parent and
      entitled to bring the child to the UK.

  42. We find that it is wholly reasonable and appropriate to require the
      sponsoring parent or relative to satisfy an Entry Clearance Officer or
      the SSHD that he or she has parental rights and that any surviving
      parent or person with parental rights, has given his or her lawful
      consent to the removal of the child from the country of origin. Where
      such consent cannot be obtained or is unreasonably withheld, then a
      Sponsor should produce a court order dispensing with that consent. In
      circumstances where the infrastructure of a country was such that no
      courts or other legal / customary law system were in existence,
      through which such an order might be obtained, then alternative means
      of demonstrating lawful removal would need to be considered.

  43. Further, we find that the Paragraphs in this section of the Rules,
      relating to children, imply the requirement that the child or children
      seeking settlement shall satisfy the SSHD that the fact of his or her
      presence in the UK or prospective entry; personal details; new home
      address and that of any school, have been notified to the Director of
      the relevant Local Authority Social Services Department and that the
      Department  has acknowledged receipt of that information, and  duly
      registered it so that it can be deployed as may be appropriate in
      order to protect the best interests of the child. In Paragraph 298(d),
      this requirement would appear to be implicit in the phrase 'and
      suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care.'

  44. The registration that we refer to would assist the Social Services
      Departments, for example, by enabling them to check the various
      registers that are kept by law, to seen whether the names of any of
      the new carers are to be found on any of those registers. This is in
      no way an adverse reflection upon the mother and step-father
      personally, in this particular case. Rather it is to be seen as a
      general policy requirement that assists in ensuring the protection of
      the child or children in question, not least in the light of the
      recent findings of the enquiry into the death of Victoria Climbie.
      Victoria was sadly one child in a line of many others who have not
      received the protection from the adults in their lives, or from the
      authorities, to which they were entitled  and which they deserved.

  45. In the light of the foregoing, we take the view that the Respondent
      would have been failing in his duty under the law and Immigration
      Rules had he not requested the documentary evidence which was not
      produced and which led to the refusal of the application. We find that
      his decision to refuse the application for want of that evidence,
      which the Appellant had failed to produce within a reasonable time,
      was fully in accordance with the law and the Immigration Rules.

  46. Insofar as the Immigration Rules are concerned, the burden of proving
      that she complies with all the provisions of the relevant Rule, said
      to be Paragraph 298, rests with the Appellant upon the balance of
      probabilities. We find that the Immigration Judge materially erred in
      law in finding that it was unreasonable of the Respondent to require
      sight of the documentary evidence requested.

  47. We find that the Immigration Judge materially erred in finding that
      therefore the application had been wrongly refused under Paragraph
      322(9) of HC395. We take the view that the Immigration Judge had
      jurisdiction to review the decision, given that the terms of the
      paragraph import discretion, in that an application to vary leave is
      normally to be refused where there has been a failure to produce
      documentation timeously, as opposed to refusal being mandatory, which
      it is, for example, under 322(1). But for the reasons that we give in
      this determination, we find that he materially erred in law in his
      finding and reasons that the Respondent's decision was wrong in law.

  48. If we are wrong in that regard, and there was no jurisdiction in the
      Immigration Judge to review the decision pursuant to 322(9), we find
      that the Immigration Judge has materially erred in law in relation to
      the Article 8 aspect of the appeal for reasons which we shall come to
      in due course.

  49. Assuming that we are right in our findings as to the jurisdiction to
      review the decision pursuant to 322(9); we find, in addition, that the
      Immigration Judge materially erred in law in finding that the evidence
      before him sufficed to demonstrate on balance that the Appellant had
      met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

  50. The proper course of action, we find, if it is the case that her
      father is under a legal disability by reason of his mental illness,
      and her paternal grandmother, as his next of kin, is unwilling or
      unable to assist herself; is for the Appellant, through her mother, to
      obtain an order or declaration from the relevant family court in the
      USA, or in the UK, as may be appropriate, giving her, or declaring
      that she has, lawful parental responsibility for the Appellant and
      permitting the Appellant to leave the jurisdiction of the USA for the
      purpose of residing on a long term basis in the UK.

  51. In the course of that enquiry, the court would take into consideration
      the rights and interests not only of the Appellant, but also those of
      her mother and her half sibling, as well as her father and paternal
      grandmother and other properly interested persons.

  52. It is alleged that the father has abused the Appellant and that he has
      been in jail. These are extremely serious matters. It is surprising
      that no investigation of these allegations appears to be underway,
      whether with the police or the social services, either in the USA or
      the UK. There is nothing to show that the mother has reported these
      matters to the proper authorities so that child protection
      investigations can be carried out. Certainly the court proceedings
      mentioned above would provide a forum form which such investigations
      would spring.

  53. Once in possession of such an order or declaration, the Appellant
      would then be able to present that as an appropriate form of evidence
      in support of an application to settle in the UK with her mother.
      Without it, and without far more cogent evidence than was presented to
      the Immigration Judge, neither the Respondent nor the Immigration
      Judge is in a position to find, for example, that the allegations
      against father, or the assertion that he is too ill to care for the
      Appellant, are on balance true. It follows that the allegations, the
      letters from the authorities in the USA, and the information provided
      by the Appellant and her mother, step-father and grandmother, even if
      given in good faith, and genuine belief, are not evidence that
      suffices to show on balance that the requirements of paragraph 298 (d)
      have been met.

  54. In addition, we note that mother has only limited leave to remain in
      the UK until 30 July 2006, as the spouse of a person present and
      settled in the UK. Therefore, on the evidence produced, it has not
      been shown that she is a parent present and settled in the UK for the
      purposes of Paragraph 298. A step-father is not included within the
      definition of parent as set out in Paragraph 6 of HC395, unless the
      biological father is dead, which is not the case here. The appeal
      fails for this reason also.


  55. I addition, we find that the Immigration Judge materially erred in law
      in reversing the burden of proof at paragraph 59 of the determination.
      Here, he notes that there are removal directions to Jamaica, but that
      there are no suggestions of any person willing to care for the
      Appellant, although he finds that she has some aunts there. This is a
      reference to the notice of decision which states that if the
      Appellant's appeal is unsuccessful and she does not leave the UK
      thereafter, then she will be removed to Jamaica. There are, as yet, no
      actual removal directions. As already indicated, the burden of proof
      rests upon the Appellant so that it is for her to demonstrate to the
      balance of probabilities , that there are no relatives willing and
      able to care for her in Jamaica. That the Appellant has not produced
      evidence in this regard cannot, on any interpretation of the burden
      and standard of proof, suffice to make good this aspect of the
      evidence.

  56. The Immigration Judge does not go on to examine the evidence and make
      findings in respect of each of the requirements of the relevant Rule.
      We find that he further errs in law in this regard also.

  57. For all the foregoing reasons, we find that the reasoning, findings
      and conclusions of the Immigration Judge relating to the appeal
      pursuant to the Immigration Rules are fatally flawed and are not
      sustainable.


   Article 8 ECHR


  58. Turning to the Article 8 aspect of the appeal, we would not quarrel
      with the Immigration Judge's finding that the Appellant enjoys family
      life in the UK with her mother, step-father and half sibling. At
      paragraph 70, the Immigration Judge finds that the matter turns on the
      answer to the question whether removal of the Appellant would be
      proportionate. He goes on to find that it would not be proportionate.
      He gives no reasons, but merely relies, by reference back, upon his
      earlier findings of fact. We agree with the Respondent that he has
      failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the circumstances of
      this case reach the high threshold cited in the case of Huang and
      Others.


  59.  We have already indicated our reasons for finding that those aspects
      of the account recited by the Immigration Judge and summarized above,
      and which go to the heart of the matter, cannot stand. These include
      but are not limited to the situation in the USA so far as the
      Appellant's father is concerned and the allegations made against him.
      Father's willingness and ability, or otherwise, to care for and be
      involved in the life of this child, with or without paternal
      grandmother's assistance, as well as the matter of whether that is
      appropriate. In addition, the Appellant has not shown that there is no
      one to care for her in Jamaica.

  60. It is not to be presumed that the Respondent would act in breach of
      the Appellant's Article 8 rights in sending her to either the USA or
      Jamaica. There is nothing to prevent her from making an application
      from abroad, in the proper way, under the Immigration Rules, to join
      her mother and other family, once her mother has become settled in the
      UK if she is not already settled. This will allow time for all the
      appropriate supporting evidence to be obtained. Ms Gibbons' final
      submission in relation to Article 8 matters was that the Appellant
      would feel uncomfortable in Jamaica. It is difficult to see how, on
      any reading of the evidence, the circumstances of this case can be
      regarded as truly exceptional as is required following the guidance in
      Huang and Others.

Decision

   61. For all the above reasons, we find that the original Tribunal made a
   material error of law. The following decision is accordingly substituted:
   the appeal by the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent made
   on 11 May 2005, to refuse to vary leave to enter or remain in the UK as a
   dependent child and on human rights grounds pursuant to Article 8 ECHR is
   dismissed.










C   JARVIS
Senior Immigration Judge

Date: 6 December 2005



