
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Singh (fee award: ancillary decision) [2013] UKUT 00179 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                SANDIP SINGH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION


The Upper Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to consider a challenge  to  a
decision of a First-tier Tribunal Judge to make,  or  not  to  make,  a  fee
award. A decision on a  fee  award  is  an  ancillary  decision  within  the
meaning of the Appeals (Excluded decisions) Order 2009 and is therefore  not
appealable.


1.   The appellant is a national of India, born  on  30  January  1979.   He
    appealed to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's
    decision of 27 September 2012 refusing to vary leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and deciding to remove him from the  United  Kingdom  by
    way of directions.  The judge allowed the  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    purported decision under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006, basing his decision on what was said by the Upper
    Tribunal in Adamally and Jaferi [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC).  Otherwise the
    judge dismissed the appeal.  He also stated that having  dismissed  the
    appeal there could be no fee award.

2.   The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this  decision,
    arguing that having allowed the appeal under section 47 the  judge  had
    failed to give reasons as to why it was deemed appropriate not to  make
    a fee award and that it was clearly arguable that the  appellant  would
    have been entitled to some if not an entire fee award.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    appellant's grounds.  In a response dated 21 January 2013 the Secretary
    of State opposed the  appeal,  arguing  that  the  judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately.

3.   At the  hearing  before  us  we  asked  the  representatives  at  least
    initially to address us on the question of jurisdiction.  Mr Malik  had
    put in a skeleton argument and a number of authorities.  He argued that
    paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Joint Presidential Guidance  "Fee  Awards  in
    Immigration Appeals" were, with great respect, wrong  in  law  and  not
    binding.  He invited us to depart from the guidance  in  this  respect.
    If we were against him then we were asked nevertheless to determine the
    substantive issue given the number of cases  where  it  arose  and  the
    absence of any provision in the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act
    2007 (the 2007 Act) or in the Immigration Rules restricting our ability
    to determine substantive issues even though there had been a finding of
    lack of jurisdiction.

4.   With regard to the Presidential Guidance, Mr Malik noted  that  it  was
    said there that the decision on fees was not part of the  determination
    and was an excluded matter for the purposes of sections 11  and  13  of
    the 2007 Act.  He argued  that  it  was  proper  to  give  guidance  on
    questions of discretion but inappropriate to give guidance on questions
    of law.  The question as to whether a  decision  on  a  fee  award  was
    appealable was a pure question of statutory interpretation.

5.   Mr Malik then took us to the relevant statutory and  other  provisions,
    including section 11 of the 2007 Act which sets out rights of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal and the specific definition of "excluded  decisions"
    at section 11(5) several of which, as he noted, referred  to  different
    statutory provisions.  Mr Malik made the point that the power to  award
    fees was set out at section 29 of the 2007  Act,  and  argued  that  if
    Parliament had intended to exclude a section 29 fee award it would have
    said so in section 11(5) where excluded decisions were defined, as  the
    power to make fee awards came from the statute itself so it  could  not
    be an incidental matter.  It would be unattractive to say that it would
    be left to the Lord Chancellor, who had power under section 11(5)(f) to
    specify decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in an order.

6.   It was  the  case  that  the  Lord  Chancellor  had  made  the  Appeals
    (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009 which at Article 3 set out  a  list  of
    express decisions at  sub-paragraphs  (a)  to  (l)  and  there  was  no
    reference to fee  awards.   Again  it  was  argued  that  if  the  Lord
    Chancellor had intended to exclude fee orders then he would  have  said
    so expressly as he had done in respect of the other types of decisions.
     As regards sub-paragraph (m), it could not be said that a decision  as
    to whether to award fees was procedural or preliminary, and although it
    was arguable that it was an ancillary decision, that argument could not
    be sustained as it was part of the overall  decision  that  a  Tribunal
    made.

7.   Mr Malik went on to refer us to what had been said by Sedley LJ  in  AS
    and RA [2009] EWCA Civ 1495,  at  paragraph  15,  and  argued  that  by
    analogy there was an unattractive argument in this case  involving  the
    obligation to seek judicial review to challenge a decision of the  kind
    involved in this case.  He  argued  that  it  was  a  presumption  that
    Parliament  would  not  have  intended  appellants   to   go   to   the
    Administrative  Court  to  rectify  errors   in   Immigration   Judges'
    decisions.

8.   Mr Malik also referred to the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  Cart
    [2011] UKSC 28, in particular at paragraphs 22 to  29  of  Lady  Hale's
    judgment concerning the scheme of the 2007 Act which had been to set up
    a specialist Tribunal to deal with all the matters falling  within  its
    specialist area.  He argued that to conclude that one could not  appeal
    a fee award to the Upper Tribunal was inconsistent with the  scheme  of
    the 2007 Act and frustrated its purpose.  It required an  appellant  to
    go to the Administrative Court rather than going to the Upper  Tribunal
    which was precisely what the 2007 Act, properly construed, discouraged.
     It was therefore inconceivable that either Parliament in section 11 or
    the Lord Chancellor in the Excluded Decisions Order could have intended
    an outcome that would frustrate the scheme of the statute as  a  whole.
    It was argued that therefore the Presidential Guidance was wrong in law
    and that the Upper Tribunal had the power to decide the appeal.

9.   In her submissions Ms Holmes argued, with respect to  paragraph  11  of
    Mr Malik's skeleton, that it was an attempt to  drag  in  wider  issues
    which were not really relevant.  She  argued  that  in  any  event  the
    appellant should not have had to pay a fee, noting what was said by  Mr
    Malik  at  paragraph  7  of  his   skeleton   concerning   the   proper
    interpretation of Article 5 of the Fees Order in relation to a  section
    47 case.  She also took issue with the criticism of  the  Secretary  of
    State set out at paragraph 11 of the skeleton, arguing that many of the
    decisions referred to had been made before the case law set out in that
    paragraph had been decided.  Ms Holmes argued that  what  was  said  by
    Sedley LJ at AS was not germane to the issue in the  case  and  was  no
    more than an aside.  The same could be said with respect to the remarks
    by Lady Hale concerning the structure of the 2007 Act.  If  there  were
    cases where nevertheless matters were left to  go  on  judicial  review
    rather than on appeal to the Upper Tribunal then that was  the  way  it
    was.

10.  By way of reply  Mr  Malik  argued  that  contrary  to  what  had  been
    asserted, what was said in AS and Cart was relevant and the  point  was
    that there was a presumption that where Parliament set up a  specialist
    body it intended it to deal with its errors internally,  and  that  was
    the basis on which the statute should be construed.  There was a  clear
    definition of excluded decisions.  The Upper Tribunal had  jurisdiction
    in this case.

11.  After a brief adjournment we communicated to  the  representatives  our
    conclusion that we did not have jurisdiction to deal with the issue  in
    this case and that we would provide our reasons  in  full  subsequently
    which we now do, after setting out the  relevant  statutory  and  other
    regulatory provisions and guidance, which are as follows:

         "Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007


         11.  Right to appeal to Upper Tribunal
         E+W+S+N.I.
             This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
             (1)  For the purposes of subsection (2), the  reference  to  a
                  right of appeal is to a  right  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
                  Tribunal on any point of law arising from a decision  made
                  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than   an   excluded
                  decision.


             (2)  Any party to a case has a right  of  appeal,  subject  to
                  subsection (8).


             (3)  That right may be exercised only with permission (or,  in
                  Northern Ireland, leave).


             (4)  Permission (or leave) may be given by-


                  (a)  the First-tier Tribunal, or


                  (b)  the Upper Tribunal, on an application by the party.


             (5)   For  the  purposes  of  subsection  (1),  an   "excluded
                  decision" is-


                  (a)  any decision of the First-tier Tribunal on an  appeal
                      made in exercise of a right conferred by the Criminal
                      Injuries  Compensation  Scheme  in  compliance   with
                      section 5(1)(a) of the Criminal Injuries Compensation
                      Act  1995  (c.  53)  (appeals  against  decisions  on
                      reviews),


                  (b)  any decision of the First-tier Tribunal on an  appeal
                      under section 28(4) or (6) of the Data Protection Act
                      1998  (c.  29)  (appeals  against  national  security
                      certificate),
                  (c)  any decision of the First-tier Tribunal on an  appeal
                      under  section  60(1)  or  (4)  of  the  Freedom   of
                      Information  Act  2000  (c.  36)   (appeals   against
                      national security certificate),
                  (d)  a decision of the First-tier Tribunal under section 9-




                      (i)  to review, or not to review, an earlier decision
                           of the tribunal,


                      (ii) to take no action, or not to take any particular
                           action, in the light of a review  of  an  earlier
                           decision of the tribunal,


                      (iii)    to set aside  an  earlier  decision  of  the
                           tribunal, or


                      (iv) to refer, or not to refer, a matter to the Upper
                           Tribunal,


                  (e)  a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  set
                      aside under section 9 (including a decision set aside
                      after proceedings on an  appeal  under  this  section
                      have been begun), or


                  (f)  any decision of the First-tier Tribunal that is of  a
                      description specified in an order made  by  the  Lord
                      Chancellor.


             (6)  A description may be specified  under  subsection  (5)(f)
                  only if-


                  (a)  in the case of a decision of that description,  there
                      is a right to appeal to a court, the  Upper  Tribunal
                      or any other tribunal  from  the  decision  and  that
                      right is, or includes, something other than  a  right
                      (however expressed) to appeal on  any  point  of  law
                      arising from the decision, or


                  (b)  decisions of that description are  made  in  carrying
                      out a function transferred under section 30 and prior
                      to the transfer of the function under  section  30(1)
                      there was no right to appeal from decisions  of  that
                      description.


             (7)  Where-


                  (a)   an  order  under  subsection  (5)(f)   specifies   a
                      description of decisions, and


                  (b)  decisions of that description are  made  in  carrying
                      out a function  transferred  under  section  30,  the
                      order must be framed so as  to  come  into  force  no
                      later than the time when the transfer  under  section
                      30 of the function takes effect (but power to  revoke
                      the order continues  to  be  exercisable  after  that
                      time, and power to amend the order  continues  to  be
                      exercisable  after  that  time  for  the  purpose  of
                      narrowing  the  description  for   the   time   being
                      specified).


             (8)  The Lord Chancellor may by order  make  provision  for  a
                  person to be treated as being, or to  be  treated  as  not
                  being, a party to a case for the  purposes  of  subsection
                  (2).


         29.  Costs or expenses


             (1)  The costs of and incidental to-


                  (a)  all proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal, and


                  (b)  all proceedings in the Upper Tribunal,  shall  be  in
                      the  discretion  of  the  Tribunal   in   which   the
                      proceedings take place.


             (2)  The relevant Tribunal shall have full power to  determine
                  by whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.


             (3)  Subsections (1) and (2) have effect subject  to  Tribunal
                  Procedure Rules.


             (4)  In any  proceedings  mentioned  in  subsection  (1),  the
                  relevant Tribunal may-


                  (a)  disallow, or


                  (b)  (as the  case  may  be)  order  the  legal  or  other
                      representative concerned to meet, the  whole  of  any
                      wasted  costs  or  such  part  of  them  as  may   be
                      determined  in  accordance  with  Tribunal  Procedure
                      Rules.


             (5)  In subsection (4) "wasted costs" means any costs incurred
                  by a party-


                  (a)   as  a  result  of  any  improper,  unreasonable   or
                      negligent act or omission on the part of any legal or
                      other  representative  or  any  employee  of  such  a
                      representative, or


                  (b)  which, in the light  of  any  such  act  or  omission
                      occurring after  they  were  incurred,  the  relevant
                      Tribunal considers it is unreasonable to expect  that
                      party to pay.


             (6)  In this  section  "legal  or  other  representative",  in
                  relation to a  party  to  proceedings,  means  any  person
                  exercising a right of audience or  right  to  conduct  the
                  proceedings on his behalf.


             (7)  In  the  application  of  this  section  in  relation  to
                  Scotland, any reference in this section to costs is to  be
                  read as a reference to expenses.


         The Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009


         Citation and commencement


         1.   This Order may be cited as the  Appeals  (Excluded  Decisions)
             Order 2009 and comes into force on 1st April 2009.


         Excluded decisions


         2.   For the purposes of section 11(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and
             Enforcement Act 2007, the following decisions  of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal are excluded decisions-


             (a)  a decision of the First-tier Tribunal under  section  103
                  of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (appeals); and


             (b)  a decision under paragraphs 22, 23, 24, 29,  30,  31,  32
                  and 33 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.


         3.   For the purposes of sections 11(1) and 13(1) of the Tribunals,
             Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the  following  decisions  of
             the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal  are  excluded
             decisions-


             (a)  any decision under section 20(7), (8B) or (8G)(b)  (power
                  to call for documents of taxpayer and others), 20B(1B)  or
                  (6) (restrictions on powers under sections 20 and 20A)  or
                  20BB(2)(a) (falsification etc. of documents) of the  Taxes
                  Management Act 1970;


             (b)   any  decision  under  section   35A(2)   (variation   of
                  undertakings),  79A(2)  (variation  of  undertakings)   or
                  219(1A) (power to require information) of the  Inheritance
                  Tax Act 1984;


             (c)   any  decision  under  section  152(5)  (notification  of
                  taxable amount of certain  benefits)  or  215(7)  (advance
                  clearance by Board of distributions and payments)  of  the
                  Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988;


             (d)  any decision under section  138(4)  of  the  Taxation  of
                  Chargeable Gains Act  1992  (procedure  for  clearance  in
                  advance);


             (e)  any decision under section 187(5)  or  (6)  (returns  and
                  information) of, or paragraph 3(2) or 6(2) of Schedule  21
                  (restrictions on powers under section 187) to, the Finance
                  Act 1993;


             (f)  any decision under paragraph 91(5) of Schedule 15 to  the
                  Finance Act  2000  (corporate  venturing  scheme:  advance
                  clearance);


             (g)  any decision under paragraph 88(5) of Schedule 29 to  the
                  Finance Act 2002 (gains and losses from  intangible  fixed
                  assets: transfer of business or trade);


             (h)  any decision under paragraph 2, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11 or 24  of
                  Schedule 13 to the Finance Act 2003 (stamp duty land  tax:
                  information powers);


             (i)   any  decision  under   section   306A   (doubt   as   to
                  notifiability),  308A  (supplemental  information),   313B
                  (reasons for non-disclosure:  supporting  information)  or
                  314A (order to disclose) of the Finance Act 2004;


             (j)  any decision under section 697(4) of the Income  Tax  Act
                  2007 (opposed notifications: determinations by tribunal);


             (k)  any  decision  under  regulation  10(3)  of  the  Venture
                  Capital Trust (Winding up and Mergers)  (Tax)  Regulations
                  2004 (procedure for Board's approval);


             (l)   any  decision  under  regulation   5A   (doubt   as   to
                  notifiability),   7A   (supplemental   information),   12B
                  (reasons for non-disclosure:  supporting  information)  or
                  12C  (order  to  disclose)  of  the   National   Insurance
                  Contributions (Application of Part 7 of  the  Finance  Act
                  2004) Regulations 2007.


             (m)  any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in
                  relation to an appeal against a decision under section 40A
                  of the British nationality Act 1981, section 82, 83 or 83A
                  of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  or
                  regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
                  Regulations 2006.


         Revocations


         4.   The Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2008  and  the  Appeals
             (Excluded Decisions) (Amendment) Order 2008 are revoked.




         JOINT PRESIDENTIAL GUIDANCE
         FEE AWARDS IN IMMIGRATION APPEALS

         Preamble


         On 19 December the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) Fees order comes into force requiring those who appeal  to
         the First-tier Tribunal to pay a fee1.
         By rule 23A(2) of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
         Rules 2005(as amended by SI 2011 No. 2840) there is a power in  the
         judge to direct the repayment of a fee in the case of an  appellant
         whose appeal succeeds.


         This guidance is issued to assist judges who have to decide on  fee
         awards.








         Introduction

         1.   In the courts, where there is power  to  award  costs,  it  is
             usual for the unsuccessful party  to  pay  the  costs  of  the
             successful party which would include any fees paid to a  court
             to bring an action.

         2.   Provision for a "fee award" is a new element  for  appeals  to
             the FtTIAC. The making of an award is to  be  decided  by  the
             judge on the evidence before him or her and dealt with in  the
             determination following the decision on outcome. The  decision
             on fees is not part of the determination and  is  an  excluded
             matter for the purposes of ss.11 and 13 of  Tribunals,  Courts
             and Enforcement Act 2007.


         ...


         4.   Although each case will turn on the  exercise  of  a  judicial
             discretion  in  the  light  of  the  issues,   the   following
             guidelines  should  be  considered  by  judges  making   these
             decisions."

12.  The right to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  set  out,  as  Mr  Malik
    reminded us, at section 11 of the 2007 Act.  As can be seen, there is a
    right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on any point of law arising  from
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal other than an excluded  decision,
    and  section  11(5)  provides  a  detailed  definition   of   "excluded
    decision".  Paragraphs (a) to  (c)  concern  specific  matters  arising
    under particular pieces of legislation, and thereafter  paragraphs  (d)
    to (f) are more general.

13.  It is also relevant to note section 29(1)  and  (2)  of  the  2007  Act
    which  makes  it  clear  that  the  costs  of  and  incidental  to  all
    proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal shall  be
    in the discretion of the Tribunal in which the proceedings  take  place
    and that the relevant Tribunal shall have full power  to  determine  by
    whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.

14.  We do not agree  with  Mr  Malik's  argument  that  if  Parliament  had
    intended to exclude a fee award made under section  29  it  would  have
    said so in section 11(5).   As  can  be  seen,  by  no  means  all  the
    categories  of  excluded  decisions  relate   to   specific   statutory
    provisions but extend to such matters as decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under section 9 of the Act to  review  or  not  to  review  an
    earlier decision of the Tribunal and a decision  to  refer  or  not  to
    refer a matter to the Upper Tribunal.  Clearly Parliament intended,  in
    section 11(5)(f) to give the  Lord  Chancellor  the  power  to  specify
    decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  which  would  also  be  excluded
    decisions.  That provision is expressed in broad terms, and it  can  in
    no sense be said to take its colour from the  specific  nature  of  the
    matters set out at section 11(5)(a) to (c).

15.  The same argument applies, mutatis mutandis, to the  Appeals  (Excluded
    Decisions) Order 2009, which is the order made by the  Lord  Chancellor
    in exercise of the power he has under  section  11(5)(f)  and  also  in
    respect of rights of appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  under  section
    13(viii)(f) of the 2007 Act.  The fact that  the  Lord  Chancellor  has
    since chosen to specify a number of specific categories of decision  as
    being excluded decisions in no sense inhibits the potential breadth  of
    Article 3(m) which we have set out above.  We agree with Mr Malik  that
    a decision on fees cannot properly be  described  as  a  procedural  or
    preliminary decision, and that if it is to fall  within  paragraph  (m)
    then it must be an ancillary decision.

16.  As regards the case law referred to by Mr Malik, paragraphs  22  to  29
    of Cart provide a helpful overview of the changes  brought  in  by  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Sedley LJ  at  paragraph
    15 of AS and RA commented, clearly obiter, on the  unattractiveness  of
    an error of the kind, if it were an error, being processed  by  way  of
    judicial review which  was  a  circuitous  and  arguably  inappropriate
    route.  Neither of these has in our view any direct  relevance  to  the
    issue before us.  In our view there is no context either in section  11
    of the 2007 Act or in the Excluded Decisions Order  which  can  detract
    from the clear wording of those provisions.  The Presidential  Guidance
    is, as it is headed, guidance, issued to  assist  judges  who  have  to
    decide on fee awards.  It does not purport  to  be  prescriptive.   The
    simple question we have to decide with regard to jurisdiction  in  this
    case is whether a decision on fees is an  ancillary  decision  made  in
    accordance with the terms of Article 3(m)  of  the  Excluded  Decisions
    Order.  In our view it is  entirely  clear  that  it  is  an  ancillary
    decision.  No doubt  wisely  the  Lord  Chancellor  preferred  to  make
    provision as he did in paragraph (m) for categories of decision  rather
    than specifying particular types of decision, and it  is  difficult  to
    see how a decision as to fees can be said to be other than ancillary to
    the main decision in the appeal.

17.  Accordingly we conclude that we do not have jurisdiction  to  entertain
    a challenge to the First-tier Judge's decision not to make a fee  award
    in this case, and that must be true of the Upper Tribunal generally  in
    relation to challenges to decisions by First-tier Judges  not  to  make
    (or to make) fee awards.  We therefore  decline  jurisdiction  in  this
    case.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
