
IN THE ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL
At Field House


    JF (Article 8: inconsistency, family members) Angola [2005] UKAIT 00173

Heard:      30.11.2005
Signed:     01.12.2005
Sent out:   08.12.2005


             NATIONALITY, IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACTS 1971-2004

Before:
                       John Freeman (a senior immigration judge)
                       Mr P Rogers JP and
                       Mrs E Morton

Between:
                                  appellant

and:
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
                                 respondent

Miss J Bond (counsel instructed by Figueiredo & Bailey) for the appellant
Mr G Saunders for the respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This case is reported on the following points:

    a) has what was said in Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716 and DM  (Croatia)  CG*
       [2004] UKIAT 00024 about  the  effect  of  inconsistency  as  between
       family members survived Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105? (see 3)
    b) in what circumstances may such inconsistency  make  for  such  "truly
       exceptional" circumstances in the appellant's private or family  life
       as would render removal disproportionate to the legitimate purpose of
       immigration control?

   This is a case where permission was given to appeal from a  decision  of
   an adjudicator (Mr PS Aujla), sitting at Hatton Cross  on  22  September
   2004, dismissing an asylum and human  rights  appeal  by  a  citizen  of
   Angola. Under the transitional provisions of  the  2004  Act,  the  case
   proceeds as if it were a reconsideration following review by the  Asylum
   and Immigration Tribunal; but only (see r. 62.7 of  the  2005  Procedure
   Rules) on the grounds on which permission was given. These were  limited
   to the question, not considered by the adjudicator in  these  terms,  of
   whether the Secretary of State had acted so inconsistently  in  granting
   the appellant's wife (as she now is) exceptional leave  to  remain,  and
   deciding to remove him, as to make the decision under appeal contrary to
   law.

2. At the date of  the  adjudicator's  decision,  and  still  by  the  time
   permission to appeal was granted (we do not know why this case has taken
   so long to come on for hearing), the law on this subject was set out  in
   Edore and DM 04-24 (see head-note for  full  citations).  The  test  was
   whether the decision to remove one member of a family (but  not  others)
   was within the range of permissible responses open to the  Secretary  of
   State: if it was, then the appellate authorities had no jurisdiction  to
   consider for themselves whether  or  not  it  was  proportional  to  the
   requirements of an individual case. It was said in both those  decisions
   that the Secretary of State might in effect limit  his  own  freedom  of
   action by making decisions on family members or others, with  which  the
   decision under appeal appeared  seriously  inconsistent:  the  Court  of
   Appeal in Edore made it clear that such cases were likely to be rare.

3. The test is now, as hardly needs to be said, in terms of Huang:  whether
   there are such "truly  exceptional"  circumstances  in  the  appellant's
   private or family life as would make  removal  disproportionate  to  the
   legitimate purpose of immigration control; and this is to be decided  by
   the appellate authorities for themselves. Both sides agreed  that  there
   was nothing specific said in Huang  on  the  point  about  inconsistency
   between family members dealt with in Edore and DM 04-24. While we do not
   think Huang makes it wrong to consider that point  as  relevant  to  the
   "truly exceptional" test, we bear in mind is that the  approach  now  is
   not so much whether the Secretary of State has (to put  it  in  ordinary
   language) boxed himself in on the present case by a  decision  taken  on
   another family member;  but  whether,  in  the  view  of  the  appellate
   authorities, the decision to let one stay and remove the other  has  led
   to a "truly exceptional"  state  of  affairs,  so  that  the  result  is
   disproportionate.

4. We turn now to the relevant facts of the present case,  which  are  best
   shown chronologically:

      03.1999     appellant and wife (Francisca) meet in Angola
      03.2000     appellant and wife move in together
   28.11.2002    wife arrives here and claims asylum
   09.01.2003    wife granted four years' exceptional leave to remain
   02.03.2003    wife gives birth to daughter by appellant  (Grace),  later
                 given exceptional leave to remain in line with her mother
   23.04.2003    appellant arrives with niece (Jurelma, born  about  1999),
                 with whom he claims to have been on the run since January
   28.04.2003    appellant claims asylum: niece treated as dependant
   19.09.2003    appellant and Francisca marry
   09.07.2004    Secretary of State decides to remove appellant

5.  Miss  Bond  realistically  conceded  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
   circumstances of this case capable of making them  "truly  exceptional",
   apart from what seemed to be the inconsistent decisions  to  remove  the
   appellant (and presumably, though nothing was  said  about  her  in  the
   notice of  decision) his niece; while his wife and their daughter are to
   be allowed to stay until at least 2007 (and, in the ordinary  course  of
   events, for good). At  first  sight,  this  is  a  remarkable  state  of
   affairs; and one which the adjudicator did  not  consider  as  a  whole,
   which for his part Mr Saunders also  conceded.   What  Mr  Saunders  did
   argue, however, was that the adjudicator's findings on  the  possibility
   of the appellant's wife returning  to  Angola  with  him  had  not  been
   challenged before us, and remained valid; so that, if the  adjudicator's
   failure to consider the inconsistency point was an error of law, it  was
   not a material one.

6. It has been well settled for some time now (at least since Amjad Mahmood
   [2002] Imm AR  229)  that  there  is  nothing  disproportionate  to  the
   legitimate purpose of immigration control in requiring  of  spouses  who
   wish to pursue their family life that either

    a) they do so in their country of origin, where that is open to them; or
    b) the spouse with no current leave to remain  in  this  country  return
       there to apply for a visa (where required) in the ordinary way.

   In other words, there is nothing so "truly exceptional"  in the state of
   affairs of one spouse having exceptional leave to remain here,  and  the
   other being  subject  to  removal,  as  to  make  the  removal  decision
   disproportionate in itself. There is no evidence in this case  that  the
   wife, having accepted exceptional leave to remain only, cannot return to
   Angola; and the adjudicator would have been fully entitled to find  that
   the appellant could go back there and get a visa himself, subject to the
   operation of Home Office policy on persons  with  exceptional  leave  to
   remain  calling  their  family  members:  the  appellant   was   refused
   permission  to  appeal  against  the  adjudicator's  dismissal  of   his
   asylum/article 3 grounds.

7. There was a suggestion in the grounds of  appeal  that  the  adjudicator
   ought to have considered the effects of the decision under appeal on the
   two children involved, the daughter and niece. There are two answers  to
   this, one jurisprudential, and one practical. To start with  the  first:
   the adjudicator was bound, as is  now  well  settled,  to  consider  the
   effect of the decision under appeal on the appellant, and not on  anyone
   else, except in so far as that effect might reflect on him. His daughter
   was not and could not be an appellant in this appeal;  and  he  had  not
   taken the opportunity to add his niece as one: in fact he had  not  even
   mentioned her in his grounds of appeal to the adjudicator.

8. The practical answer is of course that both of these  two  little  girls
   are likely to stay with their mother or aunt wherever she  goes  (unless
   Jurelma can somehow be re-united with her own  mother,  the  appellant's
   half-sister). Grace will not have started school yet, and  Jurelma  only
   just: there is no evidence whatsoever  to  suggest  that  there  is  any
   special reason, except being together with the appellant and  his  wife,
   for them to stay in this country.

9. It follows  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  case  but  the  apparent
   inconsistency of the decisions made, on the one hand on the  appellant's
   wife and daughter, and on the other on him and  (presumably,  though  we
   have  seen  nothing  in   writing)   his   niece,   to   show   anything
   disproportionate in requiring all of them to return to Angola to  pursue
   their family life there. If they  so  wished,  no  doubt  the  appellant
   himself could go back and apply for a family reunion visa in due  course
   himself; but the adjudicator did not base  his  decision  on  that,  and
   neither shall we ours.

10. In our view the possibility of the courses of action set  out  at  6  a)
   and b) is not necessarily  always  a  complete  answer  to  a  claim  of
   disproportionality based on inconsistency. The terms  in  which  we  put
   that reflect what was said in Edore about the rarity of such cases.  The
   only kind of case we can presently imagine succeeding on that  basis  is
   one where, for example, a husband and wife arrive together and the  wife
   is given exceptional leave to remain, but the decision is made to remove
   the husband, for no apparent reason beyond the difference in sex. In our
   view the obvious irrationality of such a  pair  of  decisions  would  be
   enough to make the circumstances "truly exceptional".

11. We recognize that this appellant  (and  his  wife)  are  in  a  stronger
   position than if they had met and had  a  child  together,  as  well  as
   marrying, all in this country. However, while they did  not  form  their
   relationship at a time when this country's immigration laws  made  their
   situation inherently precarious, both Mahmood and the  now  considerable
   volume of European jurisprudence make it clear that  the  country  where
   family life is to be pursued is not a matter of free choice for  persons
   with no independent right to be there.

12. Looking at the situation in practical terms, when the  appellant's  wife
   arrived in this country, she was nearly six months pregnant, and on  her
   own. We can well understand that, simply on that basis,  a  humane  Home
   Office should have given her exceptional leave to  remain  before  Grace
   was born. What has caused the difficulty in this case,  as  in  so  many
   others, is the rigidity of the decision-making system which led to  that
   being granted, more or less indefeasibly, for so long as four years.  We
   can equally well see  that  there  was  nothing  on  the  facts  of  the
   appellant's own case, once it was decided to refuse his asylum/article 3
   claim, and even taking Jurelma into account, to suggest that he ought to
   have been given the same treatment on his own merits.

13. Since the adjudicator did not  consider  the  inconsistency  point,  the
   question we have to decide is whether those two Home  Office  decisions,
   taken together, raised a case of  disproportionality  which  could  have
   materially affected his conclusions on article 8. We have considered the
   situation with some care, both because it is one  likely  to  recur,  so
   that whatever guidance we can give may be of some value, and because any
   decision where children are involved must be a question for particularly
   careful consideration. However, for the reasons we have given  at  9-12,
   we take the view that there is a perfectly good, and obvious reason  for
   the apparent inconsistency in  this  case,  and  nothing  else  to  make
   removal  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  purpose  of  immigration
   control.

The original Tribunal did not make a material error of law and the  original
determination of the Appeal stands.


                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman
                                        approved for electronic distribution

