
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   R (on the application of MK) v Wolverhampton City Council AAJR [2013]
UKUT 00177 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|On 11-13 March 2013                                                         |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE peter lane

                                   Between

                       the queen on the application of

                                     mk
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                         WOLVERHAMPTON CITY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Irena Sabic, instructed by Public Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Charles Bourne, instructed by Fiona Davis, Acting
Solicitor to
     Wolverhampton City Council


                                  JUDGMENT


A.  Introduction

1.   The applicant is a citizen of Bangladesh, who asserts that he  came  to
    the United Kingdom from Bangladesh with his parents and  sister  on  15
    December 2007.  On that date the applicant was,  on  his  account,  ten
    days short of his 12th birthday, since it is his case that he was  born
    on 25 December 1995.  The applicant understands that the family came to
    the United Kingdom for a holiday.  He describes them  visiting  various
    places in this country.  After a few weeks, however, his  parents  took
    him and his sister to a mosque in Birmingham, where the  children  were
    abandoned without any  prior  warning.   They  managed  to  secure  the
    assistance of a stranger, Mr Miah, who helped them.

2.   On 25 February 2008,  Mr  Phil  Beaumont  of  Birmingham  City  Council
    undertook an age assessment of the applicant, as a result of  which  he
    was assessed as being born on 25 December 1991.   A  second  assessment
    dated 25 February 2008,  again  by  Mr  Beaumont,  concluded  that  the
    applicant was, in fact, born on 25 December 1989.

3.   On  4  April  2008,  the  applicant  and  his  sister  claimed  asylum.
    Following the refusal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    of those applications, the applicant and his  sister  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  On 2 February 2009 Immigration Judge Sommerville,
    sitting in Birmingham, heard the appeals.   According  to  [8]  of  the
    judge's determination, the applicant "relied on  the  evidence  of  his
    sister".  The judge did, however, hear evidence from the applicant "but
    most answers were provided by his sister".  In a  determination  which,
    apparently as a result of having to be amended twice under rule  60  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  was  not
    sent out by  the  Home  Office  until  11  September  2009,  the  judge
    dismissed the applicant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds, but allowed it on human rights grounds.   This  was
    because the judge considered that the applicant was the age he  claimed
    to be, which meant that the Secretary of State's decision "was  not  in
    accordance with the law because it  was  contrary  to  the  respondents
    [sic] stated policy of granting discretionary leave to remain until the
    age of 17.5" [59].  Having, thus, answered the third of  the  questions
    in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 in  the  negative,  the  judge,  nevertheless,
    appears to have considered it necessary to address the  fifth  question
    (proportionality), which he resolved as follows:-

         "As I have found that the [applicant] is a minor  and  because  the
         [applicant] should benefit from the  respondents  [sic]  policy  of
         granting discretionary leave to remain then this is sufficient  for
         me  to  find  that  the  appellants  [sic]  decision   is   not   a
         proportionate response.  Accordingly, I find that  the  removal  of
         the [applicant] will engage Article 8 of the ECHR."


4.   In concluding that the applicant was born  on  25  December  1995,  the
    Immigration  Judge,  in  essence,  preferred  the  assessment  of   the
    applicant's age that had been undertaken by  Dr  Birch  in  June  2008,
    rather than the two assessments of Mr Beaumont.  The Secretary of State
    did not challenge the Immigration Judge's determination.  The applicant
    was, accordingly, given leave to remain by the Secretary of State until
    June 2013.  I should mention here  that  in  a  separate  determination
    Immigration Judge Sommerville allowed the  appeal  of  the  applicant's
    sister, accepting her date of birth as 1 January 1994.

5.   On 9  September  2009,  Mr  Swaran  Singh  and  Mrs  Diana  Bazurto  of
    Birmingham City Council's Social Care and Health Department carried out
    a further age assessment of the applicant.   They  estimated  that  the
    applicant had been born on 25 December 1990.

6.   As a result of the Secretary of State's acceptance of  the  applicant's
    claimed age, UKBA informed the applicant on 1 September 2010 that he no
    longer qualified for support.  This led the applicant to  approach  the
    respondent's social services department.  The  respondent  treated  the
    applicant as a "looked after child" and, in January 2011, it instructed
    Mr Patrick Mukalazi, an independent social worker, to undertake an  age
    assessment of the applicant.  Mr Mukalazi completed his assessment on 3
    October 2011.  He concluded that the applicant was "at least 19.4 years
    old" (B20). The applicant's advisors were  informed  of  and  given  an
    opportunity to respond to the assessment of Mr Mukalazi.   On  9  March
    2012, the respondent stated by letter that it  was  proposed  to  cease
    accommodation and support for the applicant on 26 March 2012.

7.   An application for permission to bring judicial review  proceedings  in
    respect of that decision was lodged on 29 March 2012.   Interim  relief
    was granted by  a  Deputy  High  Court  judge  on  30  March  2012  and
    permission to bring judicial review was granted by Singh J on 26  April
    2012.

B.  The Law

8.   Following the judgment of the Supreme Court in  R  (A)  v  Croydon  LBC
    [2009] 1 WLR 2557, the basic purpose of these proceedings is to resolve
    the issue of the applicant's age, as a matter of fact.   In  R  (AE)  v
    London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547 Aikens LJ said that:-

         "This is because the determination of a young  person's  age  is  a
         'precedent fact' to the local authority  exercising  its  statutory
         powers under section 20(1) of the [Children Act 1989].  There is  a
         right and a wrong answer and that, ultimately, is for  a  court  to
         decide" [3].


9.   In carrying out that exercise, the Tribunal must, effectively,  act  in
    an inquisitorial role and decide,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whether the applicant was or was not a child at the  time  of  the  age
    assessment: R (AE) at [23] and R (CJ) v Cardiff CC [2011] EWCA Civ 1590
    at [22] and [23].

10.  There is no burden of proof in these proceedings (R (CJ)  at  [22].   I
    am mindful that at [21] of R (CJ) the Court made it clear that,  whilst
    there is no formal "benefit of the doubt" principle,  the  Tribunal  is
    not thereby expected to eschew a "sympathetic assessment  of  evidence"
    and:-

         "In evaluating the evidence it may well be inappropriate to  expect
         from the claimant conclusive evidence of age  in  circumstances  in
         which she has arrived  unattended  and  without  original  identity
         documents.  The nature of the evaluation of  evidence  will  depend
         upon the particular facts of the case."


C.  The Proceedings

11.  The hearing in the Tribunal took place over three  days,  beginning  on
    11 March 2013.  On that day, I heard oral evidence from the  applicant.
    He spoke  with  the  assistance  of  Mr  Karim,  a  Tribunal  appointed
    interpreter.  Both Counsel  and  I  had  regard  to  and  followed,  as
    appropriate, the provisions of the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note
    No.2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance.
     In particular, the applicant was informed of his ability  to  ask  for
    breaks, as necessary.  Irrespective  of  any  such  requests  from  the
    applicant, I remained mindful of the need to ensure that the  applicant
    did not become overtaxed, whilst giving his evidence.  Both Counsel and
    I endeavoured to frame questions in the manner appropriate to a  person
    of the applicant's claimed age.  Overall, I consider that the giving of
    the applicant's evidence was undertaken compatibly with the Guidance.

12.  I also heard oral evidence from Lynn Mallin, a YMCA support  worker  to
    children and  young  people;  Liam  Stacey,  a  YMCA  peer  mentor;  Mr
    Mukalazi, whose age assessment report forms the basis of  the  decision
    under challenge; Dr  Sarah  Newth,  a  consultant  child  psychiatrist;
    Sophia Bowland, a social worker in the  Children  and  Family  Locality
    Team South West, Wolverhampton City Council; and Swaran Singh, a Senior
    Social Worker in the Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking  Children's  Team  of
    Birmingham City Council.

D.  The Evidence

13.  As well as the oral evidence from  those  mentioned  in  the  preceding
    paragraphs, I had before me two ring binder volumes of  "trial  bundle"
    evidence and two volumes of case law  and  other  materials,  including
    Practice Guidance for Age  Assessment  of  Young  Unaccompanied  Asylum
    Seekers and a UNICEF-sponsored  Report:  Age  Assessment  Practices:  a
    Literature Review & Annotated Bibliography.

14.  The trial bundles also included statements or other  forms  of  written
    evidence from the following: Mrs Christina Haddon, a dentist practising
    in Birmingham who examined the applicant on  7  April  2009;  Professor
    Helen Rodd, a Professor/Honorary Consultant  in  Paediatric  Dentistry,
    Sheffield Dental Hospital; an email from  Professor  Rodd  of  9  March
    2013, responding to certain questions put  to  her  by  the  respondent
    (given that Professor Rodd was outside the United Kingdom at  the  date
    of the hearing); and ZA, the applicant's sister, who signed  a  witness
    statement on 18 February 2013 but did not give oral evidence, since she
    was said to be undertaking exams.

15.  There is one item in the volumes of written materials which I have  not
    taken into account in reaching my judgment in this case.  This  is  the
    witness statement of  Joy  Wright,  a  social  worker  with  Allwrights
    Associates Limited who, in 2011, was employed as a locum social  worker
    by the respondent.  On 12 March, I was informed that  difficulties  had
    arisen regarding the existence and location of notes that Ms Wright may
    have made during the course of Mr Mukalazi's age  assessment.   In  the
    circumstances, Mr Bourne informed me that the respondent did not intend
    to rely upon Ms Wright's evidence.

16.  Otherwise, however, in reaching my decision I have had  regard  to  all
    the evidence, both oral  and  written,  whether  or  not  the  same  is
    specifically referred to in this judgment.  Finally,  as  well  as  the
    material in the ring binders and the e-mail from Professor Rodd, on  13
    March the applicant filed a copy letter of 20 February  2013  from  the
    receptionist at "First Dental" in Walsall stating  that  the  applicant
    had been referred to First Dental "for possible  orthodontic  treatment
    under the NHS".  The letter indicates that the applicant  has  not  yet
    been to First Dental.  It refers to the applicant as a "child".

E.  Mr Mukalazi's Assessment of the Applicant's Age


17.  At the beginning of his assessment, Mr Mukalazi acknowledged  that  the
    applicant had  remained  consistent,  throughout  his  engagement  with
    children's services and UKBA, that his date of birth  was  25  December
    1995.  Mr Mukalazi noted,  however  that  "numerous  professionals  had
    disputed [the applicant's] claims  regarding  his  age,  including  his
    social worker, teacher and various dentists".

18.  The assessment report continued by noting  that,  in  a  case  such  as
    this, it was "necessary to utilise the concept of developmental stages,
    which  enable  age  to  be  measured  against  a  range  of  acceptable
    benchmarks of normal developmental expectations; including a  range  of
    behaviours, and emotional and physical characteristics associated  with
    the idea of growth".  However, "the use of phases of development  as  a
    precise determinant of age can be potentially  problematic,  as  it  is
    difficult to assign stages of development to fixed points in time  with
    accuracy; which is further  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  key  life
    changes in significant physical growth can occur at variable ages".

19.  Adopting "a multi-disciplinary approach in conducting the  assessment",
    Mr Mukalazi took into account "the views  of  other  professionals  and
    significant figures  involved  with"  the  applicant.   These  included
    health and  educational  professionals,  as  well  as  previous  social
    workers, and past and present residential workers.  The  applicant  had
    been observed "to  ascertain  how  he  interacts  in  different  social
    situations".  Thus, the assessment  "incorporates  observation  over  a
    three year period".

20.  Mr Mukalazi's report stated that he had met the  applicant  "in  person
    on four occasions over a period of six months, on 21 January 2011, 05th
    February  2011,  13th  July  2011  and  15th  July  2011.   A   Bengali
    interpreter and the children's advocate were present  during  the  core
    age assessment interview, which took place on 13 and 15 July 2011".

21.  In addition, meetings took place  with  Sophia  Bowland,  Laura  Fowler
    (the applicant's key worker at the children's home), Linda Watson,  the
    applicant's schoolteacher, and Terri  Reekie,  a  team  leader  at  the
    children's home.

22.    Mr Mukalazi also considered  various  documents,  including  the  age
    assessment of Mr Singh and Mrs Bazurto, Dr Birch's report of June 2008,
    the determination of Immigration Judge Sommerville, what was  described
    as a "dental assessments report" by Mrs Haddon of 8 April 2009 and  the
    applicant's case files as held respectively by Birmingham City  Council
    and the children's home where the applicant was residing.

23.  Having noted the applicant's stated love of wearing hats, Mr  Mukalazi,
    unlike Mr Singh, did not consider that the applicant  had  a  "receding
    hairline".  He did, however,  consider  the  applicant's  voice  to  be
    "noticeably deep".  Although the applicant said that he did  not  shave
    much, staff at the children's home suggested that he shaved  "at  least
    once per day".

24.  Information obtained from Mayfield Medical Centre on 30 September  2011
    indicated the applicant's height to be 148 centimetres and  his  weight
    38.8 kilograms, with a body mass index of 17.7:-

         "These results are slightly less than those reported  by  Dr  Diana
         Birch in June 2008, which documents a height of 150 cms, weight  at
         41 kilograms and BMI of 18.2.  This therefore indicates a  lack  of
         physical growth throughout the period  of  June  2008  to  present,
         which is surprising considered  that  based  on  [the  applicant's]
         stated date of birth, this timeframe spans the ages of 12-15;  thus
         representing the developmental stage during which  [the  applicant]
         would be expected to experience quickest physical growth.


         Indeed, studies into human physical growth and development  suggest
         that children/teenagers of the age [the applicant] claims  to  have
         been in June 2008, will undergo  many  physical  changes  in  their
         bodies, as they experience growth surges and their  muscles  change
         shape.  These changes are frequently quite dramatic, especially  in
         boys, who would tend to grow most quickly between ages  12-15.   By
         age 16, most boys will stop growing, although muscles may  continue
         to develop.  However, by age 21, skeletal growth will have stopped.


         Nevertheless, consideration was given to the fact that  development
         can vary a great deal between individuals and environmental factors
         can have pronounced effects on growth, as well as  undernourishment
         or malnutrition.  This is more prevalent in less wealthy  countries
         like Bangladesh...


         However, it should be noted that these figures refer  to  a  period
         when [applicant] was living in the United Kingdom and was a 'looked
         after child' under Section 20 of the Children Act  (1989);  and  as
         such neither malnourished, nor  living  in  poverty.   Furthermore,
         [the  applicant]  has  not  disclosed  any  significant   traumatic
         incidents in his life that might have impacted on his  growth,  and
         has stated that he did  not  experience  hardship  when  living  in
         Bangladesh.


         I am therefore of the view that because  [the  applicant]  has  not
         achieved any physical growth between the period  of  June  2008  to
         present, his growth had already stopped by June 2008, and  as  such
         he must have been between the ages of at least 16-21 at this time."


25.  The report then  turned  to  "interaction  and  general  presentation".
    During the visit of 21  January,  the  applicant  was  observed  by  Mr
    Mukalazi to be "very  unsettled...  stressed  and  preoccupied  by  his
    relationship with his social worker".  On Mr Mukalazi's  second  visit,
    on 5 February 2011, the applicant stated that he  "wants  a  laptop,  a
    bank account and a passport".  He also said he  wanted  "a  new  social
    worker".  The applicant then "stated that he had developed  a  headache
    and did not want to talk to me anymore".  Also  at  this  meeting,  the
    applicant appears to have informed Mr  Mukalazi  that  the  applicant's
    solicitor "has  advised  him  not  to  engage  in  the  age  assessment
    process".

26.  Nevertheless, on 13 and 15 July 2011 a "core age assessment  interview"
    was held, involving the applicant, Mr Mukalazi and Ms Wright,  together
    with Mr Pinches, an independent adult  appointed  from  the  children's
    society.  An interpreter was also present.

27.  It appears that the applicant was  angered  by  the  way  in  which  Ms
    Wright had spoken to him on 13 July, specifically when  she  had  asked
    him to provide "additional information in regards to his home  town  of
    Sylhet, by describing what his neighbourhood was like, and how far  the
    nearest house was to his family home".  At the second part of the  core
    assessment interview, held on 15 July, the applicant appeared "calm and
    relaxed".  Separate interviews with staff at the  children's  home  (Mr
    Reekie and Ms Fowler) revealed that the applicant "presents as the most
    vulnerable among the home's residents".   They  also  stated  that  "he
    lacks in confidence, has very low self-esteem,  and  has  no  friends".
    The applicant appeared to prefer to spend time on his own, although  he
    did like going on "long drives with staff".  The  applicant's  attitude
    was considered by Mr Reekie to have been exacerbated  as  a  result  of
    "being the victim of a violent mugging by  six  or  seven  youths,  who
    physically assaulted him  and  stole  his  mobile  phone".   Ms  Fowler
    considered that the applicant was "depressed and very anxious,  and  is
    worried about his stay in  the  country.   She  also  added  that  [the
    applicant] is worried about his sister's immigration status".   He  was
    also "very angry about not having a bank account or passport".

28.  Mr Reekie noted that the applicant was "an  experienced  cook,  with  a
    very good understanding of  food  and  ingredients".   He  added  that,
    whilst cooking, the applicant did not use measurements, but  determined
    quantity by eye.  Both  of  the  children's  home  staff  members  were
    concerned about the applicant's mental health, citing a recent incident
    when he had stabbed his wrist with a fork, "stating that  he  wants  to
    die".  The staff members' conclusions were that, although his  physical
    appearance and expertise in the kitchen suggested  that  he  was  older
    than he claimed to be, he presented as emotional, immature,  vulnerable
    and lacking in confidence and "for those reasons, they are of the  view
    that he is under 18 years of age".

29.  Mr Mukalazi considered  that  the  behaviours  and  emotional  problems
    cited by the children's home staff were "common in adolescents  between
    15-19 years.  However, it must be taken into consideration  that  since
    coming into the UK [the applicant] has spent, and continues to spend, a
    significant amount of time around children and young people.  As  such,
    he is very much aware of their behaviours".

30.  Mr Mukalazi found that, so far as concerned the  applicant's  behaviour
    at the  interviews,  "he  was  generally  vague  in  his  answers,  and
    presented as reluctant, subtly obstructive, defensive, angry, and  less
    than honest regarding particular issues.  In addition, he  was  evasive
    and claimed to have a headache whenever he  was  challenged,  or  asked
    what he perceived as a hard question".

31.  As regards "family composition and social history", Mr  Mukalazi  noted
    that the applicant said he had lived in a small three room rented house
    with his mother, father and sister.  The applicant gave  the  names  of
    his father and mother, as well as his sister, who he said was 17  years
    old.  He did not know the ages  of  his  parents,  nor  their  physical
    appearance.  His father used to work in  Singapore  and  came  home  to
    Bangladesh every two weeks.  The applicant did not know what the father
    did in Singapore.  The family came to the United Kingdom on holiday  on
    a direct flight from Bangladesh.  He claimed to have  "no  recollection
    of the day before the family left Sylhet or what airline they  boarded,
    as to him all aeroplanes look the same".  He  could  not  remember  how
    long the flight was or what it was like nor did he have a  recollection
    of passing through immigration and customs.  The family went to stay in
    a house in London, where they spent a month.  On the  day  the  parents
    disappeared, they had spent time in a park with them, before  taking  a
    taxi to a mosque.  The parents asked the applicant and  his  sister  to
    sit down and promised they would come back for them "but they did not".
     They found a man who spoke English and Bengali, who tried to find  the
    parents and then took them to his uncle's house.  The applicant did not
    remember how long he lived with this person; but a time came when  they
    could not live there anymore and  the  man's  uncle  "contacted  social
    services and they started living in a care home in Birmingham".

32.  The applicant was "visibly emotional when talking about  his  parents".
    He said he would not hesitate to go back to Bangladesh if he knew  they
    were there.  He did not consider that he or his parents had any enemies
    in Bangladesh or were in any  sort  of  danger  there.   The  applicant
    became "visibly excited when he was shown the Bangladesh flag, which he
    recognised instantly".  He was, however, unable to  describe  his  home
    town in any detail, stating that he did not remember any  landmarks  or
    whether the roads were made of gravel or tarmac.

33.  Mr Mukalazi noted from social  care  records  that  the  applicant  had
    engaged in "various forms of risk-taking behaviour".  This included  an
    incident  in  April  2008  when,  while  staying  at  Chamberlain  Road
    Children's  Home,  the  applicant  was  the   subject   of   a   police
    investigation following an  allegation  of  conspiracy  to  rape.   The
    applicant and two adult males had allegedly  intoxicated  and  sexually
    assaulted two young females, who were "well-known"  to  the  applicant.
    Another incident  recorded  that  the  applicant  had  "inappropriately
    touched a female staff member's hand  whilst  being  transported  in  a
    car".  The applicant's schoolteacher reported that the  applicant  "had
    told another girl that he would like to be more than friends, and  that
    he was looking for someone to love and look after him.  She added  that
    on another occasion, [the applicant] had turned up to school covered in
    love bites, and had disclosed that this had been done by his girlfriend
    in West Bromwich.  At around the same time,  [the  applicant]  informed
    the school that a girl at school had asked him for sex".   Mr  Mukalazi
    also noted that the applicant had in the past "admitted  using  illegal
    substances including smoking cannabis". Under this heading, Mr Mukalazi
    assessed the applicant as being 16-18 years of age in April 2009,  when
    the "risk-taking behaviours" were most prevalent.

34.  Under "general developmental consideration" Mr Mukalazi noted that  the
    applicant said his mother was his main carer, and said that he did  not
    socialise with schoolfriends "due to the distance  between  the  school
    and their family home".  Mr Mukalazi noted what he considered to  be  a
    disparity between this detail and the applicant's inability to remember
    other details regarding  his  neighbourhood.   The  applicant  told  Mr
    Mukalazi that he and his sister "attended a fee-paying  school  and  in
    his opinion, they lived a comfortable life".  The applicant said he did
    not do any chores at home as his mother did all the work; but otherwise
    he was considered to be "very evasive about questions around  his  life
    in Bangladesh".

35.   Under  "education",  Mr  Mukalazi  noted  the  applicant's   teacher's
    concerns regarding the applicant's mental health and that he  "appeared
    to be frustrated by the behaviour of the children at school, and  seems
    to prefer the company of adults".   In  her  view,  the  applicant  was
    "older than he claims to be, and she believes that he is struggling  to
    fit in at school because of his age".

36.   Under  "life  experience,  independence  and  self-care  skills",   Mr
    Mukalazi contrasted the applicant's evidence about household chores  in
    Bangladesh with the applicant's observed "high level of skill"  in  the
    kitchen where he had an "exceptional ability  preparing  a  variety  of
    meals".  This information came from Ms Laura White,  who  had  observed
    him.

37.  Mr Mukalazi then turned to "health and medical assessments".  He  noted
    that a dental assessment undertaken by Dr Birch in June  2008  revealed
    that the applicant's third molars (or wisdom teeth) were then  assessed
    to have "emerged by 50% on both sides of his upper jaw,  and  that  one
    third molar had 25% emerged on right hand side of his jaw".  On 7 April
    2009, Mrs Haddon had undertaken a medical examination of the  applicant
    at the Kings Heath Dental Practice  in  Wolverhampton.   This  revealed
    that the applicant "has a full adult dentition, with  all  four  wisdom
    teeth erupted".  Mrs Haddon  considered  that  the  applicant's  wisdom
    teeth "had been present for a significant amount of time, and  as  such
    refused to treat him as a minor at the surgery.  She  stated  that  she
    was convinced that [the applicant] was older  than  18".   Mr  Mukalazi
    then noted that on 13 August 2011 the applicant's  dentition  had  been
    queried again by a dentist  at  Bilston  Health  Centre,  according  to
    information from Ms Fowler.  This dentist "who was unaware of  the  age
    dispute regarding [the applicant] stated that to date, he has not  seen
    any 15 year old with a dentition like [the applicant]".   All  of  this
    suggested to Mr Mukalazi that the applicant "could be at least 21 years
    of age".

38.  After some concluding remarks, Mr Mukalazi's report ends as follows:-

         "Taking into account that [the applicant's] age is estimated to  be
         24 years as per physical development assessment, 19  years  as  per
         the 1st dental development assessment, 20  years  as  per  the  2nd
         dental development assessment, 16years as per  social  presentation
         assessment, 18 years as per life experiences assessment, I conclude
         that [the applicant] is at least 19.4 years old."


F.  Credibility

(a)  General

39.  In R (AE) v London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ  547,  the  Court
    of Appeal accepted that "in the absence of any documentary evidence  of
    AE's age nor any reliable dental  or  medical  evidence,  the  starting
    point for the deputy judge's task of assessing the age of  AE  was  the
    credibility of his own evidence".  In the present case, there is dental
    or medical evidence, the significance of which I shall address  in  due
    course.  I consider, nevertheless, that it is appropriate to  begin  by
    considering the credibility of the applicant.  A  positive  credibility
    finding may well be determinative, or at least call  for  the  evidence
    relied on by the respondent to be highly cogent, if  it  is  to  negate
    what would otherwise be the consequence of that finding.  On the  other
    hand, problems with an applicant's credibility, albeit not  destructive
    of the reliability of everything he or she says, may  result  in  other
    elements, such as dental or medical evidence, assuming a  greater  role
    in the assessment of age.

40.  Before venturing into the details  of  the  evidence  touching  on  the
    applicant's credibility,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the
    significance for the purposes of these proceedings of (i) the  findings
    of Immigration Judge Sommerville; and (ii) the subsequent acceptance by
    the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  of  the  applicant's
    claimed age.

(b)  The Immigration Judge's findings as to age

41.  Neither party  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  in
    respect of the applicant were to be regarded as determinative.  Plainly
    they are not.  As found by Hickinbottom J in PM v Hertfordshire  County
    Council [2010] EWHC 2056 (Admin), the First-tier Tribunal does not have
    jurisdiction  to  make  a  declaration   in   rem.    That   Tribunal's
    jurisdiction being confined to  deciding  appeals  against  immigration
    decisions, Hickinbottom J held it had no jurisdiction to  make  an  age
    determination. I consider that the same must be true of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's predecessor in  this  regard,  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal, of which Immigration Judge Sommerville was a member  when  he
    determined the applicant's appeal in 2009. Commenting on PM in R (AS) v
    London Borough of Croydon [2011] EWHC 2091 (Admin),  the  deputy  judge
    found that:-

         "The Immigration Judge's conclusion that the claimant was an  adult
         was a credibility finding which assisted him  in  disbelieving  the
         appellant's evidence and in concluding that his article 8 claim  to
         a private and family life in the United Kingdom failed" [53].


42.  That, essentially,  was  the  approach  adopted  by  Immigration  Judge
    Sommerville in respect of the applicant; except  that,  of  course,  he
    used his finding as to age to conclude that the applicant's  Article  8
    claim succeeded.

43.  Ms Sabic submitted that  I  should  place  significant  weight  on  the
    Immigration Judge's finding as to the  applicant's  age.   Mr  Beaumont
    submitted that I  should  not  do  so.   On  this  matter,  I  find  Mr
    Beaumont's submissions have greater force.  My reasons are as follows.

44.  Even though the Immigration Judge was, as is common ground, applying  a
    lower standard of proof than the balance of probabilities that  I  must
    apply, his credibility findings are still  much  less  than  a  ringing
    endorsement of the reliability of the  applicant's  account.   This  is
    clear from, amongst other places,  [44]  where  the  Immigration  Judge
    appeared to regard it as significant that he had been provided with  no
    "correspondence or documentary evidence" to support assertions that the
    school "which the appellant said she [sic] had attended  in  Bangladesh
    had been contacted and they reported to have  no  one  missing  of  the
    appellants' claimed age of name [sic]" and  that  "enquiries  had  been
    made with Emirate Airlines, with whom the appellant  stated  he  travel
    [sic], but no record has been found.   Similarly  no  record  has  been
    found of any visa application made in Bangladesh in him or his family's
    name".

45.  At [45] the judge found that:-

         "Although there are inconsistencies between the appellant's history
         insofar as it is related by the appellant in his statements and  in
         his interview and the account as set out in Dr  Birch's  report,  I
         find that there are  not  [sic]  of  such  significance  that  they
         adversely impact upon the age assessment."


46.  Both here and at [48], it is apparent that the Immigration  Judge  was,
    in effect, finding that there was nothing in  the  credibility  of  the
    applicant's account to preclude the judge from making a finding  as  to
    the applicant's age, which involved preferring the age assessment of Dr
    Birch to the two age assessments of Birmingham City  Council.   I  will
    turn to the issue of the judge's use of Dr Birch's report in a  moment.
    First, however, it is necessary to  observe  that  the  Birmingham  age
    assessments before the Immigration Judge were,  it  is  common  ground,
    those prepared  by  Mr  Beaumont.   It  is  not  part  of  the  present
    respondent's case that Mr Beaumont's assessments of  age  should  carry
    any material weight.  On the contrary, in his evidence to me, Mr  Singh
    accepted that, at the time Mr Beaumont made his assessments, he was not
    suitably qualified to do so.  In short, the criticisms levelled at  the
    assessments in [38] and [39] of the judge's determination were sound.

47.  Accordingly, much turns upon the Immigration Judge's reliance upon  the
    2008 age assessment of the applicant, undertaken by Dr Birch.

(c)  The age assessment of Dr Birch

48.  In his determination, the Immigration Judge made it clear that  he  was
    aware of criticisms levelled at Dr Birch's methodology:-

         "41. The respondent did not accept the conclusions of Dr Birch  and
             in the refusal letter dated 29 October 2008 gave  reasons  why
             it was rejected which was  that  Dr  Birch's  methodology  was
             criticised by an expert instructed by the  respondent  in  the
             case of M & R v London Borough of  Lambeth  [2008]  EWHC  1364
             (Admin) 20 June 2008.


         42.  In response to the foregoing Dr Birch has produced an addendum
             to her report dated 1 December 2008.  She refers to  the  case
             of M & R and sets out her understanding of the judgment.   She
             also expands on  her  methodology  as  to  X-rays  and  dental
             records.


         43.  Having considered M &  R  I  see  that  case  [sic]  Bennet  J
             declined to determine as a preliminary issue the contention by
             the  local  authority  that   Dr   Birch's   methodology   was
             unscientific and unreliable.......


         48.      I am  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  given  a
             sufficient reason why the first age assessment found that  the
             appellant was 16 and the second age assessment concluded  that
             he was 18.  As between the first age assessment and the expert
             opinion of Dr Birch I prefer that of Dr Birch because  of  the
             concerns I have expressed above in respect of  the  first  age
             assessment.  Dr Birch has impressive professional credentials.
              Her methodology has not, as contended by the respondent  been
             subjected to judicial criticism.  I accept her  conclusion  as
             to the age range of the appellant namely that he was  born  on
             his stated date of birth of 28/12/95 and is therefore 13 years
             old."


49.  Since the Immigration Judge made those observations in  February  2009,
    matters have moved on.  Dr Birch has  been  criticised  in  a  judicial
    context in a number of cases, including R (WK) v Kent  CC  [2009]  EWHC
    939 (Admin), R (R) v Croydon LBC [2011] EWHC 1473  (Admin),  R  (KN)  v
    Barnet LBC [2011] EWHC 2019 (Admin) and R (MWA) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department and Birmingham City Council  [2011]  EWHC  3488
    (Admin).  In several of these cases, the Court strongly  preferred  the
    evidence of Dr Stern to that of Dr Birch.  This  is  noteworthy,  given
    that the addendum to Dr Birch's report, relied on by Immigration  Judge
    Sommerville, concerned criticism of  Dr  Birch's  methods  made  by  Dr
    Stern.

50.  In the present proceedings, it was  accepted  on  both  sides  that  Dr
    Birch's statistical methodology was problematic.  It was, however,  the
    applicant's case that, in the light of what is now a general  consensus
    as to the unreliability of Dr Birch's statistical methods, weight could
    nevertheless be placed upon other aspects of her report.  However, in R
    (R), Kenneth Parker J did not consider that what one might describe  as
    such a "blue pencil" approach could be taken to Dr Birch's  report,  so
    as  to  enable  her  statistical  methodology  to  be  ignored.  Having
    explained his  concerns  as  to  that  methodology,  Kenneth  Parker  J
    considered:-

         "52. That creates a problem in the context of this particular case.
              I do not doubt, nor did Dr Stern,  that  Dr  Birch  has  very
             great experience in working with children and, in  particular,
             with adolescents and therefore has accumulated over  a  number
             of years very considerable experience and expertise that would
             bear upon her credibility as an assessor of the  age  of  such
             young persons.  If Dr Birch had employed  what  I  might  call
             conventional techniques for assessing age, her evidence  would
             have carried very great weight.  However my concern is that Dr
             Birch, on the basis of the  evidence  that  she  gave  to  the
             court, has in my  judgment  an  erroneous  confidence  in  the
             accuracy and reliability of the statistical methods  that  she
             has employed.  That misplaced confidence undermines the  other
             evidence that she has given.   It  appears  to  me  that  that
             confidence leads her to rely primarily  upon  her  statistical
             methods.  Therefore she is very likely to  be  biased  in  her
             assessment of age by  reason  of  that  misplaced  confidence.
             Therefore it seems to me that I must approach with very  great
             caution the conclusions that she has reached.  In short, I  do
             not believe that Dr Birch's  assessment  of  the  age  of  the
             Claimant is any more reliable than that of  a  social  worker.
             Indeed, her assessment, in my judgment, is likely to  be  less
             reliable because she places such  considerable  confidence  in
             her statistical methods that I conclude, on the  basis  of  Dr
             Stern's  essentially  unchallenged   evidence,   to   be   not
             scientifically established and unreliable."


51.   R (R) is not the only recorded  instance  of  problems  regarding  the
    interaction between the statistical method adopted by Dr Birch and  her
    clinical assessments. In Beatson  J's  judgment  in  MWA  we  find  the
    following:-

         "70. I did not find Dr Birch's evidence satisfactory.   She  stated
             that she accepted that, in the light of R's  case,  until  she
             had completed more statistical work she had  to  rely  on  her
             clinical assessments and not on her  statistical  methodology.
             But she maintained that her method was sound and claimed  that
             she had been given no opportunity in R's case to  explain  the
             basis of her  statistical  methodology  as  a  result  of  the
             instructions of the solicitors  for  the  claimants  in  those
             cases and this was  unfair.   Moreover,  she  stated  that  Dr
             Stern's evidence was unchallenged and he was  not  experienced
             in adolescent work.  I accept Mr Cowen's submission  that,  if
             one reads Kenneth Parker J's judgment, there was  considerable
             consideration of the process in Dr  Birch's  reports  and  her
             methodology.  It is also clear that she was cross-examined  on
             her method......


         71.  Secondly, although Dr Birch  stated  that,  in  the  light  of
             Kenneth Parker J's decision,  she  no  longer  relies  on  her
             statistical method, it is of some significance that  her  most
             recent report (a) does not clearly distinguish findings in the
             earlier reports which did  use  the  statistical  method  from
             findings as a result of the more recent  examination  and  (b)
             does not consist of a fresh look  at  her  assessment  of  the
             claimant in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  the  statistical
             material she used in the earlier reports has  been  criticised
             in this way.


         72.  Thirdly, Dr Birch's approach to a number of the factors in the
             assessment was unsatisfactory.  So, in relation to height, her
             explanation of why, contrary to her  first  report,  the  fact
             that the claimant had not grown did not  affect  her  original
             assessment, was unsatisfactory.  She, in effect, assessed  him
             as being older than he had said he was in order to explain the
             absence of growth.  Secondly,  in  relation  to  facial  hair,
             apart from the  contradiction  between  her  evidence  and  Mr
             Singh's... her statement that the presence  and  frequency  of
             shaving is less important than the distribution and nature  of
             the hair differs from her earlier reports gives no explanation
             for the difference...."

52.  Ms Sabic relied upon the following passage from  the  judgment  of  the
    deputy judge in R (AS) [2011] EWHC 2091 (Admin):-

         "31. However, it has to be noted that both judgments [Collins J  in
             [2009] EWHC 939  (Admin)  and  Kenneth  Parker  J  in  R  (R)]
             acknowledged Dr Birch's very great experience of working  with
             children and in assessing their ages that she has  accumulated
             over many years that would bear upon  her  credibility  as  an
             assessor of the age of an individual child. In cases where the
             challenge related to an  age  assessment  following  a  Merton
             compliant  assessment,  a   successful   challenge   to   that
             assessment can only rarely be  possible.  However,  where  the
             challenged local authority assessment has to be  treated  with
             caution or even to be disregarded due to the nature and extent
             of the errors and of the non-compliance with Merton  compliant
             procedures, the assessment evidence of Dr Birch will be  given
             appropriate weight so long as it  was  not  dependent  on  the
             faulty  statistical  methods  described  and   found   to   be
             unreliable in Collins J's and Kenneth  Parker  J's  respective
             judgments in A and R."

53.  The obvious point to make about the deputy judge's observations is,  of
    course, that, as the extracts from the previous judgments indicate,  it
    has been found not to be possible to hermetically seal the  discredited
    statistical aspects of Dr Birch's  reports  from  those  aspects  which
    appear, at first sight, to  involve  more  orthodox  methods,  such  as
    clinical observation.  In the present case, Dr Birch's report  of  June
    2008 comes from the period when she  was  still  firmly  employing  her
    statistical methods.  An examination of her report (E27 et  seq)  makes
    clear the extent to which those methods infected her overall  findings.
    Thus, at E42, where one  finds  Dr  Birch's  general  observations  and
    comments, including the applicant's "scores at  the  following  average
    levels", it is  clear  that  Dr  Birch  has  employed  her  statistical
    methodology  in   relation   to   "physical   growth"   and   "physical
    development".  These two attributes produce two of the  lowest  average
    age calculations in respect of the applicant: 12.7 years and 12.3 years
    respectively.   They  are  to  be  contrasted  with  the  average   age
    calculation for "maturation", based on the applicant's dentition, which
    produced an age of 17.0 years.

54.  I therefore  find  that,  in  giving  significant  weight  to  the  age
    assessment of Dr Birch in making his findings as  to  the  age  of  the
    applicant, Immigration Judge Sommerville adopted an approach  which  he
    would undoubtedly not have taken, were he  to  have  been  hearing  the
    applicant's case today.  In her closing submissions, Ms Sabic submitted
    that even if one were to discount entirely Dr  Birch's  assessment  and
    the two assessments of Birmingham City Council that were  in  front  of
    the judge, one would still be left with "a clear finding in favour"  of
    the  applicant's  credibility.   However,  as  my   analysis   of   the
    determination has demonstrated, this submission pitches the matter  too
    high.

(d)  Conclusions as to the Immigration Judge's findings

55.  For the above reasons, I have concluded that the weight to be  attached
    to the finding on age of  Immigration  Judge  Sommerville  is  limited.
    That conclusion is reinforced by the  following  factors.   Unlike  the
    judge, I have the benefit of a much more extensive amount  of  evidence
    touching on the issue of the applicant's age.  In particular, there  is
    the medical and dental evidence,  postdating  the  hearing  before  the
    judge.  I have also heard extensive oral evidence, including  from  the
    applicant, who appears to have made only a minimal contribution in this
    regard at the hearing before the judge.

(e)  The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department's  acceptance  of  the
    applicant's age

56.  Ms Sabic submitted that I should place significant weight on  the  fact
    that, following promulgation of the Immigration Judge's  determination,
    the Secretary of State accepted that the  applicant  had  the  date  of
    birth found by the judge.  Although I have not discounted  this  factor
    in reaching my own finding, I do not consider that it merits the weight
    for which Ms Sabic contends.  The  submission  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had a public law duty to make her own assessment of age has to be
    seen in the light of the fact  that,  unless  a  determination  can  be
    successfully challenged on the basis that it  was  wrong  in  law,  the
    Secretary of State has a public law duty to act in  accordance  with  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which has allowed an appeal  under
    section 86 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The
    fact that the former Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  and,  now,  the
    First-tier Tribunal have power under section 87 of that Act to "give  a
    direction for the purpose of giving  effect  to  its  decision"  cannot
    properly be construed as absolving the  Secretary  of  State  from  her
    general obligation of giving effect to appellate tribunal decisions.

(f)  My assessment of credibility

57.  I turn to my assessment of the applicant's credibility.  In  doing  so,
    I reiterate that I have had regard to the findings of Immigration Judge
    Sommerville, albeit that I do not regard  them  as  having  the  weight
    contended for by the applicant.  I have also borne in mind  that,  both
    when giving evidence to me and in his interaction with  social  workers
    and other professionals who feature in this judgment, the applicant is,
    if not still  a  child,  nevertheless  a  young  person,  even  on  the
    respondent's assessment.  His evidence needs to  be  assessed  in  that
    light.  It also needs to be assessed  against  the  background  of  the
    applicant's life experiences.  Even if certain aspects of  his  account
    are to be regarded as unreliable  (as  to  which,  see  below),  it  is
    undoubtedly the case that he was brought to the United Kingdom  when  a
    child and has faced various challenges since, not least the attitude of
    various authorities towards his claimed age, and the legal  proceedings
    that this has generated.  I reiterate that, in evaluating the evidence,
    I  have  sought  to  apply  the  sympathetic  assessment  described  in
    paragraph [10] above.

58.  In favour of the applicant's  credibility  is  the  fact  that  he  has
    consistently asserted a date of birth of 25 December  1995,  throughout
    the many interviews he has undergone since arriving  in  Birmingham  in
    December 2007.  Although the applicant's provision of detail  regarding
    his life in Bangladesh has varied, it is also a common thread  that  he
    lived in Sylhet with his mother and sister, went  to  school  with  his
    sister there, had a father whose employment was in  Singapore  but  who
    visited the family regularly, and that the family came together to  the
    United Kingdom in  late  2007.   Also  consistent  is  the  applicant's
    description of how he came to be abandoned by his parents in  a  mosque
    in Birmingham.

59.  I also take account of the evidence of Dr Newth.  Both  Counsel  agreed
    she was an impressive witness; a view  which  I  endorse.   Dr  Newth's
    diagnosis of depression in the  applicant  may  well  account  for  his
    inability to answer questions, which  his  interlocutors  from  various
    local authorities  considered  he  could,  and  should,  have  answered
    substantively, or in more detail.

60.  I am, furthermore, mindful of the witnesses who have spoken  positively
    of the applicant, including the applicant's sister, ZA, whose own  date
    of  birth  of  1  January  1994  was  accepted  by  Immigration   Judge
    Sommerville and, subsequently, by the Secretary of State, and  who  has
    provided a short statement, dealing  with  events  after  she  and  the
    applicant arrived in the United Kingdom.  Mr Bourne described ZA  as  a
    "shadowy figure", so far as the present proceedings are  concerned.   I
    agree that her evidence is somewhat exiguous.  As a result of the  rule
    60 amendments made to Immigration Judge Sommerville's determination, it
    is apparent that ZA's determination from him  was  essentially  in  the
    same terms as those relating to the applicant.  There is, thus, nothing
    that  can  be  said  to  constitute  a  ringing  endorsement   of   her
    credibility, just as there is  no  such  endorsement  of  that  of  the
    applicant.

61.  There are, however, some troubling aspects  regarding  the  applicant's
    credibility, notwithstanding all the caveats described above.  Some  of
    these concern the age assessment of 9 September 2009 carried out by  Mr
    Singh and Mrs Bazurto of Birmingham City Council.

62.   Ms  Sabic  established  in  cross-examination  of  Mr  Singh  that  no
    appropriate independent adult was present at the  interviews  with  the
    applicant, undertaken by Mr Singh and Mrs Bazurto in  2009.   This  was
    because, at the time, Birmingham City Council did not have a policy  of
    requiring  the  participation  of  such  a  person.   Mr  Singh   said,
    correctly, that the requirement was not  one  of  the  original  Merton
    guidelines.  Nevertheless, Ms Sabic was, I consider, entitled to  point
    to the absence of such a person, as an issue going to the weight to  be
    placed upon the Birmingham assessment.  By  the  same  token,  she  was
    right to point to the absence of any notes of the interviews.  Mr Singh
    said that these had not been supplied because they had not  been  asked
    for by the respondent.

63.  That said, Mr Singh's experience as a social  worker  is  considerable,
    amounting to more than twenty years.  He has been found in previous age
    assessment proceedings to be a witness whose evidence deserves  weight.
    No criticism was levelled on behalf of  the  applicant  at  Mr  Singh's
    professionalism (or, for that matter, that of Mrs Bazurto).

64.  I accordingly consider that regard can properly be had to this  passage
    in the assessment, describing a home visit on 28 April 2009:-

         "The school was in the Meera Bazar  district  of  Sylhet  but  [the
         applicant] could not remember the name.


         In previous interviews [the applicant] and his  sister  had  stated
         they both attended Jamiya Hatim Ali School.  According to [ZA] this
         is a secondary school.  This school was contacted by  the  previous
         Social Worker and the school had no record of  [the  applicant]  or
         [ZA], [the applicant's] sister.


         Now [the applicant] states he cannot recall the name of his  school
         and the sister states her school was in  an  area  called  Uposhor,
         Sylhet....


         I asked [the applicant] his view as to why he and his  sister  were
         not known at Jamiya Hatim Ali School?  His reply was that they were
         taken off the roll when they left.  I said schools would still have
         a record of them  attending.   [The  applicant]  did  not  offer  a
         response other than he does not know."

65.  In oral evidence, the applicant gave what,  in  effect,  was  the  same
    school name, although he then said that, after his parents brought  him
    here, he had forgotten everything, owing to the situation he  had  gone
    through, which made him stressed. This was why he  could  not  remember
    the names of any of his friends at school.

66.  Ms Sabic did not take issue  with  the  statement  by  Birmingham  City
    Council that they had contacted Jamiya Hatim Ali School.  In any event,
    I see no reason to doubt the truth of what is said in  Mr  Singh's  age
    assessment.

67.  The applicant's recorded response,  to  the  effect  that  he  and  his
    sister were taken off the roll when they left, strikes  me  as  an  odd
    thing for a 13 year old boy to know (or allegedly  know),  particularly
    given the vagueness of much of the rest of the information proffered by
    the applicant regarding his life in Bangladesh.  It also strikes me  as
    inherently implausible, even making allowance for relevant cultural and
    administrative differences between the United Kingdom  and  Bangladesh.
    In short, the evidence points strongly towards the  applicant  and  his
    sister  giving   Birmingham   deliberately   false   information.    No
    explanation has been advanced for this, other than that their behaviour
    was designed to frustrate attempts by the authorities to establish  who
    they were and how old they were.

68.   This  segues  into  the  finding  at  [44b]   of   Immigration   Judge
    Sommerville's determination, where he noted that the Secretary of State
    stated that "enquiries have been made with Emirate Airlines, with  whom
    the appellant stated he  travelled,  but  no  record  has  been  found.
    Similarly no record has been found of  any  visa  application  made  in
    Bangladesh in  him  or  his  family's  name".   The  Immigration  Judge
    rejected this evidence on the basis that he had not been provided  with
    "correspondence or documentary evidence in support".  This led  him  to
    conclude that he  could  not  be  satisfied  "that  full  and  complete
    enquiries had been made".  From my wider and later vantage point, I  do
    not take the same view as the Immigration Judge.  On the contrary,  the
    evidence before him strikes me as another incidence  of  the  applicant
    and his sister wishing to put the United Kingdom  authorities  off  the
    trail leading back to Bangladesh.

69.  By the same token, even making  all  previously  described  allowances,
    the applicant's evidence about coming from  Sylhet  is  unsatisfactory.
    At one point, although not in his oral evidence, he had said  that  his
    home was a long way from school, which contrasted with the  applicant's
    inability to say whether the  roads  he  travelled  were  tarmacked  or
    merely laid with gravel.

70.  I also take account of the evidence of Ms Bowland, that UKBA  had  made
    enquiries in an attempt to  verify  the  account  being  given  by  the
    applicant and his sister  of  their  background  in  Bangladesh,  which
    included going to the alleged school, but without success.

71.  There are also instances recorded by various professionals, which  call
    the applicant's credibility into question.  At C142,  a  weekly  report
    from Brooklands Children's Home in March 2011, records the applicant as
    telling staff that he  wanted  to  "kill  himself,  as  his  girlfriend
    finished with him".  This was  on  12  March.   On  13  March,  he  was
    observed to spend "a lot of time crying when he woke up, and would  not
    say why.  Later he  told  staff  it  was  because  his  girlfriend  had
    finished with him".

72.  When this was put to the applicant in  cross-examination,  he  said  it
    was "a joke" and "not true".  The terms of the report, however, give no
    inkling that the applicant gave this answer (on two separate occasions)
    in a humorous manner.

73.  At E258, in a weekly report from Brooklands of  January  2011,  it  was
    recorded that the applicant "has been advised about love bites seen  on
    his neck and about sexual health".  The applicant denied that this  was
    true.  He said that when he went to school, the effect  of  his  school
    tie on his soft skin had caused these marks.  Again, it is difficult to
    accept that professional caring staff would confuse what they said they
    saw with the chaffing effect caused by a school tie.

74.  The finding regarding  incorrect  information  being  provided  to  the
    authorities about the applicant and his sister in Bangladesh  leads  me
    to the issue of the abandonment of the children in Birmingham by  their
    parents.  Ms Sabic criticised the respondent  and,  in  particular,  Mr
    Mukalazi for wrongly assuming that the applicant had not been abandoned
    by his parents, when the evidence was plainly to the  effect  that  the
    applicant  had  no  contact  whatsoever  with  his  parents  and  that,
    regardless of the circumstances, they were not around and have not been
    since the end of 2007. One of the reasons it is  necessary  to  address
    the issue of abandonment is because there  is  a  suggestion  that  the
    applicant's undoubtedly small stature  may  have  been  caused  by  the
    trauma he experienced of being unexpectedly left with his sister at the
    mosque in Birmingham.

75.  In Mr Singh's assessment (D42) we find this:-

         "11. Both [the applicant] and his  sister  have  given  a  detailed
             address in Sylhet - there have been  some  variations  in  the
             house and road numbers - but the people, Mr Miah, Mr Fiaz  and
             Mrs Begum, who volunteered to care  for  them,  have  made  no
             attempt to contact the parents or pass these details on to the
             Bangladeshi Embassy, Consulate or any other  agency  to  unite
             [the applicant] and [ZA] with the mother at least,  given  the
             father works  in  Singapore;  instead,  they  have  taken  the
             siblings  to  solicitors  and  the  UKBA   to   register   for
             immigration; home visits were made to Mr Fiaz, Mr Miah and Mrs
             Begum but no one was at home.  A note was  left  for  them  to
             contact me as soon as possible to discuss  how  and  why  they
             volunteered to care for [the applicant] and  his  sister.   Mr
             Miah rang me and said he did not accommodate  [the  applicant]
             and [ZA] but took them to an elderly relative,  Mr  Fiaz.   Mr
             Miah denies any relationship to [the applicant]  and  [ZA]  or
             any previous knowledge of the family.  However, it has been Mr
             Miah who has been  active  in  seeking  legal  representation,
             immigration application to the UKBA in Liverpool and directing
             others to provide accommodation for the  brother  and  sister.
             This is another example of people not being open and honest as
             to the true events of [the applicant] and [ZA]  being  in  the
             UK.


         12.  Given that there are no  other  children  in  the  family,  no
             grandparents and no extended family,  it  seems  inconceivable
             that mother would [completely] desert her only offsprings in a
             distant land with even less familiar people and  surroundings.
             If the parents wanted to leave [the applicant] and [ZA] in the
             UK for a better standard of life, surely  the  best  place  to
             leave them would have been with the family they  were  staying
             with in London.  According to the case history [the applicant]
             and his family were picked up by friends from London Airport."

76.  Mr Singh's experience  in  dealing  with  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    minors has to be borne in mind, when assessing that  passage  and  also
    the following passage from the same report:-

         "When [the applicant's] parents deserted him  and  his  sister,  he
         accepted support from a stranger very readily and lived  with  this
         man for a number of  months.   This  person  did  not  request  the
         assistance of any statutory agency until he  was  going  abroad  to
         Bangladesh.  This is a frequent scenario given by 'carers' who look
         after unknown and unrelated 'abandoned' minors."


77.  Standing  back  and  looking  at  the  evidence  overall,  it  strongly
    suggests that the applicant's coming across Mr Miah was not an accident
    at all but part of a  pre-arranged  plan  involving  Mr  Miah  and  the
    applicant's parents.  The applicant's account of how he came across  Mr
    Miah is difficult to reconcile with this finding, although  it  is  not
    inconceivable that Mr Miah would have been on  hand  to  encounter  the
    applicant and his sister, as if by accident.

78.  However, the applicant told me in oral  evidence  that  he  would  have
    liked someone to help him locate his parents in  Bangladesh.   If  that
    was true, it is to say the  least  difficult  to  see  how  it  can  be
    compatible with what is, at best, unhelpful and, at  worst  (and  as  I
    have found), positively misleading information given to the authorities
    in  the  United  Kingdom  about  the   applicant's   circumstances   in
    Bangladesh.  It is also difficult to reconcile with the fact  that,  as
    Mr Bourne pointed out, there is no  evidence  that  the  applicant  has
    asked any of those in the United Kingdom who have been representing his
    various interests for help in locating his parents.

79.  In making  these  findings,  I  do  not  ignore  or  underestimate  the
    undoubted fact that the applicant has been without day-to-day  physical
    contact with his parents (in particular, his mother) since the  end  of
    2007.  However, I find that  it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  the
    applicant was fully aware of what was about to happen, when he  arrived
    in the United Kingdom with his parents.

(g)  Conclusions on credibility

80.  In conclusion, I agree with  Mr  Bourne  that,  although  the  problems
    identified with the applicant's credibility are not such as to  destroy
    the reliability of everything that the applicant says, they are such as
    to require one to look carefully at the remainder of the  evidence,  in
    order to reach a conclusion as to the applicant's age.  In  short,  the
    applicant's own evidence as to his age is in no sense determinative.

G.  The Dental Evidence

81.  Whilst acknowledging the limitations of dental evidence in  fixing  the
    age of a person, Mr Bourne submitted that, in the present case,  dental
    evidence concerning  the  applicant  was  the  "clearest  area  of  the
    evidence".  Even applying "wide confidence limits" in respect  of  such
    evidence, he contended that the dental evidence put the  applicant  "in
    serious difficulty".  By contrast, Ms Sabic submitted that  the  dental
    evidence should be  treated  with  caution  and  the  evidence  of  the
    dentist, Mrs Haddon, who had seen the applicant in  her  surgery  on  7
    April 2009, should be afforded "minimal weight".  I have  come  to  the
    conclusion that the dental evidence in  this  case  is  of  substantial
    significance.  My reasons are as follows.


(a)  Dental examinations of the applicant

82.  There is nothing to indicate that Mrs  Haddon  had  any  preconceptions
    about the applicant, other than that he was brought to her as a  child.
    In her letter of 8 April 2009 to Birmingham City  Council,  Mrs  Haddon
    records the applicant's claimed age as 14.  In fact,  on  his  asserted
    date of birth of 25 December 1995, he would  have  been  just  over  13
    years and 3 months old, although, as we shall see, this is not  helpful
    to the applicant.  Upon inspecting the applicant's  mouth,  Mrs  Haddon
    found there was "full  adult  dentition,  including  presence  of  four
    wisdom teeth, all well erupted.  There  is  evidence  of  attrition  on
    posterior teeth, widespread staining  on  all  teeth,  consistent  with
    smoking or betel nut chewing".  On the basis of  this  examination  Mrs
    Haddon said that the patient was, in  her  view,  "in  his  early  20s,
    certainly not aged 14 as he claims, as wisdom teeth rarely erupt before
    age 18, and there is evidence of wear on these  teeth  indicating  that
    they have been present for some time".  Since she was unable to  regard
    the applicant as a minor, under the age of 18,  Mrs  Haddon  could  not
    treat him on the NHS.

83.  As we have already seen, Dr Birch,  examining  the  applicant  in  June
    2008, found some evidence of third molar emergence.  At E41,  Dr  Birch
    noted, "no extractions.  Teeth stained with Betel nut".  The  applicant
    "has emerging third molars on both sides of his upper  jaw.   They  are
    approximately 50% emerged".  She found "on the  lower  jaw  he  has  an
    emerging third molar (25% app) on the right hand side and has no  third
    molar on the left".  Dr Birch estimated the applicant's dental age  "at
    approximately 16-18 years".  In making these findings, Dr Birch appears
    to have applied the findings of Mincer: The ABFO Study of  third  molar
    development and its use as an estimator of Chronological  age,  Journal
    of Forensic Science Vol.38 No.2 379-390.  As previously noted,  in  her
    general observations and comments, Dr Birch  ascribed  an  average  age
    calculation for "maturation" of 17.0 years, based  on  the  applicant's
    dentition.

84.  At B19, in Mr Mukalazi's  age  assessment,  he  records  Ms  Fowler  as
    reporting "that the dentist at Bilston Health Centre, who  was  unaware
    of the age dispute regarding [the applicant], stated that  to  date  he
    has not seen any 15 year old with a dentition like [the applicant]".  I
    have mentioned above the letter adduced in evidence by the applicant on
    13 March 2013 from the receptionist of First Dental in  Walsall.   This
    letter, dated 20 February 2013, refers to a planned  initial  visit  by
    the applicant to First Dental's dentist,  Mr  Thompson,  for  "possible
    orthodontic  treatment  under  the  NHS".   It  ends  by   urging   the
    parents/guardian  to  "contact  the  surgery  to  arrange  a   suitable
    appointment".

85.  In her  written  closing  submissions,  Ms  Sabic  submitted  that  the
    applicant "was recently seen and examined by a dentist who treated  him
    as a minor and advised that he ought to have various  treatment  before
    he turns 18". It is the case that,  in  his  witness  statement  of  15
    February 2013, Mr Stacey, the applicant's YMCA peer mentor, describes a
    visit he made with the applicant to a dentist "this week  at  the  City
    Dental Practice in Wolverhampton", where the  dentist  told  Mr  Stacey
    that she would refer the applicant "to another dentist to be seen about
    a brace" being fitted before the applicant turned 18. It  appears  that
    the letter of 20 February is the result of this referral and that there
    is no evidence that the appointment with  the  other  dentist  has  yet
    taken place. Mrs Sabic's submission  must,  therefore,  relate  to  the
    visit described by Mr Stacey.

(b)  Professor Rodd

86.  The final person to mention  in  respect  of  the  dental  evidence  is
    Professor Rodd.  She has twenty years'  specialist  experience  in  the
    provision of dental care of children.  She was asked to comment on  Mrs
    Haddon's evidence.  Professor Rodd states that an assessment of  dental
    development "is widely used as a reliable approach for determining  the
    age of a child/young person  in  the  absence  of  known  chronological
    (actual) age" and that it is "acknowledged that dental  age  correlates
    more closely with actual age, than any other biological marker, such as
    skeletal (bone) age.  Furthermore, dental  development  appears  to  be
    less  affected  by  other  factors  such  as  nutrition  and  endocrine
    (hormonal) influences".

87.  Having described the methodology of  Dermijian  as  the  most  reliable
    technique of dental age determination in current  use,  Professor  Rodd
    states that this methodology "can only be employed for  individuals  up
    to the age of 15 years" because  "the  third  permanent  molar  is  not
    included in the assessment".

88.  Turning to the presence of wisdom teeth  (third  permanent  molars)  in
    dental age assessment, Professor Rodd has this to say:-

         "The use of third  permanent  molars  (wisdom  teeth)  in  any  age
         assessment must be viewed with caution.  The third permanent  molar
         is not an ideal development marker  as  it  is  frequently  absent,
         malformed or impacted and is the most  variable  of  all  teeth  in
         terms of times of formation and eruption.   However,  they  provide
         the only biological marker of growth from  late-teens  until  early
         20s.  By this time period, all other  teeth  have  completed  their
         development and hand-wrist bones have also achieved maturity.


         Previous studies have shown that, using  Dermijian's  developmental
         stages, one can be reasonably certain [original emphasis]  that  an
         individual is less than or over 18 years of age  according  to  the
         radiographic appearance  of  any  third  permanent  molars...  This
         empirical dichotomous cut off has been selected to aid legal  cases
         where the critical question is whether or not an  individual  is  a
         juvenile  (under   18   years).    Determination   of   a   precise
         chronological age, using third permanent  molars,  carries  greater
         uncertainty and requires the use of complex  regression  equations.
         Liversidge  and  co-workers  have  also  undertaken  a  number   of
         investigations, using different dental age  assessment  techniques,
         to evaluate the contribution  to  third  permanent  molars  to  age
         determination... They concluded that the  likelihood  ratio  of  an
         individual being at least 18 was 13.6 if the third permanent  molar
         was fully developed."


              A study, relevant to the current case, undertook a dental  age
        assessment of 221 Indian subjects (68 males, 153 females; age range
        15-21  years)  based  on  the  radiographic  appearance  of   third
        permanent molars and three different statistical approaches...  All
        three statistical methods  correctly  predicted  an  individual  as
        being </?  18  years  in  73.2%  of  test  subjects.   The  authors
        concluded that this level of accuracy may be inadequate for  courts
        of law to rule  with  sufficient  levels  of  certainty  about  the
        juvenile/adult  status  of  an   individual   using   third   molar
        development.


              In summary, the use of third permanent molars, in  determining
        the chronological age of young  people  from  around  16-24  years,
        should be used with caution.  Adopting a simple threshold of </> 18
        years may offer the most robust approach."

89.  Professor Rodd  then  noted  Mrs  Haddon's  examination  and  findings,
    before saying this:-

         "In my experience, I have never seen a child under the  age  of  14
         years with the eruption of any third permanent molars.  I have,  on
         occasions, seen some children aged 15-16 years where  one  or  more
         third permanents molar have commenced eruption.  A study  of  tooth
         eruption in a young Indian population would  concur:  investigators
         did not observe any erupted wisdom teeth in a large sample  (n=528)
         of 14-year-olds (Lakshmappa et al., 2011).


         In summary, an accurate and detailed dental age assessment, using a
         well-accepted technique, was not employed for the presented case."


90.  Finally, in terms of variation in dental age  according  to  ethnicity,
    Professor Rodd, having summarised the  literature,  stated  that,  "the
    available evidence suggests that  Asian  (including  Bengali)  children
    have a similar rate of  dental  development  to  their  white  northern
    European peers".  Under "Additional Comments" Professor Rodd said  that
    "reliance purely on dental emergence can be subjective and  imprecise".



91.  Although I have not reproduced all the references in  Professor  Rodd's
    report to the relevant academic literature, it  is  apparent  that  the
    report takes full  account  of  that  literature.  I  was  specifically
    referred to C23 of volume 2 of the materials bundle, where there  is  a
    paper by Terry Smith and Laura Brownlees, working under the supervision
    and guidance of UNICEF's Child Protection Section  in  New  York.   The
    paper, published in 2011 describes  itself  as  a  "discussion  paper",
    wherein the findings, interpretations and conclusions remain  those  of
    the authors "and do not necessarily reflect the policies  or  views  of
    UNICEF".  Furthermore, the  text  "has  not  been  edited  to  official
    publication standards".  At C44 to 46 the authors refer to  dental  age
    assessment.  The following passages are worthy of setting out in full:-

         "X-rays to look at the existence and development  of  wisdom  teeth
         are often used for older children, generally those who are  between
         16 and 22 years of age.  This is because with this age group,  most
         teeth are fully developed and only the third molars have some  root
         development left.  However, age assessments based on  wisdom  teeth
         eruption are thought to be even less precise  than  other  methods,
         giving a confidence interval of over two years around the estimated
         age (Kullman, 1995: 01).  This method is used by the American Board
         of Forensic Odontology but is criticised in the  Netherlands  where
         dental age assessment is regarded as being unsound because  25%  of
         all people grow no wisdom teeth and because root development of the
         wisdom tooth  demonstrates  an  extreme  degree  of  inter-personal
         variation in the maturation process.  According to a report by  the
         Committee on Age Determination, 'about 10% of all girls and 16%  of
         all boys reach the criterion for exclusion before they are 18 years
         old and they therefore would be unjustly  refused  treatment  as  a
         minor' (Committee on Age  Determination,  2006,  in  Crawley  2007:
         33).....


         As with bone examinations, most studies agree that dental  age  can
         only provide an indication of chronological age.  The Royal College
         of Paediatrics and Child Health concludes that  'there  is  not  an
         absolute correlation between dental and physical age  of  children,
         but estimates of a child's physical age  from  his  or  her  dental
         development are accurate to +/- two years or 95% of the  population
         and form the basis of most forensic estimates of  age.   For  older
         children, this margin of uncertainty makes it unwise to rely wholly
         on dental age (1999: 14).  Colman (1995:  1)  concluded  that  'the
         accuracy and precision of most of the dental  methods  used  during
         childhood, have been studied and found to be rather low, since many
         more developing parameters can be used in  younger  years  and  the
         development rate is faster in young children, it is to be  expected
         that accuracy and  precision  are  inferior  in  older  juveniles'.
         Colman states that most methods of age determination  have  arrived
         at a 90-95% confidence interval  of  about  two  years  around  the
         estimated age (1995:01)."

92.  Finally, on 12 March 2013 I was provided with an e-mail from  Professor
    Rodd to Emma Burgess of the applicant's solicitors, in which  Professor
    Rodd responded to this question from the respondent:-


             "Bearing in mind (i) the references on P3 of  your  report  to
             what you have  seen  in  practice,  and  (ii)  any  reasonable
             variation between what different dentists  might  describe  as
             'well erupted' wisdom teeth (and the meaning which  you  would
             give to those words), from your clinical experience, how usual
             or unusual would it be for a child under 18  to  have  'all  4
             wisdom teeth,  all  well  erupted'  and  showing  evidence  of
             wear'?"


93.  Professor Rodd responded as follows:-

         "My clinical practice, as a paediatric  dentist,  is  predominantly
         limited to young people under the age of 16 years and I see few  18
         -year-old patients.  However, I do see children  and  young  people
         from a wide range of ethnic minority backgrounds and thus I feel  I
         have sufficient clinical experience  to  respond  to  the  question
         raised.  In my professional opinion it would be  extremely  unusual
         for a young person, under the age of 18  years  to  have  all  four
         wisdom teeth, all well erupted and showing evidence of wear."


(c)  The applicant's criticisms of Mrs Haddon's evidence

94.  Ms Sabic urged me to afford Mrs  Haddon's  evidence  "minimal  weight".
    She based this on a number of propositions.  The  first  was  that  Mrs
    Haddon did not provide her opinion for the purpose of assessing age.  I
    agree with Mr Bourne that  the  circumstances  in  which  Mrs  Haddon's
    evidence came into being in fact give that evidence particular cogency.
     There is nothing to suggest that she approached her examination of the
    applicant on 7 April 2009 with any negative preconceptions  as  to  his
    age.  Her reaction, upon examining the applicant, appears to have  been
    entirely spontaneous.

95.  Ms Sabic urged me to have regard to the fact that Mrs Haddon had  given
    no reason why she had not appeared at the  hearing  to  give  evidence.
    There is, however, no indication that either side  had  considered  her
    attendance to be necessary. I was not told  that  any  application  had
    been made on behalf of the applicant to summon Mrs Haddon.

96.  It is true that there is  said  to  be  some  discrepancy  between  Mrs
    Haddon's observation in April 2009 that the third permanent molars were
    worn and stained and Dr Birch's observation ten months previously, that
    these molars had not fully emerged.  There are three responses to this.
     First, regardless of what Dr Birch saw, the mere fact  of  four  fully
    erupted third permanent molars being observed in April 2009  is  itself
    significant, as regards the applicant's age at  that  time.   Secondly,
    although Dr Birch  is  an  experienced  paediatrician,  she  is  not  a
    dentist, unlike Mrs Haddon.  Thirdly, Dr  Birch's  assessments,  as  we
    have seen, have been adjudged  to  be  qualitatively  problematic,  not
    merely from the statistical point of  view.   Indeed,  in  the  present
    case,  it  is  noteworthy  that  Dr  Birch  on  two   occasions   (E30)
    inaccurately recorded the applicant's stated age on  19  June  2008  as
    being 13 years 6 months when it was plain  that  age  was  12  years  6
    months.

97.  Ms Sabic submitted that the fact the applicant had been  recently  seen
    and examined by a dentist and was treated as a minor "neutralises"  the
    evidence of Mrs Haddon.  I disagree.  There is evidence that Mrs Haddon
    has not been the only dentist to express surprise  at  the  applicant's
    dentition (paragraph [37] above). In any  event,  whilst,  as  we  have
    seen, there is evidence from Mr Stacey that suggests a dentist who  saw
    the applicant in February 2013 may not have reacted to the  applicant's
    dentition in the way Mrs Haddon did in 2009,  we  simply  do  not  know
    whether that dentist applied  her  mind  to  the  significance  of  the
    applicant's wisdom teeth. Nor do we know her  level  of  experience  or
    awareness of the relevant literature on the relationship between wisdom
    teeth and age.

98.  The final set of submissions from Ms Sabic on this issue concerned  the
    limitation in using the  eruption  of  third  permanent  molars  as  an
    accurate or determinative method of assessing the applicant's age.   Mr
    Bourne accepted that limitation but submitted that, even with  it,  the
    dental evidence still pointed to the applicant's being nowhere near  as
    young as 13 or 14 when he saw Mrs Haddon.

99.  That is  plainly  right.   Professor  Rodd's  statement,  referring  to
    Liversidge and Marsden's research, indicates that a person is  thirteen
    or more times more likely than not to be  at  least  18,"if  the  third
    permanent molar was fully developed".  That supports (if  support  were
    needed) Professor Rodd's candid answer to  the  respondent's  question,
    that it would be "extremely unusual" for someone under the age of 18 to
    have all four wisdom teeth, all well erupted and  showing  evidence  of
    wear, such as were observed by Mrs Haddon  in  April  2009.   Professor
    Rodd cannot be said to lack expertise  or  professional  experience  in
    this area.  Nor can it be said she has based her conclusion only on her
    experience of a particular ethnic group. (In any event her report notes
    that Asian children have a similar rate of dental development to  white
    northern Europeans.)

100. I should also mention that my attention has not been drawn to  anything
    in the evidence,  including  the  relevant  literature,  to  support  a
    proposition that sudden trauma or, indeed, a traumatic upbringing,  can
    cause third permanent molars to erupt earlier than would  otherwise  be
    the  case.   There  is,  in  conclusion,  nothing  in  the  applicant's
    background that might explain the dental evidence, in a way that begins
    to be compatible with his claimed age.

H.  Physical Development

101. It is unquestionably the case that, when one compares the  measurements
    taken by Dr Birch in June 2008 with those  taken  at  Mayfield  Medical
    Centre  in  or  around  September  2011  (paragraph  [24]  above),  the
    applicant had not grown at all since he was examined by Dr Birch.  That
    is, in itself, an important piece of evidence, which  was  plainly  not
    available either to Dr Birch or  Immigration  Judge  Sommerville,  when
    they made their respective findings regarding the applicant's age.

102. In R (AM) v Solihull Metropolitan Borough  Council  [2012]  UKUT  00118
    (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held at [17] that if:-

         "...accurate measurements of the claimant's height and  weight  are
         available extending back over a considerable period of time (say 18
         months or more) and show no, or no significant,  change,  we  think
         that that is likely to be a sign that the individual  is  now  over
         about 18."


103. There was, in the present case, no dispute  between  the  parties  that
    the fact the applicant had ceased growing by June 2008 had implications
    for his claimed age then of 12.  None of the materials in  Dr  Birch's
    report, such as her Bengali growth chart,  suggest  Bengali  boys  stop
    growing at that age.  Both sides,  nevertheless,  accepted  that  there
    could be medical or other explanations for this  unusual  developmental
    history.  But Mr Bourne said  that  there  was  no  evidence  for  such
    explanations, with the consequence that the applicant must have reached
    the age of at least 16 when he saw Dr Birch.

104. The only evidence to suggest that the applicant  might,  in  truth,  be
    exceptional  in  this  regard  was  what  Dr  Birch  noted  about   the
    applicant's voice not having broken.  Dr Newth told me in oral evidence
    that it would be unusual for  growth  to  stop  before  the  voice  had
    broken. I have concerns about the evidence of Dr Birch on  this  issue.
    All that she records on the matter, following a single meeting with the
    applicant, is "voice - pitch/break/changes - not broken".  By contrast,
    Mr Singh and Mrs Bazurto in their assessment of 9 September 2009, based
    their observations that  the  applicant's  "voice  is  mature  and  not
    commensurate to that of a 13 year old teenager" on two home  visits  of
    23 April and 28 April 2009. I prefer their evidence on this issue.

105. What other explanations might  there  be  for  the  applicant's  having
    stopped growing at 12?  At E36, Dr Birch considered why the  applicant
    might be smaller than the statistics  suggest  he  ought  to  be.   She
    concluded that he might be "younger than he states, or that he is  very
    short for his age - his height may have been stunted by poor  nutrition
    and neglect in Bangladesh".  It  is  possible  that  such  explanations
    could also account for why the applicant had (as  we  know  to  be  the
    case) stopped growing entirely by the time he met Dr  Birch.   However,
    there is no credible evidence, either of poor nutrition or  of  neglect
    in Bangladesh.  The general thrust of the applicant's evidence has been
    that he was properly fed and looked after in Bangladesh, where  he  and
    his sister attended a  fee-paying  school  and  where  they  enjoyed  a
    lifestyle that meant the entire family could  afford  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom.

106. We are therefore left with  the  possibility  that  trauma  might  have
    caused the applicant to stop  growing.   However,  as  I  have  already
    found, the applicant's account of how  he  was  unexpectedly  abandoned
    with his sister by his parents is not  credible.   It  is,  of  course,
    possible that, even though the applicant was aware in advance of a plan
    to bring him to the United Kingdom, so as to be cared for and  educated
    by the authorities here and thus gain a chance  of  securing  permanent
    residence, the stress involved in actually undertaking that  enterprise
    caused the applicant to stop growing.   But  I  consider  that  such  a
    possibility  (which  in  any  event  finds  no  real  support  in   the
    documentary or other evidence) is, in  all  the  circumstances  of  the
    case, much less likely than that the applicant is  significantly  older
    than he claims.

107. What I would describe as Ms  Sabic's  fall-back  proposition  is  that,
    whatever  the  reason,  something  "highly  unusual"  has  occurred  in
    relation to the applicant's physical growth. Ms  Sabic  relied  on  the
    fact that "on any assessment, [the applicant] is unusually short,  even
    as an adult".

108. The problem with this proposition is  that  it  takes  the  applicant's
    case nowhere.  The fact that the applicant is unusually short, even for
    an adult, could plainly be  explained  by  his  growing  by  less  than
    average amounts until the point when most Bengali  boys  stop  growing.
    Ms Sabic's observation that "no suggestion has ever been made  that  it
    is impossible for growth to cease at age of 12", whilst correct, evades
    the issue that the standard upon which I must assess  the  evidence  is
    the balance of probabilities.  If, however unlikely on its  own  terms,
    there had been strong factors pointing towards such a state of affairs,
    such  as  credible  official   documentary   evidence   recording   the
    applicant's birth, or other  strongly  positive  credibility  findings,
    then it might be  possible  to  reach  a  finding  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that was compatible with the applicant's stopping growing
    at 12.  That is, however, not the case.




I.  Behaviour and the Observations of Others

109. The evidence under this heading is, I  consider,  mixed  and  does  not
    take matters significantly in  either  direction.   On  occasions,  the
    evidence from those tasked with looking  after  the  applicant  depicts
    withdrawn, needy  and  generally  immature  behaviour,  quite  possibly
    indicative of the applicant's claimed age.  At  other  times,  however,
    such as in the weekly reports  from  Brooklands  Children's  Home,  the
    picture is markedly different.  Dr Newth, whilst considering  that  the
    evidence of  behaviour  was  indicative  of  the  claimed  age  of  the
    applicant, nevertheless accepted that a link between behaviour and  age
    might be readily disturbed by various  factors,  such  as  anxiety  and
    depression, both of which she has diagnosed in the applicant.  Although
    there is evidence of the applicant's spending time  with  those  of  or
    around his claimed age, there is also evidence of his associating  with
    adults, not involved in the children's home, and of smoking tobacco and
    cannabis and drinking alcohol.

110. A senior  residential  worker,  Mr  Reekie,  and  the  applicant's  key
    worker, Ms Fowler, were both of the view that the applicant  was  under
    18.  Their views require to be accorded some weight, given  the  extent
    of their interaction with the applicant.  I  also  have  no  reason  to
    doubt the view of Lynn Mallin, of the YMCA, although she has only known
    the applicant as a support worker since 1 December 2012 and I note that
    she says she has "not thought much about [the applicant's]  age  whilst
    supporting him.  I support [the applicant] as I would  with  any  other
    child or young person in my care; in a way that is appropriate for him.
     I have never had any concerns about his age or  had  reason  to  think
    that he is much older than he says  he  is".   I  consider  that  these
    candid comments of Ms Mallin are indicative of  an  understandable  but
    nevertheless relatively superficial consideration by her of  the  issue
    of his age.

111. Essentially, the same  applies  to  the  evidence  of  Mr  Stacey,  the
    applicant's peer mentor.  Mr Stacey's main role is to assist in looking
    after  the  applicant:  "I  have  never  really  thought   about   [the
    applicant's] age before as this is not  really  my  role  as  his  peer
    mentor.  In my role, I do not judge the children  and  young  people  I
    work with.  But I wouldn't say he is any older than he says he is,  17,
    I wouldn't say he is older than me" [Mr Stacey is 19].

112. By contrast, Mr  Mukalazi  records  the  evidence  of  the  applicant's
    schoolteacher, Ms Watson, who was of the view that  the  applicant  was
    "older than he claims to be, and she believes that he is struggling  to
    fit in at the school because of  his  age",  being  frustrated  by  the
    behaviour of the children at the  school,  and  "seems  to  prefer  the
    company of adults".  In similar vein, at E68 there is a  letter  of  12
    November 2012 from Gill Mansell of Steps to Work Walsall Limited, which
    states that, having worked alongside the applicant for three months  "I
    would be inclined to put his age at 19-20  and  after  discussing  this
    with colleagues they are inclined to agree".

113.  Overall, I consider that the evidence under this heading  is  modestly
    favourable to the applicant and is a factor  to  which  I  should  have
    regard when assessing the use to be made  of  the  dental  and  general
    medical evidence (see Part K below).

J.  The Age Assessment of Mr Mukalazi

114. I have, in the course of this judgment, made numerous references to  Mr
    Mukalazi's report.  It is that report which  forms  the  basis  of  the
    respondent's decision, which is the subject of the present proceedings.

115. Ms Sabic undertook  a  lengthy  and  probing  cross-examination  of  Mr
    Mukalazi.   Although,  as  I  shall  explain,  I  find  many  of  those
    criticisms of his report to be well-founded,  I  nevertheless  consider
    that Mr Mukalazi is, as Mr Bourne submitted, a  committed  professional
    who has brought independent judgment to bear on the  case.   I  do  not
    doubt Mr Mukalazi's good faith.  I also  consider  that  Mr  Mukalazi's
    description of the evidence provided by  third  persons,  such  as  the
    staff at the children's home, as well as the dental evidence,  has  not
    been shown to be problematic in any material respect.  In  summary,  Mr
    Mukalazi has, I consider, demonstrated a  reasonable  overview  of  the
    relevant issues concerning the applicant's age.

116. That said, there are serious problems with  his  report.   Mr  Mukalazi
    was unable to produce any notes of the various interviews  or  meetings
    with the applicant.  There was some confusion as to whether  Ms  Wright
    had any notes but, in the event, none were produced  and,  indeed,  she
    was not called to give evidence on behalf of the respondent.  Unlike Mr
    Singh, who said the respondent had not asked him to produce  notes  and
    who, in  any  event,  has  considerable  expertise  in  conducting  age
    assessments, no adequate explanation has been provided for the  absence
    of any notes to underpin Mr Mukalazi's assessment.

117. A proper age assessment involves putting adverse potential findings  to
    the subject of the assessment, in order to obtain his or her  response.
    There is no  satisfactory  evidence  in  the  present  case  that  this
    happened.  Mr Mukalazi told Ms Sabic in evidence that he had done  this
    at the end of the interview.  I agree with Ms Sabic that, in the  light
    of Mr Mukalazi's evidence, this was not  sufficient.   Furthermore,  Mr
    Mukalazi did not take account of any of the representations made by the
    applicant's representatives on 21 November 2011, as he did not consider
    that these were relevant to the issue of age.

118. Mr Mukalazi  had  particular  difficulty  explaining  how  the  various
    headings in his report, and the findings made in relation to them,  fed
    into his overall conclusions at B20.  In  particular,  I  accept  that,
    important though I consider the dental evidence to be  in  the  present
    case, Mr Mukalazi appears to have triple-counted this evidence  in  his
    "averaging" exercise in the last paragraph of his report.  I also share
    Ms Sabic's inability to understand why Mr Mukalazi chose to  place  the
    applicant in the highest age in the range used for physical growth.

119. What Mr Mukalazi described as  "risk-taking  behaviour"  (inappropriate
    sexual behaviour and alcohol and drug use) appears to have been used as
    positively supportive of the applicant's age, whilst Mr  Mukalazi  also
    appears  to  have  taken  those  factors  as  operating   against   the
    applicant's claimed age.  My own view of those behaviours is that  they
    are mildly indicative, in all the circumstances, of the  applicant  not
    being as young as he claims; but they do not  point  strongly  in  that
    direction.  Thus, at the end of the day Mr Mukalazi and I are  probably
    not far apart on this particular issue.   However,  I  agree  with  the
    criticism levelled by Ms Sabic against the idiosyncratic way  in  which
    Mr Mukalazi appears to have reached that result.

120. It was also unorthodox for Mr Mukalazi to have had  two  meetings  with
    the applicant, without any other social worker being present, let alone
    an independent adult. I also consider that Mr Mukalazi  ought  to  have
    had regard to the evidence of the applicant's sister and the fact  that
    she had been found to be of the age she  claimed.   This  is  so,  even
    though, if properly analysed, that evidence may not have had a material
    bearing on the outcome.

121. In all the circumstances, I do not find that I can derive any  material
    assistance from the methodology adopted by Mr Mukalazi in his report.

K.  My Assessment of the Applicant's Age

122. It is now time for me to draw together my various findings and reach  a
    conclusion as to the applicant's age.  For the reasons I have given,  I
    consider that, although this  is  not  a  case  where  the  applicant's
    credibility has been comprehensively demolished, there are  problematic
    aspects to it in connection with the issue of age, which mean that  one
    must look elsewhere in the evidence for  the  most  probative  material
    relating to that issue.

123. In essence, the problems concern the applicant's attempts,  as  I  find
    them to be, to hamper the various United Kingdom authorities  in  their
    efforts to find information in  Bangladesh  concerning  the  applicant,
    including information as to his age.  This is linked with  the  frankly
    incredible role played by Mr Miah and the others in Birmingham whom  Mr
    Singh attempted to contact.  Ms Sabic  submitted  that  "there  was  no
    advantage in support or immigration terms for [the applicant] to say he
    was abandoned when in fact he  was  not".   Since,  on  any  view,  the
    applicant was a child when he came to the United Kingdom he would,  she
    said, "have had to be accommodated and supported by social services and
    further, even if he was of the age  assessed  by  [the  respondent]  he
    would have been entitled to discretionary leave".

124. That is, with respect, not the case.  If the applicant  had  been,  for
    example, apprehended with his parents in the United Kingdom, and if the
    parents had no leave to enter or remain, the Secretary of  State  could
    have been expected to  take  steps  to  remove  the  entire  family  to
    Bangladesh, notwithstanding the minority of the  children.   Similarly,
    if the applicant's parents could be located in Bangladesh or  elsewhere
    and the Secretary of State was satisfied  that  they  could  and  would
    provide satisfactory arrangements for the applicant's care, as a child,
    then the Secretary of State's duty under section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to treat the best interests of the
    child as a primary consideration may well have resulted in  her  making
    arrangements to secure the return of  the  applicant  to  his  parents,
    notwithstanding his being a minor.

125. Whilst in no way ignoring the holistic nature of my  task,  I  consider
    that, in the  present  case,  the  most  helpful  evidence  as  to  the
    applicant's age is the dental evidence.  I shall not repeat here what I
    have earlier said about that evidence.  It is,  however,  necessary  to
    apply it for the purposes of giving the applicant  an  age  which  most
    properly corresponds with the totality of the evidence.

126. Although Mrs Haddon considered that she was looking at someone who  was
    in his early 20s, I consider that, bearing in mind the need to adopt  a
    "sympathetic assessment" of the evidence  (paragraph  [10]  above)  and
    having regard to the two year range in respect of  the  eruption  third
    molars,  as  recognised  by,  amongst  others,  Dr  Birch,   the   most
    appropriate course is to treat the applicant as at the  bottom  of  the
    range described at paragraph 38 on E41  of  Dr  Birch's  report.   This
    would make him 16 years old when she saw him on 19 June 2008, giving  a
    date of birth of 19 June 1992.

127. As a result, Mrs Haddon would have  seen  the  applicant  when  he  was
    around two months short of his 17th birthday.  This conclusion might be
    regarded as a generous one to the applicant, so  far  as  concerns  the
    dental evidence. But, significant though that evidence is,  I  have  to
    make my assessment by reference to the entirety of the evidence in this
    case. This requires me to take appropriate account of those elements of
    the evidence, such as behaviour,  which  may  be  said  to  assist  the
    applicant, albeit not to the extent of taking him to, or even close to,
    his claimed age. The inevitable consequence of my approach is  that  it
    is plain from the dental evidence that the applicant is highly unlikely
    to have been any younger than 16 years and 10 months old  when  he  was
    seen by Mrs Haddon.

128. This approach is also compatible with and supported by the findings  in
    relation to the applicant's having ceased to grow by the time he saw Dr
    Birch.  Mr Bourne submitted that "the growth  evidence  in  combination
    with the dental evidence points overwhelmingly ... to  the  probability
    that [the applicant] had reached the age of at least 16 when he saw  Dr
    Birch".  I agree, albeit that I have decided to find the applicant  was
    exactly 16 when he saw her.  That the applicant had stopped growing  by
    the age of 16 is, on all the evidence, much more likely  than  that  he
    had stopped growing by the age of 12 (see Part H above).

129. Accordingly, I propose to make a declaration  that  the  applicant  was
    born on 19 June 1992.




L.  Submissions regarding Relief

(a) Delay

130. Mr Bourne submitted that  the  proceedings  brought  by  the  applicant
    should, in any event, fail on the grounds of delay.  Ms Sabic responded
    that, having regard to R (Lichfield Securities) v Lichfield  DC  [2001]
    EWCA Civ 304, it was not open to the respondent to raise the  issue  of
    delay at the substantive  hearing.      The  circumstances  which,  she
    said, were identified in the Lichfield case as permitting delay  to  be
    raised at this stage were not present.

131. I do not propose to spend much time  dealing  with  this  issue.   Both
    submissions, with respect, strike me as misconceived.  I consider  that
    the restrictions laid down by the Lichfield case apply only  where  the
    issue of delay has been dealt with at the  permission  stage.   In  the
    present case, the grant of permission by Singh J is entirely silent  on
    the matter on delay.  The issue was raised in the  summary  grounds  of
    defence; but these were filed only after permission  had  been  granted
    (albeit in breach of directions).

132. Mr Bourne conceded that the  delay  in  this  case  concerns  only  the
    period from 9 March 2012, when the decision based on the age assessment
    was taken, to the lodging of the claim form on  29  March.   Mr  Bourne
    contended that, although within the three month  period  prescribed  by
    CPR 54, the application was, nevertheless, not  brought  "promptly"  as
    required by those Rules.  Given the history of  the  matter,  including
    previous pre-action protocol letters served on behalf of the applicant,
    Mr Bourne's case was that, once the decision of 9 March had been  made,
    the applicant should not have  wasted  any  time  at  all  serving  yet
    another pre-action protocol but should have  immediately  proceeded  to
    make his application.

133. Ms Sabic, by contrast, submitted that  a  further  pre-action  protocol
    was still required.  I accept  that,  in  all  the  circumstances,  the
    applicant and his advisors might reasonably have regarded  that  to  be
    the case.  In any event, I do not consider that the delay  is,  in  all
    the circumstances, material.  Mr Bourne has not pointed to  any  damage
    to good administration or other legitimate interests of the respondent,
    which might justify withholding any relief that I  might  otherwise  be
    inclined to grant the applicant, still less justify refusing to make  a
    declaration as to the applicant's age.

(b)  The lawfulness of the respondent's assessment etc.

134. Ms Sabic submitted that it was important for the Tribunal  to  make  "a
    full and reasoned assessment on the lawfulness  of  the  [respondent's]
    approach, regardless of what the [Tribunal]  decides  on  chronological
    age". In this regard, she prayed in aid what she said had been shown to
    be the starting point on the part of the respondent, which was that the
    applicant was to be generally disbelieved and a  finding  made  in  his
    favour only if he was able to disprove a  relevant  matter.   She  also
    submitted that Mr Mukalazi's evidence to the Tribunal disclosed that he
    appeared to think he had been instructed in order to see if  there  was
    any evidence to support the  respondent's  case.   She  supported  this
    submission by reference to E114, where case notes recorded an  employee
    of the respondent as saying:-

         "I am meeting with the SW and TM team next week to review this case
         and look at the available evidence gathered in the Core Assessment.
          We will then arrive at a view as to whether there is a case to say
         [the applicant] is over 18+.  If we conclude there is  evidence  to
         support this then  we  will  seek  legal  advice  with  a  view  to
         discharging him."


135. Ms Sabic's final point was  that  the  fact  the  applicant  was  never
    assessed under the Children Act or given a  care  plan  was  a  serious
    failing on the part of the respondent, regardless of what his  age  was
    ultimately found to be.

(c)  Discussion on lawfulness

136. I have considered both sides' submissions carefully.  Having  done  so,
    I have  concluded  that,  in  all  the  circumstances,  it  is  neither
    necessary nor appropriate to do more than make a declaration as to  the
    applicant's age, in the terms  set  out  above.   The  effect  of  that
    declaration is that the applicant was not a child at  the  date  of  Mr
    Mukalazi's age assessment, albeit that my finding makes  the  applicant
    16 days younger than the date produced by Mr Mukalazi's assessment.

137. Although I consider that that assessment is seriously flawed  and  that
    the issue of the missing notes is of particular concern, I do not  find
    the respondent or Mr Mukalazi have  approached  the  case  in  the  way
    asserted by Ms Sabic.  Unlike her, I find nothing sinister in the  case
    notes at E114.  On the contrary, they suggest that the status quo as to
    age would be maintained, unless there was something  to  indicate  that
    the applicant was over 18.

138. The issue of the care plan was raised as a matter of  concern  only  in
    closing submissions.  Having taken instructions,  Mr  Bourne  submitted
    that the "looked after child" plan was, according  to  the  respondent,
    the care plan.  Be that as it may, the effect  of  the  interim  relief
    granted by the deputy judge has been to preserve the status quo, so far
    as the applicant's treatment by the respondent is concerned  (paragraph
    [7] above) during the period when the applicant was not, on my finding,
    a child.

139. I do not  intend  to  repeat  here  all  that  I  have  said  about  Mr
    Mukalazi's assessment.  In essence, although  the  relevant  evidential
    elements concerning the applicant's age were, in effect, identified  by
    Mr Mukalazi, the procedures he adopted and  the  process  by  which  he
    arrived  at  his  conclusion  as  to  the  applicant's  age  were  both
    problematic.  What I have had to say about them stands as  part  of  my
    judgment in this case.  It is to be expected that the  respondent  will
    draw the necessary lessons, as regards any future  age  assessments  it
    may need to undertake.

140. In all the circumstances, I do not  therefore  consider  that  anything
    useful would be served by quashing the decision of 9 March or by making
    a discrete declaration as to the legality of that decision  and/or  the
    age assessment.

141. In his closing submissions, Mr Bourne acknowledged that any  criticisms
    I might make of the age assessment and its  associated  procedures  may
    well have implications for  any  order  as  to  costs.   I  invite  the
    parties' written submissions on that issue and as to the  form  of  the
    declaration referred to in paragraph [129] above.
















                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
                                       26/03/13
