
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


     SGC and others (EEA - Date of Decision - 1999 Act) Ireland [2005] UKAIT
                                                                       00179


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing:  15 November 2005
                                                         Sent: 23 December
                                    2005

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                   Mr P R Lane (Senior Immigration Judge)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between






                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M Gill QC instructed by Christine Lee & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


In an appeal under the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  against  an  EEA
decision made under the EEA Regulations 2000, section 77(4) of the 1999  Act
applies and an adjudicator or immigration judge  is  required  to  allow  or
dismiss the appeal on the  basis  of  the  facts  as  at  the  date  of  the
Secretary of State's decision and not at the date of the hearing.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The four appellants in these appeals are a family of Chinese ethnicity
     who live in the United Kingdom.  The first appellant was  born  on  15
     July 2002 in Dublin and is, therefore, a citizen of  the  Republic  of
     Ireland.  The second appellant is his sister who was born in the UK on
     2 July 2001 but is a citizen of the People's Republic of  China.   The
     third and fourth appellants are respectively the father and mother  of
     the first and second  appellants.   They  are  both  citizens  of  the
     People's Republic of China.

  2. The third appellant, [    ] came to the United  Kingdom  in  1997  and
     unsuccessfully claimed asylum.  At some point, the fourth appellant, [
        ] came to the UK and  also  unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum.   They
     married in November 1999.   Despite  their  status,  or  lack  of  it,
     neither appellant was restricted from engaging employment and  between
     them, they own and operate two  food  takeaway  businesses  in  Calne,
     Wiltshire where the family lives in accommodation which they lease.

  3. On 24 October 2002,  following  the  birth  of  the  first  appellant,
     representatives acting on behalf of the four appellants applied to the
     Secretary of State for a residence permit for the first appellant  and
     residence documents for the other three appellants.  It  was  said  on
     their behalf that the first appellant, an EU national because  he  was
     an Irish citizen, was exercising his EU free movement rights in the UK
     and, as a result, both he and his family were entitled  to  remain  in
     the UK.   On 10 December 2002, the Secretary of  State  refused  their
     applications.   He  did  not  accept  that  the  first  appellant  was
     exercising an EU right in the UK  and  was,  therefore,  a  "qualified
     person" within the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
     2000, SI 2000/2326 (hereafter "the EEA  Regulations  2000")  and  thus
     also that the other appellants were "family members" of  a  "qualified
     person".

  4. In a determination promulgated on 3 December 2004 an adjudicator, Mr R
     R Hopkins dismissed the  four  appellants'  appeals.   The  appellants
     sought and were granted permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal
     Tribunal in March 2005; that grant now takes effect as  an  order  for
     reconsideration before the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  under  the
     transitional provisions and is restricted, by virtue of rule 62(7)  of
     the Procedure Rules, to the ground upon which leave was granted.

     The EEA Regulations 2000

  5. It is not necessary for us to set out in detail the terms of  the  EEA
     Regulations 2000 which apply to these appeals.  In summary, regulation
     15(1) entitles, on proof of certain matters, the first appellant to  a
     residence permit as an EEA national if he is a "qualified person".  If
     he is so entitled, regulation 15(2) (read with the ECJ's  decision  in
     Chen and Zhu (Case C-200/02) [2004] Imm AR  754)  entitles  the  other
     appellants as his "family members" to residence documents on the  same
     basis.  There is no doubt that the first appellant is an EEA national.
      The only question is whether he is a "qualified  person"  within  the
     EEA Regulations.

  6. The adjudicator rejected the appellants' case that the first appellant
     was exercising an EU right (and thus a "qualified person") as  he  was
     not in receipt of services or was a student.  We  say  no  more  about
     this because Mr  Manjit  Gill  QC,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
     appellants, no longer placed any reliance on this aspect of  the  case
     as original put to the adjudicator.   However,  the  adjudicator  held
     that the first appellant could, in principle, rely on his EU right  of
     free movement under  Article  18,  EC  Treaty  and  Council  Directive
     90/364/EEC if he was a 'self-sufficient' person.

  7.  The  EEA  Regulations  2000  give  effect  to  these  EU  provisions,
     regulation 5(1) of which defines a "qualified person" to include:

           "(e) a self-sufficient person; ...".


  8. Regulation 3(e) states that a "self-sufficient person means  a  person
     who

           "(i) has sufficient resources to avoid his becoming a burden  on
           the social assistance system in the United Kingdom; and
           (ii) is covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in
           the United Kingdom; ...".

  9. The adjudicator accepted that the  family's  resources  and  financial
     situation were such that the first appellant  (and  indeed  the  whole
     family) would not require them to resort to support from public  funds
     (para [29]).  However, he concluded that at the date of the  Secretary
     of State's decision the  first  appellant  and  his  family  were  not
     covered by sickness, i.e medical, insurance.   Their  BUPA  membership
     was dated 27 October 2004: which post-dated the Secretary  of  State's
     decision.  Thus, the first appellant  was  not  a  "qualified  person"
     within the EEA Regulations 2000 exercising treaty rights as  a  'self-
     sufficient' person at the date of the Secretary  of  State's  decision
     although he was by the date of the hearing.   In  paragraphs  [23]  to
     [26] of his determination,  the  adjudicator  concluded  that  he  was
     required to assess the facts  at  the  date  of  decision  and  so  he
     dismissed the appeals.

 10.  It  is  this  final  matter  which  is  the  sole   basis   for   the
     reconsideration.  The facts are not disputed.  It is now accepted that
     if the adjudicator erred in law because he should  have  assessed  the
     facts as at the date of the hearing, the appellants  are  entitled  to
     succeed; otherwise the adjudicator's  decision  is  unassailable.   We
     turn, therefore,  to  consider  that  issue  in  the  context  of  the
     statutory appeal framework

     The appeal framework

 11. The Secretary of State's decisions in  this  case  were  taken  on  10
     December 2002 and hence the appeal framework is to  be  found  in  the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and the EEA  Regulations  2000  as  in
     force at that time.

 12. Part VII of the EEA  Regulations  2000  governs  appeals  against  EEA
     decisions.  Regulation 29(1) provides for the  appeal  and  regulation
     29(3),  for  these  purposes,  states  that  the  appeal  is   to   an
     adjudicator.  The appeal provisions are made pursuant to the power  in
     section 80 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  In paragraph  [24]
     of his determination, the adjudicator concluded that neither  the  EEA
     Regulations 2000 nor section 80 assisted him in  deciding  whether  he
     should assess the facts at  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decisions or at the date of hearing.  Mr Gill appeared to be  of  much
     the same view when he addressed the Tribunal.  Both are mistaken.

 13. We deal first with the EEA Regulations 2000.  Regulation 29(4)  states
     that:

           "Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act (appeals), to the extent  (and  with
           the modifications) set out in Schedule 2 to  these  Regulations,
           has effect in relation to appeals to the adjudicator under these
           Regulations."

 14. When one turns to Schedule 2 to the Regulations, we see that parts  of
     Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act are to apply to EEA appeals, in  particular
     paragraph 2 of Schedule  4  states  that  "paragraphs  21  to  23"  of
     Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act shall apply.  For these purposes  paragraph
     21 is the important one.  It provides, so far as relevant, as follows:
                          "Determination of Appeals


           21(1) On an appeal to him under Part  IV,  an  adjudicator  must
           allow the appeal if he considers -
                 (a) that the decision or action against which the appeal is
           brought  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  with  any
           immigration rules applicable to the case, or
                 (b) ....


           but otherwise must dismiss the appeal."

 15. We pointed out this statutory provision to Mr Gill at the hearing.  He
     seemed to be unaware of its existence or, at least, of its application
     to these appeals.  By  virtue  of  regulation  29(4),  it  is  clearly
     applicable.  The statutory provision is phrased  in  the  past  tense:
     "was not in accordance with the law"  (our  emphasis).   The  Tribunal
     reminded Mr Gill that it was the equivalent words in section 19(1)  of
     the  Immigration  Act  1971  which  led  the  courts,   perhaps   most
     prominently the Court of Appeal in R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex
     parte Kotecha [1983] 2 All ER 289, to decide that in appeals  governed
     by the 1971 Act, adjudicators were required to assess the facts as  at
     the  date  of  the  immigration  decision.   It  is   true   that   in
     Sandralingham and Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97 the  Court  of  Appeal
     held that in asylum cases the general (past tense) wording of  section
     19(1) had to give way to the particular (forward looking)  wording  of
     section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration Appeals  Act  1993  in  asylum
     appeals.   However,  there  are  no   contrary   specific   provisions
     applicable here, for example to be found in the EEA  Regulations  2000
     themselves.  Indeed,  the  1999  Act  has  specific  provisions  which
     parallel the interpretation in Kotecha.

 16. We now  turn  to  consider  those  provisions.   A  further  statutory
     provision is  highly  relevant  to  the  disposal  of  these  appeals.
     Section 80 of the 1999 Act deals with appeals against  EEA  decisions.
     Whilst much of it relates to the scope of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     power to make regulations in respect of appeals in EEA cases,  section
     80(9) goes further.  We did not have the benefit of  submissions  upon
     it as, inexplicably, it was not drawn to our attention at the hearing.
      Section 80(9) states that in appeals against EEA decisions:

           "(9) Part IV [of  the  1999  Act]  has  effect  subject  to  any
           regulations made under this section."

 17. Part IV of the 1999 Act contains the statutory  provisions  regulating
     in general appeals to adjudicators and the  (former)  IAT.   Contained
     within Part IV is section 77 and, in particular,  sections  77(3)  and
     (4) which provide as follows:

           "(3) In considering -
                 (a) any ground mentioned in section 69, or
                 (b) any question relating to the appellant's rights  under
           Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention
           the appellate authority may take into account any evidence which
           it considers to be relevant to the  appeal  (including  evidence
           about matters arising after  the  date  on  which  the  decision
           appealed against was taken).


           (4) In considering any other ground, the appellate authority may
           take into account only evidence -
                 (a) which was available to the Secretary of State  at  the
           time when the decision appealed against was taken; or
                 (b) which relates to relevant facts as at that date."

 18. The combined effect of section 77(3) and (4) is well recognised within
     this jurisdiction.   In determining appeals on asylum or human  rights
     grounds  which  are  governed  by  the  1999  Act,  adjudicators   (or
     immigration judges) are required to look at the facts as at  the  date
     of the hearing (s72(3) as interpreted in SK* [2002] UKIAT 05613).   By
     contrast, in all other appeals, adjudicators (or  immigration  judges)
     must look to the facts at the date of decision (s77(4)).  The contrast
     is clear: the nature of the "grounds" relied  upon  to  challenge  the
     immigration decision dictate the date the adjudicator (or  immigration
     judge) must focus upon in determining the facts.

 19. Section 77(3) and (4) is, by virtue of section 80(9) of the 1999  Act,
     applicable in appeals against EEA decisions under the EEA  Regulations
     2000.  Reliance  upon  EU  rights  -  which  is  the  basis  of  these
     appellants' cases - do not fall within section 77(3) and  so  are,  on
     the face of it, covered  by  section  77(4)  and  the  adjudicator  is
     required to find the facts as at the date of the Secretary of  State's
     decision.

 20. Mr Gill sought to counter what might seem to be the inevitable outcome
     of applying paragraph 21(1) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act (and had  he
     contemplated it section 77(4) also) by  submitting  that  it  did  not
     apply here because EU rights were at stake.  We, of course,  recognise
     that English  law  must  be  interpreted  consistently  with  directly
     applicable EU law and ultimately must give way to it when that EU  law
     contradicts our own domestic law.  We do not cite  here,  nor  require
     citation to  us,  of  authority  for  that  broad  approach  which  is
     undeniable.   Mr Gill referred us  to  the  ECJ  decision  in  Mark  &
     Spencer v Customs and Excise Commissioners (Case C-62/00) [2003] 2 WLR
     665.  He principally relied upon 'the principle of effectiveness'.  In
     a passage, to which we were referred, the ECJ sets out in summary  the
     relevant EU principles (at para [34]):

           "34 ... it is for the domestic legal system of each member state
           to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to
           lay down the detailed procedural  rules  governing  actions  for
           safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law,
           provided, first that such rules are  not  less  favourable  than
           those governing  similar  domestic  actions  (the  principle  of
           equivalence) and, secondly, that they do  not  render  virtually
           impossible or  excessively  difficult  the  exercise  of  rights
           conferred by Community  law  (the  principle  of  effectiveness)
           ...".


 21. The facts of that case are far removed from the present and  need  not
     detain us.  The principles spelt out are, however, those we understand
     Mr Gill to rely upon in these appeals.  Mr Gill submitted that  unless
     we  adopt  a  date  of  hearing  rule,  appellants  (including   these
     appellants) who rely upon their EU rights will be denied them.  We  do
     not agree.   Whichever rule is adopted, an adjudicator (or immigration
     judge) is simply deciding whether the Secretary  of  State's  decision
     not to recognise the appellant's EU rights was correct at the relevant
     time - whether then or now.  The argument,  in  effect,  confuses  the
     role of the Secretary of  State  who  holds  the  executive  power  to
     recognise an individual's rights and the role of the appellate  system
     which is to correct errors by him.  Even if  the  appeal  decision  is
     adverse to an appellant, that judicial decision does not  foreclose  a
     further application by the individual to the Secretary of State on the
     basis that the evidence now shows that he has a right to remain on the
     basis of an EU right.  It is difficult to see  how  the  principle  of
     effectiveness could be said to be transgressed when, on  the  case  as
     put by Mr Gill, at any time  since  they  obtained  medical  insurance
     effective from 27 October 2004 (and therefore  prior  to  the  hearing
     before the adjudicator), the claimants could have obtained the  relief
     they now seek by direct application to the Secretary of  State.   That
     being so, we do not see how adopting a date of decision rule  "renders
     virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise  of  rights
     conferred by Community law".

 22. Turning to the other  principle,  namely  that  of  "equivalence",  we
     understood  Mr  Gill  to  argue  that  it  was  breached  because   an
     appellant's EU rights were not  assessed  on  the  same  basis  as  an
     individual's human rights which, by virtue of section 77(3),  were  to
     be determined on the facts  as  at  the  date  of  hearing.   Although
     possessing a certain superficial attraction,  we  do  not  accept  the
     argument.   As the Tribunal pointed out during the hearing, the  issue
     of which date is taken as the correct one to ascertain  the  facts  is
     essentially neutral in its impact.  It is neutral as between EEA cases
     and others in-country cases.  The equivalent claim to remain by a non-
     EEA national will be on the basis  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  an
     applicable Home Office policy.  In such cases, the  date  of  decision
     rule applies equally to EEA nationals and others  alike.    Should  an
     EEA national wish to raise  human  rights  grounds  to  challenge  the
     Secretary of State's decision, he may do so and the  legislation  puts
     him on precisely the same evidential footing as any other individual.

 23. In the result, we reject Mr Gill's submissions.  We see no reason  not
     to apply the clear and unequivocal legislative provisions in the  1999
     Act to  appeals  against  EEA  decisions.   In  an  appeal  under  the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 against an EEA decision made under the
     EEA Regulations 2000, section 77(4) of the 1999  Act  applies  and  an
     adjudicator or immigration judge is required to determine the facts as
     at the date of the Secretary of State's decision and not at  the  date
     of the hearing.

 24. The proper course for these appellants is to make  fresh  applications
     to the Secretary of State based upon the facts as they are said to  be
     at the date of any such application.

 25. For completeness, we note that the position is different  for  appeals
     against EEA decisions governed by  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002 where the Secretary of State's decision was taken  on,
     or after, 1 April 2003.   Regulation  29(7)  and  Schedule  2  to  the
     Regulations in their current version apply section 85(4)  and  (5)  of
     the 2002 Act to EEA appeals.  At least for in-country appeals, section
     85(4) makes  clear  that  the  Tribunal  must  consider  all  relevant
     evidence including matters arising after the date of decision and thus
     must determine the facts as at the date of hearing (LS  (Post-decision
     evidence; direction; appealability) Gambia [2005] UKAIT 00085).

     Decision

 26. For these reasons, we conclude that the Adjudicator  did  not  make  a
     material error of law and his decision  dismissing  the  appeals  must
     stand.







                                                           PROFESSOR A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
