
[pic]

           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of B) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
(Rule 33A JR amendments and transfers) IJR [2016] UKUT 00182 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


Field House
8 March 2016

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE WALKER
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                   Between


                     The QUEEN (on the application of B)
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          Hearing date: 4 June 2015

- - - - - - - -

Mr Declan O'Callaghan, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, appeared on
behalf of the applicant.

Mr Mathew Gullick, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared
on behalf of the respondent.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

(i)   Neither s.18, nor any other provision in  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
     Enforcement Act 2007  ("the  2007  Act"),  nor  any  provision  in  the
     Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 gives the Upper Tribunal
     a discretionary power to transfer to the High Court a  case  which  has
     been begun in the Upper Tribunal. Where a case has been transferred  to
     the Upper Tribunal, it is  only  in  circumstances  bringing  the  case
     within rule 33A(3)(b) that a discretionary power to transfer  the  case
     back to the High Court will arise.

(ii)  Section 18(11) of the 2007 Act contemplates  that  Tribunal  Procedure
     Rules should provide for the making of amendments  to  judicial  review
     proceedings in the Upper Tribunal which would  have  the  effect  that,
     once made, the application would be required to be transferred  to  the
     High Court. Rule 33A does this by expressly giving the tribunal control
     over the making of such  amendments,  and  it  ensures  also  that  the
     tribunal controls whether there can be reliance on  additional  grounds
     which would have the same effect.


MR JUSTICE WALKER:

[Table of Contents]
A. Introduction  2
B. A declaration of interest 3
C. Background    3
D. Legislative history prior to May 2011     3
  D1. Judicial review jurisdiction: the 2007 Act as enacted   3
    D1.1 The 2007 Act as enacted: general     3
    D1.2 As enacted: claims that may be made to the Upper Tribunal  3
    D1.3 As enacted: claims which must or may be transferred by the High
    Court   3
  D2. Judicial review jurisdiction: new "Fresh Claim" powers  3
E. The May 2011 TPC consultation  3
  E1. The May 2011 TPC consultation: general  3
  E2. May 2011: amendments requiring transfer 3
  E3. May 2011: amendments after transfer     3
  E4. Responses, TPC reply, and the new rule 33A   3
F. Legislative history: November 2011 onwards      3
G. Validity of the 27 May consent order 3
H. Conclusion    3


A. Introduction


   1. The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, as  amended  ("the
      Upper Tribunal rules"), made under section 22 and schedule  5  of  the
      Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ("the  2007  Act"),  govern
      the practice and procedure to be followed in the Upper Tribunal. On 17
      October 2011 a new rule 33A came into force. By rule 33A(1) it applies
      only to judicial review proceedings arising under the law  of  England
      and Wales.


   2. Paragraph (2) of rule 33A states that in relation to  judicial  review
      proceedings arising under the law of England and Wales:

           (a) the powers of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  permit  or  require
           amendments under rule 5(3)(c) extend to amendments which  would,
           once in place, give rise to an obligation or power  to  transfer
           the proceedings to the High Court in  England  and  Wales  under
           section 18(3) of the 2007 Act or paragraph (3);

           (b) except with the permission of the Upper Tribunal, additional
           grounds  may  not  be  advanced,  whether  by  an  applicant  or
           otherwise, if they would give rise to an obligation or power  to
           transfer the proceedings to the High Court in England and  Wales
           under section 18(3) of the 2007 Act or paragraph (3).


   3. Paragraph (3) of rule 33A provides:

           (3) Where the High Court in England and  Wales  has  transferred
           judicial review proceedings to  the  Upper  Tribunal  under  any
           power or duty and subsequently the proceedings  are  amended  or
           any party advances additional grounds -

              (a) if the proceedings in their present form could  not  have
              been transferred to the Upper  Tribunal  under  the  relevant
              power or duty had they been in that form at the time  of  the
              transfer, the Upper Tribunal must  transfer  the  proceedings
              back to the High Court in England and Wales;

              (b) subject to sub-paragraph (a), where the proceedings  were
              transferred to the Upper Tribunal under section 31A(3) of the
              Senior Courts Act 1981 (power  to  transfer  judicial  review
              proceedings to the Upper Tribunal), the  Upper  Tribunal  may
              transfer proceedings back to the High Court  in  England  and
              Wales if it appears just and convenient to do so.


   4. The present case is a claim for judicial review  begun  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal. It concerns the entitlement of the respondent  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department to return the applicant asylum-seeker to
      Malta under the Dublin III Convention. That convention is now embodied
      in EU law: see Regulation (EU) 604/2013 of the European Parliament and
      of  the  Council  of  26  June  2013  establishing  the  criteria  and
      mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for  examining
      an application for international  protection  lodged  in  one  of  the
      Member States by  a  third-country  national  or  a  stateless  person
      (recast), which I shall refer to as "the recast Regulation".


   5. In the present case a proposed consent order, signed by the parties on
      22 May 2015, was sealed by the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of  the
      Upper Tribunal on 27 May 2015 ("the 27 May consent order"). The 27 May
      consent order purported to transfer the claim to the High Court.  This
      course was taken because the applicant proposed to ask the High  Court
      for permission to amend to claim a declaration of  incompatibility,  a
      remedy which in England and Wales only the High  Court  has  power  to
      grant. The validity of the 27  May  consent  order,  however,  was  in
      doubt. A question arose as to whether rule 33A gave the Upper Tribunal
      power to make the 27 May consent order. At a hearing on 4 June 2015  I
      ruled that the 27 May consent order was not permitted by rule 33A, and
      was accordingly a nullity. I now give my considered reasons  for  that
      ruling.


   6. At the hearing Mr  Declan  O'Callaghan,  instructed  by  Duncan  Lewis
      Solicitors ("Duncan Lewis"), appeared for  the  applicant.  Mr  Mathew
      Gullick, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  appeared  for
      the respondent. I am grateful for the assistance that I have  received
      from the legal teams on both sides.



B. A declaration of interest


   7. Prior to the hearing I advised the parties:

           As regards Upper Tribunal Rule 33A, the  parties  should  please
           note that:

               (1) I was the Chairman of the Tribunal  Procedure  Committee
           ("TPC") from 2010 to 2012;

               (2) the TPC's consultation papers on  Fresh  Claim  Judicial
           Reviews and on  Judicial  Review  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
           replies to consultation responses, were  published  during  that
           period;

               (3) the relevant statutory instrument introducing  rule  33A
           was made by the TPC during that period;

               (4) I was responsible for  much  of  the  drafting  of  what
           became rule 33A.





   8. I asked the parties  whether  in  these  circumstances  they  had  any
      objection to my dealing with the matter. Both sides stated  that  they
      had no objection. In the circumstances I concluded that  it  would  be
      undesirable to recuse myself of my own motion,  as  the  parties  were
      content for me  to  deal  with  the  matter,  and  as  it  may  assist
      practitioners to highlight certain aspects of the consideration  given
      by the TPC to rule 33A.


C. Background


   9. The applicant is a national of Eritrea. He  has  concerns  about  what
      would happen to him if the Maltese authorities were to return  him  to
      Eritrea. Without pre-judging those concerns, I have directed  that  he
      is not to be identified in any report of these proceedings, and is  to
      be known in these proceedings as "B". Dealings with B  concerning  his
      status here have been handled by United Kingdom Visas and  Immigration
      ("UKVI") on behalf of the respondent.


  10. B says that he  had  been  living  in  Libya,  and  had  escaped  from
      detention there, before coming to this country in  February  2014.  He
      claimed asylum here. However he accepts that, before coming  here,  he
      irregularly crossed the border into Malta on 29  March  2011  by  sea,
      having come from Libya. On 19 March 2014 Malta accepted that it is the
      member state responsible for B under the recast Regulation.


  11. In a letter to B dated 26 March 2014 ("the  26  March  asylum  refusal
      letter") UKVI recorded this acceptance by Malta. The letter could have
      been more clearly expressed: there was in one  place  a  reference  to
      "Bulgaria" instead of "Malta", and in another an omission to  identify
      Malta at all. Nevertheless it was tolerably clear from the letter that
      the respondent had concluded that Malta was a safe  third  country  to
      which B could be sent, and that accordingly the respondent declined to
      examine B's asylum application  substantively.  The  letter  certified
      that conditions mentioned in paragraphs 4 and 5 of part 2 of  schedule
      3 to the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
      2004 were satisfied. This certification deprived B  of  an  in-country
      right of appeal against the refusal of asylum.


  12. On 10 April 2014 Duncan Lewis wrote to UKVI a  letter  before  action.
      The letter submitted  that  certification  of  B's  asylum  claim  was
      unlawful. Referring to the recent decision of the Supreme Court in  EM
      (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKSC 12,
      the letter made human rights  representations.  Those  representations
      asserted that returning B to Malta would breach article 3 and  article
      5 of the European Convention on Human Rights in that:

           ... on his return to Malta he is likely to face  poor  reception
           conditions, mandatory detention for a prolonged period  of  time
           without access to  lawyers  or  a  speedy  and  effective  legal
           redress mechanism to address to the lawfulness of his detention.




  13. The claim form in the present case, seeking permission  to  apply  for
      judicial review, was issued in the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of
      the Upper Tribunal on 11 April 2014. It was accompanied by Grounds for
      seeking Judicial Relief ("B's grounds").  B's  grounds  noted  that  a
      reply was awaited to B's human rights representations.


  14. On 8 May 2014 UKVI wrote a letter ("the 8 May human  rights  rejection
      letter") to Duncan  Lewis.  This  letter  rejected  B's  human  rights
      claims. It noted that in EM (Eritrea) the Supreme Court had recognised
      that  there  remained  a  "significant  evidential  presumption"  that
      European Member States would comply with their obligations under  both
      European law and the European Convention on Human Rights. Lord Kerr in
      that case had emphasised that "to rebut  the  presumption  a  claimant
      will have to produce sufficient evidence to  show  that  it  would  be
      unsafe for the court to rely on it." In relation  to  article  3,  the
      letter said that B had not shown that he was at real risk of breach of
      that article on  return  to  Malta,  whether  deriving  from  systemic
      deficiencies in the asylum procedures and reception conditions in that
      state, or by  way  of  any  other  route,  including  individual  risk
      factors. In relation to article 5  the  letter  noted  that  detention
      would be required to be in strict accordance with Maltese law  and  to
      be fully compliant with article 5(1)(f) of the European Convention  on
      Human Rights. In relation to the entirety of B's  human  rights  claim
      the letter certified that that claim  was  "clearly  unfounded".  This
      certification deprived B of an in-country right of appeal against  the
      rejection of his human rights claim.


  15. An acknowledgement of service was lodged by the respondent  on  9  May
      2015. It was accompanied by summary grounds of defence  which  relied,
      among other things, on the 26 March asylum refusal letter  and  the  8
      May human rights rejection letter.


  16. The application for permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  came
      before His Honour Judge Purle QC, sitting as  a  judge  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal, for consideration on the papers. In a decision dated 21  May
      2015 he granted permission,  and  gave  case  management  and  listing
      directions. In  accordance  with  His  Honour  Judge  Purle's  listing
      directions the application was listed to be  heard  by  a  High  Court
      judge on 4 June 2015.


  17. On 19 May 2015 Duncan Lewis wrote to the Government Legal  Department.
      Their letter sought consent to proposed amendment of B's grounds,  and
      to transfer of the proceedings to the High Court. The proposed amended
      grounds included a new head of relief, in the form of a declaration of
      incompatibility.  A   document   headed   "Application   to   transfer
      proceedings to the High  Court  of  Justice"  was  enclosed  with  the
      letter. This document explained that the Upper Tribunal did  not  have
      jurisdiction  to  deal  with  an  application  for  a  declaration  of
      incompatibility. It added:

           Consequently, [B] applies for a transfer of  his  claim  to  the
           High Court.


  18. The document drew attention to a judicial review  claim  in  the  High
      Court concerning return of another asylum-seeker to  Malta  under  the
      recast Regulation. It explained that amended grounds in that case also
      sought a declaration of incompatibility, and it was proposed  to  link
      the present case with that case.


  19. On 22 May the  parties  signed  an  agreed  "Form  of  Consent".  This
      document referred to B as "the  Claimant".  So  far  as  material,  it
      provided:

           1. The Substantive Hearing for 4 June 2015 is vacated

           2. The Claimant's claim for Judicial Review  be  transferred  to
           the Administrative Court

           3. Upon transfer the Claimant have leave to make an  application
           to  amend  his  Judicial  Review  grounds  with  notice  to  the
           Respondent

           ...


  20. An important feature of this  "Form  of  Consent"  is  that  what  was
      proposed involved  no  amendment  to  the  proceedings  prior  to  the
      proposed transfer. Instead, it envisaged that upon  transfer  B  would
      have "leave to make an application to amend ...".


  21. The "Form of Consent" as signed by the parties  was  lodged  with  the
      Upper Tribunal. Once lodged, it was placed before Upper Tribunal Judge
      Jordan. He approved the "Form of Consent" and  signed  it  on  27  May
      2015. On the same day it was sealed  by  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber of the Upper Tribunal. Thus it was that  the  27  May  consent
      order came into being.


  22. However, a further order was made by Judge Jordan on 28 May  ("the  28
      May order"). It was headed:

           Application for the Upper Tribunal to consent to a  transfer  to
           the Administrative Court


  23. The 28 May order stated that it was made upon reading "the application
      for judicial review and the proposed consent order". I infer from this
      that Judge Jordan was unaware that the "Form of Consent" had  in  fact
      been sealed the previous day. The 28 May order recorded a decision  by
      Judge Jordan, along with directions, as follows:

           Decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

           I make no order transferring the application

           Directions:

           1. The application is to remain listed for  substantive  hearing
           on 4 June 2015

           2. The application is to be listed before a High Court Judge.


  24. Under the heading, "Reasons", the 28 May order stated:

           1. The matter has been listed for one-day as the hearing of  the
           substantive application (permission having been granted by Judge
           Purle QC).

           2. The Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine the
           issues raised in the grounds of application. No argument has  so
           far addressed the Upper Tribunal's want of jurisdiction.

           3. If the Upper Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, the  Judge  hearing
           the appeal is able to sit  as  a  Judge  of  the  Administrative
           Court.

           4. No  application  for  permission  to  amend  the  grounds  of
           application has been made and no draft of the  proposed  amended
           grounds has been submitted.

           5. The directions made by Judge Purle QC on  21  May  2014  were
           explicit and the consequences of a failure to comply with  those
           directions may be explored at the hearing.

           6. There is sufficient time to prepare for the  hearing  on  the
           basis of the material already filed and served.


  25. B's skeleton argument dated 3 June 2015 explained that the parties had
      proceeded on the basis that it was for the High Court to consider  B's
      application to amend because  only  the  High  Court,  not  the  Upper
      Tribunal,  possesses  jurisdiction  to  consider  a   declaration   of
      incompatibility. While noting that rule 33A "can appropriately be read
      as requiring a grant of permission to the amendment of a  claim  form/
      amendment of grounds before consideration can be given to the transfer
      of proceedings," the skeleton argument added at paragraphs 11 and 12:

           11. As this matter raises what appears to be a novel point,  and
           one of some importance,  consideration  has  been  given  as  to
           whether a wider power can be identified  within  the  provision,
           permitting a situation whereby the Upper Tribunal  can  exercise
           its  powers  to  transfer  without  previously  having   granted
           permission that additional grounds be advanced.

           12. The heart  of  the  consideration  is  where  the  power  to
           transfer bites:  is  there  a  requirement  that  permission  be
           granted to amend  grounds  giving  rise  to  the  obligation  to
           transfer proceedings before such power  to  transfer  as  exists
           under section 33A is established? Or can the Upper Tribunal  act
           upon notification of intention, exercise its power  to  transfer
           and give directions as to the filing of amended grounds with the
           High  Court?  Though  the  former  may  be  preferred  in   many
           situations, the latter may be satisfactory where the parties are
           in agreement that a transfer is  appropriate  and  such  a  step
           prevents unnecessary use of public funds.





  26. The questions posed in paragraph 12 require consideration  not  merely
      of powers to transfer but also of duties to transfer. For this purpose
      I examine in turn the legislative history prior to the introduction of
      rule 33A,  the  consideration  of  that  rule  by  the  TPC,  and  the
      subsequent legislative history: see sections D,  E  and  F  below.  My
      analysis is then set out in section G below.


  27. It is important to stress that in this judgment I  am  concerned  only
      with the position in England and Wales. I add that  both  the  27  May
      consent order and the 28  May  order  referred  to  transfer  "to  the
      Administrative Court". This was no doubt  because  the  Administrative
      Court is the part of the  High  Court  which  deals  with  claims  for
      judicial review. In the remainder of this judgment I  shall  generally
      follow the statutory wording and refer to the "High Court".


D. Legislative history prior to May 2011


D1. Judicial review jurisdiction: the 2007 Act as enacted


D1.1 The 2007 Act as enacted: general


  28. The 2007 Act created  both  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal ("FTT"). Appeals lie from the  FTT  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      which also has a number of additional  roles.  Importantly,  in  cases
      arising under the law of  England  and  Wales,  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      additional roles include the exercise of power under section 15 of the
      2007 Act to grant certain relief which has the same effect  as  relief
      granted by the High Court on an application for judicial review. Under
      section 15(1) the relief that may be  granted  comprises  a  mandatory
      order, a prohibiting order, a quashing  order,  a  declaration  or  an
      injunction. In circumstances described  in  section  16(6)  the  Upper
      Tribunal may  award  to  an  applicant  damages,  restitution  or  the
      recovery of a sum due. Certain supplementary powers  are  set  out  in
      section 17.


  29. Detailed provision is made in section 15 (3),  (4)  and  (5),  and  in
      section 16,  to equate the Upper Tribunal's role  in  judicial  review
      claims to that of the High Court, among  other  things  by  making  it
      necessary for an applicant to seek permission to make the application.
      By section 15(3) relief granted under section 15 has the same  effect,
      and is enforceable, as if it were granted by  the  High  Court  on  an
      application for judicial review. By section 15(4) and  (5)  the  Upper
      Tribunal,  in  deciding  whether  to  grant  relief,  must  apply  the
      principles that would be applied by the High Court on  an  application
      for judicial review. The  availability  and  effect  of  relief  under
      section 15 will thus in all material respects  be  the  same  as  that
      granted by the High Court on judicial  review.  It  follows  that,  as
      regards mandatory, prohibiting or quashing orders  under  section  15,
      applicable principles concerning prerogative relief will  be  no  less
      relevant in the Upper Tribunal than they would be in the  High  Court.
      No doubt for this reason cases seeking relief  under  section  15  are
      listed using the same terminology as in High  Court  applications  for
      prerogative orders - the case being brought in the name of  the  Crown
      on the application of the party seeking relief.


  30. It is convenient to refer to the powers arising under sections  15  to
      17 as "the Upper Tribunal's judicial  review  powers".  Significantly,
      however, the powers listed in those sections do not include the  power
      to grant a declaration of incompatibility under the Human  Rights  Act
      1998.


  31. The Upper Tribunal rules in their original form were made by  the  TPC
      on 9 October 2008 (SI 2008 No.  2698).  They  came  into  force  on  3
      November 2008, the date on which relevant parts of the 2007  Act  came
      into force. Part 4 concerned particular  aspects  of  judicial  review
      claims:


        1) Rule 27 made specific provision for judicial review  proceedings
           transferred to the Upper Tribunal.


        2) Rules 28 to 30 made provision for applications for permission to
           apply for judicial review, for acknowledgements of service  with
           accompanying grounds of opposition, and  for  permission  to  be
           decided on the papers.


        3) In cases where permission was wholly or partly refused, or  made
           subject to conditions, rule 30 enabled  the  applicant  to  seek
           reconsideration at a hearing.


        4) Rule 31 entitled any person who had been notified by  the  Upper
           Tribunal of a grant of permission, and who wished to contest  or
           support the claim, to provide detailed grounds for that purpose.




        5) Rule 32,  by  contrast,  prevented  an  applicant,  without  the
           consent of the Upper Tribunal, from relying on any grounds other
           than those on which the grant of permission had been obtained.


        6) Rule 33 set out certain entitlements to submit evidence, to make
           representations   at   a   hearing,   and   to   make    written
           representations.


  32. When can the Upper Tribunal's judicial  review  powers  be  exercised?
      Section  15(2)  identifies  two  categories.  The  first  arises  when
      conditions in section 18 (dealing with applications made to the  Upper
      Tribunal) are met. The second arises where there has been  a  transfer
      from the High Court to the Upper Tribunal: in that event section 19(3)
      and (4) may authorise the Upper Tribunal to proceed  even  though  not
      all of those conditions are  met.  The  requirements  in  this  second
      category differ according to whether the  application  is  of  a  kind
      which the High Court is required to transfer to the Upper Tribunal, or
      whether it is of a kind in  relation  to  which  the  High  Court  may
      exercise a discretionary power of transfer to the Upper  Tribunal.  In
      each of these types of case the  conditions  which  must  be  met  are
      discussed below.


D1.2 As enacted: claims that may be made to the Upper Tribunal


  33. Section 18 of the 2007 Act concerns judicial review claims made to the
      Upper Tribunal. In this section I describe it  as  enacted.  It  lists
      four conditions. It is convenient to refer to each of  the  conditions
      listed in section 18 as a "Section 18 Condition."  Only  if  all  four
      Section 18 Conditions  are  met  will  the  Upper  Tribunal  have  the
      function of deciding the application. If the Upper Tribunal  does  not
      have the function of deciding the application  (i.e.  if  any  of  the
      Section 18 Conditions was  not  met)  then  the  Upper  Tribunal  must
      transfer the application to the High Court: see section 18(3).


  34. Section 18 Condition 1 is found in section 18(4). It is  concerned  to
      limit applications in the Upper Tribunal for judicial review,  or  for
      permission to apply for judicial review, to those seeking the types of
      relief identified in sections 15  and  16,  along  with  interest  and
      costs.


  35. Section 18 Condition 2 is found in section 18(5). It requires that the
      application must not call into question anything  done  by  the  Crown
      Court.


  36. Section 18 Condition 3 is found in section 18(6).  Subsection  (6)  is
      concerned to limit the classes of case which may be begun in the Upper
      Tribunal. It limits them to those within a  class  specified  for  the
      purposes of the subsection. The specification must be  set  out  in  a
      direction given in accordance  with  Part  1  of  Schedule  2  to  the
      Constitutional Reform Act 2005. For cases arising  under  the  law  of
      England and Wales, this will be a direction by the Lord Chief  Justice
      made with the consent of the Lord Chancellor. In this regard:


        1) Two classes of case were specified  under  section  18(6)  in  a
           direction given by the Lord Chief Justice  on  29  October  2008
           (see  Practice  Direction  (Upper  Tribunal:   Judicial   review
           jurisdiction) [2008] WLR (D) 336).


        2) The first of the two classes, at paragraph (a) of the direction,
           comprised "any decision of the [FTT] on an appeal  made  in  the
           exercise  of  a  right  conferred  by  the   Criminal   Injuries
           Compensation Scheme in  compliance  with  section  5(1)  of  the
           Criminal  Injuries  Compensation  Act  1995   (appeals   against
           decisions on review)."


        3) What paragraph (a) does is to focus on  judicial  review  claims
           seeking to challenge the main type of decisions  dealt  with  in
           the Criminal Injuries Compensation jurisdiction  of  the  Social
           Entitlement Chamber of the  FTT.  They  are  excluded  decisions
           under section 11(5)(a) of  the  2007  Act,  so  they  cannot  be
           appealed from the FTT to the Upper Tribunal - hence the route of
           judicial review as the means of challenge.


        4) The second of the two classes specified in 2008 is at  paragraph
           (b) of the direction. It comprises "any decision  of  the  [FTT]
           made under the Tribunal Procedure Rules or  section  9  of  [the
           2007 Act] where there  is  no  right  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal and that decision is not an  excluded  decision  within
           paragraph (b), (c), or (f) of section 11(5) of [the 2007 Act]."


        5) What led to the specification at paragraph (b) of the  direction
           was that under social security legislation prior to the 2007 Act
           it had been held that interlocutory and certain other  ancillary
           decisions at the equivalent of first-tier level  could  only  be
           challenged by judicial review, and  not  by  appeal.  The  Upper
           Tribunal subsequently held that under the 2007 Act  a  right  of
           appeal arises from all decisions of the  FTT  other  than  those
           specifically defined as "excluded decisions": see  LS  v  London
           Borough of Lambeth (HB) [2010] UKUT 461 (AAC), [2011] AACR 27 at
           paras 79 to 97. Prior to the decision in LS there had been about
           a dozen judicial review claims falling within paragraph  (b)  of
           the direction. The effect of the LS decision is that this  class
           is confined to  judicial  review  claims  seeking  to  challenge
           excluded decisions  within  paragraph  (a),  paragraph  (d),  or
           paragraph (e) of section 11(5) of the 2007 Act. In broad  terms,
           the excluded decisions set out in section 11(5)(a) are  criminal
           injuries  compensation  decisions;  those  set  out  in  section
           11(5)(d) are decisions about setting aside,  or  review,  of  an
           earlier decision of the FTT or about referring a matter  to  the
           Upper Tribunal; and  those  set  out  in  section  11(5)(e)  are
           decisions that have been set aside.


  37. Section 18 Condition 4 is found in section 18(8). It  applies  at  the
      hearing of the application, and requires that the presiding judge must
      be either (a) a judge of the High Court or  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      England and Wales or Northern Ireland, or a  judge  of  the  Court  of
      Session, or (b) a person who has been agreed from time to time between
      the Lord Chief Justice, the Lord President, or the Lord Chief  Justice
      of Northern Ireland, as the case may be, and the Senior  President  of
      Tribunals. From November 2008 onwards individual Upper Tribunal judges
      have been "ticketed" so as to have authority  to  preside  under  this
      provision.


  38. Subsection (11) of section 18 is a rule-making power. It  states  that
      Tribunal Procedure Rules may  make  provision  about  amendments  that
      would cause the application to become  transferable  under  subsection
      (3) - see section D1.1  above.  The  original  Upper  Tribunal  rules,
      however, did not make use of the power under section 18(11).


D1.3 As enacted: claims which must or may be transferred by the High Court


  39. The 2007 Act amended what is now the Senior Courts Act 1981  (formerly
      the Supreme Court Act 1981) by introducing a new  section  31A.  Under
      section 31A(2) of the  Senior  Courts  Act  1981  the  High  Court  is
      required to transfer an application if specified conditions  are  met.
      It is convenient to call each such condition a  "Transfer  Condition."
      In this section I describe the position on coming into  force  of  the
      new section 31A. Four such conditions must be met in order  for  there
      to be a requirement to transfer. The criteria identified  in  Transfer
      Condition 1 in section 31A(4), Transfer Condition 2 in section 31A(5),
      and Transfer Condition  3  in  section  31A(6)  reflect  corresponding
      provisions found in Section 18 Conditions 1, 2 and 3. They  thus  have
      the effect that in cases where all three of these conditions are  met,
      subject to satisfaction of Transfer  Condition  4  in  section  31A(7)
      (which broadly  excludes  immigration,  nationality,  and  citizenship
      claims from transfer), the Upper Tribunal has  an  exclusive  judicial
      review jurisdiction in England and Wales.


  40.  In  addition  to  compulsory  transfer  under   section   31A(2),   a
      discretionary power  of  transfer  is  conferred  by  section  31A(3).
      Provided that Transfer Conditions 1, 2 and 4 are met, the  High  Court
      may transfer an  application  even  if  it  does  not  fall  within  a
      specified class. This power has been exercised on a substantial number
      of occasions over the period since November 2008, particularly in  age
      assessment cases: see the decision of the Court of Appeal in R (FZ)  v
      Croydon LBC [2011] EWCA Civ 59.


  41. As regards transferred judicial review claims in  England  and  Wales,
      the 2007 Act makes additional provision in section  19  (3),  (4)  and
      (5). By section 19(3) there is a seamless transition of a  transferred
      application for judicial review. The application is  treated  for  all
      purposes as if it had been made to the Upper Tribunal. Things done  by
      the High Court prior to transfer are to be treated  as  if  they  were
      done by the Upper Tribunal. It is made clear that it does  not  matter
      whether the application falls within a class specified  under  section
      18(6). Similarly by section 19(4) there is a seamless transition of  a
      transferred application for permission to apply for judicial review.


  42. Subsection (5) of section 19 is a rule-making power. It provides  that
      tribunal procedure rules may supplement subsections (3) and (4). Here,
      too, the original Upper Tribunal rules did not make use of this power.


D2. Judicial review jurisdiction: new "Fresh Claim" powers


  43. The Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the BCI Act") made
      changes to the conditions under s 31A of the Senior Courts  Act  1981.
      In particular, section 53 of  the  BCI  Act  modified  the  impact  of
      Transfer Condition 4 in  section  31A(7).  As  noted  above,  Transfer
      Condition 4 broadly excluded immigration, nationality, and citizenship
      claims from transfer.


  44. Section 53 of the BCI Act was designed to have the  following  effect.
      From the time that it was brought into force, if  Transfer  Conditions
      1, 2 and 3 were met, then transfer would continue to be  mandatory  if
      Transfer Condition 4 were met (section 31A(2) and (7): no nationality,
      immigration or asylum question arises). However also  from  that  time
      section 31A(2A) and (8) would  make  transfer  mandatory  if  Transfer
      Conditions 1, 2, 3 and a new Transfer Condition 5 were  met.  Transfer
      Condition 5 was that:

           ... the application  calls  into  question  a  decision  of  the
           Secretary of State not to treat submissions as an  asylum  claim
           or a human rights claim within the meaning  of  Part  5  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 wholly or partly on
           the  basis  that  they  are  not  significantly  different  from
           material that has previously been considered (whether or not  it
           calls into question any other decision).


  45. Decisions of the kind described  in  Transfer  Condition  5  arose  in
      certain types of case where, in broad terms, an  individual's  earlier
      asylum or human rights claim had been refused or withdrawn.  In  these
      types of case the individual would only exceptionally have a right  of
      appeal against refusal of a  later  application.  Relevant  rights  of
      appeal under part 5 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 would, however, be conferred if the Secretary of State  concluded
      that there was a "fresh" claim, in the sense of a claim  significantly
      different from material that had previously been considered. In  order
      to secure relevant appeal rights, a decision that the  claim  was  not
      "fresh" would often be the subject  of  an  application  for  judicial
      review. These "fresh claim" judicial  reviews  came  to  be  known  as
      "FCJRs".


  46. The effect of the BCI Act was thus that the statutory bar on  transfer
      of immigration, nationality and  citizenship  cases  would  not  apply
      where an application included a challenge to a "fresh claim" decision.
      However the statutory amendment in the BCI Act did not remove the need
      for Transfer Condition 3 to be satisfied. It would be a matter for the
      Lord Chief Justice, with the concurrence of the  Lord  Chancellor,  to
      decide whether a new direction should be given, if so  whether  if  it
      should be confined to "pure" FCJRs  (i.e.  those  in  which  no  other
      decision was called into question), and  if  not  confined  to  "pure"
      FCJRs then what factors would determine whether a FCJR fell within the
      scope of the new direction.


  47. Where a proposed FCJR fell within the scope of the new direction,  and
      other Section 18 Conditions were satisfied, the Upper  Tribunal  would
      have jurisdiction to deal with the claim. Moreover, if a proposed FCJR
      within the scope of the direction were brought in the High Court, then
      (provided that Transfer Conditions 1 and 2 were  satisfied)  the  High
      Court would be required to transfer the claim to the Upper Tribunal.


  48. In  March  2011  the  TPC  issued  a  consultation  paper  ("the  FCJR
      consultation paper")  on  changes  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  rules  to
      accommodate FCJRs. The bulk of the FCJR  consultation  paper  set  out
      detailed proposals in that regard. The paper noted  in  paragraph  45,
      however, that the TPC was also considering possible general changes to
      Part 4 of the Upper Tribunal Rules, which  concerned  judicial  review
      claims in the Upper Tribunal. These  possible  changes  would  be  the
      subject of a separate consultation.


E. The May 2011 TPC consultation


E1. The May 2011 TPC consultation: general


  49. This separate consultation, as foreshadowed in  paragraph  45  of  the
      FCJR consultation paper, was the subject of a TPC  consultation  paper
      issued in May 2011 ("the May 2011 TPC  consultation  paper").  It  was
      entitled "Judicial Review in the Upper Tribunal". Despite the  breadth
      of that title, however, the introduction to the paper  made  it  clear
      that it  did  not  seek  to  review  the  rules  for  judicial  review
      generally. Rather, it arose "because developments in England and Wales
      may make it desirable for rules to be made  in  that  jurisdiction  to
      cater  for  amended  or  additional   grounds   of   challenge".   The
      developments referred to were the new arrangements  for  FCJRs,  which
      would greatly increase the volume of judicial review work in the Upper
      Tribunal.


  50. The May 2011 TPC consultation paper identified two  areas  where  rule
      changes might be appropriate.  The  first  concerned  provision  about
      amendments or additional grounds that would cause  a  judicial  review
      claim to become transferable to the High Court. The  second  concerned
      amendments or additional grounds in cases which had  been  transferred
      to the Upper Tribunal by the High Court. I deal with them in  sections
      E2 and E3 below.


  51. In this judgment I have included  citations  from  the  May  2011  TPC
      consultation paper. When doing so  I  have,  for  ease  of  reference,
      adopted the short forms used in the present judgment rather than those
      which were used in the May 2011 TPC consultation  paper  when  it  was
      originally published.


E2. May 2011: amendments requiring transfer


  52. The May 2011 consultation paper stated at paragraphs 27 to 32:

           27. Section 18(11) of the 2007 Act provides that the  "provision
           that may be made by Tribunal Procedure Rules about amendment  of
           an application for  relief  under  section  15(1)  includes,  in
           particular, provision about  amendments  that  would  cause  the
           application to become transferable under  subsection  (3)".  The
           implication appears  to  be  that  amendments  may  be  made  to
           judicial review proceedings in the Upper  Tribunal  even  though
           the effect is that they must then be  transferred  to  the  High
           Court.  There is a good reason why this should be so.  It  would
           be open to the  Upper  Tribunal  to  refuse  to  allow  such  an
           amendment on the ground that it  would  be  preferable  for  the
           applicant to bring  separate  proceedings  in  the  High  Court,
           leaving the existing proceedings in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   But
           there will be cases where it would be more appropriate  for  the
           existing proceedings to be amended and transferred to  the  High
           Court, rather than for separate  proceedings  to  be  commenced,
           e.g.  where   an   arguable   claim   for   a   declaration   of
           incompatibility is added.

           28. No rules under section 18(11) have thus far been made. There
           is reason to think, however, that such rules should be  made  so
           as to cater for developments in judicial  review  cases  in  the
           Upper Tribunal. This  is  because  parties  may  wish  to  amend
           proceedings, or rely on additional grounds, in a way which would
           bring section 18(3) into play because an amendment or additional
           ground would mean that the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  have  the
           function of deciding the application. In FCJRs there  are  often
           occasions when, e.g. because a fresh decision is  taken,  it  is
           appropriate to add or substitute a  challenge  which  no  longer
           involves a "fresh claim" dispute. Similarly  an  age  assessment
           judicial review may have been transferred by the High  Court  to
           the Upper Tribunal at a time when no immigration, nationality or
           citizenship issue arose, but subsequent  developments  may  give
           rise to such an issue.

           29. The Committee invites comment on proposed  new  rules  which
           would provide -

                 "33A. Rules 33B and  33C  apply  only  to  judicial  review
                 claims arising under the law of England and Wales.

                 33B. In relation to an application for judicial  review  or
                 for permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  the  Upper
                 Tribunal  may  permit  or  require  amendments  under  rule
                 5(3)(c), or permit the applicant or another party  to  rely
                 on additional grounds of challenge, which  will  result  in
                 transfer of the application to the High Court under section
                 18(3) of the 2007 Act or under rule 33C."

           30. This would not merely make clear what is implicit in section
           18(11).  It refers also to "additional grounds" and to  transfer
           under the proposed new rule 33C (see below) and therefore  makes
           clear what otherwise might be in doubt. Reliance upon additional
           grounds does not necessarily imply an  amendment.   The  current
           Rules use the term "additional grounds" where a party other than
           the applicant  wishes  to  support  an  application  on  grounds
           additional to those on which the applicant relies  (rule  31(2))
           or where an applicant seeks to rely on grounds in a  substantive
           application which were not grounds  upon  which  permission  was
           granted (rule 32).

           31. The proposed new rules would apply to judicial review claims
           that were originally begun in the Upper  Tribunal.  They  would,
           pursuant to section  19(3)  of  the  2007  Act,  also  apply  to
           applications for judicial review transferred from the High Court
           to the Upper Tribunal. Moreover they would apply in cases  where
           an  application  for  permission  made  to  the  High  Court  is
           transferred to the Upper Tribunal, and the Upper Tribunal grants
           permission - for in that event  the  permitted  application  for
           judicial review is made to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  for  that
           reason falls within section 18(1) of the 2007 Act.

           32.The proposed new  rules  would  confirm  as  regards  section
           18(11) (and  establish  as  regards  "additional  grounds")  the
           availability to the  Upper  Tribunal  of  a  flexible  means  of
           determining  whether  new  issues  should  become  part  of  the
           application in the light of  the  statutory  consequences  which
           would follow. Comments on this  and  alternative  or  additional
           proposals are invited. Alternative provision that could be  made
           would, for instance, include  a  rule  that  would  prohibit  an
           amendment that required section 18(3) to  be  acted  upon,  thus
           requiring an applicant to make a  separate  application  to  the
           High Court. Additional provision might take the form of  a  rule
           that would require the parties to state whether they would  like
           the case transferred back to the Upper  Tribunal,  and  why,  so
           that that information may be passed to the High Court  when  the
           case is transferred.





E3. May 2011: amendments after transfer


  53. The May 2011 consultation paper stated at paragraphs 33 to 39:

           33. Section 19(5) of the 2007 Act permits the making of rules to
           supplement section 19(3) and (4), dealing with the  consequences
           of a case being transferred to the Upper Tribunal from the  High
           Court.  No such rules have hitherto been made.

           34. The relationship between section 19(3) and (4)  and  section
           18 needs consideration.  Section 18(3), read with section 18(2),
           requires a case to be transferred to the High Court if the  four
           conditions in that section are not all satisfied.  Section 19(3)
           and (4) ensure that an application for judicial review  that  is
           transferred to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  an  application  for
           judicial review made in the Upper Tribunal following transfer of
           an application for permission, are subject to  the  requirements
           in  section  18.  When  doing  so,  however,  those  subsections
           identify one exception: the Upper Tribunal has the  function  of
           deciding the case notwithstanding that Condition 3 in section 18
           (that the case falls within the scope of a direction made by the
           Lord Chief Justice) is not  met.   The  exception  ensures  that
           discretionary transfers are not stifled  once  the  transfer  is
           made, for they will have been transferred expressly on the basis
           that Condition 3 is not met (see section 31A(3)  of  the  Senior
           Courts  Act),  and  without  the  exception  would  have  to  be
           transferred back as soon as they  reached  the  Upper  Tribunal.
           However, it appears to the Committee that  there  are  potential
           difficulties where an  application  is  amended,  or  additional
           grounds are relied on, after transfer.

           35. First, where there has been a  mandatory  transfer,  without
           the High Court having considered  the  merits  of  transfer,  it
           would arguably be contrary to principle for the  application  to
           continue in  the  Upper  Tribunal  without  the  High  Court  so
           ordering if an amendment or additional  ground  has  the  effect
           that Condition 3 ceases to be satisfied.   On  the  other  hand,
           allowing  such  an  amendment  or  additional  ground  would  be
           sensible if good case  management  required  it  to  be  decided
           together with existing issues. This may well  happen  in  FCJRs.
           The Committee therefore proposes that Rule 33C(a) should require
           such a case to be transferred  back  to  the  High  Court.   One
           factor in this regard is that to treat  mandatorily  transferred
           cases more advantageously than cases  that  have  been  properly
           commenced in the Upper Tribunal might act as an encouragement to
           applicants to start proceedings in the High  Court,  causing  an
           unnecessary waste of resources in transferring them.

           36. Proposed rule 33C(a) would also extend to a  case  that  had
           been transferred on a discretionary basis under  section  31A(3)
           of the Senior Courts Act if a subsequent amendment or additional
           ground has the effect that Condition 4 of section 31A  would  no
           longer be met.  There is no equivalent to Condition 4 of section
           31A in section 18 and so such  a  case  would  not  fall  to  be
           transferred to the High Court under section  18(3).   Again,  it
           seems to the Committee that it would be  contrary  to  principle
           for the case to remain in  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  it  could
           neither have been started in the Upper Tribunal nor  transferred
           to it if the amendment or additional ground had been  relied  on
           at the time of transfer.

           37.  Secondly,  where  a  case  has  been   transferred   on   a
           discretionary basis, the  Committee  considers  that  the  Upper
           Tribunal should have the power to transfer the case back to  the
           High Court if an amendment or additional ground would be of such
           significance that the Upper Tribunal considered  that  the  High
           Court  would  not  have  transferred  it  if  the  amendment  or
           additional ground had been relied on at the  time  of  transfer,
           even  though  section  31A(3)  would  have  permitted  transfer.
           Proposed rule 33C(b) would provide such a power.  The  criterion
           for transfer back would be in identical terms to section  31A(3)
           of the Senior Courts Act  -  "if  it  appears  to  be  just  and
           convenient to do so".

           38. The proposed rule is -

                 "33C. Where the High Court has transferred judicial  review
                 proceedings to the Upper Tribunal under any power  or  duty
                 and subsequently the proceedings are amended or  any  party
                 relies on additional grounds of challenge -

                      (a)    if  the  proceedings  could   not   have   been
                 transferred to the Upper Tribunal by  the  High  Court  had
                 they been so amended or with such additional grounds relied
                 on at  the  time  of  transfer,  the  Upper  Tribunal  must
                 transfer the proceedings back to the High Court;

                      (b)    subject  to   subparagraph   (a),   where   the
                 proceedings were transferred to the  Upper  Tribunal  under
                 section 31A(3) of the Senior  Courts  Act  1981  (power  to
                 transfer  judicial  review   proceedings   to   the   Upper
                 Tribunal), the Upper Tribunal may transfer the case back to
                 the High Court if it appears to be just and  convenient  to
                 do so."

           39. The Committee invites  comment  on  this  proposal,  or  any
           alternative or additional proposals.






E4. Responses, TPC reply, and the new rule 33A


  54. In November 2011 the TPC published a single document giving a  summary
      of responses on the FCJR consultation and the May  2011  consultation,
      and  its  reply  to  those  responses.  As  regards   the   May   2011
      consultation, the document first set out Question 1 from the May  2011
      TPC consultation  paper,  concerning  provision  about  amendments  or
      additional grounds that would cause a judicial review claim to  become
      transferable to the High Court:

           Question 1

           As regards amendments which would bring  section  18(3)  of  the
           2007 Act into play, or would  give  rise  to  an  obligation  to
           transfer the application to the High Court  under  the  proposed
           new rule 33C:

           (a) is it appropriate that the Upper Tribunal's  general  powers
           to permit or require amendments under rule 5(3)(c), or to permit
           the applicant or another party to rely upon  additional  grounds
           of challenge, should extend to amendments and additional grounds
           which would, once made or relied upon, require  the  application
           to be transferred to the High Court?

           (b) if so, is the proposed new rule 33B a  satisfactory  way  of
           ensuring that this will be the case?

           (c) if not, ought there to be a rule  that  would  prohibit  the
           Upper Tribunal from permitting or  requiring  an  amendment,  or
           permitting reliance upon an additional ground, which would, once
           made or relied upon, give rise to an obligation to transfer  the
           application to the High Court?

           (d) when the Upper Tribunal is  under  an  obligation  to  order
           transfer to the High Court, would it be appropriate for  a  rule
           to require the parties to state whether they wish the High Court
           to transfer the application back to the Upper Tribunal, and why,
           if the High Court's discretionary powers under section 31A(3) of
           the Senior Courts Act 1981 permitted it to do so?


  55. As to question 1, the TPC summarised the responses:

           All respondents agreed that the proposal at (a) was appropriate,
           that  the  proposal  at  (b)  was  satisfactory  (although  some
           drafting observations were made), and that  the  alternative  at
           (c) was unsatisfactory.

           One respondent stressed the importance of speedy  resolution  of
           FCJRs.  Another  commented  specifically  that  it  is  in   the
           interests of justice for amendments to be permitted to  be  made
           to the existing claim rather  than  requiring  an  applicant  to
           issue  a  new  claim  in  the  Administrative  Court,  with  the
           attendant costs implications, even where that  would  result  in
           the claim being transferred back to  the  Administrative  Court.
           It was said that the issues will often be closely connected  and
           it would be a waste of court time, costs and risk  injustice  if
           the  claims  have   to   be   considered   separately   by   the
           Administrative Court and the Upper Tribunal.

           Respondents were divided as to the merits of the  suggestion  at
           (d).


  56. The TPC's reply to the responses on question 1 stated:

           The TPC concluded that it should proceed as proposed at (a)  and
           (b), which accorded with the views of all  respondents.  On  the
           question of delay the TPC considered  that  the  tribunal  would
           have well in mind the need to avoid  delay,  especially  in  the
           light of the overriding objective set out in the  rules.  As  to
           the suggestion at (d), the TPC considered that  the  appropriate
           course was to leave it to the parties to make representations if
           they wished.


  57.  The  document  next  set  out  Question  2  from  the  May  2011  TPC
      consultation paper, concerning amendments  or  additional  grounds  in
      cases which had been transferred to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  High
      Court:

           Question 2

           As regards an application for judicial review or an  application
           for permission to apply for  judicial  review,  which  the  High
           Court has transferred as a matter of discretion, or  as  regards
           an application for judicial review following grant of permission
           by the Upper Tribunal  in  a  case  where  the  application  for
           permission was transferred by the High  Court  as  a  matter  of
           discretion:

           (a) is it appropriate that the  Upper  Tribunal  should  have  a
           power to transfer the application to the High  Court  where  the
           significance of an amendment, or additional ground of challenge,
           makes it just and convenient that the High Court rather than the
           Upper Tribunal should deal with the proceedings?

           (b) if so, is the proposed new rule 33C a  satisfactory  way  of
           ensuring that this will be the case?

           (c) ought the Upper Tribunal to  be  required  to  transfer  the
           application to the High Court where an amendment, or  additional
           ground of challenge, is such that if the amendment or additional
           ground had been relied on at the time of transfer the conditions
           which must be met for discretionary transfer would not have been
           satisfied?

           (d) if so, is the proposed new rule 33C a  satisfactory  way  of
           ensuring that this will be the case?


  58. As to question 2, the TPC summarised the responses:

           All respondents agreed with what was proposed at  each  of  (a),
           (b), (c) and (d), with one adding a proviso about the importance
           of avoiding delay. Others raised a  major  point:  there  was  a
           concern that merely raising an additional ground falling  within
           the proposed rule should not of itself lead  to  transfer:  this
           should only occur  if  the  tribunal  permitted  the  additional
           ground to be raised. Otherwise, rule 33C would be engaged simply
           by a party raising a proposed  additional  ground,  rather  than
           where it would actually fall to be determined in  the  case.  In
           addition  one  respondent  noted  that  the  parties  should  be
           afforded the opportunity to make representations as  to  whether
           it is just and convenient that the High Court  rather  than  the
           Upper Tribunal deal with the proceedings.


  59. The TPC's reply to the responses on question 2 stated:

           Dealing with the last point first, the TPC  concluded  that  the
           tribunal could be relied upon  to  ensure  that  representations
           could be made at an appropriate stage. There was no need to make
           a change to the rules. On the major point raised, the TPC agreed
           that it was appropriate to make express provision to  avoid  the
           danger that merely advancing an additional ground might lead  to
           unnecessary transfer. It has modified the proposed rule  changes
           to that end.


  60.  The  document  then  set  out  Question  3  from  the  May  2011  TPC
      consultation paper, also concerning amendments or  additional  grounds
      in cases which had been transferred to the Upper Tribunal by the  High
      Court:

           Question 3

           As regards an application for judicial review or an  application
           for permission to apply for  judicial  review,  which  the  High
           Court has transferred because it was required to do  so,  or  as
           regards an application for judicial review  following  grant  of
           permission by the Upper Tribunal in a case where the application
           for permission was transferred by the High Court because it  was
           required to do so:

           (a) ought the Upper Tribunal to  be  required  to  transfer  the
           application to the High Court where an amendment, or  additional
           ground of challenge, is such that if the amendment or additional
           ground had been relied on at the time of transfer the conditions
           which must be met for compulsory transfer would  not  have  been
           satisfied?

           (b) if so, is the proposed new rule 33C a  satisfactory  way  of
           ensuring that this will be the case?


  61. As to question 3, the TPC summarised the responses:

           All respondents agreed with the proposals at (a)  and  (b).  The
           only qualifications concerned the major point  identified  above
           in relation to Question 2.


  62. The TPC's reply to the responses on question 3 stated:

           The TPC concluded that it should proceed with  these  proposals,
           on the footing that the major  point  would  be  dealt  with  as
           indicated above.


  63. In the late summer and autumn  of  2011  a  statutory  instrument  was
      prepared by the TPC giving effect to the conclusions described  above.
      The opportunity was taken to simplify the drafting so that it took the
      form of a single rule 33A as set out in section A above. A major point
      noted in the consultation responses and reply was the need  to  affirm
      the tribunal's ability to control "additional grounds" in the same way
      that  it  can  control  amendments.  This  was  dealt  with   by   the
      introduction of paragraph (2)(b) in that rule: see  section  A  above.
      Relevant  changes  under  the  statutory  instrument,  including   the
      introduction of new rule 33A, came into force on 17 October 2011.


  64. A direction by the Lord Chief Justice made on 9  September  2011  also
      came into force on 17 October 2011. The class which it specified under
      section 18(6) of the 2007 Act included not only "pure" FCJRs, but also
      those where certain additional  matters  were  called  into  question.
      Expressly excluded from the class, however, were  cases  in  which  an
      applicant  sought  a  declaration  of  incompatibility  or  sought  to
      challenge detention.


  65. Thus it was that new Upper Tribunal rule 33A took effect on 17 October
      2011. It made specific provision enabling the Upper Tribunal to  grant
      permission for amendments or additional grounds which would,  once  in
      place, require transfer of the claim to the High Court. In relation to
      cases transferred from the High Court, it also made specific provision
      imposing in  certain  circumstances  a  duty,  and  in  certain  other
      circumstances a power, to transfer the case back to the High Court. At
      the same time,  important  alterations  in  the  definition  of  cases
      falling within the Upper Tribunal's judicial review jurisdiction  took
      effect. Those alterations significantly increased the likelihood  that
      amendments would be needed to  cater  for  changing  circumstances  in
      judicial review cases before the Upper Tribunal.


F. Legislative history: November 2011 onwards


  66. A further major change took effect on 1 November 2013.  On  that  date
      amendments under section 22 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013  modified
      section 31A of the Senior Courts  Act  1981.  The  amendments  removed
      Transfer Conditions 4 and 5 entirely, and altered  section  31A(2)  so
      that the requirement to transfer an application from the High Court to
      the Upper Tribunal would arise when Transfer Conditions  1,  2  and  3
      were met. There was thus no  longer  a  statutory  limitation  on  the
      ability of the Upper Tribunal to deal with immigration judicial review
      claims.


  67. At the same time directions of the Lord  Chief  Justice,  Lord  Judge,
      dated 21 August 2013, and of the Lord Chief Justice,  Lord  Thomas  of
      Cwmgiedd,  dated  24  October  2013,  also  came  into  force.   Those
      directions, made under section 18(6) of  the  2007  Act,  specified  a
      class which encompassed cases calling into question a  decision  under
      the Immigration Acts (as defined in Schedule 1 to  the  Interpretation
      Act 1978), or any  instrument  having  effect  under  those  Acts,  or
      otherwise relating to leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
      outside the immigration rules.  Expressly  excluded  from  the  class,
      however, are certain categories of cases, among them  cases  in  which
      there is an application for a declaration of incompatibility.


  68. The effect of these  directions  was  to  add  the  vast  majority  of
      immigration judicial review claims to the classes of case  that  under
      section 18 of the 2007 Act can, and under section 31A  of  the  Senior
      Courts  Act  1981  must,  be  dealt  with  in  the   Upper   Tribunal.
      Consequential changes to the Upper Tribunal rules were the subject  of
      a TPC consultation and were brought into force on 1 November 2013.


G. Validity of the 27 May consent order


  69. In the circumstances described in section F above, the  present  claim
      for judicial review was properly brought in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It
      satisfied each of Section 18 Conditions 1, 2 and 3 and, so long as the
      presiding judge held the appropriate standing, it would  meet  Section
      18 Condition 4.


  70. The present claim, however, could not have been brought in  the  Upper
      Tribunal if it had  included  an  application  for  a  declaration  of
      incompatibility. If it had done so it would not have fallen within any
      class specified in a direction under section 18(6) and would thus have
      failed to meet Section 18 Condition 3.


  71. It seems from the explanation in B's skeleton argument (see section  C
      above) that these considerations led the parties  to  assume  that  it
      would be for the High Court to decide whether B should be permitted to
      add a claim for a declaration of incompatibility.  The  assumption  is
      understandable, but consideration of the structure of  relevant  parts
      of the 2007 Act, and section 18 of that Act in particular, shows it to
      be mistaken. There are three principal features which must be borne in
      mind:


        1)  Section  18  ensures  respect  for  the  limits  on  the  Upper
           Tribunal's judicial review jurisdiction by imposing a  mandatory
           duty to transfer: section 18(3) is  a  bright  line  rule  under
           which the Upper Tribunal can only exercise its  judicial  review
           power if it continues to have  "the  function  of  deciding  the
           application". This means that:


              a) unless the application was the subject of a  transfer  from
                 the High Court, and thus benefited from  section  19(3)(b),
                 each of section 18 Conditions 1 to 4 must  continue  to  be
                 satisfied - and if they are not all satisfied then the case
                 must be transferred to the High Court; and


              b) in a case transferred from the High Court, section 19(3)(b)
                 removes the need for compliance with section  18  Condition
                 3, thereby enabling the Upper Tribunal to continue to  deal
                 with a case which does not fall within a  specified  class.
                 In all cases transferred  from  the  High  Court,  however,
                 consideration will need to be given to rule 33A(3) if after
                 transfer the proceedings are amended or any party relies on
                 additional grounds. In that event:


                     i) under rule 33A(3) a mandatory duty to transfer  back
                        arises if the  proceedings  in  their  present  form
                        could  not  have  been  transferred  to  the   Upper
                        Tribunal under the relevant power or duty  had  they
                        been in that form at the time of transfer; and


                    ii) subject to  that  mandatory  duty,  a  discretionary
                        power is given to transfer proceedings back  to  the
                        High Court where it appears just and  convenient  to
                        do so.


        2) Neither section 18, nor any other provision in the 2007 Act, nor
           any provision in the Upper Tribunal rules in their current form,
           gives the Upper Tribunal a discretionary power  to  transfer  to
           the High Court  a  case  which  has  been  begun  in  the  Upper
           Tribunal. Where  a  case  has  been  transferred  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal, it is only in circumstances bringing the  case  within
           rule 33A(3)(b) that a discretionary power to transfer  the  case
           back to the High Court will arise.


        3) As noted by the TPC (see section E2 above) section 18(11) of the
           2007 Act  contemplates  that  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  should
           provide  for  the  making  of  amendments  to  judicial   review
           proceedings in the Upper Tribunal which would  have  the  effect
           that, once  made,  the  application  would  be  required  to  be
           transferred to the High Court. Rule 33A does this  by  expressly
           giving the tribunal control over the making of such  amendments,
           and it ensures also that the tribunal controls whether there can
           be reliance on additional grounds  which  would  have  the  same
           effect.


  72. It necessarily follows from  this  analysis  that  the  "wider  power"
      contemplated in paragraphs 11 and 12 of B's  skeleton  argument  would
      not be consistent with the 2007 Act structure, and does not exist. The
      mere fact that the parties may both agree that a judicial review claim
      begun in the Upper Tribunal should be transferred to  the  High  Court
      will not of itself confer the necessary jurisdiction. The parties may,
      of course, propose a consent order permitting amendments, or  reliance
      on additional  grounds,  of  a  kind  which  would  give  rise  to  an
      obligation to transfer once the amendment or  additional  grounds  had
      been permitted: under rule  33A(2)(b)  it  will  be  within  the  sole
      discretion of  the  tribunal  whether  to  give  permission  for  such
      amendments or additional grounds.


  73. By the time of the hearing on 4 June, it had become apparent that  the
      proposal which had led to the "Form of Consent" was premature. Neither
      side suggested that it was appropriate at that stage for the claim  to
      be amended so as to include  a  declaration  of  incompatibility.  The
      reason  was  that  additional  material  had  been  submitted  to  the
      respondent on  B's  behalf,  and  both  parties  considered  that  the
      preferable course was for the  proceedings  to  be  stayed  while  the
      respondent considered that material. In  these  circumstances  it  was
      accepted on B's behalf at the hearing that the 27  May  consent  order
      was a nullity, and there was no submission on behalf of the respondent
      to the contrary.


H. Conclusion


  74. The statutory  provisions  governing  the  Upper  Tribunal's  judicial
      review functions are less complex than they once were. It remains  the
      case, however,  that  they  are  not  straightforward.  Moreover,  the
      directions specifying classes  of  case  are  now  significantly  more
      complex than previously.


  75. Consideration of the statutory provisions, and of Upper Tribunal  rule
      33A, in the  present  case  has  ensured  that  an  over-hasty  agreed
      proposal for  transfer  to  the  High  Court  has  not  taken  effect.
      Practitioners must in  future  give  careful  consideration  to  those
      provisions and to relevant  rules  so  as  to  ensure  that  they  are
      deployed in furtherance of the legislative objectives and in a  manner
      consistent with the overriding objective found in Upper Tribunal  rule
      2.



