

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

IM and AI (Risks - membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan
CG [2016] UKUT 00188 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|28 and 29 July 2015                           |                             |
|4 November 2015                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                    1) IM
                                    2) AI
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the first appellant:        Ms M. Vidal and Mr J. Thai-Duy Dinh,
Counsel, Duncan Lewis
For the second appellant:  Mr S. Vokes and Ms E. Rutherford, Counsel
instructed by              Fountain Solicitors
For the respondent:        Mr C. Thomann, Counsel instructed by Government
Legal         Department


    1. In order for a person to be at risk on return to Sudan there must be
       evidence known to the  Sudanese  authorities  which  implicates  the
       claimant in  activity  which  they  are  likely  to  perceive  as  a
       potential threat to the regime to the  extent  that,  on  return  to
       Khartoum there is a risk to the claimant that he will be targeted by
       the authorities.  The task of the decision maker is to identify such
       a person  and  this  requires  as  comprehensive  an  assessment  as
       possible about the individual concerned.


    2. The evidence  draws  a  clear  distinction  between  those  who  are
       arrested,  detained  for  a  short  period,   questioned,   probably
       intimidated, possibly rough  handled  without  having  suffered  (or
       being at risk of suffering) serious harm and those who face the much
       graver risk of serious harm.  The distinction does not  depend  upon
       the individual being classified, for example,  as  a  teacher  or  a
       journalist (relevant as these matters are) but is the  result  of  a
       finely  balanced  fact-finding   exercise   encompassing   all   the
       information that can be gleaned about him.  The  decision  maker  is
       required to place the individual in the airport on  return  or  back
       home in his community and assess how the authorities are  likely  to
       re-act on the strength of the information known to them about him.

    3. Distinctions must be drawn with those whose  political  activity  is
       not particularly great or who do not have great  influence.   Whilst
       it does not take much for the NISS to open a  file,  the  very  fact
       that so many are identified as potential targets inevitably requires
       NISS to distinguish between those whom they view as  a  real  threat
       and those whom they do not.


    4. It will not be enough to make  out  a  risk  that  the  authorities'
       interest will be limited  to  the  extremely  common  phenomenon  of
       arrest and detention which though intimidating (and designed  to  be
       intimidating) does not cross the threshold into persecution.


    5. The purpose of the targeting is likely to be  obtaining  information
       about the claimant's own activities or the activities of his friends
       and associates.


    6. The evidence establishes the targeting is not random but the  result
       of suspicion based upon information in the authorities'  possession,
       although it may be limited.

    7. Caution should be exercised when the claim  is  based  on  a  single
       incident.   Statistically,  a  single  incident  must   reduce   the
       likelihood of the Sudanese  authorities  becoming  aware  of  it  or
       treating the claimant as of significant interest.


    8. Where the claim is based on events in Sudan in  which  the  claimant
       has come to the attention of the  authorities,  the  nature  of  the
       claimant's involvement, the likelihood of this being perceived as in
       opposition to the government, his treatment in detention, the length
       of detention and any  relevant  surrounding  circumstances  and  the
       likelihood of the event or the detention being made the subject of a
       record are all likely to be material factors.


    9. Where the claim is based on events outside Sudan,  the  evidence  of
       the claimant having come to the attention of  Sudanese  intelligence
       is bound to be more difficult to establish.   However  it  is  clear
       that the  Sudanese  authorities  place  reliance  upon  information-
       gathering about the activities of  members  of  the  diaspora  which
       includes  covert  surveillance.   The  nature  and  extent  of   the
       claimant's activities, when and  where,  will  inform  the  decision
       maker when he comes to decide whether it is likely those  activities
       will attract the attention of the authorities, bearing in  mind  the
       likelihood that the authorities will have to distinguish  amongst  a
       potentially large group of individuals between those who merit being
       targeted and those that do not.


   10. The decision maker must seek to build up as comprehensive a  picture
       as possible  of  the  claimant  taking  into  account  all  relevant
       material including that which may not have been established even  to
       the lower standard of proof.


   11. Once a composite assessment of the evidence has been made,  it  will
       be for the decision maker to determine whether there is a real  risk
       that the claimant will come to the attention of the  authorities  on
       return in such a way as amounts to more than the routine commonplace
       detention but meets the threshold of a real risk of serious harm.


   12. Where a claimant has not  been  believed  in  all  or  part  of  his
       evidence, the decision maker will have to assess how this impacts on
       the requirement to establish that a Convention claim has  been  made
       out.  He will not have the comprehensive, composite picture he would
       otherwise have had.  There  are  likely  to  be  shortfalls  in  the
       evidence that the decision maker is unable to speculate  upon.   The
       final analysis will remain the same: has  the  claimant  established
       there is a real risk  that  he,  the  claimant,  will  come  to  the
       attention of the authorities on return in such a way as  amounts  to
       more than the routine commonplace detention and  release  but  meets
       the threshold of serious harm.
Glossary

ACJPS         African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies

CPA           Comprehensive Peace Agreement
CIG           Country Information and Guidance
COI           Country of Origin Information

ESPA     Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement (2006)

ICC           International Criminal Court

JEM           Justice and Equality Movement

NCP           National Congress Party
NISS          Sudan's national Intelligence and Security Services,
              sometimes referred to as
NSIS          National Security and Information Service

OGN      Operational Guidance Note
OHCHCR        Office of the United States High Commissioner for Human
           Rights
ORDF     Organisation for Defence of Rights and Freedoms

PST           Norwegian Police Security Service

SAF           Sudan Alliance Forces
SCP           Sudanese Communist Party
SLM           Sudan Liberation Movement
SOAT     Sudan Organisation Against Torture
SPLA          Sudan People's Liberation Army
SPLM          Sudan People's Liberation Movement
SPLM-N        Sudan People's Liberation movement - North,
              the major element of the
SLM           Sudan Liberation Movement
SRF           Sudanese Revolutionary Front,
         attended by JEM, SPLM and SCP members

UEDP     United Ethiopian Democratic Party
UNMIS         United Nations Mission in Sudan
              which wound up its operations on 9 July 2011 the same day
South Sudan                declared independence
UNMISS             United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the successor to
UNMIS

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Immigration History


    1. Both appellants are citizens of Sudan whose appeals  are  being  re-
       determined for the purposes of providing Country Guidance as to  the
       risks faced by those returning to Sudan.  The appeal was heard on 28
       and 29 July 2015 at which point the hearing was adjourned because Mr
       Thomann for the Secretary of State was aware  that  the  Country  of
       Origin Information (COI) Service of the Home Office  was  finalising
       additional Country Information, now known as Country Information and
       Guidance (CIG).  This material, as the name suggests, is  a  mixture
       of COI material and Guidance.  The Guidance does not  form  part  of
       the COI and has been described as policy  guidance.   The  documents
       are thematic.  Two such products were published.  One  was  entitled
       Sudan: Treatment on return; the other - Sudan: Treatment of  persons
       involved in 'sur place' activity in the UK published in August 2015.
        In addition, the adjournment permitted the Secretary  of  State  to
       produce a translation of a Swedish  report  of  October  2010  which
       recorded the findings of a fact-finding mission made as long ago  as
       October 2009.  In the  meantime,  the  appellants'  expert  produced
       additional  material  relating  to   the   hacking   of   electronic
       communications by the Sudanese authorities.  The hearing resumed  on
       4 November 2015.


Procedural background to the appeals

    2. IM was born on 20 June 1984.  In  2006  he  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom and claimed asylum the same day. His application was refused
       on 30 November 2006 and an appeal against the decision was dismissed
       on 12 February 2007. Following reconsideration his  appeal  was  re-
       heard on 15 August  2007  by  Immigration  Judge  Hall.  Judge  Hall
       dismissed this appeal on 6 September 2007.

    3. Thereafter IM made several  representations  which  were  eventually
       treated as a fresh asylum claim. This  new  claim  was  nevertheless
       refused on 31 March 2011. An appeal against this  new  decision  was
       dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  on  23  May  2011.
       Permission to appeal this decision to the Upper Tribunal was granted
       and, on 13 December 2011, Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson identified  a
       material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       She directed that the appeal be heard afresh and that it might be an
       appropriate vehicle for country guidance.

    4. Directions were consequently issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  9
       October 2012 identifying the relevant country guidance issues.  IM's
       appeal was joined with that of  the  second  appellant  and  further
       directions were issued in May  2014  relating  to  the  respondent's
       position in  respect  of  activists  of  the  Justice  and  Equality
       Movement (JEM).






    5. AI was born on 18 June 1985. He claimed to have left Sudan  in  June
       2008 and arrived in the UK illegally on 4 November 2010. His  asylum
       claim was refused on  29  November  2010.  An  appeal  against  this
       decision was dismissed by Immigration Judge Waygood  on  17  January
       2011.

    6. AI made a fresh asylum claim on 15 March 2011. This was  refused  by
       the respondent on 15 January 2013. An appeal against  this  decision
       was dismissed by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 28
       February 2013. On 30 August  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King  and
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bowen identified a material error of law
       in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.   The   appeal   was
       subsequently joined with that of IM.

     Details of each appellant's claim

    IM


    7. Judge Hall accepted that IM had been both a member of the Beja tribe
       and an active member of the Beja Congress while a student at the Red
       Sea University College of Applied Sciences in Port Sudan. Judge Hall
       also accepted that IM had for a specified role in the Beja Congress,
       and that IM had been detained by the Sudanese security services on 4
       June 2006 after his arrest at a planning meeting for a demonstration
       being called for by the Congress. The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
       that IM had been beaten during this  period  of  detention.  IM  was
       transferred from his detention to hospital on 1 July  2006  and  was
       eventually released on 8 July 2006 after signing an undertaking  not
       to engage in any future political activity. IM nevertheless attended
       a further political meeting on 3 August 2006 which was raided by the
       security forces. IM fled Sudan on 7 August 2006.

    8. Judge Hall noted, based on the documentary country  evidence  before
       him, that the Eastern Front, an organisation comprised  of,  amongst
       others, the Beja Congress, signed a peace accord with  the  Sudanese
       government at the end of October 2006. Judge Hall was not  therefore
       satisfied that IM would be at risk of persecution on  the  basis  of
       his involvement with the Beja Congress if removed to Sudan.

    9. In the appeal hearing before Judge Finch the factual  findings  made
       by Judge Hall were retained. The basis of IM's appeal  before  Judge
       Finch stemmed from his claimed fear of the Sudanese authorities as a
       result of his active involvement with JEM and  his  previous  arrest
       and detention.

   10. Judge Finch noted paragraph 3.6.6 of  the  respondent's  Operational
       Guidance Note (OGN)  current  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.  This
       indicated that "... since the  ceasefire  agreement  in  June  2006,
       individuals associated with the Beja Congress are not at risk of ill
       treatment amounting  to  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the  state
       authorities." In the absence of any other evidence to show that  the
       Congress was now associated  with  those  opposed  to  the  Sudanese
       government the  Judge  was  satisfied  IM  would  face  no  risk  of
       persecution on the basis of his past association and  activities  on
       behalf of the Beja Congress.

   11. IM claimed he became a member of JEM in the  United  Kingdom  on  15
       January 2010. He  maintained  that  he  attended  JEM  meetings  and
       seminars in the United  Kingdom.  IM  claimed  to  have  attended  a
       meeting in Manchester in  July  2010  concerning  the  International
       Criminal  Court  (ICC)  and  produced  photographs  in  support.  He
       explained in evidence before  us  that  he  had  not  organised  the
       meeting but it had been attended by representatives from the ICC and
       that,  although  the   meeting   had   been   addressed   by   those
       representatives, he had  spoken  from  the  floor.  IM  additionally
       produced photographs purportedly showing him at a  demonstration  in
       front of the Sudanese  Embassy  calling  for  peace  in  Darfur.  He
       claimed in the  hearing  before  Judge  Finch  to  have  attended  a
       demonstration on 10 April 2010 and invited members of  the  Sudanese
       community to it and that he had  participated  in  the  slogans  and
       banner  writing.  He  also  attended  a  demonstration  outside  the
       Commonwealth Office in May 2010. Judge Finch  referred  to  the  OGN
       dated  2  November  2009  which  stated  that  all  JEM  members  or
       affiliates, at any level of involvement, were at real risk  of  ill-
       treatment by the Sudanese authorities or Janjaweed militia in Darfur
       and by the Sudanese authorities elsewhere in Sudan.

   12. Judge Finch was not satisfied IM had given a truthful account of his
       activities in the UK. In reaching this conclusion she  took  account
       of an inconsistency in respect of which day of the week  IM  claimed
       to have joined JEM, his inability  to  correctly  name  the  General
       Secretary of the legislative  council  of  the  JEM  in  Sudan,  the
       absence of a JEM membership card, and the apparent absence of checks
       carried out by JEM when IM claimed to  have  become  a  member.  The
       Judge additionally relied on a difference in signatures between  two
       letters  purportedly  written  by  Abdulrahman  Sharafedin,  the  UK
       General Secretary of JEM.  One  of  those  letters,  written  on  20
       January 2010, indicated IM was a member of the Halga tribe,  whereas
       his evidence had always been that he was a member of the Beja tribe.
       The other letter, dated 16 June 2010, stated that IM  defected  from
       the Beja Congress to JEM after the former  signed  a  reconciliation
       agreement with the Sudanese government.  This  however  occurred  in
       2006 and IM was still basing his fear of  return  to  Sudan  on  his
       connection with the Congress up until late 2007. The Judge  drew  an
       adverse inference from IM's  non-attendance  at  any  demonstrations
       since May 2010 and a further inconsistency in his evidence  relating
       to the date of the ICC  meeting  in  2010.  Having  considered  this
       evidence holistically Judge Finch was not satisfied IM was a  member
       of JEM.

   13. Having regard to photographs provided by IM the Judge accepted  that
       he attended one demonstration against the Sudanese authorities.  The
       Judge however relied on SS (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2008] EWCA Civ 310 to support her finding  that  IM  had
       nevertheless failed to establish that this  limited  activity  would
       cause the Sudanese authorities to become aware of his identity.

   14. The Judge noted that IM had, at that stage, lived in the UK for more
       than 5 years and had completed a number of short courses. There were
       however no letters or representations from any friends  before  her.
       The Judge further noted that IM's father and siblings still lived in
       Port Sudan and found that he could safely return there and live with
       his family. The Judge found IM's private life  to  be  limited  and,
       applying the approach identified in R v. Secretary of State for  the
       Home Department, ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, she concluded  that
       his removal would not  constitute  a  disproportionate  interference
       with IM's right to enjoy a private life in the United Kingdom.

   15. On appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson  found  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's reliance on SS (Iran) in respect of  IM's  attendance  at
       one demonstration was factually inconsistent with the  statement  in
       the OGN of November 2009 that 'all JEM members or affiliates, at any
       level of involvement, are at  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  by  the
       Sudanese authorities or Janjaweed in  Darfur  and  by  the  Sudanese
       authorities  elsewhere  in   Sudan'.   It   was   agreed   by   both
       representatives  that  the   dissonance   between   the   First-tier
       Tribunal's acceptance of the statement in the OGN and  her  decision
       on risk from limited JEM activities amounted to an error of law  and
       that the decision would have to be remade. Further evidence would be
       required of IM's claimed JEM activities in the UK and any  resultant
       risk on return.

   16. Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson received a witness  statement  from  Mr
       Abdulrahman Sharafedin which sought to deal with a number of  points
       including the two disputed letters purportedly written  by  him.  Mr
       Sharafedin  renounced  the  earlier  letter   as   a   forgery.   Mr
       Sharafedin's statement was silent as to the veracity of  the  second
       letter, but the statement dealt at some  length  with  IM's  claimed
       membership of JEM. Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson  additionally  noted
       that, since the determination under appeal was made, there had  been
       a major change in Sudan, which had separated into two countries, the
       Republic of Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan. It was noted that
       IM hailed from the northern region of the Republic of Sudan.


    AI


   17. In his first appeal before the First-tier Tribunal AI claimed to  be
       a member of the Berti tribe from the  Darfur  region  of  Sudan.  He
       claimed to have lived until the age of 8 in Nyala, in South  Darfur,
       before moving with his family to Omdurman in Khartoum. He maintained
       that he and his family faced discrimination as  a  result  of  their
       Berti ethnicity. AI said that he was arrested by the security forces
       on 10 May 2008 after giving a lift to two men and was severely  ill-
       treated. It is not disputed that on  10  May  2008  JEM  mounted  an
       attack against the government at Omdurman.  AI alleged that  he  was
       taken to hospital  as  a  result  of  this  ill-treatment  and  then
       released on daily reporting conditions. He subsequently fled Sudan.

   18. Neither the respondent nor Judge Waygood found AI to be  a  credible
       witness. The Judge's adverse credibility findings were based,  inter
       alia, on AI's lack of detailed response  when  asked  to  provide  a
       history of the Berti tribe and how it had changed  over  the  years,
       inconsistencies in respect of the location of a place called Mellit,
       his inability to confirm the geographic details of Nyala and related
       inconsistencies  and  omissions,  and  the  rejection  of  a  letter
       purporting to have been issued by the Union of the People of  Darfur
       in  the  UK  and  Northern  Ireland.  The  Judge  found   additional
       inconsistencies between AI's account  and  the  background  evidence
       relating to the JEM attack on 10 May 2008,  and  identified  further
       internal inconsistencies in AI's account  of  the  ill-treatment  in
       respect of which he claimed to have been subjected.

   19.  The Judge rejected AI's claim to be a member of the Berti tribe and
       his claim that he had been targeted and ill-treated as a  result  of
       his perceived association with JEM. The only aspect of AI's  account
       accepted by the Judge was that he was  a  black  African  and  spoke
       Arabic. The Judge accepted that AI may be  stopped  at  the  airport
       upon his return as a failed asylum-seeker but  found  there  was  no
       evidence that he would, as a result, receive treatment sufficient to
       breach Article 3 ECHR.

   20. In respect to his fresh asylum claim made on 15 March 2011 AI relied
       on new evidence relating to his  claimed  membership  of  the  Berti
       tribe and, further,  claimed  to  have  been  active  in  JEM  since
       arriving in the UK. Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
       considered the new evidence relied on by AI, which included a letter
       from the Darfur Union UK & Northern Ireland and a  report  by  Peter
       Verney, dated 18 October 2012, who was satisfied, having asked AI  a
       series of questions that he belonged to the Berti tribe.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal rejected AI's claim to be a  member  of  the
       Berti tribe in a decision promulgated on  28  February  2013.  Given
       AI's inability to answer similar questions during his lengthy asylum
       interview on 19 November 2010 the Judge was satisfied AI had  learnt
       relevant facts about the Berti tribe and Nyala  in  the  intervening
       period, that he had misled Mr Verney, and that  Mr  Verney's  report
       could not therefore be regarded as reliable.

   22. AI had provided two letters  purportedly  from  JEM  confirming  his
       active membership, both  signed  by  Mr  Abdulrahman  Sharafedin.  A
       person identifying himself as Mr Sharafedin attended the hearing and
       produced his passport. He additionally signed his witness  statement
       at the hearing. There were however discrepancies in  the  signatures
       between the various documents and, having taken  instructions,  AI's
       representative did not call the person  identifying  himself  as  Mr
       Sharafedin to give evidence. In these circumstances the  Judge  felt
       he was unable to attach any weight to the JEM letters and found that
       AI was seeking to mislead the Tribunal by presenting a  witness  who
       was not who he said he was. The Judge noted that AI appeared in only
       some  of  the  photographs  produced  allegedly   showing   him   at
       demonstrations and it was not clear where the events took place. Nor
       was the Judge satisfied there was independent evidence to show  that
       the Sudanese authorities had any means of recording  or  identifying
       those who participated in demonstrations in the United Kingdom.  The
       Judge rejected AI's claim to be a member of the Berti tribe and  his
       claimed involvement with JEM. The Judge finally noted that AI  would
       be returned to Sudan as a failed asylum-seeker and that neither  the
       background country information nor the  country  guidance  decisions
       indicated that he would face a real risk of persecution  or  serious
       harm simply on that basis.

   23. The Upper  Tribunal  found  no  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's assessment of the evidence save in respect of the risk on
       return as a failed asylum-seeker. Paragraph 32.05 of  the  September
       2012 Sudanese Country of  Origin  Information  Report  (COI  report)
       cited a Waging Peace report dated 4 August 2011. This report, itself
       citing sources from 2006 and 2010, maintained that:

         Returning Sudanese asylum seekers from the UK to Sudan in  and  of
         itself constitutes a significant threat  to  their  safety  at  the
         hands of the  NISS  [Sudan's  National  Intelligence  and  Security
         Services], and in the worst instances can result in death.


       The full extract suggested that returning Sudanese asylum-seekers to
       Sudan constituted a significant threat to their safety at the  hands
       of the NISS. The Upper Tribunal was not satisfied this document  had
       been considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  An  added  complication
       was said to be  the  split  of  Sudan  into  two  countries.  Having
       identified an error of law in the  aforementioned  terms  the  Upper
       Tribunal directed a rehearing on the limited aspect of the safety of
       return for failed asylum-seekers.

   24. Hence in the case of IM,  the  Tribunal  is  concerned  to  consider
       general principles in relation to the risks faced by those who  have
       engaged (or are perceived to  have  been  engaged)  in  activity  in
       opposition to the current Sudanese regime, whilst in the case of AI,
       the Tribunal is concerned to consider general principles in relation
       to those returned who are failed asylum seekers.

   25. In the course of these proceedings, the  respondent  conceded  in  a
       response dated 16 May 2014:

         [T]he Secretary of State would like to confirm her  position  that
         activists of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) in Sudan would
         likely be at risk  of  ill-treatment  and  persecution  on  return.
         However,  this  is  with  the  caveat  that  each  case  should  be
         considered on its individual merits. Claimants who have a  credible
         claim of being a member of JEM and can show they have come  to  the
         adverse attention of the Sudanese authorities,  or  are  reasonably
         likely to do so, are likely to qualify for asylum.
         The Secretary of State does however ask that  the  Tribunal  gives
    specific attention to  defining what a JEM 'activist' should reasonably
    be interpreted as being.


    IM's oral evidence before us

   26. AI did  not  elect  to  give  any  oral  evidence.  IM  adopted  his
       statements of 10 May 2011, 24 May 2012, 26 August 2014 and  23  June
       2015. There was no examination-in-chief.


   27. In cross-examination IM confirmed that he arrived in the UK in  2006
       but did not become a member of JEM until 15 January 2010, a  gap  of
       around three and a half years. When asked why he did not join sooner
       IM explained that he had been against the  Beja  Conference's  peace
       agreement with the Sudanese government but it was only  following  a
       long conversation with a JEM member  that  he  became  convinced  of
       JEM's aims and decided to join them. IM claimed he  had  engaged  in
       activism with the Beja Congress in the UK prior to joining  JEM.  IM
       rejected the suggestion that the absence of  any  reference  in  his
       statements to such activism was  because  he  was  not  telling  the
       truth. When his statements were taken IM had not  been  asked  about
       his activities on behalf of the Beja Conference in the UK.


   28. IM disagreed with the suggestion that he only became active with JEM
       because he was about  to  submit  a  fresh  asylum  application.  IM
       maintained that he was an active member of JEM in Plymouth and asked
       JEM members to attend demonstrations and meetings in London  and  to
       attend JEM meetings in Cardiff. He did  not  accept  the  suggestion
       that he last attended a public meeting in 2010. He maintained,  with
       reference to his most recent statement, that he  organised  meetings
       and asked JEM members to join meetings. IM accepted  that  his  most
       recent statement made  no  reference  to  meetings  in  Plymouth  or
       Cardiff but he insisted that the last JEM event he attended  was  on
       10 May 2015 in Cardiff, and prior to that,  he  attended  events  in
       Cardiff in January 2015 and December 2014. His most recent statement
       made no reference to the meetings in Cardiff because his  solicitors
       only asked him about his attendance at demonstrations in London, and
       the reference to his having attended 'no further events' was only in
       respect of London. Although he had  no  documents  relating  to  his
       attendance at events in Cardiff his witness,  Mr  Sharafedin,  could
       attest to his attendance at these meetings. The meetings in Cardiff,
       at which approximately 50 people attended, took place  in  a  large,
       rented three-bedroom residential flat. IM attended the meetings with
       fellow JEM members from Plymouth together with members from  London,
       Newport, Swansea, Birmingham and Manchester. He knew the first names
       of some of the attendees from other places. The meeting  on  10  May
       2015 was an anniversary of the events of  10  May  2008,  see  [17],
       above. The meeting in December 2014 was a tribute to the JEM  leader
       who had been killed by the Sudanese government. IM did not know  why
       Mr Sharafedin, in his statement, did not  mention  the  meetings  in
       Cardiff.


   29. IM maintained that he last attended a  demonstration  in  London  in
       September 2014. He referred in support to a number of photographs in
       his bundle. He was sure the photographs were  taken  in  2014.  They
       were taken in order to document the events and were submitted to the
       JEM website. IM accepted that his statements neglected to  make  any
       mention of the JEM website. He had not been asked to provide  photos
       of screen shots or printouts from the website. He disagreed that his
       oral evidence  relating  to  the  website  was  untrue.  Mr  Thomann
       conceded that IM had become a member of JEM.  IM  accepted  that  he
       still had his father and siblings in Port Sudan. IM did not know  if
       his father was still employed. He was 62 years old and worked  as  a
       labourer from time to time. IM's brothers were not employed.  Theirs
       was a poor family and, as non-Arab Sudanese,  sometimes  they  could
       not get jobs. IM did not believe he would be able to secure work  in
       Port Sudan if he were to return. He confirmed he had  no  family  in
       the UK. There was no re-examination.

    Past and current Country Guidance


   30. In HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006]  UKAIT  00062,  the
       Tribunal (Hodge J, President, and Senior Immigration  Judges  Storey
       and P. Lane) focussed its attention upon the risk faced by  non-Arab
       Darfuris returning to  Khartoum.   Having  examined  the  background
       material it summarised its findings:



     (2)  Neither  involuntary  returnees  nor  failed  asylum  seekers  nor
             persons  of  military  age  (including   draft   evaders   and
             deserters) are as such at real risk on return to Khartoum.

                  (7) There will, nevertheless,  be  limited  categories  of
             Darfuri returnees who  will  be  at  real  risk  on  return  to
             Khartoum. Each case will need  to  be  considered  on  its  own
             individual   merits,   taking   account   of    all    relevant
             circumstances, considered individually and cumulatively.


   31.  The  Tribunal  identified  at  that  time,  2006,  particular  risk
       categories which included:


     (i) persons of non-Arab Darfuri origin from  one  of  the  villages  or
          areas of Darfur which are "hotspots" or "rebel  strongholds"  from
          which rebel leaders are known to originate;
     (ii) persons (including certain students) whose conduct marks them  out
          as oppositionists or anti-government activists;
     (iii)    tribal leaders;
     (iv)  persons  who  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom  have  engaged  in
          activities which the Sudanese government is likely to  know  about
          and regard as significantly harmful to its interests...


   32. In its consideration of the country evidence the Tribunal noted  the
       2001 Danish Fact-finding Report and, at paragraph  131,  set  out  a
       section of that report headed 'Conditions of Entry and Exit':


         3.1 Entry to Sudan


         Abdulbagi Albushra Abdulhay, Major General, Director  of  Passport
         and Immigration,  General  Administration,  Khartoum,  denied  that
         Sudanese citizens who had stayed abroad  for  some  time  would  be
         arrested or questioned by the authorities on their return home.  He
         said that no Sudanese would be questioned about  his  circumstances
         while abroad, however long he had been away,  and  whether  he  had
         been in Western Europe,  the  USA  or  other  countries,  with  the
         exception of Israel. If a person had been in  Israel  he  would  be
         questioned.


         He also explained that Sudanese who worked abroad were obliged  to
         pay tax on their foreign income either at a Sudanese Embassy or  to
         the tax authorities in Sudan. Abdulhay said that  no  Sudanese  had
         been arrested or even questioned on their return from abroad unless
         they had some unresolved business with the Sudanese tax authorities
         or were suspected of previous criminal activities in Sudan.


         Abdulhay explained that the airport police at Khartoum airport had
         a register of all wanted persons. The airport police  showed  these
         lists when the delegation visited the airport.  The  lists  contain
         information about approximately  1700  Sudanese  citizens  who  are
         wanted by the authorities. The lists  are  drawn  up  manually  and
         there is no wanted persons database. Abdulhay also  said  that  any
         foreigner could enter Sudan freely. Even former militant members of
         the opposition who had fought against the  Government  could  enter
         without having problems with the authorities. He added  that  there
         was an amnesty for such people in Sudan.


         Anyone entering the  country  who  appears  on  the  list  and  is
         identified by the authorities  will  immediately  be  arrested  and
         handed over to the Detective Police/Central Intelligence Department
         (CID) at the airport, which after further investigations  may  hand
         him over to the security service. A source at  the  airport  police
         said that this happened three or four times a month.  However,  the
         head of the CID, Colonel Emad Kalafalla M. Khier, said that five or
         six people were handed over every day. This figure  included  those
         travelling on false passports.


         Waltmans-Molier said that the Netherlands Embassy did  not  follow
         up  any  deportations  of  rejected  asylum  applicants  from   the
         Netherlands. There was  no  form  of  monitoring  and  the  Embassy
         therefore did not know what subsequently happened to those who  had
         been returned...


         ...She knew that it was the practice for Sudanese citizens who had
         been away from the country for a couple of years or  more  and  who
         were now returning home to be questioned by the Sudanese police  on
         their arrival. Often this would be because of a failure to pay tax.
         The Netherlands Embassy was not aware of  any  examples  of  people
         suffering any harm while being questioned.


         A well-informed local source in Cairo said that Sudanese  citizens
         in possession of  a  valid  national  passport  could  enter  Sudan
         without any difficulty. However,  if  they  only  had  a  temporary
         travel document they would be questioned about their  circumstances
         on  arrival  in  Sudan.  This  applied  only  to  those   returning
         voluntarily  to  Sudan.  The  source  had  no   information   about
         conditions on entry for Sudanese citizens who were  being  forcibly
         repatriated to Sudan.


         Johannes Lehne said that Germany had never had problems  with  the
         deportation of rejected asylum applicants to  Khartoum,  either  on
         entry or following entry. In the previous year a total of 15 people
         had been sent back to Sudan from Germany. Only in  some  individual
         cases had the deportation been followed up".

   33. The Tribunal went on to consider the 10th ACCORD Country  of  Origin
       Seminar Report, Budapest, December 2005 which set out  the  opinions
       of Dr Hans Schodder and Dr Hamayoun Alizadeh. Dr  Alizadeh  was  the
       Regional Representative of the Office  of  the  United  States  High
       Commissioner for Human Rights  (OHCHCR)  for  South  East  Asia  and
       former head of OHCHR in Khartoum, and Dr  Schodder  was  the  Senior
       Protection Officer of the UNHCR  representative  in  Khartoum.   The
       Tribunal quoted from Dr Schodder's comments found in  their  report,
       under the heading '3.10. Exit, Political  Activities  in  Exile  and
       Return':

         "Sudanese citizens need [an] exit visa to leave the  country,  and
         these are denied to persons the government doesn't want  to  travel
         abroad, for example to attend  critical  meetings  or  conferences.
         While considering an application for an exit visa, the  authorities
         keep the passport of the applicant. It's not a fact that  political
         opponents don't get exit visa at all; it just might [take] a couple
         of months or even years, and through all those years  the  passport
         stays with the authorities".


        In relation to political activities in exile, Dr Alizadeh stated:


          "Of  course,  the  Sudanese  government  observes  activities  of
         Sudanese nationals in Europe. Each  consulate  or  embassy  has  at
         least two security officers who deal with intelligence information.
         Each event that is related to Sudan is attended by people from  the
         embassy who observe and report - not to  the  minister  of  foreign
         affairs, but  directly  to  their  headquarters  in  Khartoum.  The
         security  apparatus,  consisting  of  both  internal  security  and
         intelligence service, monitors the activities of Sudanese  citizens
         abroad."

     In relation to the return of failed asylum seekers Dr Alizedeh  stated:



         "Failed asylum seekers won't face severe problems upon return,  as
         long as they are not recognized as a threat to the state.  However,
         if they are seen as a threat  -  there  is  no  guarantee.  In  the
         beginning  of  the  90s  there  were  cases  of  people  who   just
         disappeared. A lot of persons who left the country after  the  coup
         returned from exile. Of course  they  feared  that  they  would  be
         arrested at the airport, but nothing happened. However,  this  does
         not mean that the situation will continue like this."

       Dr Schodder added:

         "In the past persons who left  the  country  after  the  coup  and
         stayed away for more than one year, would be questioned upon return
         automatically. This is no routine policy anymore; also the practice
         of arrests straight at the airport is not  common  anymore  at  the
         moment. Returnees might get visits from security officers later and
         be questioned or warned not to start any "funky ["funny"] business"
         in Sudan. I have no information that these people are  particularly
         being targeted. Instead, some people who have been abroad for  many
         years, maybe for political reasons, have  come  back  to  Khartoum.
         They are subject to close surveillance  and  they  know  that  they
         cannot engage in political activities. They also know that they can
         be arrested, questioned, and detained at  any  time.  They  feel  a
         little bit more secure if they obtained a foreign  passport  before
         their return. But if they are still Sudanese citizens, they have no
         protection at all. There have been some positive developments,  but
         the security is monitoring the situation very  closely  and  it  is
         quite unpredictable".


   34. The Tribunal in analysing the material reached these conclusions:


     172. We start with the  most  general  risk  category  which  has  been
          proposed to us in the course of submissions.  It is that we should
          find that involuntary returnees to Sudan  generally  would  be  at
          risk. This was not of course  the  scope  of  the  review  of  the
          situation in Sudan contemplated by the House of  Lords  in  Januzi
          when remitting the three Sudan cases to  the  AIT.  The  arguments
          canvassed in that case were confined  to  the  issue  of  risk  to
          persons of non-Arab/black African Darfuri origin facing return  to
          Khartoum. The original grounds of appeal in the four cases  before
          us did not argue for such a general risk category. Nor, as we have
          seen, is such a  broad  risk  category  advanced  by  any  of  the
          established country reports or even by the latest  UNHCR  Position
          Paper.  Nor is it one subscribed to by Mr Verney  in  his  written
          and oral evidence to us...


     173. We are not persuaded that there is such a  general  risk  category
          for several interrelated reasons.   If the general  argument  here
          advanced was right, of  course,  then  even    Sudanese  nationals
          returning on up-to-date Sudanese passports who were members of the
          Sudanese government would be at risk. That  itself  defies  common
          sense. It also contradicts the very considerable evidence  from  a
          number of sources and supported by both Mr Verney and Ms  Maguire,
          that the current regime is extremely  security-minded  and  highly
          sophisticated  in  its  approach  to  the  control  of   political
          opposition of every kind. But even considering  that  in  practice
          this category would be confined to those who would be returning on
          other travel documents, we cannot see that the  argument  is  made
          out.  First of all, we can see no good reason why, for example, an
          involuntary returnee who was an Arab from northern  Sudan  or  who
          was a member of the Sudanese government would be viewed adversely.
          It may be that certain individuals from one or both of these  sub-
          categories may have specific characteristics which would put  them
          at risk: e.g. if they were a member  of  the  government  who  had
          turned "whistleblower" (and so had effectively become  outspokenly
          anti-government), but here we are considering  the category on its
          own.


     174. Secondly, such a risk  category  assumes  a  general  practice  or
          pattern of adverse treatment of involuntary returnees  on  return,
          satisfactory evidence for which is lacking.  It has been submitted
          that a practice or pattern of ill-treating  involuntary  returnees
          is not one which would  necessarily  be  known  about,  especially
          given the secretive and repressive  nature  of  the  NSIS  in  its
          security and intelligence work. However,  it  is  clear  from  the
          background evidence  that,  internal  censorship  notwithstanding,
          organisations within Sudan, both parliamentary and NGO-based, have
          shown ability to document and bring to light evidence of [National
          Security and Information Service] NSIS activities and abuses.  The
          Sudan Organisation Against Torture  (SOAT)  reports  on  the  Soba
          Aradi incidents of May 2005 are one such example. Whether SOAT  is
          wholly based outside Sudan or not, it is clearly  able  to  obtain
          and document a great deal  of  relevant  information  from  inside
          Sudan. It is also clear that even  outside  international  bodies,
          such as Amnesty International, have been able to obtain  and  make
          public evidence of  human  rights  abuses:  see  for  example  its
          detailing of some 330 detentions of political  opponents  covering
          mid-2004- mid-2005  (at  pp.160-170  of  the  bundle  relating  to
          appellant M).  Even where investigations have  not  been  able  to
          give complete information, e.g. in relation to the regime's use of
          'ghost houses', nevertheless  the  underlying  practice  has  been
          identified and documented to some degree.


     175. It may be that there is  no  international  or  national  body  or
          agency monitoring returns to Khartoum Airport, but  by  virtue  of
          the protracted civil war in the South, the issue of risk on return
          to failed asylum seekers has long  been  seen  as  one  which  the
          international community has had to examine: see  for  example  the
          2001 Danish Fact-finding report. From the evidence  of  the  Aegis
          Trust and Mr Verney and Ms Maguire, we also  know  that  it  is  a
          topic which national and external NGOs in Khartoum have been asked
          to think about for some time now.


     176. In such circumstances we would expect those  contending  that  the
          situation has changed such that there is now  a  general  risk  on
          return, to evidence how and why.


     177. We agree with Miss Giovannetti  that  if  there  was  a  practice,
          official  or  unofficial,  of  adverse  treatment  of  involuntary
          returnees,  it  would  have  become  known  and  would  have  been
          adequately documented.   On  Mr  Verney's  and  Ms  Maguire's  own
          approach, such a pattern would have started  some  time  in  2003,
          when the current regime decided to oppress  the  non-Arab  Darfuri
          population, so there have been three years in which such a pattern
          would have become discernible.


     178. Despite the scrutiny of national and international bodies, we note
          in this regard  that  there  have  only  been  two  specific  case
          examples cited in the  evidence  before  us  of  returnees  facing
          mistreatment. We shall deal with them below when considering  non-
          Arab Darfuri returnees, but the general  point  we  make  here  is
          this: if there was an established practice or  pattern,  we  would
          have expected to see much more extensive evidence in the form of a
          significant number of adequately documented case examples.


   35. It is apparent that the situation deteriorated between 2006-2009 (or
       more information came to light which required the Tribunal to modify
       its views) because in AA (Non-arab Darfurians - relocation) Sudan CG
       [2009] UKAIT 00056 (Senior Immigration Judges Allen  and  P.  Lane),
       the Tribunal painted a bleaker picture, summarising its  conclusions
       as follows:

     All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution in Darfur  and  cannot
          reasonably be expected  to  relocate  elsewhere  in  Sudan.   HGMO
          (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 is no  longer
          to be followed, save in respect of the guidance summarised at  (2)
          and (6) of the headnote to that case.


   36. The reference to headnote (6) was a reference to a claimant  seeking
       protection on the basis of his medical needs, a category that is not
       material for our purposes.


   37. In AY (Political parties - SCP - risk) Sudan CG [2008]  UKAIT  00050
       (AIT)  (Senior Immigration Judges Latter  and  Southern  and  Mr  C.
       Thursby) the Tribunal considered the risk faced by  members  of  the
       Sudanese Communist Party (SCP) but spoke more broadly  of  political
       opposition in a wider sense.  In summary, the panel decided:

        1. Opposition parties are allowed  to  function  within  relatively
           narrow parameters in Sudan.


        2. The Sudanese authorities do not seek or  even  attempt  to  take
           action which could amount to persecution against  all  political
           opponents but in the main they seek to control  by  the  use  of
           fear   and   intimidation.    Depending   on   the    particular
           circumstances of an individual,  they  may  resort  to  stronger
           measures,  particularly  against  those  actively   engaged   in
           building up grass roots democracy, working in support  of  human
           rights and involved in  open  criticism  of  the  regime's  core
           ideology and philosophy.


        3. In general  it  will  be  difficult  for  ordinary  members  and
           supporters of the SCP or any other political party to  establish
           a claim for asylum. They will need to show that they  have  been
           engaged in specific activities  likely  to  bring  them  to  the
           attention  of  the  adverse  authorities  such  as  active   and
           effective local democratic activity or  support  for  particular
           human  rights  activities.   Whether  any  individual  political
           activist is at risk will necessarily depend upon his  individual
           circumstances set within the context of the situation as at  the
           date of decision.  This will include an assessment of the nature
           of the activities carried out and how they will be seen  by  the
           authorities.

        4.  The legal status of an  opposition  party  has  no  significant
           bearing in itself on whether an individual is likely  to  be  at
           risk of persecution. Political activities also take place  under
           the guise of cultural associations.


   38. Most recently, in MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG  [2015]  UKUT  00010  (IAC)
       heard on 7 October 2014 (King J and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey),
       the Upper Tribunal summarised its views, once again in  the  context
       of non-Arab Dafuris, in the italicised words:

     In the country  guidance  case  of  AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris-relocation)
           Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056,  where  it  is  stated  that  if  a
           claimant from Sudan is a non-Arab Darfuri he must succeed in  an
           international protection claim, "Darfuri" is to be understood as
           an ethnic term relating to origins, not as a geographical  term.
           Accordingly it covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur.


   39. The above constitutes our starting point for our assessment of those
       who may face a risk of persecution on  return  to  the  Republic  of
       Sudan.


    The country evidence


    US State Department Country Report: Human Rights  Practices  for  2014,
    Sudan


   40. In the Executive Summary of the US State Department  Country  Report
       on Sudan on Human Rights Practices for 2014, Sudan is described as:


          '...a  republic  with  power  concentrated  in   the   hands   of
         authoritarian President Omar Hassan al-Bashir and his inner circle.
         The  National  Congress  Party  (NCP)  maintained  control  of  the
         government,  continuing  25  years  of  nearly  absolute  political
         authority. The country last held national elections  in  2010,  the
         first multi-party elections since President Bashir took power.  The
         elections, which several opposition parties boycotted, did not meet
         international standards.'

   41. Although the President, according  to  the  Human  Rights  Practices
       report, announced a National Dialogue in  January  2014  to  discuss
       democratic reforms with opposition  parties  and  members  of  civil
       society, some key opposition parties refused to participate  in  the
       dialogue until the  government  demonstrated  its  good  faith  with
       reforms to  improve  the  environment  for  civil  liberties  and  a
       cessation of hostilities. Although the President announced in  April
       2014 that the  government  would  release  political  prisoners  and
       protect  press  freedoms,  the  government  arrested  key  political
       figures and restricted the operation of newspapers  and  journalists
       throughout 2014. Many who protested or  publicly  commented  on  the
       actions of national security forces were  arrested  or  beaten,  and
       many individuals who aligned themselves  with  opposition  movements
       were also detained without charge.

   42. Government forces,  government-aligned  groups,  rebels,  and  armed
       groups committed human rights abuses and violations  throughout  the
       year, according to the US report.  The  most  serious  human  rights
       abuses and violations included indiscriminate and deliberate bombing
       of civilian  areas  and  armed  attacks  on  civilians,  attacks  on
       humanitarian  targets   including   humanitarian   facilities,   and
       extrajudicial and other unlawful killings.

   43. Other major abuses included torture, beatings, rape and other  cruel
       or inhuman treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest  and  detention
       by security forces; harsh and life-threatening  prisons  conditions;
       incommunicado detention; prolonged pre-trial detention;  obstruction
       of humanitarian  assistance;  restrictions  on  freedom  of  speech,
       press, assembly, association, religion, and movement; harassment  of
       internally displaced persons (IDPs);  corruption;  intimidation  and
       closure of human rights and  nongovernmental  organizations  (NGOs);
       and recruitment of child soldiers.

   44. In the section headed 'Arbitrary or Unlawful  Deprivation  of  Life'
       the Human Rights Practices report spoke of how the  Security  forces
       used excessive  force  against  demonstrators.  On  11  March  2014,
       security forces used force and live ammunition to disperse  students
       at the University of  Khartoum  protesting  escalating  violence  in
       Darfur. One  student  died  of  injuries  he  sustained  during  the
       confrontation with security forces and pro-regime students.

   45. According to NGOs, civil society activists in Khartoum,  and  former
       detainees, government security forces beat and tortured  persons  in
       detention, including members  of  the  political  opposition,  civil
       society activists, and  journalists.  Subsequently,  the  government
       released  many  of  these  persons  without  charge.  It   did   not
       investigate cases of torture or excessive use of force  by  security
       agents.

   46. Former detainees reported  physical  and  psychological  torture  by
       police, the National Security and Information  Service  (NSIS),  and
       military intelligence personnel of the Sudan Alliance Forces  (SAF),
       an opposition group.  Some  of  those  arrested  were  subjected  to
       torture  and  other  forms  of  mistreatment,  including   prolonged
       isolation, exposure  to  extreme  temperature  variations,  electric
       shock, and use of stress positions.

   47. Human rights advocates reported that between April  and  May,  three
       detainees died in the custody  of  military  intelligence  units  in
       Nyala, South Darfur, and Fazugli, Blue Nile state. A fourth detainee
       from Nyala died in the hospital shortly after being transported from
       the  military  intelligence  detention  centre.   Journalists   were
       beaten, threatened, and intimidated.  Prison  conditions  throughout
       the country remained harsh, overcrowded, and life threatening.

   48. Although the interim  national  constitution  and  law  provide  for
       freedom of assembly, the government severely restricted this  right.
       The criminal code considers gatherings of  more  than  five  persons
       without  a  permit  to  be  illegal.  Organizers  must  notify   the
       government 36 hours prior to assemblies  and  rallies.   Authorities
       disrupted or prevented Sudanese Communist Party  (SCP)  meetings  in
       private homes and offices.

   49. Whilst these extracts from the Human  Rights  Practices  report  are
       necessarily very selective, they offer an insight into the  type  of
       regime that operates in Sudan and  it  is  against  such  an  albeit
       poorly-sketched back-drop, that the assessment of risk falls  to  be
       made.

   50.  The  regime's  sensitivity  over  human  rights  abuses  has   been
       significantly increased since March  2009,  when  the  International
       Criminal Court  in  the  Hague  issued  an  arrest  warrant  against
       President al-Bashir on charges of  war  crimes  and  crimes  against
       humanity in  Darfur.  A  charge  of  genocide  was  added  in  2010,
       according to the Freedom House Sudan Report 2012.   As  recently  as
       June 2015, the prosecutor of the International  Criminal  Court  has
       condemned disproportionate use of force against  civilians  and  the
       deliberate hampering of efforts to afford humanitarian relief.  This
       is consistent with reports from Amnesty International, Human  Rights
       Watch and the African Centre for Justice and Peace  Studies,  issued
       in 2015, which spoke of the continued conflict in South Kordofan and
       Blue Nile states and noted the Sudanese governments  use  of  aerial
       bombardments and  proxy  militias,  and  the  continued  attacks  on
       civilians by  both  the  Sudanese  Armed  Forces  and  the  Sudanese
       Peoples' Liberation Movement - North (SPLM-N).

    The COI Service report, 11 September 2012


   51. The last comprehensive COI Service report is that  of  11  September
       2012.   Extracting  from  its  opening  sections,  we  are  able  to
       summarise Sudan's recent history. For decades,  Sudan  has  suffered
       from political, military and social  upheavals.   Particular  unrest
       has been experienced by communities in the south.  The  country  has
       experienced two civil wars  (1955  -  1972  and  1983  -  2005)  and
       uprisings in the Nuba Mountains, in Blue Nile  State,  by  the  Beja
       people in the east and by rebels in Darfur.


   52. On 19 November 2004, the Government of Sudan  and  the  SPLA  (Sudan
       People's Liberation Army) and its political  arm,  the  SPLM  (Sudan
       People's  Liberation  Movement)  signed  a  declaration   committing
       themselves to conclude a final comprehensive  peace  agreement.  The
       two parties formally signed the Comprehensive Peace Agreement  (CPA)
       on 9 January 2005 ending the civil war with the south  and  allowing
       for  a  referendum  on  southern  independence  after   a   six-year
       transitional  period.  The  referendum  took  place  in   2011.   An
       overwhelming majority voted for secession.

   53. Although the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed between Sudan  and
       South Sudan in 2005 formally brought to an end the conflict  between
       the north and south, the disputed status  of  Abeyi  and  a  vaguely
       worded right to 'popular  consultations'  in  Blue  Nile  and  South
       Kordofan without a guaranteed  outcome  [3.20]  continued  to  be  a
       source of tension in Sudan post  2005.  The  conflict  continues  in
       Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The COIS report noted [3.13]
       the main conflicts as follows:

        a) An ongoing humanitarian crisis in Darfur in the  west  where  at
           least 300,000 have died and about 2.2 million been displaced  by
           fighting since 2003.
        b) Clashes in oil-rich states bordering  South  Sudan,  called  the
           Three Areas (Abyei, South Kordofan and Blue Nile).
        c)  Tensions with South  Sudan  following  the  21-year  civil  war
           between the north and the south that ended in 2005. South  Sudan
           seceded from the north in July 2011.
        d) Slow recovery from  conflict  in  east  Sudan  where  insurgents
           threatened to challenge  the  government  for  a  share  of  the
           country's power and natural resources.

   54. However, the country has also been  wracked  by  demonstrations  and
       popular protests which have periodically occurred over the last  few
       years.


   55. Paragraph 16.20 of the COI report  noted  the  popular  protests  of
       January 2011 which, it is said, were endorsed by the opposition  and
       attended by roughly 2,000 individuals in Khartoum despite  the  NISS
       announcing that any demonstration would be considered illegal. UNMIS
       documented more than 100 arrests made  by  the  NISS.  Most  of  the
       detainees were  released  the  same  day.  More  than  30,  however,
       remained in detention  until  the  end  of  February  without  being
       charged. Many of them  reported  having  been  mistreated  while  in
       custody.

   56. The Human Rights Watch, World Report 2012,  Sudan,  covering  events
       from 2011, dated January 2012 similarly observed:

         In January 2011 in response  to  demonstrations  inspired  by  the
         popular uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia,  security  forces  arrested
         more than 100 protesters in Khartoum and Omdurman alone.

   57. There were other protests in June-July 2012.  According to paragraph
       16.22, a report on Al Jazeera, dated 28 June 2012, noted


         ... after over a year  of  sporadic  protests,  Sudanese  say  the
         newest round of demonstrations has evolved into a popular uprising.
         The protests began in reaction to new austerity measures introduced
         by the government, but now many are calling for al Bashir  and  his
         government to step aside.

   58. A report from  Agence  France-Presse,  dated  1  July  2012,  citing
       figures provided by the  Organisation  for  Defence  of  Rights  and
       Freedoms (ODRF) reported that about 1,000 people had  been  arrested
       and hundreds more hurt during anti-regime protests in  Sudan  on  29
       June 2012.

   59. A press release from Human Rights Watch, dated 26  June  2012  noted
       [16.22] that:

         ... President Omar al-Bashir [had] downplayed the significance  of
         the  protests,  calling  them  foreign-backed,  and  threatened  to
         respond  to  protesters  with  real  jihadists  instead  of  as   a
         responsible government. The day before, Sudan's police chief  vowed
         to quell the protests forcefully and immediately according to law.


   60. These events formed part of what is colloquially  described  as  the
       Arab Spring.  These events, centred upon various  countries  in  the
       southern Mediterranean rim, caused different reactions on  the  part
       of the authorities depending upon the country concerned. In mid-July
       2012, President al-Bashir, as reported in paragraph 6.26 of the  COI
       report explained his reaction in inflammatory language:


         'They talk of an Arab Spring - let me tell them that in  Sudan  we
         have a hot summer, a burning hot summer that burns its enemies.'


   61. UN Report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan established  pursuant
       to resolution 1591 (2005) (S/2011/111),  dated  20  September  2010,
       published 8 March 2011 explained:


         The Panel received reports of arbitrary arrest  and  detention  as
         well as of ill-treatment  and  torture  of  persons  while  in  the
         custody of security agents acting on behalf of  the  Government  of
         the Sudan. The continuing reports of arbitrary arrest and detention
         of Darfurian community leaders, members of civil society and  human
         rights activists indicate that the practice remains  widespread  in
         Darfur. Arbitrary arrest and detention is  of  particular  concern,
         since it is often a precursor for further human rights violations.


   62. The panel identified infringements by the Government of these rights
       in relation to internally displaced persons, community  leaders  and
       members of civil society perceived to be supportive of  armed  rebel
       groups, or in relation to community leaders who are against  efforts
       to bring internally displaced persons into the peace process.  Other
       cases documented by the Panel involved efforts by the Government  to
       target individuals  it  suspected  of  having  cooperated  with  the
       International Criminal Court.


   63. The Report of the independent  expert  on  the  situation  of  human
       rights in the Sudan, Mohamed Chande Othman (A/HRC/10/40),  dated  22
       August 2011, and the UN's High Commissioner for Human Rights,  '10th
       Report on the situation of human rights in Sudan', dated 28 November
       2008, spoke in similar terms.  The latter report stated:


         Darfurians in the Khartoum area are at heightened  risk  of  being
         subjected to arbitrary arrests, in particular if they are suspected
         of maintaining links  with  Darfurian  rebel  groups  or  political
         movements. Darfurians may  raise  the  suspicion  of  the  security
         forces by the mere fact of travelling from other parts of Sudan  to
         Darfur, by having travelled abroad, or by having  been  in  contact
         with individuals and organizations  abroad.  Over  the  past  three
         years, United Nations human rights officers have conducted numerous
         interviews with Darfurians who have been arbitrarily  arrested  and
         detained. Many reported that they were ill-treated and tortured.


   64. This is consistent with the Tribunal's earlier  assessment  of  risk
       found in AA (Non-arab Darfurians - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT
       00056.


   65. There is evidence  that  students  and  youth  activists  have  been
       targeted for their role in the civil unrest  and  criticism  of  the
       regime.  A paper from the  African  Centre  for  Justice  and  Peace
       Studies, 'Silencing the  New  Front:  the  Emergence  of  Widespread
       Torture against the Youth Movement',  dated  April  2011,  explained
       with regard to Sudan's youth movement and recent popular uprisings:


         Sudan's demonstrations are different from Egypt and  Tunisia's  in
         that they are already occurring at an extremely sensitive political
         time as they face the loss of the South and the end of the  interim
         period,  constitutional  revision,  and  the  ongoing  conflict  in
         Darfur. Austerity measures  imposed  in  early  January  [2011]  to
         combat the economic impacts of Southern secession has led  to  huge
         spikes in the  prices  of  food,  petrol,  and  other  commodities.
         However, the youth movement has drawn inspiration from the  popular
         uprisings. A coalition of members of the youth movement from groups
         such as Girifna, Youth for Change, Change  Now,  and  Sharara  (the
         'spark' in Arabic) quickly organised as a mass movement (also known
         as  the   Neighbourhood   Mobilisation   Committee)   and   planned
         demonstrations in Khartoum, El Obeid, Wad Medani, and Kosti for  30
         January [2011] to protest NCP rule.


   66. The same source, referring to the demonstrations which took place in
       early 2011, noted the arrest and widespread use of  torture  against
       youth  activists,  which  in  turn  acted  to  disincentive  popular
       protests at that time. It noted:


         ... [T]he [January] movement has failed  to  gain  broad,  popular
         support due to lack of cohesion and fears of the NISS,  the  brutal
         and widespread  torture  of  detainees  following  the  30  January
         demonstrations and subsequent days of rage indicate  that  the  NCP
         now views the opposition and independent civil society as the  next
         front. While torture remained all too  common  during  the  interim
         period, its scope and targets were somewhat subdued to  periods  of
         crackdown and following major political events such as the  Justice
         and  Equality  Movement  (JEM)   attack   on   Omdurman   and   the
         International Criminal Court's indictment  of  President  Omar  al-
         Bashir. Torture was most prevalent  amongst  mid-level  members  of
         civil society, journalists and members  of  disenfranchised  ethnic
         groups. Now, the main target of the NISS is the youth movement.  It
         appears that the majority of  detainees  from  the  youth  movement
         organised demonstrations were subjected to torture.


    The Embassy letters


   67. The respondent has sought information from the British  government's
       Embassy in Khartoum. This has resulted in two  letters  being  sent.
       Since these are not in the public domain, as far as we are aware, we
       will reproduce their contents in full  so  far  as  is  material.  A
       letter from the Deputy Head of Mission at  the  British  Embassy  in
       Khartoum, dated 8 April 2013 stated:

     'We have contacted the office of the  United  Nations  High  Commission
         for Refugees here in Khartoum. They are the lead agency for dealing
         with refugee issues  in  Sudan  and  have  large  protection  teams
         operating throughout the country in Sudan. They had no knowledge of
         returned asylum seekers being mistreated by the  Sudanese  security
         agencies.  We  have  also  contacted  the  German  and  Netherlands
         Embassies.  None  was  aware  of  any  cases  of  returnees   being
         mistreated on return  to  Sudan,  although  they  do  not  actively
         monitor every case of Sudanese being returned from their countries.
         We have also raised our concerns  about  allegations  of  returnees
         being mistreated verbally with  EU  partners  at  EU  Human  Rights
         meetings. Again EU partners had no  knowledge  of  mistreatment  of
         returnees but were also concerned at the reports.
     However there is evidence from domestic and international human  rights
         groups to show that those who openly  oppose  the  Government  from
         abroad will likely be arrested on  return.  Recently  a  number  of
         opposition leaders who  signed  a  political  manifesto  (New  Dawn
         Charter) in Uganda calling for reform  and  the  overthrow  of  the
         government of Sudan were detained for a number of weeks. These were
         widely reported in the Sudanese press and acknowledged as  fact  by
         the  Sudanese  Government.  One  of  the  arrestees  was   a   dual
         Sudanese/British National and this Embassy has had  direct  contact
         with the Government of Sudan about the case. We have also  received
         credible reports from political parties and human rights groups  in
         Sudan that those who are openly  critical  of  the  government  are
         usually  subject  to  surveillance  and  intimidation  by  security
         services. Reports from human right groups suggest that Darfuris and
         Nubans are also more likely  to  be  at  risk  from  this  type  of
         persecution.
     We should also acknowledge that in 2012,  Norway  expelled  a  Sudanese
         diplomat whom they believed was  involved  in  spying  on  Sudanese
         refugees there.'

     68. A letter from the Deputy Head of Mission and Consul General at  the
         British Embassy in Khartoum addressed to  the  Country  Policy  and
         Information Team at the Home Office in relation to the treatment of
         returnees in Sudan dated 19 February 2015 was  designed  to  update
         the situation since its letter of April 2013.  It  stated  that  in
         preparing the letter the embassy had consulted  with  the  Sudanese
         Immigration Authorities, UNHCR  and  IOM  and  a  number  of  other
         embassies in Khartoum. The letter continued:

     'It is the understanding of the British Embassy in  Khartoum  that  any
             individual identified as failed asylum seeker it  is  standard
             practice to have their  documents  removed  and  detained  for
             investigation by the immigration authorities for a  period  of
             up to 24 hours upon arrival at Khartoum International Airport.
             Should the investigation reveal any previous criminal activity
             or other nefarious reason for their  original  departure,  the
             returnee is blacklisted from leaving Sudan again. If the crime
             is outstanding, they will be  arrested.  If  a  crime  is  not
             outstanding or the investigation does not reveal anything  the
             returnee would be released by immigration.
     While we have received no definitive answer  on  how  a  failed  asylum
             seeker  would  be  identified,  things  that  would  draw  the
             attention of the authorities would include, but not be limited
             to: the use of an emergency travel document; having  no  valid
             exit visa in passport; or, being escorted into the country.
      It  is  our  understanding  that  any  intervention  by  the  National
             Intelligence and Security  Service  (NISS)  would  necessarily
             await the outcome of the immigration  procedures.  It  is  our
             firm  belief  that  a  failed  asylum  seeker,  including   an
             individual that had  been  subject  to  investigation  by  the
             immigration authorities on return, would not  be  at  risk  of
             further investigation by NISS on that basis alone. We do  know
             however that returnees can be subjected to further questioning
             by security should they be determined to be a potential person
             of interest. While it  is  difficult  to  offer  a  definitive
             statement on who would fall  into  such  category,  activities
             likely to be of interest  would  include:  being  of  previous
             interest to the authorities (in which case they may appear  on
             a travel watch list); having a record of contact with Sudanese
             opposition groups outside of Sudan; or, having  attracted  the
             attention of the authorities during  time  overseas  including
             through engagement with opposition groups within the diaspora.
         ...
     It is our understanding that  UNHCR  has  no  role  in  monitoring  the
             situation  of  Sudanese  returned  to  Khartoum  International
             Airport, but that representatives of IOM would  normally  meet
             any individual being returned under the  global  programme  of
             assisted voluntary returns. As reported in our letter of April
             2013 it remains  the  case  that  none  of  our  international
             partners were aware of any cases of returnees being mistreated
             on  return  to  Sudan.  Counterparts  at  other  embassies  in
             Khartoum have told us that the  numbers  returned  from  their
             countries is very limited, if it happens at all, and that even
             when individuals are returned, they do  not  actively  monitor
             every case.
     Although the British Embassy in Khartoum has  no  independent  evidence
             of overseas surveillance of asylum  seekers  by  the  Sudanese
             government, in October 2012 a Sudanese diplomat  was  expelled
             from  Norway  following  allegations  of  spying  on  Sudanese
             refugees there. Article 25 of the [Sudanese] 2014  Asylum  Act
             states that the Commissioner for Refugees has  an  "obligation
             to monitor the situation of Sudanese refugees  abroad  and  to
             expressly encourage them to return to Sudan", although we have
             not received a clear answer as to what this means in practice.
             The Office of the Commissioner for Refugees  comes  under  the
             Ministry of Interior, but  it  is  the  understanding  of  the
             British Embassy that they also maintain close  relations  with
             NISS.
      Without  prejudice  to  the  comments  above  about   allegations   of
             mistreatment attributed to NISS, it is important to note  that
             such detentions are an  extremely  common  occurrence  and  it
             should not be assumed that everyone detained would be  subject
             to the same sort of treatment. The treatment received would be
             determined by a number of factors including, but  not  limited
             to: the nature of the accusations;  public  and  international
             profile; age; family connections; and ethnic background."


    Waging Peace reports


   69. Waging Peace  is  a  non-governmental  organisation  that  campaigns
       against genocide and systematic human rights abuses  and  seeks  the
       full implementation of  international  human  rights  treaties.  Its
       current priority is Sudan. It was founded by  Rebecca  Tinsley,  its
       current Chair, who is  a  journalist  and  writer  who  has  written
       numerous publications for  leading  United  Kingdom  newspapers  and
       periodicals. She was formerly with the BBC  and  currently  sits  on
       Human Rights Watch London committee.


   70. In a report entitled 'The  Danger  of  Returning  Home:  The  perils
       facing Sudanese immigrants when they go back  to  Sudan'  (September
       2012), the organisation described itself as  'working  closely  with
       the UK's Sudanese community to help to give them a  voice  to  speak
       out about their experience of human rights abuses' and  helping  'to
       ensure the Sudanese diaspora in the UK has access to the services to
       which they are entitled':

         'We have a particular focus on the most vulnerable  amongst  them,
         those who are seeking asylum  in  the  UK.  As  the  only  UK  non-
         governmental organisation with a focus on Sudanese  asylum  seekers
         we are uniquely placed to collect the testimonies in  this  report.
         The testimonies, included in full in annexes  at  the  end  of  the
         report, have been gathered over a period of a-year-and-a-half. They
         document the experiences of six men: three men from Darfur, one man
         from South Kordofan,  one  from  Eastern  Sudan,  and  one  British
         national. Whilst some of the men interviewed by Waging Peace  spoke
         willingly of their  ordeal,  others  were  more  hesitant,  fearing
         future repercussions, and they have  therefore  remained  anonymous
         for the purposes of this report.'

   71. The September 2012 report summarised its view  in  relation  to  the
       experiences of a number of  identified  Sudanese  citizens  who  had
       returned to Sudan having been in Europe in these terms:


         Under interrogation returnees were explicitly  questioned  by  the
         Sudanese authorities about  their  activities  and  experiences  in
         Europe, and it appears they were targeted because of the time  they
         spent overseas. The testimonies make it  clear  that  the  Sudanese
         government went out of its way to keep track of what Sudanese  were
         doing while they were in Europe, and continued to monitor them upon
         their return. The Sudanese authorities  perceived  their  citizens'
         time spent in Europe  and  their  subsequent  return  to  Sudan  as
         sufficiently threatening to justify their monitoring, detention and
         sometimes their torture.

   72. The report is organised  into  four  sections.  The  first,  'Asylum
       Seekers', deals with the  experience  of  asylum  seekers  who  have
       returned, or who have been forcibly  returned,  to  Sudan  following
       unsuccessful claims for asylum. It describes  their  experiences  of
       being picked up by the Sudanese authorities the moment  they  arrive
       back on Sudanese soil, at Khartoum  International  Airport.  In  the
       second section, 'Voluntary  Returnees',  the  authors  included  the
       testimony of those who have gone back to Sudan of their  own  accord
       following a period living in Europe. These individuals,  the  report
       says,  subsequently  found  themselves   monitored,   detained   and
       suspected by the Sudanese authorities. The  third,  'Interrogation',
       provides details from those interviewed of their questioning at  the
       hands of the Sudanese government. It  reveals  their  interrogators'
       particular interest in  the  presence  and  activities  of  Sudanese
       within Europe. Finally, in the 'Treatment of Detainees', the authors
       described the different experiences that the interviewees  faced  in
       detention. The report states that it  'paints  a  clear  picture  of
       inhumane and degrading treatment at the hands of the  prison  guards
       and the Sudanese national intelligence and  security  services'.  In
       addition, the report includes the testimony of a  British  national,
       MB. The authors  assert  that  it  sheds  light  on  the  'horrific'
       conditions faced by detainees in detention in Sudan.  His  testimony
       demonstrates that at  times  when  the  authority  of  the  Sudanese
       government is  threatened,  suspicion  and  persecution  extends  to
       foreign nationals.


   73. Of the men interviewed by Waging  Peace,  three  had  sought  asylum
       within Europe before returning to  Sudan.  In  two  instances  their
       return was forcible following a failed  claim  for  asylum;  in  one
       instance the return was voluntary.

   74.  The  accounts  of  the  men  interviewed  were  summarised  in  the
       respondent's closing submissions.  No  objection  was  made  to  the
       summaries provided, which we adopt as a reasonable starting-point.

     a) Mr M states he claimed asylum after completing a course of study in
        the UK.  He claims to be from Darfur, and to have been a member  of
        the Darfurian Alliance Party and the Sudan Liberation Movement.  He
        recounts being held back at the airport, and kept in detention in a
        "Ghost House".  He recounts mistreatment in  Khartoum  and  Darfur.
        The Sudan Liberation Movement paid for his documents and tickets to
        travel back to the UK.  His second asylum  claim  was  said  to  be
        outstanding;


     b) Mr B states he is a member of the (non-Arab) Fur Tribe from Darfur.
         He returned  voluntarily  to  Khartoum  from  Italy,  having  been
        fingerprinted there upon arrival, and having  visited  the  UK.  He
        claims  to  have  been  detained,  threatened  with  violence   and
        interrogated after attending demonstrations at Downing  Street  and
        outside the Sudanese Embassy, and told  he  would  be  "shamed  for
        leaving Sudan".  He returned to the United Kingdom in October  2011
        and claimed asylum.

     c) Mr A claims to have been refused asylum in Germany in 2009, and  to
        have returned to Sudan in July 2009 on a flight from Frankfurt  via
        Doha.  It is unclear whether he had,  by  this  stage,  engaged  in
        political activity.  He  states  that  he  was  detained,  hit  and
        subjected  to  verbal  abuse.   Having  travelled  to  London,  and
        returned, he claims to have been asked about meetings  he  attended
        with the UK branch  of  the  Justice  and  Equality  Movement.   He
        recounts being detained and physically abused.

   75. The other interviewees are from voluntary entrants to Sudan claiming
       to have been questioned about political activities in the UK.   They
       comprise:


     d) Mr Y, a student  whose  studies  were  funded  by  the  Gum  Arabic
        Company, a company part-owned by the Sudanese government.   He  was
        visited by plain clothed police at work, and asked about  attending
        demonstrations to protest about  the  situation  in  Sudan.   Those
        questioning him accused him of attending the meeting at  the  House
        of Lords.  He had attended the meeting but denied it.  His accusers
        spoke of the press release following the meeting as a crime against
        the state.  He was detained  on  2  occasions  for  3  and  7  days
        respectively.  He was released after the intervention  of  the  ex-
        Minister for Health.  His sponsorship was eventually terminated.

     e) Mr X claims to be a Darfurian from the  (non-Arab)  Zaghawa  tribe,
        who claimed asylum successfully and was granted indefinite leave to
        remain in March 2010.  He obtained a British passport in June 2011.
         He claims to have been followed and asked  for  identification  by
        National Intelligence and Security Service staff during his  visit,
        and was questioned for four hours.

     f) Mr MB is a British passport holder who  arrived  in  Sudan,  having
        resided in Holborn and then in Egypt, 24 hours after  the  Egyptian
        revolution began and stayed in the house of the nephew of Sadiq  Al
        Mahdi, the former Prime Minister of Sudan.  The family is described
        as a prominent opponent of the government in Sudan.   He  describes
        being  detained  at  a  number  of  prisons,  and  encounters  with
        Darfurian leaders of the JEM there. The focus of his  interrogation
        were suggestions that he was a spy, sending text messages to  rally
        protests in Sudan like those in Tahrir Square in Egypt supra, (Q1).

   76. The second report entitled 'The Long Arm of the Sudanese Regime: How
       the Sudanese National Intelligence and Security Service monitors and
       threatens Sudanese nationals who leave  Sudan  (September  2014)  is
       prepared jointly by Article 1 and Waging Peace.  Article  1  is  the
       sister organisation of Waging Peace and is a UK-based charity  which
       gives support to asylum seekers and  refugees  from  Sudan,  working
       closely with the Sudanese Diaspora community in the UK.


   77. This second report describes how in May  2011  the  Khartoum  regime
       introduced a new civil register requiring all citizens to obtain and
       carry identity cards in order to qualify for various  services  such
       as driving licenses, university entrance and  registration  of  land
       ownership.  Citizens  need  to  confirm  various  aspects  of  their
       identity such as their place of birth, tribe and  provide  proof  of
       identification  like  a  birth  certificate,   passport,   residency
       certificate, letter of employment etc. to receive a National  Number
       with which they can then use to apply for a National Identity  Card.
       In practice, vulnerable and marginalised groups do not  have  access
       to these documents and/or cannot get to registration  centres.  They
       therefore have difficulty  obtaining  the  National  Identity  Card,
       leaving themselves vulnerable to persecution and  unable  to  access
       services.

   78. Sudanese visa procedures impose restrictive rules  and  surveillance
       on national and international travellers who wish to enter  or  exit
       the country. All travellers must produce a  valid  entry  visa  upon
       arrival. In addition, Sudan is one of the few  countries  where  you
       need an exit visa in order to leave. Travellers can obtain  an  exit
       visa from the Ministry of Interior's main office in Khartoum or  the
       transit office at Khartoum International airport. Travellers may  be
       prevented from leaving the country and questioned about their future
       movements and activities.

   79. The report includes the testimonies from  11  more  individuals,  of
       whom three were failed asylum seekers:


      (g) Mr T describes himself as a Darfurian  claiming  to  be  from  the
         Berti tribe.  He states that he was arrested,  but  did  not  claim
         asylum, in  France.   He  describes  no  difficulties  at  Khartoum
         airport, where he was met by "UN people".  He claims to  have  been
         abandoned in his home area (now in South Sudan)  and  there  found,
         and beaten by "a mix of police,  military  men  and  NISS  security
         forces suspecting him of being a Darfuri rebel."  He claims to have
         been detained and tortured, and  to  have  escaped  to  the  United
         Kingdom by ship.

      (h) Mr U is a Sudanese asylum seeker returned  under  the  Fast  Track
         scheme.  He claims to have been beaten  and  interrogated  by  NISS
         following his handing over by escorts  at  the  airport.   Security
         Officers insisted  he  was  a  member  of  Girifna,  the  political
         opposition movement founded in 2009.  Having been released, he  was
         subsequently held for a month after fresh information was  received
         that he was a member of Girifna, see paragraph 65.


      (i) Mr Y states that he was removed with escorts following the failure
         of his asylum claim to Khartoum. There,  he  was  ushered  into  an
         office and questioned by  the  head  of  NISS.   His  passport  was
         confiscated.  He states that his taxi driver knew that he had  come
         from the UK, and Y suspected him of being a NISS  agent.     Waging
         Peace assisted him in obtaining his passport,  and  his  girlfriend
         came from the UK for marriage. He obtained a Visa and  returned  to
         the UK.


   80. Interviews were conducted with a further 8 respondents:


      (j) AM, a Dutch national originally from Darfur, and a member  of  the
         (non-Arab) Massalit tribe in Darfur.  She  travelled  to  Khartoum,
         and from there to Darfur.  She describes being taken to a  security
         office in El Geneina, West Darfur.  She  answered  questions  about
         her activities as a human rights activist  for  the  Darfur  Union.
         She was then able to return to the United Kingdom.


      (k) Dr  SK  describes  himself  as  the  founder  of  a  human  rights
         organisation in Khartoum called Sudan for Human  Rights,  and  from
         1999 became involved in politics for the Sudanese Communist  Party.
         He states that he spoke at political rallies and attended meetings,
         and was head of the UK branch from 2005-2009, and elected  head  of
         the Central Committee for the Communist Party in 2009.   He  claims
         to have made many trips to Sudan, without problems, until September
         2013 when he was detained at an additional security  control  as  a
         wanted person.  He was detained for 18 days in near isolation,  and
         questioned about his political activities.


      (l)  Ms A describes herself as a journalist from Nyala,  South  Darfur
         who is currently claiming asylum in the UK.  She  claims  that  she
         was detained and beaten after a visit to London in  May  2013  when
         she attended a  training  course  on  media  and  English  language
         skills, as well as an  event  to  honour  the  anniversary  of  the
         creation of the Sudanese Revolutionary Front attended by JEM, Sudan
         People Liberation Movement and Communist  Party  members.  She  was
         shown photographs of the SRF event, and of her meeting a friend who
         was part of the JEM at a cafe on Edgware Road. (This  incident  may
         also be the basis for an article in the Telegraph  newspaper  dated
         20 October 2014 which referred to a Sudanese woman who was detained
         at the airport in Sudan and shown photographs of her meeting with a
         Darfurian activist in a coffee shop in London. She was taken  to  a
         detention centre, interrogated and set a number of physical  tasks.
         She was 5 months pregnant. She was released, driven to the  airport
         and returned to the United Kingdom.)


     m) Ms B, too, states that she had worked as a journalist in  Khartoum,
        Sudan, but was originally from the Nuba Mountains.   She  describes
        being taken aside at the  airport  and  asked  about  her  Sudanese
        passport. Her research in the Nuba Mountains was disrupted  by  two
        men questioning her right to ask questions in a  market  area,  and
        trying to drag her away.  She found an email with a  virus  on  her
        computer when she returned to Khartoum.


     n) Mr  V  describes  himself  as  a  senior  member  of  the  Sudanese
        opposition in the UK.  He complains that NISS officers come to  the
        UK and make false  asylum  claims  or  use  student  visas.   These
        individuals are not checked adequately by the Home Office.

     o) Mr W is from North Darfur, and describes himself as  of  Berti  and
        mixed race parentage.  He states he was detained, and tortured  for
        three days after visiting  the  UK,  and  attending  a  meeting  of
        Darfurian civil society in Glasgow.  He states that he  fled  Sudan
        on a fake passport and claimed asylum at Heathrow airport.

     p) Mr X describes himself as a designer,  human  rights  activist  and
        torture victim, and states that he came to the UK in 2006 to study.
         He applied for and was granted refugee status  subsequently.   His
        job is,  he  claims,  to  advocate  on  behalf  of  Darfurians  and
        oppressed people from the Nuba Mountains,  Blue  Nile  regions  and
        others.  He claims that he received threats following  his  posting
        of online messages hostile to the Sudan Government.

     q) Mr Z is an activist for the Democratic Unionist Party  who  claimed
        asylum in 2002 and  lives  in  Manchester  and  is  active  in  the
        Sudanese community.  He claims to have visited Sudan numerous times
        since gaining British citizenship in 2009.  He claims to have  been
        followed by National Security Officers on various journey,  and  to
        have been asked for money on departure from the airport.


Landinfo report, 11 November 2013


   81. The Norwegian Immigration Service  draws  upon  Country  Information
       which  includes  Landinfo  reports.   The  report  Sudan:  Scope  of
       political activity critical to the regime  (11  November  2013)  was
       based on a combination of  written  material  and  information  from
       meetings with local sources gathered on visits to Khartoum/Ummdurman
       in April/May 2008 and September/October 2012.  The  summary  of  its
       findings is in these terms:


         The  scope  of  political  activity  critical  of  the  regime  is
         restricted in Sudan, especially for parties and groups working  for
         a more pluralistic society. Conditions for  oppositional  activists
         have deteriorated since South Sudan gained its independence in July
         2011. Sudanese security forces have used brutal means to stop waves
         of popular demonstrations in June-July and September-October  2012,
         and in September-October 2013. The  main  instrument  of  political
         oppression  is  the  National  Intelligence  and  Security  Service
         (NISS), which uses a range of forceful means to restrict  political
         activity and freedom of speech. Political activity inside Sudan  is
         not the sole focus of the Sudanese  regime,  which  also  tries  to
         limit such activity among Sudanese abroad through monitoring  exile
         communities. Although there is no concrete evidence to support that
         forced returnees to  Sudan  face  problems  with  security  forces,
         Landinfo  can  see  no  reason  why  Sudanese  authorities   should
         differentiate  between  political  activities  outside  and  inside
         Sudan, provided their aim is to change the political  situation  in
         Sudan in ways threatening President Umar al-Bashir's regime.


   82. All Landinfo's sources agreed that the scope of action for political
       activism critical of the regime in Sudan has decreased significantly
       since South Sudan was declared an independent state on 9 July  2011.
       Sources were anonymised as  conditions  for  activists  have  become
       worse since then.  [1] (The number in square brackets refers to  the
       paragraph number in the Landinfo report.)


   83. Given the inequalities in  society  and  the  regime's  policies  in
       general (not least in the armed conflicts with groups in many  parts
       of the country, it is not  surprising  that  political  interest  is
       great.  Similarly,  as  in  other  societies,  certain  groups   are
       particularly politically  active,  for  example,  the  upper  social
       levels and students.

   84. The report pointed out, however, that many poor  students  dare  not
       involve themselves politically because  the  potential  risks,  both
       economically and personally, are too great. One consequence of this,
       and of the general centralisation  in  Sudan,  is  that  the  active
       oppositional environment in the country is  largely  centred  around
       the capital, and many activists come from the upper  social  levels.
       [1.1]

   85. Reports on breaches of human rights against activists in Sudan often
       mention their involvement in one of a number of  organisations  with
       which they are involved, making  it  difficult  know  which  is  the
       target. [1.1]

    86. The regime has once more begun to describe Sudan as a state  with  a
        homogeneous Arabic and Muslim identity and downplays the ethnic  and
        religious diversity of the people. [2]

    87. The regime cracks down harder on political activity which is seen as
        threatening. [2] The Landinfo report went on to describe the various
        instances of political unrest since 2012.


    Landinfo report: Demonstrations during and after Summer 2012

    88. Summer 2012 saw a wave of demonstrations in a number  of  towns  and
        cities in Sudan, including Khartoum/Ummdurman and  Port  Sudan.  The
        African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies (ACJPS)  reported  that
        the first of these demonstrations took place on 16 June 2012 at  the
        University of Khartoum.  The demonstrations in Sudan had  a  greater
        focus on  economic  themes,  such  as  price  increases.   [3]  Many
        activists had organised new  groups  as  alternatives  to  the  more
        established channels for youth opposition. Two of the most important
        groups are Girifna (trans: "We have had enough") and Sharara (trans:
        "spark").  [3.1]

    89. In Nyala, live ammunition was fired  at  demonstrators  on  31  July
        2012. 12 people were killed, of whom 10 were minors.  Over 300  were
        arrested and detained in connection with various demonstrations, but
        activists believe that the figure was actually over 1,500.  Many  of
        the sources  that  Landinfo  met  in  Khartoum  in  2012  said  that
        demonstrators  from  South  Kordofan  and  Blue  Nile  regions  were
        detained separately from the other activists and were  treated  more
        brutally. [3.1.2]

    Landinfo report: Autumn 2012

    90. The University of Port Sudan was the location for a demonstration on
        30  September  2012  in  the  course  of  which  three  people  were
        reportedly injured. [3.1.3]

    Landinfo report: September 2013

    91. Demonstrations lasting  for  10  days  broke  out  in  Sudan  on  23
        September  2013,  after  the  Sudanese  authorities  declared   that
        subsidies on fuel, domestic gas and other goods would be reduced  or
        removed.

    92. The ACJPS reported over 170 killed (of which  15  were  minors)  and
        over 800 placed in detention, most of them by NISS. [3.1.4]

    93. The Landinfo report refers  to  tactics  employed  by  the  Security
        Services  to  cow  those  intent  on  voicing  opposition   to   the
        authorities, stating that summoning  activists  for  questioning  by
        NISS is a control tactic used extensively in Sudan.  Almost  all  of
        the activists that Landinfo met during visits to Sudan in  2008  and
        2012 said that they had been summoned and interrogated by NISS on  a
        number of occasions.

    94. Many of them said that the purpose was not  necessarily  to  extract
        information from them, especially  not  those  who  had  been  under
        observation for a longer period, but to remind them that  they  were
        being watched. [4.1]

    Landinfo report: Surveillance

    95. The report also spoke of surveillance both at home and  abroad.   It
        said  that   NISS   uses   significant   resources   in   conducting
        surveillance. However, many activists that Landinfo met in  Khartoum
        in October 2012 said that the questions they had been  asked  during
        their questioning and detention in summer  2012  implied  that  NISS
        knew less about the opposition than their  use  of  resources  might
        suggest. Some activists suggested that intelligence  officers  often
        asked  questions  that  revealed  they  had  very  little   detailed
        knowledge of the  individual  opposition  members'  activities.  One
        stressed, however, that there were  still  many  opposition  members
        that NISS did have information on.

    96. The report suggested this illustrated that there is a  variation  in
        how effective surveillance actually is, although  it  was  extremely
        difficult to say anything concrete about individual cases. [4.8.2]

    97. It was difficult to gather concrete  information  on  who  is  being
        monitored, but it is Landinfo's definite impression that it does not
        take much for an individual to be noticed by the NISS. Any  form  of
        association with a political party or organisation that is not close
        to the regime is 'undoubtedly enough', as any form  of  activity  in
        connection with these is potentially problematic from  the  regime's
        point of view. At the same time, there are probably many people that
        do not experience any problems other than being  monitored  to  some
        extent, because their activity does not have any great  significance
        for the organisations with which they are associated.

    98. Landinfo said it was also important to point out  that  even  though
        the NISS has good resources, these are not unlimited and  their  use
        must therefore be prioritised. There would appear to be a particular
        focus on activists that are  likely  to  be  able  to  affect  pubic
        opinion and opinion within their own spheres, and who delineate  and
        distribute information critical of conditions for which  the  regime
        is responsible; for example, the results of war in  areas  of  armed
        conflict, other  human  rights  breaches,  corruption  and  misrule.
        [4.8.3]

    Landinfo report: The Press and journalists

    99.  The  report  also  indentified  steps  taken  against  the   Press:
        journalists are prevented from working;  are  subject  to  the  same
        summoning and questioning by NISS which has  been  noted  before,  a
        technique used to control journalists; there is evidence of  arrests
        of journalists, violence against  journalists  and  restrictions  on
        foreign journalists. [5.0 - 5.9]


   100. This material is supported by a report of 2 April 2015 from  Amnesty
        International, 'Sudan: Entrenched Repression - Freedom of Expression
        and Association under Unprecedented  Attack',  which  spoke  of  the
        period leading up to the elections which took place between  13  and
        16 April 2015.  In  the  approach  to  the  elections,  a  NISS  led
        crackdown  on  independent   media   and   civil   society   reached
        unprecedented levels. The  NISS  confiscated  publications  from  at
        least 16 newspapers on 42  occasions.  Around  21  journalists  were
        interrogated  by   police,   and   three   leading   civil   society
        organisations were shut down.

   101. The April  2015  elections  also  saw,  perhaps  unsurprisingly,  an
        increase in the government's efforts to quell opposition.   A  Human
        Rights Watch report of 29  April  2015  entitled  'Sudan:  Surge  in
        Detention, Beatings, Around Elections', noted that  security  forces
        in Sudan arrested dozens of opposition party members, students,  and
        political activists, in the  lead-  up  to,  during  and  after  the
        national elections.


    Landinfo report: Sudanese communities abroad

   102.  The  Landinfo  report   identifies   significant   Sudanese   exile
        communities in many places around the world. The largest are in  the
        Arabic countries and  are  mostly  migrant  workers,  although  many
        people have had other reasons to migrate. Outside the Arab world, as
        a former colonial power, the United Kingdom has a Sudanese immigrant
        community  of  considerable  size.  [6.1]  Most  Sudanese  are  very
        involved in politics. In Sudanese exile communities,  Sudanese  with
        higher education form  a  significantly  higher  proportion  of  the
        community than they do in the indigenous population in Sudan.  Thus,
        political activity in Sudanese exile communities is  correspondingly
        high. [6.2]

   103. The writers of the Landinfo report did not think that  it  made  any
        difference whether  an  individual's  political  involvement  begins
        abroad or  in  the  home  country.  What  counts  is  the  level  of
        involvement, the activity and its effect.  The lack of  coordination
        of political activity for Sudanese critical of the  regime  in  most
        places abroad, did not mean that the regime does not view  it  as  a
        threat, as it still has consequences for political  developments  in
        Sudan. [6.3] The writers also emphasised that those who reject armed
        resistance against the regime may be suspected of  supporting  armed
        actions. This can be the case with groups that are  close  to  armed
        groups from an ideological point of view and especially  those  that
        belong to ethnic groups that sympathise with armed rebel  groups  in
        the conflict areas of Sudan (Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue  Nile).
        [6.3.1]

    Landinfo report: Surveillance of communities in exile

   104. The Landinfo report referred to a domestic example - the refugee spy
        case -discovered by the Norwegian Police Security Service  (PST)  in
        October 2012 which  showed  the  Sudanese  authorities'  attempt  to
        monitor political activity in exile communities.  While  it  is  not
        possible to  know  exactly  who  the  authorities'  were  targeting,
        Landinfo was aware that the threshold for being monitored  in  Sudan
        is extremely low. On this basis, it assumed that it is  equally  low
        abroad.


   105. At the same  time:  the  writers  conceded  that,  even  though  the
        authorities attempt to monitor communities in exile, this is a  much
        more challenging task than is possible  in  Sudan.  Surveillance  in
        Sudan can be carried  out  without  difficulty  and  in  more  forms
        compared to what is possible abroad. In other  countries,  telephone
        tapping  would  be  more  difficult  (as  this  often  requires  the
        complicity and support of the telephone companies), and other covert
        surveillance abroad would be more difficult than in Sudan. [6.4]

   106. Landinfo concluded that  those  who  carry  out  political  activity
        critical to the regime when abroad can attract the attention of  the
        authorities when they return to Sudan  -  if  the  authorities  have
        noticed this activity. This applies as much to activities  aimed  at
        influencing public opinion and political development  in  Sudan,  as
        activities aimed at  gathering  international  recognition  for  the
        conditions in the country. The consequences of this type of activity
        will probably be  the  same  as  corresponding  activity  in  Sudan.
        Landinfo  emphasised  that  their  interpretation  of  the  examples
        described indicates that the regime's aim is more  to  stop  regime-
        critical activity and frighten people from pursuing such activity in
        the future, rather than punishing  them  for  activities  that  have
        already taken place.

   107. Landinfo also notes that political activity does  not  automatically
        have consequences for Sudanese when they return  to  the  country  -
        either voluntarily or enforced.

   108. Even though it does not take much for NISS to create  a  file  on  a
        person for their political activity,  Landinfo  also  believed  that
        those whose political activity is not particularly great or  who  do
        not have great influence in the country in which they live or within
        their own community, will not be followed very closely. NISS is busy
        enough with following those they view as a real threat to the regime
        (precisely because the tolerance for monitoring is low and many  are
        being monitored), and the writers believed that it takes  more  than
        membership of a political party, passive participation in a  meeting
        occasionally and/or passive participation in  public  demonstrations
        for someone to be viewed as a threat.

   109.  According  to  the  report,  exposure   in   local,   national   or
        international media may have some significance, but again, this will
        depend on a number of factors.  As Landinfo sees it, taking part  in
        a demonstration and possibly being featured in  a  photograph  in  a
        newspaper will probably be of little importance, whereas  playing  a
        leading  role  as  a  spokesperson  or  organiser  would   be   more
        problematic,  because  it  shows  that  the  person  has   charisma,
        influence and can mobilise people. Being noticed in  a  medium  with
        broad exposure will contribute more to this, but it is difficult  to
        say just how much.

   110. The Sudanese security service must be well aware that  the  Sudanese
        are very  politically  engaged  and  have  robust  opinions  on  the
        political development in their homeland. [6.5]

   111. The concrete examples Landinfo knew of regarding the consequences of
        political activity abroad upon return to  Sudan  concern  those  who
        return voluntarily. Landinfo does not have  access  to  material  on
        situations where an  individual  is  deported  back  to  Sudan  from
        another country either  due  to  rejection  of  an  application  for
        political asylum or for any other reason. [6.5.1]

Waging Peace comments on Landinfo report


  112. The organisation Waging Peace has provided comments on the  Landinfo
       report and disputes the point made in  paragraph  104,  above,  that
       opposition abroad tends to be from  those  of  a  higher  education,
       citing that this is not representative  of  Darfuri  asylum  seekers
       many of whom are relatively low down in the economic  scale.   Given
       the concession that there is a high degree of  politicisation  among
       the diaspora, Waging Peace  suggests  that  Darfuri  asylum  seekers
       whilst apolitical in Sudan may therefore develop a sur  place  claim
       in the different environment of the diaspora.


  113. The comment-writer, referring to the Waging Peace material  set  out
       above, repeats its stance that Sudanese from all parts of society  -
       men and women; rich and poor - who have spent time outside Sudan may
       be at risk on return.


Returns

  114. There is  evidence  of  substantial  numbers  of  Sudanese  citizens
       returning from selected neighbouring  countries  in  Africa  on  the
       strength of agreements between them  and  UNHCR.   These  fluctuated
       between 30,000 in 2009 to 126,000 in 2007..  However, these  figures
       contrast with the very much smaller numbers of returns  from  Europe
       and beyond Africa.  The COIS continues in paragraph 32.13, quoting a
       passage from the IOM report 'Migration in Sudan: A  Country  Profile
       2011':


         UNHCR mainly deals with refugees in Sudan  and  Sudanese  refugees
         abroad assisting the involved national institutions (especially COR
         [Ministry of Interior, Commission of Refugees]) in establishing and
         implementing international  agreements  and  introducing  practical
         arrangements for return and reinsertion of refugees in their  areas
         of origin. Given the instability  and  conflict  across  Sudan  and
         beyond its borders,  UNHCR  deals  with  different  challenges  but
         focussing mostly on the protection and assistance of  refugees,  as
         well as returns.

  115. As the appellants pointed out, there is no reference to  monitoring.
       The numbers from Europe and beyond Africa were and remain small.  In
       the case of forced returns, the number was very small: a mere  9  in
       2011 although rising to 24 in 2014. Even the total number of returns
       (which included  assisted  voluntary  returns  and  other  voluntary
       departures) was only 15 for 2011. In the 8 year period between  2004
       and 2011 a total of 322 were recorded as  having  returned  or  been
       returned.


    The expert evidence


    Mareike Schomerus


  116. Ms Schomerus provided a report on behalf of IM but did not give oral
       evidence.  The report is undated but Ms Schomerus' curriculum  vitae
       extends to February 2013.  The report, however, deals with events up
       to and including 2012. Since 2011 she had been the  Chief  Executive
       Officer at the Justice and Security Research Programme at  the  LSE.
       From October 2011 to March 2012 she was the  leader  of  a  research
       team  on  community-driven  development  in  South  Sudan.  She  has
       published a number of articles, provided analysis  and  advice,  and
       undertaken research projects relating to Sudan.


  117. She described the  Beja  as,  generally  speaking,  African  Muslims
       united by their language and culture, although the Beja people  were
       made up of several sub-groups. The Beja were politically represented
       primarily through the Beja  Congress.  Although  the  Beja  Congress
       engaged in a low-intensity conflict against the Khartoum  government
       between 1997 and 2006, Ms Schomerus stated that it was "... fair  to
       say that the Beja Congress  never  fully  succeeded  in  becoming  a
       guerrilla movement and had only  limited  military  success..."  and
       that the "... Beja Congress as a fighting force only existed through
       SPLA support."

  118. Ms Schomerus stated that the signing  of  the  Eastern  Sudan  Peace
       Agreement (ESPA) in October 2006 brought no noticeable  improvement,
       either politically or economically,  to  the  situation  in  Eastern
       Sudan, although outright armed rebellion ceased and  anti-government
       groups, including splinter groups of  the  Beja  Congress,  are  now
       operating differently. Ms Schomerus was  of  the  view  that  if  an
       individual in eastern Sudan or members of the Beja Congress were  to
       pursue political activities that were clearly in opposition  to  the
       Khartoum government, they might face the same  level  of  harassment
       and intimidation as experienced before the ESPA was signed.

  119. This echoes other parts of the background material that the ESPA has
       achieved few if any tangible results. An International Crisis  Group
       report 'Sudan: Preserving Peace in the East'  of  26  November  2013
       indicated that the ESPA was slow and only partially implemented, and
       that it delivered no substantive  peace  dividend  to  most  eastern
       Sudanese; tension remained high in the east.

  120. Ms Schomerus stated that there had been reports that members of  the
       Beja Congress had experienced harassment, although  no  support  was
       provided for this assertion and no details  of  the  nature  of  the
       'harassment' provided. She claimed that Eastern Sudan  continued  to
       be one of the most marginalised in the Republic  of  Sudan  and  the
       Beja  remained  impoverished,  struggled  with  health  issues,  had
       limited access to land and almost no opportunity of employment. With
       reference to media reports from 2011 and 2012 she  stated  that  the
       situation in eastern Sudan remained volatile. Ms Schomerus indicated
       that some factions of the Beja Congress had  reportedly  joined  the
       Sudan Revolutionary Front, whose declared aim is  to  overthrow  the
       government and includes rebels from West Darfur m South Kordofan and
       Blue Nile, all areas of violent unrest or outright war.

  121. Ms Schomerus indicated  that  small-scale  harassment  of  the  Beja
       seemed to be common and indicated that, when visiting Eastern  Sudan
       in January  2011,  she  received  reports  of  abuse  by  government
       security agents. No details were however provided as to the level or
       nature of the abuse. Her evidence does not go so far as to establish
       the treatment met or would meet the threshold of serious harm.   She
       referred to a violent response by the police to student protests  at
       the Red Sea University. She concluded that IM, as a Beja,  a  member
       of the Beja Congress and having a history of political  activity  at
       the Red Sea University, may face harassment by the Sudanese security
       forces if returned to Port Sudan or to  the  Republic  of  Sudan  in
       general.

  122. Ms Schomerus stated that JEM remains a strong opponent  of  the  NCP
       government and President Bashir. JEM did not sign the  Darfur  Peace
       Agreement and reiterated its commitment to  toppling  the  President
       and his government. Ms Schomerus  stated  that  being  a  member  or
       affiliate of JEM could carry consequences and referred to UN reports
       from the end of 2009 stating that more  than  100  people  had  been
       sentenced to death and executed as  supporters  of  JEM  during  its
       Omdurman attack in 2008. According to Ms Schomerus  JEM  remains  an
       active fighting force. She found it plausible that a person known to
       the Sudanese government  as  a  member  of  JEM,  who  supports  the
       overthrowing of the NCP government and delivering President  to  the
       International Criminal Court, may face difficulties  and  harassment
       in Sudan. She claims, without  offering  any  supporting  reference,
       that Sudanese embassy staff in London keep a close eye on  political
       activities in the Sudanese community in the United Kingdom.


    Peter Verney


  123. Mr Verney is a  well-known  Country  Expert  who  has  assisted  the
       Tribunal  in  a  number  of  cases  including  HGMO  (Relocation  to
       Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062; Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department v. AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007] UKHL  49;  AY  [Political
       parties  -  SCP  -  risk]  Sudan  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00050  and   MG
       (Christians, including Coptic  Christians)  Sudan  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
       00047.


  124. Mr Verney has written four reports, two for each of the  appellants.
       Those in relation to IM are directed towards country conditions  and
       therefore apply to both appellants.  In  contrast  the  two  reports
       directed towards AI are focussed upon his particular  circumstances.
       We therefore intend to consider Mr Verney's evidence in relation  to
       him separately as  part  of  the  consideration  of  his  individual
       claim.

    Mr Verney's report, 25 May 2012, in relation to IM

  125. IM is from the Halenga, a branch of  the  Beja  people.   Mr  Verney
       described the Beja Congress Party as  representing  one  of  Sudan's
       politically marginalised and impoverished ethnic groups.  He  stated
       the party has been outlawed by the current regime. Dealing with  the
       Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), he  described  it  as  a  broad
       coalition  of  opposition  forces  in  Sudan  against  the  Islamist
       extremist regime of the National Congress Party (NCP).  He  did  not
       regard  the  appellant's  involvement  with  JEM  as  unusual  since
       numerous individuals, hitherto members of the Beja Congress had also
       joined  JEM.  JEM   was   ostensibly   a   Darfur/Western   Sudanese
       organisation but had developed a  nationwide  political  agenda  and
       membership was not confined to Dafur. There  is  a  history  of  the
       Sudanese authorities arresting members of JEM. For example,  in  the
       aftermath of the May 2008 coup d'tat,  hundreds  were  arrested  in
       Khartoum. Similarly, the mass civilian protest in Port Sudan  on  28
       January 2005 resulted  in  Sudanese  government  forces  using  live
       ammunition to quell the protests as a result of which 22 people were
       shot dead including women  and  children  and  more  than  400  were
       issued. A spokesman for the Beja  Congress  Dr  Abu  Amna  (whom  Mr
       Verney has met) claimed that the force used to  quell  the  protests
       was directly sanctioned  by  the  Ministry  of  Interior.   Dr  Amna
       claimed 17 Beja leaders were held in detention for  several  months,
       part of a widespread process of mass  arrests.   The  Beja  Congress
       Party split into three groups after the signing of the 2006  Eastern
       Sudan Peace Agreement (ESPA):  a  minority  who  signed  up  to  the
       agreement; the majority who do not accept  it;  and  those  who  are
       undecided.


  126. It is a theme of Mr Verney's evidence that the  Sudanese  government
       arrests "low-level" or "grass roots"  members  in  contrast  to  the
       opposition leaders who are either abroad or  operating  at  a  level
       where they are  relatively  untouchable.  He,  therefore,  does  not
       accept the classification of "high-level" or  "low-level"  activists
       as a means of assessing the level of risk.

  127. The  ESPA  was  intended  to  end  a  long-standing  'low-intensity'
       conflict and was part of  a  more  widespread  process  to  end  the
       various conflicts in Sudan: the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
       Darfur Peace Agreement and the ESPA did not, however, bring  lasting
       results.

  128. JEM joined 'the Kauda Alliance' which includes the Northern wing  of
       the Sudan People's Liberation movement (STLM-N) the major element of
       the Sudan Liberation Movement (SLM).

  129. It was Mr Verney's evidence that the Sudanese embassy  is  known  to
       monitor  and  conduct  close  surveillance  of  Sudanese  opposition
       activities in the UK. For example, there is in circulation the video
       clip, sourced from Al Jazeera TV  of  protesters  in  London  on  10
       December 2006. A man can be seen  inside  the  Sudanese  embassy  in
       London using a hand-held camera to film the protesters.

  130.  Mr  Verney  described  how  the  authorities  use  disproportionate
       criminal offences to dissuade demonstrators. By way of  an  example,
       Article 51 ("waging war against the state") under the 1991  Sudanese
       criminal code is a capital offence used by police and  the  NISS  to
       prolong detention for up to 4  months without judicial intervention
       and which prevents those detained from receiving  bail.  It  is  not
       suggested that, ultimately, those detained face the death sentence.

  131. Powers available to the National Intelligence and  Security  Service
       are  enshrined  in  statute  and  provide  powers  to   detain   for
       substantial periods without access to  judicial  oversight.  At  the
       same  time  National  Security  forces  are  given   immunity   from
       prosecution.  The  death  penalty  is  permitted  for  a  number  of
       offences.

  132. Mr Verney says there are 2    million  Beja  people  mainly  living
       alongside the Red Sea in southern Egypt,  north  eastern  Sudan  and
       northern Eritrea. Although Arabising influences resulted in the Beja
       accepting Islam, they maintain a distinct culture. According  to  Mr
       Verney, they are marginalised because they are  non-Arab.  There  is
       evidence from international sources that  in  the  eastern  area  of
       Sudan those living there suffer higher rates of  malnutrition,  lack
       of  access  to  basic  services  and  experience  higher  rates   of
       unemployment and illiteracy  than  in  other  parts  of  Sudan.  The
       success of the 2006 Eastern  Sudan  Peace  Agreement  would  lie  in
       bringing tangible socio-economic development to the region.

  133. At the time of writing his first report, the government  was  facing
       the impact of the Arab Spring which  had  threatened  the  continued
       existence of regimes along the southern Mediterranean rim.

  134. There is no internal relocation option given the nature of  Sudanese
       society and the reach of the Sudanese authorities.

    Mr Verney's report, 8 July 2014, in relation to IM

  135. According to Mr Verney, the elements of the case which suggests that
       this appellant is at risk include his past activities in  the  Sudan
       as a member of the Beja Congress Party; the risk that he would offer
       opinions which would  be  treated  as  opposition  to  the  Sudanese
       government; as  a  member  of  the  Sudanese  Justice  and  Equality
       Movement whose activities in the United Kingdom would  be  known  to
       the Sudanese authorities through monitoring  UK  activities  of  the
       Sudanese  opposition.  Mr  Verney  regarded  the  expulsion  of  aid
       agencies such as the Red Cross and Save the Children and the halting
       of mine-clearing activities  in  the  eastern  Sudan  by  the  Sudan
       government as harmful to the Beja people in that area. He classified
       the current regime as "Arab-supremacist which regards  the  non-Arab
       Beja as inferior".

  136.  He  considered  the  Beja  as  undergoing   comparable   forms   of
       marginalisation (although not comparable levels of conflict) as  the
       non-Arab peoples of Darfur and South Kordofan.

  137. He spoke  of  the  Sudanese  Embassy's  monitoring  and  conduct  of
       surveillance as being an intrinsic part of the work carried  out  in
       the United Kingdom by the Sudanese security apparatus.

  138. Mr Verney went further by stating there is also a risk to  IM  as  a
       JEM member even if he is not yet known to be one by  reason  of  his
       activities whilst in Sudan, described in paragraph 7,  above.  There
       is  extensive  surveillance  undertaken  in   the   Sudan   by   the
       authorities. Thus, speaking  out  about  the  failing  ESPA  or  any
       shortcomings in the political system would be treated as  opposition
       activity  sufficient  to  bring  him  to  the   attention   of   the
       authorities.

  139. After a period of some years, Mr Verney has developed his assessment
       of  the  ESPA  which  he  described  as  "weak  to  the   point   of
       worthlessness" and which has served only to divide the Beja Congress
       Party. He describes how, on the very day the ESPA was signed,  there
       were arrests of Beja Congress members.

  140. He repeated his contention that there is no  reduction  in  risk  by
       being  a  relatively  "low-level"  member   within   the   political
       hierarchy. In particular, it could not  be  said  that  an  adequate
       level of safety was likely to be achieved by a party member who  was
       categorised as "low level" or "grass roots".

  141. Mr Verney stated that following the independence of South Sudan  and
       the spread of the conflict to South Kordofan in  2011,  the  general
       political situation has deteriorated. The government has blamed  JEM
       and  the  Sudan  Revolutionary  Forces  Alliance  for   the   street
       demonstrations  in  September  2013  that  were  suppressed  by  the
       government resulting in a death  toll  of  over  200  civilians.  He
       refers to  an  article  in  Africa  Confidential  by  Gillian  Lusk,
       Associate Editor of Africa Confidential and a specialist  in  Sudan,
       published on 27 June 2014. Ms Lusk considered the current regime was
       besieged on all fronts with the economy in a dire state, nearly half
       the population below the poverty line and  the  opposition  steadily
       gaining political and  military  ground.  The  article  went  on  to
       describe how Khartoum had stepped up the bombing of Darfur  and  the
       Two Areas (Blue Nile and South Kordofan) with the result  that  some
       300,000 people have been driven from their homes. On  17  June  2015
       the  International   Criminal   Court   Prosecutor   condemned   the
       'indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks against civilians'  and
       the 'deliberate obstruction of humanitarian aid'.


  142. In a personal communication of 1 July 2014 [page 28 of  Mr  Verney's
       report] she said:

          "As  a  journalist,  I   have   attended   dozens   of   Sudanese
         demonstrations and other public events and I have not the slightest
         doubt that the Khartoum  government  monitors  them  closely.  Most
         Sudanese are very poor and it is always possible for the regime  to
         find a few who will spy on their compatriots. Sudanese whom I  know
         and trust are convinced that they are monitored by  the  government
         and often name suspected spies."

  143. Whilst this  passage  is  clearly  directed  towards  demonstrations
       taking place in Sudan, it establishes by implication a mind-set that
       echoes the evidence about surveillance in the United Kingdom, albeit
       in the very different setting of a foreign country.


  144. Mr Verney points out that the United Kingdom is not unaware  of  the
       regime's record.  On p. 36 of the report, reference  is  made  to  a
       statement by Mark Simmonds, a Junior Minister, who said in answer to
       questions from Gareth Thomas MP that the Foreign Office was aware of
       the reports of torture detailed by the campaign group Waging  Peace:
       "We have frequently made clear, publicly and in private  discussions
       with the Sudanese authorities, our concerns over  the  ill-treatment
       of detainees in Sudan."






    Mr Verney's oral evidence


  145. The bulk of Mr Verney's examination  in  chief  was  taken  up  with
       seeking to characterise  the  level  of  activity  in  political  or
       opposition activity that would place an individual at  risk  and  to
       expand on his evidence as to the scope of surveillance  operated  by
       the Sudanese authorities at home and abroad.


  146. The tenor of Mr Verney's evidence was that it was artificial to draw
       distinctions with reference to the term 'low level' in the sense  of
       basing a decision to refuse asylum because such low  level  activity
       would  not  attract  adverse  attention.  He  described  this  as  a
       misperception in that an organisation like JEM depended on its grass
       roots supporters (the so-called low or street level activists).   Mr
       Verney believed these same low level activists were more  vulnerable
       to the actions of the Sudanese  state  than  senior  or  high  level
       members of the party.  His reason was  that  higher  levels  of  the
       party had a measure of protection by virtue of social and  political
       status. The Sudanese government recognised these were  people  whose
       political influence could lead to backlash or upset if  detained  or
       maltreated. By contrast a low level participant did  not  have  this
       social protection and was, therefore, more likely to  be  vulnerable
       to abuse.

  147. The level of  surveillance  was,  inevitably,  provided  by  way  of
       examples.  He had already given evidence of a recorded  instance  in
       December 2006 of demonstrators being filmed by a person  inside  the
       Sudanese embassy building in London using  a  hand-held  camera.  He
       cited the example of one on its nationals abroad when in the  United
       Kingdom. Gillian Lusk, Associate Editor of Africa Confidential,  had
       been shown a dossier with information of whom she  had  visited,  to
       whom she had spoken to and what her movements had been. He  conceded
       she was referring to an  incident  that  had  occurred  before  this
       regime came to power, indeed, as long ago as about 1988. He spoke of
       the regime's reliance on its security apparatus which  he  described
       as 'the most powerful body in the country' which maintains files  on
       those of interest to  them  and  which  has  extensive  intelligence
       resources including human intelligence. These days they have  fairly
       sophisticated computer systems and keep  files  on  individuals  for
       several decades.

  148.  In  view  of  the  threatening  statements  made  by  the  Sudanese
       government against anyone who might give evidence  to  the  ICC,  Mr
       Verney considered it highly likely that the government would make it
       its business to obtain details, for example, of those organising the
       invitation to the ICC to come and talk in the UK. He  accepted  that
       neither appellant was one of the organisers but went on to  consider
       whether the 'ordinary Joe' who went to protests would ever  come  to
       the attention of the government.  It was his view that he would.  In
       reaching this conclusion he relied upon the material from the Waging
       Peace report and several reports of people returning  to  Sudan  who
       were confronted at Khartoum airport with photographs  or  videos  of
       their attendance at meetings or protests.  He  said  that  over  the
       last couple of years, as the regime's own predicament  deteriorated,
       it had been especially concerned to identify those  who  might  have
       opposition links and, at the very least, to spread  intimidation  so
       that the links were not extended.

  149. Mr Vokes attempted to draw Mr Verney on identifying a black  African
       Arabic speaker as an individual who, for that reason alone, would be
       the object of suspicion in the eyes of the regime.  However,  whilst
       this might create a preliminary impression, Mr Verney  described  it
       as an 'unhelpful clich' because it introduced the idea  that  there
       may be colour prejudice, whereas there is an overlap in  skin  tones
       amongst the population.   The peripheries of  Sudan  are  the  areas
       where the indigenous population is not Arab and does not  aspire  to
       or claim any Arab identity. These are the less powerful  groups  who
       are contrasted with the Arab Sudanese (who have been in the  country
       for many centuries) and who have  been  the  dominant  economic  and
       political force. According to Mr Verney, there is a  lot  of  social
       cachet in identifying oneself as Arab  rather  than  African;  hence
       people of the Nile valley, even if they have  African  grandmothers,
       are entirely vested in Arab identity. People who do  not  fall  into
       this category (often the longest standing inhabitants) are  for  the
       sake of convenience called non-Arabs. The use of the term 'black' is
       not helpful, he said,  because  it  is  more  to  do  with  lineage,
       inheritance and where your family comes from.


  150. Mr Verney spoke of the original  plan  of  the  regime  was  for  an
       Islamist military dictatorship, aimed at spreading Islam  throughout
       Africa, using the Muslim population of  Africa,  such  as  those  in
       Darfur. That did not succeed and  the  advocates  of  a  pan-African
       policy left the regime. Those remaining in the government pursued  a
       more traditional Arab supremacist Islamism. It seems they could  not
       overcome their distaste for those whom they  considered  the  'lower
       forms  of  life'.   However,  Mr  Verney   conceded   this   was   a
       generalisation in the sense that  there  are  people  from  non-Arab
       background  who  are  supporters  of  the  regime,  albeit  a  small
       minority, perhaps  in  some  cases  a  few  powerful  families.  His
       evidence was that clear-cut lines were not possible.  To be a 'black
       African' was not a litmus test; nor was being a non-Arab.

  151. Mr Verney was asked about the  'patterns  of  detention'.  Mr  Vokes
       suggested it came down to a  random  display  of  intimidation.   Mr
       Verney took a more nuanced approach identifying the  differences  in
       treatment as a series of grades. At one end  of  the  spectrum  were
       those cases where the authorities may have substantial evidence.  He
       accepted that there were a large number of  detentions  by  security
       forces  which  were  intended   to   maintain   an   atmosphere   of
       intimidation. It does not have  to  be  based  on  anything  strong.
       However, if someone were released that did not necessarily mean that
       the authorities had no further interest in him.  This plays into the
       principle of the 'Arab supremacy' so that, in the case of  the  Beja
       and some Darfuri non-Arabs whom the authorities believe are 'getting
       above their station', they are regarded as second class citizens who
       must be kept in place.

  152. Once again, however, Mr Verney  drew  back  from  drawing  clear-cut
       lines.  When asked whether someone from an  Arab  ethnic  background
       who was against the regime would face the same arbitrary  detention,
       he accepted that there are Arab Sudanese who  are  involved  in  the
       opposition. It is probable that the Arab Sudanese do  not  like  the
       dictatorship,  any  more  than  the  non-Arab  groups.  However   he
       concluded it was more likely that a non-Arab  would  be  accused  of
       such activity based on a lower level of evidence.

  153. In answer to a question about racial stereotyping  and  geographical
       origin, Mr Verney  said  one  had  to  be  wary  of  making  blanket
       statements  and  one  had  to  adopt  a   more   nuanced   approach.
       Nevertheless, the place of origin and ethnic  origin  would  have  a
       significant bearing on the way a person is  treated  on  return.  If
       someone is from a Darfuri or Beja background, there  was  a  greater
       likelihood of persistent interrogation.

  154. Mr Verney spoke of no NGO operating without some  NISS  involvement.
       At least one Sudanese member of staff must be provided by government
       and he thought it was clear that the Sudanese authorities  place  at
       least one security force member in their offices to monitor what was
       going on. He described the atmosphere as  one  of  extreme  mistrust
       because they were often seen as giving aid to the enemy.

  155. In any event, the numbers were limited as  were  the  conditions  of
       operation.

  156. However, he no longer had an up-to-date list because after the  2009
       suspension and expulsion of  foreign  NGOs,  only  a  few  had  made
       arrangements to return.   It  was  difficult  to  get  hard  details
       because the NGOs themselves were nervous of losing their freedom  to
       operate in country.

Responses to Secretary of State's Questions, 30 June 2015

  157. In answer to a question which sought information  about  persecution
       against the Beja  since  the  2006  Eastern  Sudan  Peace  Agreement
       (ESPA), Mr Verney described how Beja demonstrators in Port Sudan who
       had spoken out against privatisation  of  an  elementary  school  in
       April 2015 were heavily fined and threatened with imprisonment after
       their protest was broken up. Indeed, he commented that Beja Congress
       leaders in Port Sudan are regularly "persecuted" on the occasion  of
       the anniversary of the January 2005 massacre and, in at least  three
       towns, Beja Congress leaders are regularly subjected  to  detention,
       imprisonment and intimidation.


  158. Mr Verney was also asked whether a failed or refused  asylum  seeker
       would be identified on return. His response  was  that  it  was  not
       surprising that identification is possible when information to  that
       effect is received in advance or, in the case of  a  person  who  is
       accompanied, from the manner of return. In the case  of  documentary
       evidence,  where  a  returnee  attends  the  Sudanese  embassy   for
       interview in order to  be  issued  with  documentation  required  to
       secure his re-admission to Sudan, the process of  're-documentation'
       may lead to embassy officials  becoming  aware  of  an  unsuccessful
       claim in the United Kingdom. Similarly, where a passport  or  travel
       document is endorsed with only limited leave to enter or  remain  in
       the United Kingdom, unauthorised presence in the United Kingdom  may
       cause the authorities to be suspicious.

  159. Mr Verney also explained that the authorities usually ask  questions
       about the individual's family background, his ethnic  identity,  his
       home area and his reasons for travelling, the persons he met and the
       events he attended. He also explained that  non--Arab  tribes,  even
       those  who  work  in  government  posts,  are  subjected  to  racial
       discrimination  in  a  complex  way.  He  confirmed  material  found
       elsewhere that individuals may be detained on the  basis  of  little
       more than suspicion.

  160. Mr Verney was also asked about the likelihood of participants in the
       United Kingdom demonstrations facing identification  on  return.  He
       described  the   likelihood   of   identification   on   return   as
       'significant' but did so on the basis that the  Sudanese  regime  is
       known to carry out surveillance. Understandably, he said that it was
       impossible to predict the likelihood  of  someone  attending  a  JEM
       meeting being identified but the regime takes  steps  to  infiltrate
       such meetings and that there are  cases  of  Sudanese  returning  to
       Sudan who have  been  accused  of  involvement  with  JEM  or  other
       opposition elements on the basis of their attendance  at  gatherings
       in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  risk  is  not  confined  to   actual
       involvement  but  the  perception  on  the  part  of  the   Sudanese
       authorities that an individual has been so involved.

  161. In answer to a question, Mr Verney referred to the Corporate  Report
       of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office published on  10  April  2014
       which stated that the conflict  between  government  and  the  Sudan
       People's  Liberation  Movement-North  (SPLM-N)  was  continuing   in
       Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states with aerial  bombardment  and
       ground fighting leading to  civilian  casualties  and  displacement.
       February 2014 saw the highest number of  civilian  casualties  since
       the start of the conflict in Southern Kordofan since 2011.


The August 2015 CIG reports


  162. Since these appeals were adjourned in July 2015, the Home Office has
       produced two additional CIG reports in  August  2015.  These  are  a
       mixture of Country Information on the one hand and Guidance to  Home
       Office decision makers on the other. The  Home  Office  guidance  is
       policy or akin to policy. We do not  look  to  it  as  a  source  of
       country  information.  It  is  only  that  part  of   the   document
       specifically called Country Information that we rely on as a summary
       of the background information from which it is sourced.


  163. The CIG report 'Sudan:Treatment of persons involved in  'sur  place'
       activity in the United Kingdom' makes extensive reference to the two
       reports from Waging Peace: 'The Danger of Returning Home: the perils
       facing Sudanese immigrants when they go back  to  Sudan'  (September
       2012) and 'The Long Arm of the Sudanese  Regime:  how  the  Sudanese
       National Intelligence and Security Service  monitors  and  threatens
       Sudanese nationals who leave Sudan' (September 2014) both  of  which
       have been extensively referred to above. In  addition,  the  letters
       from the British Embassy dated 8 April 2013  and  19  February  2015
       which we have quoted in the body of this text have been  annexed  to
       the report as Annexes A and B.

  164. The same CIG report refers to removal  statistics  from  the  United
       Kingdom.  Over the period 2004 to 2015 a total of 141 failed  asylum
       seekers were recorded as being  forcibly  removed  from  the  United
       Kingdom to Sudan. Some 235 asylum seekers were recorded as returning
       voluntarily. However, recent figures show a  sharp  decline.  It  is
       recorded that there were only 2 enforced returns  and  15  voluntary
       returns in 2013 with 6 enforced and 18 voluntary returns in 2014. In
       the first quarter of 2015 there were no enforced returns and only  2
       voluntary returns.

  165. The second piece of additional Country  Information  from  the  Home
       Office is entitled Country Information and Guidance Sudan: Treatment
       of persons involved in 'sur place' activity in the UK (August 2015).
       Once again, the two letters from the British Embassy of 8 April 2013
       and 19 February 2015 appear as Annexes.  Although this does not form
       part of  the  country  information,  we  note  as  representing  the
       respondent's policy at paragraph 2.2.8 of the Guidance:

         However, given the increasingly repressive nature of  the  regime,
         the threshold of activity and profile for  conducting  surveillance
         on a person, and for them to become of interest to NISS, is  likely
         to be lower than that set out in HGMO. Furthermore, given  the  low
         number of enforced and voluntary returns from the UK, if  a  person
         has  been  politically  active  this  may  become  known   by   the
         authorities on return either through surveillance undertaken in the
         UK or from questioning on arrival in Khartoum.


  166. The report refers to  sources  which  speak  of  the  difficulty  in
       assessing the size of the  Sudanese  exile  communities  across  the
       world and, perhaps unsurprisingly, the relative social  cohesion  of
       its membership. Reference  is  made  to  a  July  2006  IOM  mapping
       exercise showing various Sudanese  community  organisations  in  the
       United Kingdom including political and non-political  organisations,
       Trade Unions, refugee and social  organisations  some  organised  on
       ethnic  or  gender-based  criteria.   A   large   number   of   such
       organisations were listed in an open letter from Waging Peace  dated
       22 December 2014. Copious references are  made  to  the  two  Waging
       Peace reports 'The Danger of Returning Home, etc' and 'The Long  Arm
       of the Sudanese Regime, etc'.


  167. There is a separate passage on the  Justice  and  Equality  Movement
       (JEM) and its presence in the United Kingdom where it is run from an
       office in London with a number of senior members working and  living
       in the United Kingdom and Ireland.  JEM  has  a  London-based  media
       spokesperson. The identity of many of its senior members  is  given,
       including Prof Abdullahi el-Tom, the Chief Whip of JEM who  is  also
       Professor and Head of Anthropology at Maynooth University, Dublin.


  168. The CIG on 'sur place' activities makes reference  at  8.1.4  to  an
       Amnesty International report on NISS dated March 2015  in  which  it
       noted:

     'As the Sudanese National  Intelligence  and  Security  Service  (NISS)
         intensifies its crackdown on the freedoms of  expression,  assembly
         and association in Sudan, it  provides  an  ominous  warning  about
         human rights in the context of upcoming general elections in  April
         [2015]. ... Since January 2015, at least  16  newspapers  have  had
         their publications confiscated on 42 different occasions  by  NISS.
         Four leading civil society organisations have been shut  down  with
         at least five others under  threat  of  imminent  closure.  Several
         journalists report interrogation and harassment by the  police  and
         NISS agents. There is no legal basis or rationale for these actions
         by NISS other than to quell dissent and criticism of  the  National
         Congress Party as the general elections approach.
     'Though the NISS has for  the  last  decade  perpetrated  human  rights
         violations with impunity, its current human rights violations  have
         reached unprecedented levels.  The  NISS  has  used  excessive  and
         sometimes lethal force in breaking up demonstrations, protests  and
         rallies as well as office raids and  confiscations  of  newspapers,
         perpetrated arbitrary arrests and deliberately targeted ethnic  and
         religious minorities.
     'Between 2012 and 2014,  the  NISS  arrested  human  rights  defenders,
         students, activists, political opponents and journalists en  masse.
         Most of those arrested were subsequently  released  without  trial,
         but a few have been kept incommunicado, outside the  protection  of
         the law and vulnerable to torture and other forms of ill-treatment.
         Human  rights  violations  committed  by  NISS  agents  are  seldom
         investigated by the Sudanese authorities.

  169. Importantly, this same CIG report contains a  passage  referring  to
       surveillance which draws upon the now familiar material from  Waging
       Peace.  The report at paragraph 9.1.6  refers to the case of  Ms  A.
       (cited above at [80(l)]) who, following her  detention  at  Khartoum
       airport,  was  shown  photographs  of  her  meeting  with  a  friend
       belonging to the Justice and Equality Movement at a coffee  shop  in
       London. She was also shown a photograph of herself attending a Sudan
       Revolutionary Front event in London, which her  friend  in  JEM  had
       also attended.


  170. Reference is also made to the Landinfo report and the evidence there
       of surveillance activities in Norway.

  171. In addition, the CIG 'sur place' report at 9.3 deals with reports on
       the use of electronic  surveillance  and  cyber  monitoring  by  the
       Sudanese authorities. Mr Verney, in submitting  additional  material
       after the hearing was adjourned in July 2015, produced  material  to
       the effect that Hacking Team, an Italian set of hackers  that  hires
       out its services to governments and other organisations, had  itself
       apparently been hacked. As a result, documents  extracted  indicated
       that the Sudanese authorities had used its services as part  of  its
       surveillance activities. Although  Hacking  Team  has  categorically
       denied that it has been providing cyber weapons  to  Sudan  and  was
       stonewalling a UN investigation into their business, both Russia and
       Sudan were among the countries appearing  in  a  leaked  spreadsheet
       describing them as 'not officially supported'. It  is  difficult  to
       know precisely what this means but in an article dated 6  July  2015
       Gianluca Mezzofiore stated:


         Moreover, a subsequent invoice for Euro 480,000  dated  July  2012
    seems to      prove that   the Italian company was involved in  selling
    surveillance software to Sudan.

Migrationsverket Report

  172. One of the reasons for adjourning the hearing in July  2015  was  to
       obtain a translation of the Swedish Migrationsverket report  on  the
       fact-finding mission. The report is dated 20 October 2010 but refers
       to the fact-finding mission which took place between  1-  8  October
       2009. The report is limited in its scope as far as  this  appeal  is
       concerned  and  provides  only  a  sketch  of  those  who   may   be
       particularly vulnerable to government intervention. When considering
       organisations with a specific political  opinion,  the  writers  say
       that there may sometimes be links between these groups  and  certain
       ethnic groups but it is


         "rather those persons activities and/or connections that determine
    the risk of   exposure than the actual ethnic affiliation."


       It  then  lists  political  activists  who  are  critical   of   the
       government, human rights defenders, those  who  openly  support  the
       International Criminal Court ruling against President al Bashir  and
       those with links - or suspected links - to armed groups  and  family
       members of individuals with links to armed groups as  being  subject
       to an increased risk.  As  the  other  material  to  which  we  have
       referred  makes  clear,  there  is  little  that  is  new  in   this
       identification and it cannot be said to be either subtle or nuanced.


    The analysis


  173. Dealing with the situation in Sudan in the most general terms, power
       is concentrated in the hands of an authoritarian  regime  headed  by
       President al-Bashir whose National  Congress  Party  has  maintained
       control of the country for the last 25 years. The  period  has  been
       turbulent, involving civil war and uprisings in the Nuba  Mountains,
       Southern Kordofan, the Blue Nile State, unrest on the  part  of  the
       Beja people in the east and by rebel forces in Darfur. Whilst  South
       Sudan seceded in July 2011, tension remains. It is  not,  therefore,
       surprising that the country has faced periodic demonstrations in the
       form of popular protest. The government has reacted in two divergent
       ways. On the one hand, it has sought peace agreements  with  various
       opposition groups, most notably the  Comprehensive  Peace  Agreement
       with the Sudan People's Liberation Army in  2005  and  the  National
       Dialogue announced in January 2014, but  with  muted  commitment  to
       implementation. On the other, and sometimes at the same time, it has
       cracked down on protests with violence and intimidation. Inevitably,
       as the regime feels it is losing its grip, it  has  reacted  by  the
       only means left to it, the use of force.


  174. The country is, politically, largely isolated, having few  local  or
       international allies.

  175. The regime has plainly seen with  alarm  the  popular  uprisings  in
       Egypt, Tunisia and Libya. The events which are  generally  known  as
       the Arab Spring must have greatly  concerned  the  President  as  we
       noted by his chilling remark, set out in paragraph  60  above,  when
       speaking of the Arab Spring, "...we have a hot summer, a burning hot
       summer that burns its enemies."   While such incendiary comments are
       loaded with rhetoric designed to intimidate, they are a guide to the
       attitude of the authorities against any threat to the regime.

  176. This sensitivity towards the pressures that surround the regime from
       all  sides  has  been  exacerbated  by   the   activities   of   the
       International Criminal Court since it issued an  arrest  warrant  in
       March 2009 against the President on charges of war crimes and crimes
       against humanity in Darfur which was enlarged to include a charge of
       genocide in 2010.  It has been repeated as recently as June 2015  by
       the  prosecutor  of  the  International  Criminal  Court  condemning
       disproportionate use of force against civilians and  the  deliberate
       hampering of efforts to afford relief to the victims.

  177. Once an individual has been assessed by a decision maker  as  having
       established himself as being a  threat  to  the  regime  -  real  or
       imagined - and sufficient to merit his  detention  and  the  serious
       interest of NISS,  there  is  unanimity  amongst  the  providers  of
       country information that the individual is at risk of  human  rights
       abuses. The question for a decision maker is how to identify such  a
       person.  In assessing the risk to an  individual,  it  is  essential
       that as comprehensive an assessment as possible is  made  about  the
       individual concerned.

  178. In the past the assessment has tended to rely upon  particular  risk
       categories.  Reviewing the material we have summarised, the Tribunal
       in HGMO identified those  at  risk  as  being  persons  of  non-Arab
       Darfuri origin from areas where rebel leaders are known to originate
       along with persons at home or abroad whose conduct marked  them  out
       as oppositionists or tribal leaders. The group was  extended  in  AA
       and MM to cover all non-Arab  ethnic  Dafuris.   The  evidence  also
       pointed to those at risk being members and supporters of  opposition
       parties whose activities are likely to bring them to  the  attention
       of the authorities or those actively and openly  involved  in  human
       rights work or known critics of the regime (AY). This would  include
       members of the Beja Congress and the Justice and  Equality  Movement
       (JEM), amongst others.  It is easy to find other examples  of  those
       potentially at  risk:  opposition  activists,  teachers,  academics,
       students, journalists and those who  have  spoken  out  against  the
       government and whose activities have resulted in adverse  treatment.
       Other  material  suggests  that  internally  displaced  persons  and
       community leaders are at risk.


  179. The 17 examples provided in the Waging Peace reports (set out at (a)
       to (q) in paragraphs 74-80, above) contain information on  which  we
       can properly rely.  Indeed, insofar as it now forms part of the Home
       Office COI, it has become readily accessible to all decision makers.
        The two reports refer to conversations with  persons  from  Darfur,
       from non-Arab tribes such as the Fur, the Zaghawa, the Berti and the
       Massalit; suspected or imputed members of  Girifna,  those  involved
       with JEM, those involved in human rights work,  those  who  attended
       demonstrations in the United Kingdom and the meeting at the House of
       Lords, a person associated with a member of a well-known  family  of
       prominent opposition supporters, those from the conflict  areas  and
       political opponents in various roles.   In  each  of  the  examples,
       there was a reason provided by the speaker for the interest taken by
       the Sudanese authorities.  There is no reason to  infer  these  were
       random targets.

  180. There may, of course, be factual issues  yet  to  be  determined  in
       relation those whose  asylum  claims  or  appeals  have  yet  to  be
       decided. It is unnecessary to determine those issues because  it  is
       the nature of the claims, not their reliability, that is  the  focus
       of our assessment.  For the purposes of the  following  (which  does
       not claim to be a comprehensive summary of  the  claims),  we  shall
       treat their claims as true.  They are identified from the  summaries
       of their cases at (a) to (q) in paragraphs 74-80, above.

  181. Several were Darfurians; (a), (b), (e), (g), (j), (l) and (o).

  182. Some were involved in demonstrations in the United Kingdom; (b)  and
       (d).  One, (d), was involved in the meeting at the House of Lords.

  183. Some were  involved  in  JEM  or  were  accused  of  involvement  in
       opposition groups including Girifna; (a), (c), (h), (l),  (n),  (o),
       (p) and (q).

  184. Some were human rights activists; (j), (p) and one,  Dr  Kaballo  at
       [k], had a prominent record of involvement.

  185. Two were journalists; one from Darfur (l),  another  from  the  Nuba
       District who had carried our research in the Nuba Mountains, (m).

  186. One was involved with a prominent opponent of the government; (f).

  187. A significant number were subjected to treatment falling well  short
       of serious harm; (b), (e), (f), (i), (j), (k - at least on  all  but
       one occasion), (l), (m), (n), (p) and (q).  In the  cases  of  those
       who were able to produce a British or European  passport,  this  was
       probably a significant contributory factor in their safety; (e), (f)
       and (q).  A somewhat smaller number were ill-treated; (a), (c), (d),
       (g), (h) and (o).

  188. All, of course were able to leave Sudan or they could not have  been
       interviewed on arrival or on return to the United Kingdom.

  189. None of their claims fall outside  the  broad  categories  of  those
       potentially at risk as we have identified from the  evidence  before
       us.

  190. Mr Verney referred to  the  risk  faced  by  those  who  have  given
       evidence to the International Criminal Court or  those  involved  in
       inviting the International Criminal Court to  speak  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  The list continues to grow.

  191. In contrast the Sudanese authorities (in the form of the Director of
       Passport and Immigration Control) only singled  out  those  returned
       from Israel, those who were abroad and would not  settle  their  tax
       liabilities with the tax authorities  in  Sudan  and  those  on  the
       register  of  wanted  persons  and  those  travelling   with   false
       passports. These categories are not  found  elsewhere  and,  perhaps
       understandably, neither  the  background  nor  the  expert  evidence
       referred to them.  There is, therefore, no objective  evidence  that
       those who have failed to sort out their tax liability are  subjected
       to persecution although, of course, the authorities  are  likely  to
       pursue them  for  any  outstanding  debts.  Similarly  there  is  no
       evidence that those returning from Israel,  although  likely  to  be
       questioned, are for that reason alone subjected to persecution.

  192. It is however too simplistic to approach the risk assessment  simply
       by reference  to  an  individual's  work  or  political  stance.  It
       requires a more detailed evaluation. This stems, of course, from the
       fact that not all teachers or academics or students  or  journalists
       are at risk of prosecution anymore  than  is  every  individual  who
       opposes the regime or has participated in  a  demonstration  or  has
       spoken out against it. Looking at the  background  material  in  the
       round, many of those arrested and detained were released on the same
       day without experiencing  harm  sufficient  to  engage  the  Refugee
       Convention.  Where the purpose of the arrest was to intimidate,  the
       effect of intimidation is not normally,  in  itself,  sufficient  to
       meet the threshold for international protection.  The evidence makes
       clear that intimidation is used as a means to deter those who  might
       take their opposition further. We are supported in  this  conclusion
       by the evidence of just how widespread this practice is and we would
       not  conclude  that  all  those  similarly  treated  are  Convention
       refugees.

  193. The situation is further  confused  by  the  fact  that  even  quite
       prominent  members   of   some   organisations,   although   clearly
       intimidated, were  not  subjected  to  ill-treatment  sufficient  to
       amount to persecution; see, for  example,  Afaf  Mohammed,  a  Dutch
       national, [82(j)], who answered questions  about  her  human  rights
       activities as a human rights activist for the Darfur Union  and  was
       then allowed to return to the United  Kingdom  or  Dr  Kaballo,  [82
       (k)], founder of an organisation called Sudan for Human  Rights  and
       head of the Central Committee of  the Sudanese Communist  Party  who
       often visited Sudan and, although detained for  18  days,  was  then
       released.

  194. Mr Verney's evidence also picks up this equivocality.  He  suggests,
       perhaps counter-intuitively, that more prominent persons are less at
       risk because their connections and, indeed, their very celebrity act
       as a protection.   We think that, in saying so, Mr Verney falls into
       the same trap that he wishes the Tribunal to  avoid  when  asserting
       that it is artificial to draw distinctions by reference  to  whether
       an individual is a low-level activist.  There may be some  prominent
       people - perhaps a prominent member of an opposition group in  Sudan
       - who are not at risk but that is a far cry  from  saying  prominent
       persons are not at risk or face a significantly reduced risk.

  195. Whilst Mr Vokes suggested to Mr Verney that  patterns  of  detention
       came down to a random display of intimidation, Mr Verney took a more
       nuanced approach.  He identified the differences in treatment  as  a
       series of grades: at one end of the scale,  those  cases  where  the
       authorities have substantial evidence with the inevitable  corollary
       of those cases where they do not.  At another stage in his  evidence
       he sensibly drew back from drawing clear-cut lines and  gave  as  an
       example someone from an Arab ethnic background who was  against  the
       regime as facing the same risk of arbitrary detention as a non-Arab.
        He avoided Mr Vokes' suggestion of racial stereotyping or clear-cut
       distinctions based on geographical origin, seeking to  avoid  making
       blanket statements, whilst at the  same  time  being  aware  of  the
       significance of the place  of  origin  and  an  individual's  ethnic
       background.

  196. This is to some extent echoed by the Waging Peace's response to  the
       Landinfo report, [114 and 115, above].  They  challenged  the  point
       made that opposition abroad tended to be  from  those  of  a  higher
       education.  Its response was to claim that no such distinctions were
       possible and that Sudanese men and women from all parts  of  society
       who had spent time outside Sudan may be at risk.

  197. The  contra-indications  about  widespread  risk  contained  in  the
       evidence must also be evaluated.  As we have set out above,  the  17
       examples contained in the two Waging Peace  reports  paint  a  mixed
       picture.  The individuals were not  apparently  random  targets  but
       were selected because something that they had done or  said  created
       suspicion on the part of the Sudanese  authorities.   There  was  no
       general  or  universal  pattern  of  violence.   In   other   words,
       distinctions were made between  those  who  had  been  detained  for
       questioning.  The single thread  that  might  be  derived  from  the
       examples, taken as a whole, was an  intention  to  seek  information
       about those who posed  a  threat  to  the  regime  as  a  result  of
       activities at home or abroad.

  198.   There is evidence of  substantial  numbers  of  Sudanese  citizens
       returning from selected neighbouring  countries  in  Africa  on  the
       strength of agreements between  them  and  UNHCR.   Nothing  can  be
       derived from this save that it does not suggest a generalised  risk.
       However, these figures contrast with the very much  smaller  numbers
       of returns from Europe and beyond Africa.

  199. The Embassy letters based upon information from UNHCR  in  Khartoum,
       the German and Netherlands Embassies and other EU governments are  a
       useful source of material.  We would not regard their assessment  as
       biased in favour of the respondent but as a professional examination
       of  the  material  it  has  extracted  from  its  informants.    Any
       assessment must involve the exercise of caution because most, if not
       all, of the  organisations  approached  do  not  have  a  monitoring
       capability.  That  said,  monitoring  is  not  the  only  method  of
       collecting information and the level  of  interest  in  seeking  out
       information about the risk faced by returnees is such that we  would
       expect adverse consequence to filter through into the public domain.

  200. The Embassy letters do not support a claim  that  returnees  are  at
       risk of mistreatment for that reason alone.   However,  the  Embassy
       recites the evidence from its sources that those who  openly  oppose
       the government from abroad are likely to be arrested on return.   In
       the second letter, dated  19  February  2015,  the  Deputy  Head  of
       Mission while repeating that a returnee is not at  risk,  identified
       the type of person who is likely  to  be  of  interest.  These  were
       classified  as  including  those  of  previous   interest   to   the
       authorities (in which case they may appear on a travel watch  list);
       having a record of contract with Sudanese opposition groups  outside
       of Sudan; or, having attracted  the  attention  of  the  authorities
       during time overseas including through  engagement  with  opposition
       groups within the diaspora. The Deputy Head concludes by saying that
       detention is a common occurrence but that it should not  be  assumed
       that the treatment  meted  out  is  uniform.  It  is  likely  to  be
       determined according to a non-exhaustive list of factors such as the
       nature of the accusations; the individual's public and international
       profile; age; family connections and ethnic background.


  201.  The problem for the decision maker is to determine who is likely to
       be arrested, detained  for  a  short  period,  questioned,  probably
       intimidated,  possibly  rough   handled   and   then   released   in
       circumstances which fall short of having suffered (or being at  risk
       of suffering) serious harm and those who face the much  graver  risk
       of serious harm. The answer to that question does  not  depend  upon
       the individual  being  classified  as  a  teacher  or  a  journalist
       (although these factors are, of course, significant) but requires  a
       finely  balanced  fact-finding   exercise   encompassing   all   the
       information that can be gleaned about  him  in  which  the  decision
       maker is required to place the individual in the airport  on  return
       or back home in his community and ask himself the question: how  are
       the authorities likely to re-act to the person  I  have  before  me,
       knowing the things I know about him? Are the authorities  likely  to
       know some or all of  these  matters?   Does  my  assessment  of  the
       reaction place him at a real risk of harm?

  202. The importance of a detailed assessment of  the  individual  arising
       from material before the decision maker, which will vary in  quality
       and reliability, cannot be over-emphasised.  It is why  there  is  a
       need for a case-by-case evaluation of every claim. In assessing  the
       material the entire  range  of  evidence  falls  to  be  considered,
       including  material  which   must,   of   necessity,   be   somewhat
       speculative. This approach is not  necessarily  any  different  from
       saying that a person  has  a  profile  that  renders  him  at  risk,
       provided the decision maker does not treat the concept of a  profile
       as a short-cut to a detailed analysis, far less a tick-box exercise.



  203. The problem that the evidence presents is that whilst the categories
       of those potentially at risk are legion, it is apparent that not all
       those falling into a particular category are at  risk.   It  is  not
       enough, therefore, to be a journalist or a student because  not  all
       members of these groups are at risk.  So, too, with ethnic or tribal
       classification.  Not all  non-Arabs  are  at  risk;  nor  all  black
       Africans are at risk notwithstanding the unchallenged evidence  that
       they are members of the various tribes associated with  this  group.
       Not all those from the troubled regions of Darfur, Southern Kordofan
       or the Blue Nile are at risk.  Nor  are  all  those  who  have  been
       arrested and detained.  However, all of these  matters  are  factors
       that are relevant and some, of course, are much more  likely  to  be
       significant, such as prior detention and ill-treatment as  a  result
       of involvement in activities perceived as being in opposition to the
       government.  Yet, all of this material must be taken into account.

  204. Mr Verney has given clear evidence that caution should be  exercised
       about classification of high-level and  low-level  activists.   This
       is, to some degree, the same point that we are making here.   He  is
       inviting decision makers to avoid making assessments of risk on  the
       basis of a profile of a low-level supporter of  JEM.   It  is  over-
       simplistic to use the description of a claimant's activities as 'low-
       level' as the means of dismissing a claim without more.  What we  do
       not take his evidence to mean is that every such supporter of JEM is
       at risk and the nature and scope of his activities is bound to be  a
       proper subject of enquiry.  Such a person may  be  at  risk  but  to
       decide whether he is (or has established to the lower standard  that
       he is or that there is a real risk of his  being  treated  as  such)
       requires an overall assessment of the  case.   This  strikes  us  as
       moving away from a check-list of those at risk (with  the  exception
       of non-Arab Dafuris)  to  a  much  greater  emphasis  on  a  rounded
       assessment of all the material including the effect of  positive  or
       adverse credibility findings.


  205. It would undoubtedly make for easier decision  making  if  we  could
       identify various categories of persons at  risk,  say,  teachers  or
       journalists and  present  the  list  to  decision  makers  with  the
       invitation that if a finding of fact is made that he is a teacher or
       a journalist, the task is done. There is something  of  this  within
       the approach adopted by the  Secretary  of  State  and  recorded  in
       paragraph 25 of the determination in seeking the define 'what a  JEM
       'activist' should reasonably be interpreted as being'.    Doubtless,
       the response might be along the lines that a  'low-level  supporter'
       would not be at risk whilst  a  'high-level  local  party  official'
       would be. The invitation to decision  makers  would  accordingly  be
       that if a finding of fact is made  that  a  person  is  a  low-level
       supporter or a high-level supporter the job is done.   However,  the
       evidence does not, we  find,  support  such  a  low-level/high-level
       categorisation of those at risk.  Second, it requires  the  decision
       maker to force every claimant into one box or the other in order  to
       determine his appeal, without offering guidance as  to  what  should
       happen if an individual cannot properly be placed into such  a  tidy
       classification.


  206. This is not a counsel of  despair  because  we  believe,  given  the
       country evidence we have set out, it is possible  for  the  decision
       maker who has made a careful and reasoned assessment of the evidence
       about  a  claimant  to  conclude  whether  a  real  risk  has   been
       established. This is the very antithesis of a decision  based  on  a
       finding of fact and little or no more that an individual is, say,  a
       teacher as if this were dispositive of the claim.  In a sense  there
       is no better way of expressing this point than in our assessment  of
       these two appeals, one of which will succeed and one of  which  will
       fail.

    The significance of an adverse finding of fact

  207. Some cases will result in a sustainable adverse credibility finding.
        Where there has been an adverse credibility finding,  the  Tribunal
       will have been  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  making  a  fully
       detailed assessment of the facts surrounding the appellant. In  some
       cases this may mean there are no findings that can be made about the
       appellant's case at all.   Into this evidential black hole,  it  may
       be difficult to make any findings at all that the appellant will  be
       at risk.  Further, when an appellant has been found not to have been
       telling the truth, it might be inferred that, had he told the truth,
       his claim would have been weakened by the telling of  it.  This  may
       render it impossible for the decision maker to  make  a  sustainable
       finding of fact that the appellant is at risk.  The claim  will  not
       have failed because the appellant has not told the truth; rather, it
       has failed  because  the  evidential  lacuna  does  not  permit  the
       decision maker to reach a conclusion on risk and no  inferences  can
       be drawn as to the appellant's true circumstances.

  208. In similar vein but where there is not the starkness of  an  adverse
       credibility finding, if the decision maker is not  satisfied  as  to
       some or all of the factual components of the claim, there will be  a
       lacuna in the evidence  such  that  a  detailed  assessment  of  the
       individual's circumstances is not  possible.  This  re-enforces  our
       view as to the  requirement  that  there  is  no  substitute  for  a
       detailed analysis of the evidence.


    Sur place activities

  209. There is room for disagreement on the risk faced by those  attending
       demonstrations.  It is, of course, a matter of fact and not of  law.
       Thus in HB (Ethiopia) [2004] UKIAT 00235, the Tribunal said  in  the
       context of Ethiopia:

         We have already set out Dr Campbell's assessment of the risk  faced
         by those involved with the UEDP in London in paragraph  15,  above.
         On the basis of his assessment, we are prepared to accept that  the
         Ethiopian Embassy in London monitors the  political  activities  of
         Ethiopian citizens resident in England.  However, we are unable  to
         accept that this means that the Embassy's officials are capable  of
         monitoring  the  activity  of  every  Ethiopian   citizen.   Simple
         constraints of resources must inevitably mean that the Embassy will
         concentrate upon the more important or the most  active  opposition
         figures.  It cannot be inferred that the  appellant,  described  by
         the organisation itself as "discharging his responsibilities by way
         of attending meetings and paying his membership contribution" is an
         obvious target  for  surveillance.   There  are  also,  of  course,
         significant difficulties in  an  Embassy  official  identifying  an
         individual, even if his photograph is taken.   Short  of  having  a
         database with which the photograph can be compared, surveillance by
         the Embassy is unlikely to lead to identification  without  further
         information  being  supplied.   Bearing  in  mind  the  appellant's
         relatively minor role in the UEDP in London, the  Tribunal  is  not
         satisfied that the fresh material establishes that the  appellant's
         activities in London will place him at risk on return.  We consider
         that it is speculative to say that  he  is  monitored  in  the  way
         suggested by Dr Campbell:


         "As an active member of the  London  branch  of  the  UEDP...  his
         activities... will have been monitored by a Political Councillor at
         the Ethiopian Embassy in London."

  210. Contrast this with what Sedley LJ said in YB (Eritrea)  v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 360
         As has been seen (7 above), the tribunal,  while  accepting  that
         the appellant's political activity in  this  country  was  genuine,
         were not prepared to accept in the  absence  of  positive  evidence
         that the Eritrean authorities had "the means and  the  inclination"
         to  monitor  such  activities  as  a  demonstration  outside  their
         embassy, or that they would be able to identify the appellant  from
         photographs of the  demonstration.  In  my  judgment,  and  without
         disrespect to what is a specialist  tribunal,  this  is  a  finding
         which risks losing  contact  with  reality.  Where,  as  here,  the
         tribunal has objective evidence which "paints a  bleak  picture  of
         the suppression of political opponents" by a named  government,  it
         requires little or no evidence or speculation to arrive at a strong
         possibility - and perhaps more - that  its  foreign  legations  not
         only film or photograph their nationals who demonstrate  in  public
         against  the   regime   but   have   informers   among   expatriate
         oppositionist organisations who can name the people who are  filmed
         or photographed. Similarly it does not require affirmative evidence
         to establish a probability that the intelligence services  of  such
         states monitor the internet  for  information  about  oppositionist
         groups. The real question in most cases will be  what  follows  for
         the individual claimant. If, for example, any information  reaching
         the embassy is likely to be  that  the  claimant  identified  in  a
         photograph  is  a  hanger-on  with  no  real  commitment   to   the
         oppositionist cause, that will go directly to the issue flagged  up
         by art 4(3)(d) of the Directive.
  211. In the present case we have the following  evidence.   It  is  clear
       that the Sudanese authorities conduct surveillance on its nationals.
       Normally a single reported incident of an embassy official  using  a
       camera to video demonstrators in 2006, [129, above] would hardly  be
       persuasive that the practice is widespread but it  is  a  reasonable
       inference that a regime that feels threatened from those  abroad  as
       well as those at home will wish to gather  such  information  as  is
       reasonably available as to the  level  of  opposition  expressed  by
       those in an expatriate community and, where possible,  the  identity
       of the groups and the individuals within them.  The  evidence  amply
       supports that view, see paragraph [95] to [98] and  [104]  to  [105]
       above.

  212. It seems likely that there will be informers but the success  within
       which such informers are embedded in a local group is  never  likely
       to be  established  affirmatively.  Members  of  a  small  group  of
       Sudanese nationals, all of whom know each other  with  a  degree  of
       intimacy, holding private meetings in their homes, are  unlikely  to
       have any suspicions that one amongst them is an informer.   If  that
       applies to one local  group,  the  members  of  other  local  groups
       probably share a similar degree of  confidence.  There  is  evidence
       from  some  correspondents  that,  from  the  questions  asked  when
       interviewed by NISS the  authorities  did  not  have  the  level  of
       detailed knowledge that would have been expected  of  them.   Whilst
       these considerations must be borne in mind, it is impossible  to  be
       dogmatic about the reach of informants and the scope of surveillance
       that we know is practised.

  213.  It  seems  unlikely  that  photographs   of   those   attending   a
       demonstration outside an embassy where the photographer  is  one  of
       the group are likely to  have  been  photographed  by  an  informer.
       There are formidable difficulties in ascertaining the identity of  a
       person in a photograph unless the person in known to the person  who
       identifies him.  Absent facial recognition techniques about which we
       have no evidence, there is  no  evidence  that  a  person  could  be
       identified from banks of photographs taken at demonstrations  across
       the world when he is returned to Khartoum.

  214. Notwithstanding these limitations,  we  accept  the  fact  that  the
       Sudanese authorities seek information about opposition activists  in
       the United Kingdom and there is direct evidence that some  returnees
       have been confronted with photographs taken by covert operations  in
       the United Kingdom conducted on behalf of the security services.  It
       is  not,  therefore,  a  fanciful  claim  that  individuals  can  be
       identified by embassy or other staff.  Speaking generally, given the
       cost and effort of conducting  surveillance,  it  is  reasonable  to
       assume that these activities would not be  conducted  if  they  were
       incapable  of  producing  some  results  and  that  the  information
       obtained is sufficient to merit the continuation of  these  efforts.
       The obvious cost and effort  render  it  probable  (like  any  other
       intelligence-gathering  organisation)  that  these   resources   are
       targeted at those that pose the most obvious risk.  In  a  crowd  of
       dozens of people, surveillance is unlikely to be carried through  in
       an attempt to identify the rank-and-file participants  and  is  more
       likely to  be  focussed  on  leaders,  organisers,  those  often  or
       regularly seen at such events and those present at events which  are
       likely  to  attract  the  particular  sensitivity  of  the  Sudanese
       officials  here,  perhaps  outside  the  embassy  or  perhaps  at  a
       significant anniversary or commemoration.

  215. In the context of this case, obvious difficulties arise in  relation
       to  establishing  what  information  finds  its  way  back  to   the
       authorities in Sudan about the activities of individuals  whilst  in
       the United Kingdom.  It is a forlorn hope that  an  individual  will
       establish - save in the rarest of  cases  -  that  an  informer  has
       identified him at a particular event on a particular day or that  an
       embassy official has photographed a protest in circumstances that he
       is then able to identify the participants.   We  doubt  whether  the
       risk can be elevated to a finding that there is a real risk  of  his
       doing so.  Nevertheless the evidence should  not  be  discarded  for
       that reason alone but falls into the jig-saw of evidence building up
       the composite picture of the individual.  It is at the end  of  this
       entire process that the  decision  maker  then  reaches  his  single
       conclusion on the issue of a real risk.

    Involuntary returnees and failed asylum seekers

  216. In HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) the Tribunal was concerned in  2006
       with non-Arab Darfuris returning to Khartoum but its conclusions  on
       that matter were sharpened up in 2009 in the decision  in  AA  (Non-
       arab Darfurians - relocation) where the Tribunal found that all non-
       Arab Darfuris were at risk of persecution in Darfur  and  could  not
       reasonably be expected to relocate  elsewhere  in  Sudan.  This  was
       extended in 2015 in MM (Darfuris) where the expression 'Darfuri' was
       to be treated as an ethnic term relating  to  origins  and  was  not
       limited to a geographical location.


  217. IM makes no claim to be a Dafuri.  In contrast, AI claimed to  be  a
       member of the Berti tribe from the Darfur region of Sudan  but  this
       claim was decisively rejected.  It is therefore not surprising  that
       neither appellant has advanced his case on the  basis  of  the  risk
       faced by Dafuris.  In these circumstances, there  is  no  legitimate
       basis upon which  we  can  depart  from  the  Tribunal's  assessment
       summarised in the preceding paragraph  as  to  the  risks  faced  by
       Dafuris.  Our conclusions, therefore, leave this  discreet  area  of
       the earlier Country Guidance intact and our own conclusions speak of
       more general risks.  The only relevance of the specific risks  faced
       by Dafuris is in building up the general picture of the government's
       attitude towards those it perceives to be a threat to its stability.



  218. As long ago as 2005, Dr Alizadeh of UNHCR  commented,  as  noted  in
       [33] above,  that  failed  asylum  seekers  would  not  face  severe
       problems upon return, as long as they are not recognized as a threat
       to the state.  That was the  conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  in  HGMO
       (Relocation to Khartoum).

  219. There is no evidence that there is a  recognisable  group  of  black
       Africans  (even  those  who  speak  Arabic)  who  are  at  risk   of
       persecution for that reason alone.   Notwithstanding  the  prompting
       from Mr Vokes of his witness, Mr Verney declined to use  a  person's
       skin colour as a litmus test.  Whilst acknowledging that those  from
       the periphery of Sudan were less advantaged and less  powerful,  the
       overlap of skin colours rendered the assessment of risk by reference
       to such colouration as 'unhelpful'.  He maintained the  most  useful
       distinction between ethnic groups (which has been apparent for  many
       years) was distinguishing between  'Arabs'  and  'non-Arabs'.   That
       does not, of course, mean that not all non-Arabs are  at  risk,  any
       more than it establishes no Arabs are at risk.


  220. In HGMO  (Relocation  to  Khartoum),  the  Tribunal  concluded  that
       neither involuntary returnees nor failed asylum seekers nor  persons
       of military age (including draft evaders and deserters) were as such
       at real risk on return to Khartoum.

  221. We have not been directed  to  material  that  sheds  light  on  any
       specific risk faced by draft evaders or  deserters.   We  would  not
       infer that such individuals would be seen by the  authorities  as  a
       threat to the regime or  would  be  perceived  as  having  political
       leanings supporting opposition to the State.

  222. As noted in [32] above, it was not argued before the  Tribunal  that
       involuntary returnees would be at risk for that reason alone and  Mr
       Verney did not suggest this then or  before  us.  Had  this  been  a
       general practice, the information would have filtered out.

  223. The Embassy letters speak of the United Kingdom government's contact
       with UNHCR and with EU partners at EU Human Rights meetings, none of
       whom had any knowledge of mistreatment of returnees.


  224. As a body of witnesses, we do not find that the  accounts  of  those
       interviewed in the Waging Peace report support a general  contention
       that all involuntary returnees or failed asylum seekers are at  risk
       for that reason alone.  In particular, whilst spending  a  prolonged
       period in the United Kingdom may well attract the attention  of  the
       Sudanese authorities, the evidence does not support  the  contention
       that this factor leads to a real risk of persecution.

  225. It is our firm conclusion that a failed asylum seeker, including  an
       individual that had been subject to investigation by the immigration
       authorities on return, would not be at risk of further investigation
       by NISS on that basis alone.

  226. The response made by Waging Peace to the Landinfo report repeats its
       stance that Sudanese from all parts of society - men and women; rich
       and poor - who have spent time outside  Sudan  may  be  at  risk  on
       return.  We accept the analysis of Waging Peace  that  risk  is  not
       confined to those who are well-educated or relatively wealthy but we
       are not satisfied that this supports a  claim  that  all  those  who
       return as failed asylum seekers are at risk.   We  accept  that  our
       assessment is hampered by a lack of monitoring from  UNHCR  or  from
       countries that return failed asylum seekers to Sudan.   However,  we
       are satisfied that the approach adopted  by  the  Tribunal  in  HGMO
       (Relocation to Khartoum) to the effect that even without monitoring,
       news leaks  out  if  there  had  been  widespread  ill-treatment  of
       involuntary returnees.  Indeed, the persons  interviewed  by  Waging
       Peace afford good examples of how individuals are able  to  describe
       their experiences and how those experiences find their way into  the
       public domain.

    The Guidance


  227. The guidance intended to inform the  assessment  of  any  particular
       claim must be drawn from this decision read as a whole  and  is  not
       distilled into this section alone.  There must be evidence known  or
       likely to be known to the Sudanese authorities which implicates  the
       claimant in  activity  which  they  are  likely  to  perceive  as  a
       potential threat to the regime to the  extent  that,  on  return  to
       Khartoum, there is a risk to the claimant that he will  be  targeted
       by the authorities.  The task of the decision maker is  to  identify
       such a person and this requires as comprehensive  an  assessment  as
       possible about the individual concerned.


  228. The evidence  draws  a  clear  distinction  between  those  who  are
       arrested,  detained  for  a  short  period,   questioned,   probably
       intimidated, possibly rough  handled  without  having  suffered  (or
       being at risk of suffering) serious harm and those who face the much
       graver risk of serious harm.  The distinction does not  depend  upon
       the individual being classified, for example,  as  a  teacher  or  a
       journalist (relevant as these matters are) but is the  result  of  a
       finely  balanced  fact-finding   exercise   encompassing   all   the
       information that can be gleaned about him.  The  decision  maker  is
       required to place the individual in the airport on  return  or  back
       home in his community and assess how the authorities are  likely  to
       react on the strength of the information known to them about him.

  229. Distinctions must be drawn between those whose political activity or
       perceived political activity is not significant or who do  not  have
       much influence.  Whilst it does not take much for the NISS to open a
       file, the very fact that so many are identified as potential targets
       inevitably requires NISS to distinguish between those whom they view
       as a real threat and those whom they do not.


  230. It will not be enough to make  out  a  risk  that  the  authorities'
       interest will be limited  to  the  extremely  common  phenomenon  of
       arrest and detention which though intimidating (and designed  to  be
       intimidating) does not cross the threshold into persecution.


  231. The purpose of the targeting is likely to be  obtaining  information
       about the claimant's own activities or the activities of his friends
       and associates.


  232. The evidence establishes the targeting is not random but the  result
       of suspicion based upon information in the authorities'  possession,
       although it may be limited.

  233. Caution should be exercised when the claim  is  based  on  a  single
       incident.   Statistically,  a  single  incident  must   reduce   the
       likelihood of the Sudanese  authorities  becoming  aware  of  it  or
       treating the claimant as of significant interest.


  234. Where the claim is based on events in Sudan in  which  the  claimant
       has come to the attention of the  authorities,  the  nature  of  the
       claimant's involvement, the likelihood of this being perceived as in
       opposition to the government, his treatment in detention, the length
       of detention and any  relevant  surrounding  circumstances  and  the
       likelihood of the event or the detention being made the subject of a
       record are all likely to be material factors.


  235. Where the claim is based on events outside Sudan,  the  evidence  of
       the claimant having come to the attention of  Sudanese  intelligence
       is bound to be more difficult to establish.   However  it  is  clear
       that the  Sudanese  authorities  place  reliance  upon  information-
       gathering about the activities of  members  of  the  diaspora  which
       includes  covert  surveillance.  The  nature  and  extent   of   the
       claimant's activities, when and  where,  will  inform  the  decision
       maker when he comes to decide whether it is likely those  activities
       will attract the attention of the authorities, bearing in  mind  the
       likelihood that the authorities will have to distinguish  amongst  a
       potentially large group of individuals between those who merit being
       targeted and those that do not.


  236. The decision maker must seek to build up as comprehensive a  picture
       as possible  of  the  claimant  taking  into  account  all  relevant
       material including that which may not have been established even  to
       the lower standard of proof.


  237. Once a composite assessment of the evidence has been made,  it  will
       be for the decision maker to determine whether there is a real  risk
       that the claimant will come to the attention of the  authorities  on
       return in such a way as amounts to more than the routine commonplace
       detention but meets the threshold of a real risk of serious harm.


  238. Where a claimant has not  been  believed  in  all  or  part  of  his
       evidence, the decision maker will have to assess how this impacts on
       the requirement to establish that a Convention claim has  been  made
       out. He will not have the comprehensive, composite picture he  would
       otherwise have had.  There  are  likely  to  be  shortfalls  in  the
       evidence that the decision maker is unable to speculate  upon.   The
       final analysis will remain the same: has  the  claimant  established
       there is a real risk  that  he,  the  claimant,  will  come  to  the
       attention of the authorities on return in such a way as  amounts  to
       more than the routine commonplace detention and  release  but  meets
       the threshold of serious harm.

  239. This is a fact-finding exercise.  The above is no more than guidance
       as to  the  way  in  which  a  decision  maker  might  approach  the
       assessment of risk.  It is general in nature and is not designed  to
       fit all situations that might arise.






    The re-making of the decision in the case of IM


  240. IM is both a member of the Beja tribe and has been an active  member
       of the Beja Congress while a  student  at  the  Red  Sea  University
       College of Applied Sciences in Port Sudan. He held a position within
       the Congress and had been detained by the Sudanese security services
       on 4 June 2006  after  his  arrest  at  a  planning  meeting  for  a
       demonstration being called for by the Congress. He had  been  beaten
       during this  period  of  detention.  IM  was  transferred  from  his
       detention to hospital on 1 July 2006 and was eventually released  on
       8 July 2006 after signing an undertaking to not engage in any future
       political activity. IM nevertheless  attended  a  further  political
       meeting on 3 August 2006 which was raided by the security forces. IM
       fled Sudan on 7 August 2006.  We are left to speculate  whether  his
       involvement with the meeting on 3 August 2006 became  known  to  the
       authorities or whether the authorities construed this as a breach of
       his  undertaking  not  to  become  involved  in  further   political
       activity. However, given the evidence that it does not take much for
       the authorities to start a file on an individual and a  document  in
       which an undertaking is given as to the future is of no  use  unless
       it is recoverable in a file in the name of the person who  has  made
       it, we can properly infer that his activities were the subject of  a
       file in the hands of the Sudanese authorities.


  241. Mr Thomann conceded that IM had become a member of JEM.  IM  claimed
       he had become a member of JEM on 15 January 2010. He maintained that
       he attended JEM meetings and seminars in the UK. IM claimed to  have
       attended a  meeting  in  Manchester  in  July  2010  concerning  the
       International Criminal  Court  (ICC)  and  produced  photographs  in
       support. He had not organised the meeting.  It had been attended  by
       representatives from the ICC and,  although  the  meeting  had  been
       addressed by those representatives, he had spoken from the floor. IM
       additionally produced  photographs  purportedly  showing  him  at  a
       demonstration in front of the Sudanese Embassy calling for peace  in
       Darfur. He claimed  in  the  hearing  before  Judge  Finch  to  have
       attended a demonstration on 10 April 2010 and invited members of the
       Sudanese community to it and that he had participated in the slogans
       and banner writing. He also attended  a  demonstration  outside  the
       Commonwealth Office in May 2010.

  242. In cross-examination IM confirmed that he arrived in the UK in  2006
       but did not become a member of JEM until 15 January 2010, a  gap  of
       around three and a half years. When asked why he did not join sooner
       IM explained that he had been against the  Beja  Conference's  peace
       agreement with the Sudanese government but it was only  following  a
       long conversation with a JEM member  that  he  became  convinced  of
       JEM's aims and decided to join them. IM claimed he  had  engaged  in
       activism with the Beja Congress in the UK but he accepted  this  had
       not been mentioned in his statements. Whatever his involvement  with
       the Beja Congress in the United Kingdom, it plainly does not feature
       as a significant element in his claim as undoubtedly it  would  have
       been had he perceived this to be even a partial source of risk.   It
       did not require a solicitor to tell him to mention it if it  was  in
       the forefront of his own mind as a concern to him were he to return.
        The activity is not particularised in such a way as to make out  an
       intelligible claim that this has increased the risk to him.  He  may
       indeed have had some contact with the Beja Congress  but  not  in  a
       manner that is an appreciable element in his claim.


  243. IM disagreed with the suggestion that he only became active with JEM
       because he was about to submit a fresh asylum application and we  do
       not infer from the nature and scope of his activity (much  of  which
       took place in Plymouth) was designed  to  be  directed  towards  the
       United Kingdom authorities as a means of bolstering his claim. Those
       activities  resulted  in  his   asking   JEM   members   to   attend
       demonstrations and meetings in London and to attend JEM meetings  in
       Cardiff. We accept that he organised meetings and asked JEM  members
       to join meetings, amongst them a meeting on 10 May 2015  in  Cardiff
       the anniversary of the events of 10 May 2008,  and  prior  to  that,
       events in Cardiff in January 2015 and December 2014 (a tribute to  a
       JEM leader who had been killed  by  the  Sudanese  government).  The
       meeting in Cardiff, he claimed, was  attended  by  approximately  50
       people.  It took place in a large, rented three-bedroom  residential
       flat. He attended the meetings with fellow JEM members from Plymouth
       together with members from London, Newport, Swansea, Birmingham  and
       Manchester. He knew the first names of some of  the  attendees  from
       other places. It is, of course, difficult to assess the significance
       of a private meeting in a residential flat.  Somehow we rather doubt
       that as many as 50 might have been crammed in together  but  neither
       do we suppose there was a head-count.  It seems an unlikely venue to
       attract the attention of an informant but  we  were  not  told  what
       information was subsequently disseminated about it on social  media.
       A relatively intimate group of individuals many of who were known to
       the appellant seems an  unlikely  setting  for  an  informant.   The
       appellant himself did not  suggest  he  had  any  doubts  about  the
       loyalty of  those  present.   It  affords  a  fair  example  of  the
       difficulty of assessing whether any risk might  attach  to  such  an
       event.  Were the issue to be decided on the basis  of  a  real  risk
       that the appellant was identified as one attending,  (let  alone  on
       balance of probabilities) we would certainly make no such finding of
       fact.  However, it forms part of our overall assessment.


  244. IM maintained that he last attended a  demonstration  in  London  in
       September 2014 and that the photographs were submitted  to  the  JEM
       website.  In one sense this operates to his favour:  the  individual
       intent on ensuring he was  photographed  so  those  photographs  are
       ready for the Tribunal Judge, excites a degree of scepticism.  We do
       not think this can be said about this appellant.  The fact  that  he
       did not bother to provide photos of screen shots or  printouts  from
       the  website  rather  supports  his  claim  that  this  was  not   a
       manufactured piece of his claim or otherwise, doubtless, these items
       would have been provided in graphic detail.

  245. Looking at the  totality  of  the  evidence,  we  accept  that  this
       appellant has given a credible account. He was found credible in the
       evidence he gave before another  Tribunal  and  those  findings  are
       preserved.  We have no reason to  reverse  that  assessment  in  the
       evidence he provided to us or the manner in which it was given.   We
       accept that IM has always been involved in politics and  has  become
       more politicised since his arrival in the  United  Kingdom.  He  has
       been present here for 9 years, a factor which  is  likely  to  be  a
       material consideration when he is questioned. Certain parts  of  his
       claim, his ethnicity, his political involvement whilst at university
       and in Sudan are likely to be recorded or  easily  ascertained.   We
       avoid saying whether this activity is 'low-level'  or  'high-level':
       it is what it is.  The composite picture is of a man who  has  found
       to have been credible, who has been active to  the  degree  we  have
       identified in Sudan and in the United Kingdom, whose activities  are
       the genuine expression of his political beliefs and there  are  good
       reasons to suppose that his antipathy to the regime is genuine.   We
       find it almost impossible to reach  a  finding  as  to  whether  his
       activities in the United Kingdom will have come to the attention  of
       Sudanese  officials  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as   a   result   of
       surveillance  either  by  informants  or   the   identification   of
       photographs which were probably taken  at  some  of  the  events  he
       attended. However, we maintain the view that we cannot  be  expected
       to make such a finding and our task has  to  be  approached  on  the
       basis of a more general assessment. We know that Sudanese  officials
       are intent on gathering material.   We  also  find  that,  were  the
       Sudanese authorities to have the facts about this  appellant  as  we
       have found them to be, then the information is sufficient to  result
       in his being a target for NISS and to place him at risk  of  serious
       harm.


  246. There is no evidence that this appellant is at  risk  from  anything
       appearing in electronic form other than such material as  is  posted
       on social media and is in the public domain. The evidence of hacking
       is clear evidence of the information -gathering aspirations  of  the
       Sudanese authorities but nothing about it increases the risk to this
       appellant. It is at  this  stage  that  we  must  make  our  overall
       assessment.  We conclude that there is a reasonable likelihood  that
       on  arrival  at  Khartoum,  the  authorities  will  investigate  the
       appellant and this will result in an information  trail  identifying
       sufficient about him to engage the interest of NISS and  that  if  a
       significant part of what we know about him is  revealed,  this  will
       place him at risk such as to render him a Convention refugee.


    Article 8


  247. Having found IM to be a person entitled to international  protection
       there is no need for a further consideration of his claim  based  on
       private and family life. We  are  nevertheless  satisfied  that  his
       removal from the United Kingdom would breach his Article  8  private
       life rights on the basis that, as a recognised refugee, it would  be
       disproportionate to remove him. Had IM  not  been  recognised  as  a
       refugee then his claim under Article 8  would  not  have  succeeded.
       There was no evidence that he was in a relationship with  a  partner
       or that he had any children. Although he has resided in  the  United
       Kingdom for 9 years he has not produced  any  evidence  establishing
       the existence of compelling circumstances sufficient  to  support  a
       claim for a grant of Leave To Remain outside the immigration  rules.




    The re-making of the decision in the case of AI


  248. We have already noted the limited basis upon which the  Tribunal  is
       required as a matter of law to approach the case of AI.   The  Judge
       rejected AI's claim to be a  member  of  the  Berti  tribe  and  his
       claimed involvement with JEM. The Upper Tribunal found no errors  of
       law in the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the evidence.  Having
       identified an error of law the Upper Tribunal directed  a  rehearing
       on the limited aspect of the safety of  return  for  failed  asylum-
       seekers. Thus, in the case of  AI,  the  Tribunal  is  concerned  to
       consider general principles in relation to those  returned  who  are
       failed asylum seekers.


  249. That is not the approach adopted by Mr Verney  in  his  two  reports
       before us.  We reject this approach for reasons which we give in the
       Appendix to this decision which shall not form part of  the  Country
       Guidance and will not be published as part  of  it.   It  serves  no
       purpose to have it as part of the body of the decision.

  250. For the reasons we have already touched upon, AI's case falls to  be
       determined on the basis of a claimant who has not been believed  and
       who has failed to give a full and frank account of the circumstances
       which resulted in his leaving Sudan.  He has failed,  therefore,  to
       provide the Tribunal with the material upon which  the  Tribunal  is
       able to be satisfied that he is at real risk of harm  from  anything
       arising from his account. This only leaves open a bare claim that he
       will return to Sudan as an involuntary returnee or a  failed  asylum
       seeker. As such the evidence does not permit a finding of fact  that
       AI is at real risk of serious harm for that reason alone.

DECISION

 1. In each case the Judge made an error on a point of law and the original
    decision of the appeal is set aside.
 2. In the case of IM, we re-make the decision in the following terms: the
    appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and on Article 3 grounds.
 3. In the case of AI, we re-make the decision in the following terms: the
    appeal is dismissed on all the grounds advanced.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                           14 April 2016
                                  APPENDIX
                            SCHEDULE OF COUNTRY EVIDENCE
                                           Documents before the Upper
          Tribunal



|Date        |Source           |Description         |Weblink               |
|24 October  |Sudan Tribune    |'Sudan's national   |http://www.sudantribun|
|2015        |                 |monologue'          |e.com/spip.php?article|
|            |                 |                    |56827                 |
| 1 October  |Sudan Tribune    |'Sudan Democracy    |http://www.sudantribun|
|2015        |                 |First Group         |e.com/spip.php?article|
|            |                 |Statement on The    |56567                 |
|            |                 |International Day   |                      |
|            |                 |for Democracy'      |                      |
|August 2015 |Home Office      |Country Information |https://www.gov.uk/gov|
|            |                 |and Guidance 'Sudan:|ernment/uploads/system|
|            |                 |Treatment of persons|/uploads/attachment_da|
|            |                 |involved in 'sur    |ta/file/458008/Sudan_-|
|            |                 |place' activity in  |_Sur_Place_Activities_|
|            |                 |the UK'             |-_v1_0.pdf            |
|August 2015 |Home Office      |Country Information |https://www.gov.uk/gov|
|            |                 |and Guidance 'Sudan:|ernment/uploads/system|
|            |                 |treatment on return'|/uploads/attachment_da|
|            |                 |                    |ta/file/458010/CIG_Sud|
|            |                 |                    |an_FAS_v1_0.pdf       |
|28 July 2015|Sudan Tribune    |'Sudan summons EU   |http://www.sudantribun|
|            |                 |official over "     |e.com/spip.php?article|
|            |                 |false information"  |55854                 |
|            |                 |on humanitarian     |                      |
|            |                 |situation'          |                      |
|8 July 2015 |Independent      |'Huge Adobe Flash   |http://www.independent|
|            |                 |Security            |.co.uk/life-style/gadg|
|            |                 |vulnerability       |ets-and-tech/news/huge|
|            |                 |revealed after      |-adobe-flash-security-|
|            |                 |hacking group's     |vulnerability-revealed|
|            |                 |documents leaked'   |-after-hacking-group-s|
|            |                 |                    |-documents-leaked-1037|
|            |                 |                    |4804.html             |
|6 July 2015 |Independent      |'Hacking Team hack: |http://www.independent|
|            |                 |cybersecurity firm  |.co.uk/life-style/gadg|
|            |                 |'sold spying tools  |ets-and-tech/news/hack|
|            |                 |to oppressive       |ing-team-hack-cybersec|
|            |                 |regimes to let them |urity-firm-sold-spying|
|            |                 |spy on activists and|-tools-to-oppressive-r|
|            |                 |journalists', hack  |egimes-to-let-them-spy|
|            |                 |claims'             |-on-10369835.html     |
|6 July 2015 |International    |'Hacking team       |http://www.ibtimes.co.|
|            |Business Times   |hacked: Spy tools   |uk/hacking-team-hacked|
|            |                 |sold to oppressive  |-spy-tools-sold-oppres|
|            |                 |regimes Sudan,      |sive-regimes-sudan-bah|
|            |                 |Bahrain and         |rain-kazakhstan-150946|
|            |                 |Kazakhstan'         |0                     |
|6 July 2015 |International    |'Hacking Team sold  |http://www.ibtimes.co.|
|            |Business Times   |spy software to     |uk/hacking-team-sold-s|
|            |                 |blacklisted Sudan   |py-software-blackliste|
|            |                 |and stonewalled UN  |d-sudan-stonewalled-un|
|            |                 |investigation'      |-investigation-1509465|
|6 July 2015 |Telegraph        |'Hacking team sold  |http://www.telegraph.c|
|            |                 |spying tools to     |o.uk/technology/intern|
|            |                 |repressive regimes, |et-security/11720800/H|
|            |                 |hack reveals'       |acking-Team-hack-revea|
|            |                 |                    |ls-firm-sold-spying-so|
|            |                 |                    |ftware-to-repressive-r|
|            |                 |                    |egimes.html           |
|2 July 2015 |Sudan Tribune    |'256 charges files  |http://www.sudantribun|
|            |                 |against Sudanese    |e.com/spip.php?article|
|            |                 |journalists and     |55555                 |
|            |                 |newspapers in 2014: |                      |
|            |                 |prosecutor'         |                      |
|July 2015   |European         |ECHO factsheet      |http://www.starintheea|
|            |Commission       |'Republic of the    |st.net/data/za-sudan-e|
|            |                 |Sudan'              |n.pdf                 |
|July 2015   |Intergovernmental|'Request for        |unavailable           |
|            |Consultations on |information from the|                      |
|            |migration, asylum|UK on how the       |                      |
|            |and refugees     |authorities of Sudan|                      |
|            |(IGC)            |process and treat   |                      |
|            |                 |persons who have    |                      |
|            |                 |claimed asylum and  |                      |
|            |                 |whether they monitor|                      |
|            |                 |diaspora communities|                      |
|            |                 |overseas -          |                      |
|            |                 |Compilation of      |                      |
|            |                 |answers'            |                      |
|25 June 2015|US State         |'2014 Country       |http://www.state.gov/j|
|            |Department       |Reports on Human    |/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanri|
|            |                 |Rights Practices:   |ghtsreport/index.htm#w|
|            |                 |Sudan'              |rapper                |
|22 April    |Sudan Tribune    |'Sudan's 2015       |http://www.sudantribun|
|2015        |                 |Elections: A huge   |e.com/spip.php?article|
|            |                 |step in democratic  |54696                 |
|            |                 |consolidation'      |                      |
|21 April    |Sudan Tribune    |'Sudan summons UK,  |http://www.sudantribun|
|2015        |                 |US and Norway envoys|e.com/spip.php?article|
|            |                 |over criticism of   |54688                 |
|            |                 |election'           |                      |
|16 April    |African Union    |'African Union      |http://pa.au.int/en/co|
|2015        |                 |Election Observation|ntent/aueom-satisfied-|
|            |                 |Mission to the April|voting-went-peacefully|
|            |                 |2015 General        |-sudan-calls-sudanese-|
|            |                 |Elections in the    |political-leaders-stri|
|            |                 |Republic of Sudan'  |ve-genuine-inclusive-n|
|            |                 |                    |ational-dialogue      |
|2 April 2015|Amnesty          |'Sudan: Entrenched  |http://www.amnestyusa.|
|            |International    |Repression'         |org/sites/default/file|
|            |                 |                    |s/sudan__entrenched_re|
|            |                 |                    |pression_-_brief.pdf  |
|25 February |Amnesty          |Report 2014/15: The |http://reliefweb.int/r|
|2015        |International    |State of the World's|eport/world/global-res|
|            |                 |Human Rights        |ponse-atrocities-state|
|            |                 |                    |s-and-armed-groups-sha|
|            |                 |                    |meful-and-ineffective |
|19 February |Letter from      |'Treatment of       |unavailable           |
|2015        |British Embassy  |returnees in Sudan' |                      |
|            |Khartoum to the  |                    |                      |
|            |Country Policy   |                    |                      |
|            |and Information  |                    |                      |
|            |Team             |                    |                      |
|22 January  |Guardian         |'We are the victims |http://www.theguardian|
|2015        |                 |of our own corrupt  |.com/world/2015/jan/22|
|            |                 |government - life as|/we-are-the-victims-of|
|            |                 |an activist in      |-our-own-corrupt-gover|
|            |                 |Sudan'              |nment-life-as-an-activ|
|            |                 |                    |ist-in-sudan          |
|January -   |Home Office      |Asylum data tables  |https://www.gov.uk/gov|
|March 2015  |                 |                    |ernment/statistics/imm|
|            |                 |                    |igration-statistics-ja|
|            |                 |                    |nuary-to-march-2015-da|
|            |                 |                    |ta-tables             |
|2015        |Freedom House    |'2015, Sudan'       |https://freedomhouse.o|
|            |                 |                    |rg/report/freedom-worl|
|            |                 |                    |d/2015/sudan          |
|2015        |Human Rights     |World Report 2015,  |https://www.hrw.org/wo|
|            |Watch            |Sudan (Events of    |rld-report/2015/countr|
|            |                 |2014)               |y-chapters/sudan      |
|2015        |United Nations   |'2015 UNHCR country |http://www.unhcr.org/p|
|            |Refugee Agency   |operations profile -|ages/49e483b76.html   |
|            |                 |Sudan'              |                      |
|11 December |Amnesty          |'Sudan Opposition   |http://www.amnesty.se/|
|2014        |International    |leaders detained,   |engagera-dig/agera/akt|
|            |                 |risk torture'       |uella-blixtaktioner/ua|
|            |                 |                    |-31014-sudan-oppositio|
|            |                 |                    |n-leaders-detained-ris|
|            |                 |                    |k-torture/            |
|3 December  |Amnesty          |'A Londoner's ordeal|https://www.amnesty.or|
|2014        |International    |in Sudan's torture  |g/en/latest/news/2014/|
|            |                 |dungeons'           |12/londoner-s-ordeal-s|
|            |                 |                    |udan-s-torture-dungeon|
|            |                 |                    |s/                    |
|14 November |Amnesty          |'Sudan: Political   |https://www.amnesty.or|
|2014        |International    |activist at risk of |g/en/documents/afr54/0|
|            |                 |torture: Rashid     |22/2014/en/           |
|            |                 |Shikhaldeen Abash'  |                      |
|12 November |Home Office      |Response to country |unavailable           |
|2014        |                 |of origin           |                      |
|            |                 |information request |                      |
|            |                 |on sur place        |                      |
|            |                 |activities in the UK|                      |
|26 October  |BBC Monitoring   |'Islamist NCP member|unavaialble           |
|2014        |                 |and former editor Dr|                      |
|            |                 |Yasir Mahjub granted|                      |
|            |                 |asylum in the UK'   |                      |
|20 October  |The Telegraph    |'The Sudanese spies |http://www.telegraph.c|
|2014        |                 |in London Starbucks'|o.uk/news/worldnews/af|
|            |                 |                    |ricaandindianocean/sud|
|            |                 |                    |an/11173595/The-Sudane|
|            |                 |                    |se-spies-in-London-Sta|
|            |                 |                    |rbucks.html           |
|16 October  |UK Government    |Corporate report    |unavailable           |
|2014        |                 |'Sudan- Country of  |                      |
|            |                 |Concern'            |                      |
|25 September|Dabanga          |'UN Expert's human  |https://www.dabangasud|
|2014        |                 |rights report on    |an.org/en/all-news/art|
|            |                 |Sudan; EU extremely |icle/un-expert-s-human|
|            |                 |concerned'          |-rights-report-on-suda|
|            |                 |                    |n-eu-extremely-concern|
|            |                 |                    |ed                    |
|24 September|Human Rights     |'Statement of the   |https://www.dabangasud|
|2014        |Council (27th    |Independent Expert  |an.org/uploads/media/5|
|            |session)         |on the situation of |4887c42ec5ce.pdf      |
|            |                 |human rights in the |                      |
|            |                 |Sudan'              |                      |
|9 September |Human Rights     |'Israel: Thousands  |https://www.hrw.org/ne|
|2014        |Watch            |coerced into leaving|ws/2014/09/09/israel-t|
|            |                 |the Country -       |housands-coerced-leavi|
|            |                 |Sudanese, Eritreans |ng-country            |
|            |                 |Seeking Protection  |                      |
|            |                 |faced with          |                      |
|            |                 |indefinite          |                      |
|            |                 |detention'          |                      |
|4 September |Office of the    |'Report of the      |http://www.ohchr.org/E|
|2014        |United Nations   |Independent Expert  |N/HRBodies/HRC/Regular|
|            |High Commissioner|on the Situation of |Sessions/Session27/Doc|
|            |for Human Rights |human rights in the |uments/A.HRC.27.69_AEV|
|            |                 |Sudan'              |.doc                  |
|September   |Waging Peace     |'The Long Arm of the|http://www.wagingpeace|
|2014        |                 |Sudanese Regime: How|.info/images/The_Long_|
|            |                 |the Sudanese        |Arm_of_the_Sudanese_Re|
|            |                 |National            |gime_-_COMPRESSED.pdf |
|            |                 |Intelligence and    |                      |
|            |                 |Security Service    |                      |
|            |                 |monitors and        |                      |
|            |                 |threatens Sudanese  |                      |
|            |                 |nationals who leave |                      |
|            |                 |Sudan'              |                      |
|August 2014 |Waging Peace     |'Beja Peple and Beja|http://www.wagingpeace|
|            |                 |Congress: Human     |.info/images/BEJA_HUMA|
|            |                 |Rights Concerns in  |N_RIGHTS_CONCERNS_FINA|
|            |                 |Eastern Sudan'      |L_August_2014.pdf     |
|July 2014   |International    |'It's a joke -      |http://www.refugee-rig|
|            |Refugee Rights   |Ongoing Conflict in |hts.org/Publications/P|
|            |Initiative       |Sudan's Darfur      |apers/2014/ItsAJoke.pd|
|            |                 |region and          |f                     |
|            |                 |controversies over  |                      |
|            |                 |return'             |                      |
|23 May 2014 |Foreign and      |Travel Advice on    |unavailable           |
|            |Commonwealth     |Sudan               |                      |
|            |Office           |                    |                      |
|20 May 2014 |Agence France    |'Keeping it in the  |http://www.aberfoylese|
|            |Presse report    |Family: A profile of|curity.com/?p=850     |
|            |cited by Andrew  |Jilil Ibrahim:      |                      |
|            |MacGregor        |leader of Darfur's  |                      |
|            |                 |Justice and Equality|                      |
|            |                 |Movement'           |                      |
|27 February |US Department of |'2013 Country       |http://www.state.gov/j|
|2014        |State            |Reports on Human    |/drl/rls/hrrpt/2013/af|
|            |                 |Rights Practices:   |/220164.htm           |
|            |                 |Sudan'              |                      |
|23 January  |Freedom House    |'Freedom in the     |https://freedomhouse.o|
|2014        |                 |World 2014: Sudan'  |rg/report/freedom-worl|
|            |                 |                    |d/2014/sudan          |
|21 January  |Human Rights     |'World Report 2014: |https://www.hrw.org/wo|
|2014        |Watch            |Sudan'              |rld-report/2014/countr|
|            |                 |                    |y-chapters/sudan      |
|2014        |National         |Asylum Regulation   |unavailable           |
|            |legislation      |Act 2014            |                      |
|            |(Sudan)          |                    |                      |
|10 December |Sudan Justice and|Open Letter 'Justice|http://sudaneseonline.|
|2013        |Equality Movement|and Equality        |com/cgi-bin/esdb/2bb.c|
|            |                 |Movement bids Madiba|gi?seq=print&board=10&|
|            |                 |farewell' (Gibreel  |msg=1386741291&rn=    |
|            |                 |Adam Bilal,         |                      |
|            |                 |Secretary for Media |                      |
|            |                 |and Spokesperson    |                      |
|26 November |International    |'Sudan: Preserving  |http://www.crisisgroup|
|2013        |Crisis Group     |Peace in the East'  |.org/~/media/Files/afr|
|            |                 |                    |ica/horn-of-africa/sud|
|            |                 |                    |an/209-sudan-preservin|
|            |                 |                    |g-peace-in-the-east.pd|
|            |                 |                    |f                     |
|11 November |Landinfo         |'Theme notes, Sudan,|unavailable           |
|2013        |(Norwegian       |Scope of political  |                      |
|            |Country of Origin|activity critical to|                      |
|            |information      |the regime' Home    |                      |
|            |centre)          |Office translation  |                      |
|11 November |Parliamentary    |Questions on Sudan  |http://davidalton.net/|
|2013        |Questions        |the Republic of     |2013/11/07/house-of-lo|
|            |                 |South Sudan         |rds-debate-on-sudan-ge|
|            |                 |                    |nocide-and-crimes-agai|
|            |                 |                    |nst-humanity-in-darfur|
|            |                 |                    |-and-south-kordofan/  |
|5 November  |Office of Foreign|Sudan Sanctions     |https://www.treasury.g|
|2013        |Assets Control   |Program             |ov/resource-center/san|
|            |                 |                    |ctions/Programs/Docume|
|            |                 |                    |nts/sudan.pdf         |
|27 August   |Country of Origin|Response including  |unavailable           |
|2013        |Information      |letter from the     |                      |
|            |Service          |British Embassy     |                      |
|            |                 |Khartoum dated 8    |                      |
|            |                 |April 2013          |                      |
|21 June 2013|United Nations   |'Positive           |http://www.ohchr.org/E|
|            |                 |developments in     |N/NewsEvents/Pages/Dis|
|            |                 |Sudan, but still    |playNews.aspx?NewsID=1|
|            |                 |major issues in     |3478&LangID=E         |
|            |                 |Darfur, Blue Nile   |                      |
|            |                 |and South Kordofan' |                      |
|14 June 2013|United Nations   |'Secretary-General  |http://www.un.org/pres|
|            |                 |Condemns Killing of |s/en/2013/sgsm15110.do|
|            |                 |Peacekeeper in      |c.htm                 |
|            |                 |Sudan'              |                      |
|23 May 2013 |Amnesty          |'Annual Report 2013:|http://www.amnestyusa.|
|            |International    |Sudan'              |org/research/reports/a|
|            |                 |                    |nnual-report-sudan-201|
|            |                 |                    |3?page=show           |
|19 April    |US Department of |'2012 Country       |http://www.state.gov/j|
|2013        |State            |Reports on Human    |/drl/rls/hrrpt/2012hum|
|            |                 |Rights Practices:   |anrightsreport/index.h|
|            |                 |Sudan'              |tm?year=2012#wrapper  |
|8 April 2013|Country of Origin|Response on Justice |unavailable           |
|            |Information      |and Equality        |                      |
|            |Service          |Movement, UK letters|                      |
|            |                 |and ID cards        |                      |
|4 April 2013|Country of Origin|Response on Sudanese|unavailable           |
|            |Information      |community groups in |                      |
|            |Service          |the UK and US       |                      |
|9 January   |The Telegraph    |'Sudanese diplomats |http://www.telegraph.c|
|2013        |                 |spying for agents   |o.uk/news/worldnews/af|
|            |                 |that torture in     |ricaandindianocean/sud|
|            |                 |Khartoum'           |an/9790152/Sudanese-di|
|            |                 |                    |plomats-spying-for-age|
|            |                 |                    |nts-that-torture-in-Kh|
|            |                 |                    |artoum.html           |
|17 December |Justice and      |Justice and Equality|http://www.sudanjem.or|
|2012        |Equality Movement|Movement Sudan      |g/2013/12/justice-and-|
|            |                 |Office UK and       |equality-movement-suda|
|            |                 |Northern Ireland    |n-office-uk-and-northe|
|            |                 |                    |rn-ireland/           |
|9 October   |Reuters, New York|'Norway: Sudanese   |http://www.nytimes.com|
|2012        |Times            |Envoy Expelled'     |/2012/10/10/world/euro|
|            |                 |                    |pe/sudanese-diplomat-i|
|            |                 |                    |s-expelled-from-norway|
|            |                 |                    |.html?_r=0            |
|11 September|Home Office,     |Report on Sudan     |https://www.gov.uk/gov|
|2012        |Country of Origin|                    |ernment/uploads/system|
|            |Information      |                    |/uploads/attachment_da|
|            |Service          |                    |ta/file/310191/Sudan_C|
|            |                 |                    |OI_report_2012.pdf    |
|September   |Waging Peace     |'The Danger of      |http://www.wagingpeace|
|2012        |                 |returning home: The |.info/images/pdf/Exclu|
|            |                 |perils facing       |sives/2012_09_THE_DANG|
|            |                 |Sudanese immigrants |ER_OF_RETURNING_HOME.p|
|            |                 |when they go back to|df                    |
|            |                 |Sudan'              |                      |
|August 2012 |Home Office      |Operational Guidance|https://www.gov.uk/gov|
|            |                 |Note, Sudan         |ernment/uploads/system|
|            |                 |                    |/uploads/attachment_da|
|            |                 |                    |ta/file/310188/Sudan_o|
|            |                 |                    |perational_guidance_20|
|            |                 |                    |12.pdf                |
|19 June 2012|Home Office,     |Response on Sudanese|unavailable           |
|            |Country of Origin|community groups in |                      |
|            |Information      |the UK              |                      |
|            |Service          |                    |                      |
|4 January   |Australian       |'Country Advice     |http://www.refworld.or|
|2012        |Government       |Sudan'              |g/publisher,AUS_RRT,,,|
|            |Refugee Review   |                    |5033c7ac10be,0.html   |
|            |Tribunal,        |                    |                      |
|September   |Waging Peace, the|Joint report, 'The  |http://www.wagingpeace|
|2011        |South Yorkshire  |Border Agency are   |.info/images/pdf/Exclu|
|            |Migration &      |playing a game to   |sives/2011_09_A_report|
|            |Asylum Action    |scare us: A report  |_and_recommendations_o|
|            |Group and the    |and recommendations |n_Sudanese_re-document|
|            |Northern Refugee |on Sudanese         |ation_interviews.pdf  |
|            |Centre           |re-documentation    |                      |
|            |                 |interviews'.        |                      |
|2011        |International    |Migration in Sudan: |http://publications.io|
|            |Organization for |A Country Profile   |m.int/system/files/pdf|
|            |Migration (IOM)  |2011                |/mpsudan_18nov2013_fin|
|            |                 |                    |al.pdf                |
|20 October  |Migrationsverket |'Sudan - Report form|unavailable           |
|2010        |(Swedish         |the fact-finding    |                      |
|            |Migration Agency)|missions completed  |                      |
|            |                 |on 1-8 October 2009'|                      |
|            |                 |(English            |                      |
|            |                 |Translation)        |                      |
|4 June 2010 |Refugee          |'Treatment of failed|http://www.justice.gov|
|            |Documentation    |asylum seekers      |/sites/default/files/e|
|            |Centre (Ireland),|returned to Sudan'  |oir/legacy/2013/06/11/|
|            |                 |                    |asylum%20seekers_2.pdf|
|2010        |National         |National Security   |unavailable           |
|            |legislation      |Act 2010            |                      |
|            |(Sudan)          |                    |                      |
|20 March    |The Evening      |'Luton doctor       |http://www.standard.co|
|2009        |Standard (Anna   |spearheads fight    |.uk/news/luton-doctor-|
|            |Davis)           |against Sudan       |spearheads-fight-again|
|            |                 |leader'             |st-sudan-leader-689267|
|            |                 |                    |4.html                |
|January 2009|IOM/ The American|'The Prospects of   |http://www.egypt.iom.i|
|            |University in    |Assisted Voluntary  |nt/doc/iom%20study%20a|
|            |Cairo, Center for|Return Among the    |ssisted%20voluntary%20|
|            |Migration and    |Sudanese Population |return%20among%20sudan|
|            |Refugee Studies  |in Greater Cairo'   |ese%20in%20cairo.pdf  |
|July 2006   |International    |Sudan mapping       |http://unitedkingdom.i|
|            |Organization for |exercise, London    |om.int/sites/default/f|
|            |Migration (IOM)  |                    |iles/doc/mapping/IOM_S|
|            |                 |                    |UDAN.pdf              |
|19 June 2006|National         |Eastern Sudan Peace |unavailable           |
|            |Agreement (Sudan)|Agreement           |                      |
|10 February |UNHCR            |Position on Sudanese|http://www.refworld.or|
|2006        |                 |asylum-seekers from |g/docid/43f5dea84.html|
|            |                 |Darfur              |                      |
|1-2 December|10th European    |Sudan country       |https://www.ecoi.net/f|
|2005        |Country of Origin|profile and country |ile_upload/918_1164896|
|(republished|Information      |report              |371_coi-se-budapest200|
|29 November |Seminar, Budapest|                    |611-sudan-report-revis|
|2006)       |                 |                    |ed-version.pdf        |
|Undated     |Justice and      |Articles on Justice |unavailable           |
|            |Equality Movement|and Equality        |                      |
|            |                 |Movement            |                      |
|Undated     |Human Rights     |Sudan               |https://www.hrw.org/af|
|            |Watch            |                    |rica/sudan            |
|Undated     |National         |Comprehensive Peace |https://unmis.unmissio|
|            |Agreement (Sudan)|Agreement between   |ns.org/Portals/UNMIS/D|
|            |                 |The Government of   |ocuments/General/cpa-e|
|            |                 |the Republic of The |n.pdf                 |
|            |                 |Sudan and The Sudan |                      |
|            |                 |people's Liberation |                      |
|            |                 |Movement/Sudan      |                      |
|            |                 |People's Liberation |                      |
|            |                 |Army                |                      |
|Undated     |New York Times   |'News about Sudan,  |http://topics.nytimes.|
|            |                 |including commentary|com/top/news/internati|
|            |                 |and archival        |onal/countriesandterri|
|            |                 |articles published  |tories/sudan/index.htm|
|            |                 |in the New York     |l#                    |
|            |                 |Times'              |                      |
|Undated     |New York Times   |'Sudan, Chronology  |unavailable           |
|            |                 |of Coverage'        |                      |
|Undated     |Parliamentary    |Questions on the    |unavailable           |
|            |Questions        |Republic of Sudan   |                      |
|            |                 |and South Sudan 2014|                      |
|Undated     |Sudan Justice and|Sudan Justice and   |unavailable           |
|            |Equality Movement|Equality Movement   |                      |
|            |                 |website             |                      |
|Undated     |Sudan Tribune    |'Justice and        |http://www.sudantribun|
|            |                 |Equality Movement'  |e.com/spip.php?mot284 |
|Undated     |Sudan Tribune    |'Justice and        |http://www.sudantribun|
|            |                 |Equality Movement-  |e.com/spip.php?mot2233|
|            |                 |Sudan               |                      |
|            |                 |(JEM-S)/JEM-Military|                      |
|            |                 |Council             |                      |
|            |                 |(JEM-MC)/JEM-Bashar'|                      |
|Undated     |United Nations   |Documents on the    |http://www.un.org/en/p|
|            |                 |United Nations      |eacekeeping/missions/u|
|            |                 |Mission in the      |nmiss/reports.shtml   |
|            |                 |Republic of South   |                      |
|            |                 |Sudan               |                      |
|Undated     |United Nations   |Mission in the      |http://www.un.org/en/p|
|            |                 |Republic of South   |eacekeeping/missions/u|
|            |                 |Sudan 'Consolidating|nmiss/                |
|            |                 |peace and security  |                      |
|            |                 |and helping to      |                      |
|            |                 |establish conditions|                      |
|            |                 |for development'    |                      |
|Undated     |United Nations   |Mission in the      |http://www.un.org/en/p|
|            |                 |Republic of South   |eacekeeping/missions/u|
|            |                 |Sudan 'Facts and    |nmiss//facts.shtml    |
|            |                 |Figures             |                      |
|Undated     |Waging Peace     |'East Sudan'        |http://www.rapar.org.u|
|            |                 |                    |k/uploads/4/6/8/7/4687|
|            |                 |                    |542/east_sudan_28.11.1|
|            |                 |                    |1.pdf                 |
|Undated     |See weblink      |Map of Sudan        |http://www.genderconce|
|            |                 |                    |rns.org/images/gal/Sud|
|            |                 |                    |an_SouthSudan(1).png  |

