
[pic]
ar


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SP (allowed appeal: directions) South Africa [2011] UKUT 00188 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 February 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                                LADY DORRIAN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between

                                     SP

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation.  The sponsor attended
For the Respondent:    Ms L Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


Section 87(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  permits
the Tribunal to give a direction for the purpose of  giving  effect  to  its
decision and is a broader power than paragraph 21 (5) of Schedule 4  to  the
Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 where the direction must be 'necessary'

In an entry clearance case directions should only  be  given  requiring  the
issue of entry clearance where the judge is  satisfied  that  the  appellant
will be able to meet all the  requirements  of  the  relevant  rule  in  the
foreseeable future.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a national of South Africa who was born on  21  March
    2001. She appealed to an Immigration Judge against the decision of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer refusing to grant her entry  clearance  to  the
    United  Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of  settlement  with  her  paternal
    grandparents.

2.    The only basis upon which the application was  refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was under paragraph 297(f)  of  HC  395.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer did not accept that the appellant's mother  in  South
    Africa was incapable of, and unwilling to  provide  her  with  parental
    care and did not accept that it had been  shown  that  her  mother  was
    content for her to move to the United Kingdom  with  her  grandparents.
    The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  there   were
    sufficiently serious and compelling considerations in  the  application
    such as to lead him  to  conclude  that  denying  the  appellant  entry
    clearance was  undesirable.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  expressed
    himself satisfied that the appellant met all the other requirements  of
    paragraph 297.  He did not consider that the decision to  refuse  entry
    clearance constituted a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

3.    The Immigration Judge found the sponsor, the  appellant's  grandfather
    to be entirely credible.  He accepted the entirety of the evidence  and
    found that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) had been  made  out.
    He directed that entry clearance be issued to the appellant.

4.     The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  sought  permission  to  appeal   this
    decision, on the basis that the Immigration Judge had not explained why
    it was considered necessary to direct the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    grant entry clearance. It was  said  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    failed to have regard to guidance given  to  Entry  Clearance  Officers
    about the effect of an allowed determination and the action to be taken
    in response to it. Reference was made to a decision of the Tribunal  in
    EA (Ghana) [2005] UKAIT 00108.

5.    Ms Ong very fairly said that she was  in  difficulties,  in  light  of
    points we put to her about the nature of the findings and the facts  of
    this case.  The kind of difficulty referred to in the authorities  that
    could attach to the making of a direction,  in  that  time  would  have
    passed between the application and the hearing  and  there  might  well
    have been significant  changes in the circumstances  of  an  appellant,
    did not it seemed to us appertain in this case.  In  the  circumstances
    Ms Ong was content to rely on the grounds.

6.    We indicated that the Secretary of State's appeal would  be  dismissed
    and the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  maintained,  with  reasons  to
    follow. We now provide those reasons.

7.    Section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  makes
    the following provision in respect of  directions  after  a  successful
    appeal:

         "(1)     If the Tribunal allows an appeal under Section 82,  83  or
             83A, it may give a direction for the purpose of giving  effect
             to its decision.


         (2)      A person responsible for making  an  immigration  decision
             shall act in accordance with  any  relevant  directions  under
             subsection (1).


         (3)      But a direction under this section shall not  have  effect
             while


             (a)        an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  under
                  Section 11 or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
                  Act 2007 could  be made or is awaiting determination,


             (b)       permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
                  court under either of those Sections has been granted  and
                  the appeal is awaiting determination, or


             (c)       an appeal has been remitted under Section 12  or  14
                  of that Act and it is awaiting determination.


         (4)      A direction under subsection (1) shall be treated as  part
             of the Tribunal's decision on the appeal for the  purposes  of
             Section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007."



8.    In MG (Visit appeal - directions)  Jamaica  [2004]  UKIAT  00140,  the
    Tribunal considered the issue of directions in the context of  a  visit
    appeal.  It quoted from what had been said earlier by the AIT in  Obeid
    [1986] Imm AR 341, where an adjudicator directed "the appropriate entry
    clearance" in the case of a visit. The Tribunal in Obeid made the point
    that a lack of justification of refusal of entry for a  proposed  visit
    made for express purposes on a  different  date  could  not  entitle  a
    person to entry clearance for a visit made  at  a  different  time  and
    indeed the purposes themselves might have changed. Even  if  that  were
    not the case, there would still be likely to be issues  of  maintenance
    and accommodation.

9.    Subsequently in a decision in Sharif [2002] UKIAT 00953, referring  to
    paragraph 21(5) of Schedule 4 to the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,
    the Tribunal suggested that a direction  should  only  be  made  by  an
    adjudicator if was indeed necessary or required to  give  effect  to  a
    determination.  Those remarks reflect the wording at paragraph 21(5) of
    the Schedule, which was repealed by  Schedule  9  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In Sharif the Tribunal emphasised  the
    appropriateness of making directions which were reasonably required.

10.   In MG itself the Tribunal accepted that the  direction  given  by  the
    adjudicator in that case was  not  necessary  to  give  effect  to  his
    decision.  The Entry Clearance Officer would still have to be satisfied
    when the rescheduled visit was made that the requirements of the  Rules
    were fulfilled.

11.   Subsequently in EA (Family visitor,  directions,  mistake  of  fact  -
    unfairness) Ghana [2005] UKAIT 00108, the Tribunal agreed with what was
    said in MG, noting such matters in the case before it as the fact  that
    the adjudicator had not taken into consideration the fact that  he  did
    not have the opportunity  to  hear  from,  or  receive  any  up-to-date
    documentary evidence from the sponsor, who had played no part at all in
    the appeal proceedings. The appellant had proposed  to  travel  to  the
    United Kingdom for a short visit of four weeks in May 2003 between  the
    end of his undergraduate final examinations and the commencement of his
    military service. As the Tribunal noted, that window of opportunity had
    long gone by the time the adjudicator considered and decided the appeal
    in October 2003 and evidence as to  the  appellant's  circumstances  at
    that stage was missing.

12.   We have also had regard to the guidance given to ECOs  concerning  the
    effect of an allowed  determination,  which  was  noted  in  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's grounds of appeal, though not, as  far  as  we  are
    aware, put before the Immigration Judge.  It  is  clear,  for  example,
    from paragraph APL2.5 "Appeal allowed - no directions  given"  that  an
    allowed appeal means the Immigration Judge has  ruled  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was wrong to refuse entry clearance and not that  the
    applicant is entitled to  entry  clearance.   It  is  also  clear  from
    paragraph APL2.8 "Appeal allowed -  directions  given  to  issue"  that
    these instructions contemplate what was done in the instant  case,  and
    that, as is said, an Entry Clearance Officer has no power to  re-refuse
    an application if an Immigration Judge has "directed  issue"  of  entry
    clearance.  The ECO must issue the entry  clearance  if  the  applicant
    still wants to travel.

13.   The case before us is some way distant from the factual  situation  in
    the cases we have set out above.  There was only, as we have noted,  an
    issue as to paragraph  297(i)(f).  That  matter  was  resolved  in  the
    appellant's favour by the Immigration Judge  and  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer did not seek to challenge the findings in that  regard.   There
    is  no  indication  of  any  degree  of   likelihood   of   change   in
    circumstances.   The appellant is a  child  of  9.   The  circumstances
    might have been different if she had been a young woman of  17,  or  if
    there had been evidence of significant ill-health of the sponsor or his
    wife or some other factor that might have made it appropriate  for  the
    issue to be considered afresh by the Entry Clearance Officer.

14.   We remind ourselves of the wording of  s.  87(1)  and  the  difference
    between that wording and  what  was  set  out  in  paragraph  21(5)  of
    Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act.  Sharif should no longer be followed  since
    it employs the somewhat more restrictive test  under  paragraph  21(5).
    There was a clear purpose in this case and  that  is  the  need  for  a
    speedy reunion of the appellant with her grandparents.  She is a  child
    of 9 whose father has died, whose mother has  abdicated  responsibility
    for her, and who is  living,  seemingly  on  a  temporary  basis,  with
    somebody who amounts to a foster mother.  The sponsor and his wife, her
    grandparents, have exhibited very great care and concern for her as  is
    attested to by their regular visits to South Africa to see her and  the
    daily telephone calls they make to her and the letters that they  write
    to her.  It is not, as we have said above, a case where  there  is  any
    reason to suppose that circumstances will change such as to necessitate
    the Entry Clearance Officer requiring to assess  the  evidence  afresh.
    We bear in mind the guidance to ECOs quoted at paragraph 12 above,  and
    the consequences of a direction by  an  Immigration  Judge  that  entry
    clearance be issued. If a judge is contemplating making a direction, we
    think it would be sensible to ask the Presenting  Officer  (if  one  is
    attending) if  he  or  she  sees  any  difficulties  arising  from  the
    direction. The absence of a Presenting Officer should not preclude  the
    making of a direction in an appropriate case, however.  But  the  judge
    will have to be alert to the statutory framework in which the making of
    a direction operates, and will need to consider the  practicalities.  A
    direction should not be made unless the judge  is  satisfied  that  the
    appellant will be able to meet the requirements of any relevant rule in
    the foreseeable future, but where he or  she  is  so  satisfied,  then,
    especially where a child or other  vulnerable  person  is  involved,  a
    direction may be appropriate. Accordingly, this being a proper case  to
    do so, we endorse the direction of the Immigration Judge in  this  case
    and dismiss the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.






Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Allen
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
