

                                    [pic]

Luu (Periods of study: degree level) [2016] UKUT 00181(IAC)


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th January, 2016                          |                              |
|Given extempore                               |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                KIET NHI LUU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, Saintta International Lawyers UK
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer


    Periods of study for a qualification below degree level, are capable of
    being counted as time spent studying at degree level for the purpose of
    paragraph 245ZX(ha), if the period of study is taught at degree  level,
    and when the qualification itself is added to other periods  of  study,
    resulting in the award of a degree.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Vietnam  and  she  was  born  on  27th
    December, 1986.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 12th May, 2006  and  was
    in possession of a visa conferring leave on her  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom until 31st October, 2006 as a student.  It  was  subject  to  a
    condition restricting employment and recourse to public funds.  She was
    subsequently granted further leave to remain from  19th  October,  2006
    until 30th June, 2010 as a student, again  restricting  employment  and
    recourse to public funds.  During the period June 2007  until  February
    2008 the appellant studied a Degree Foundation Programme at NQF level 3
    and from February 2008 until February  2010  she  studied  an  Advanced
    Diploma in Business Studies at NQF study level 4 and 5.

3.   The appellant was subsequently granted a  further  grant  of  leave  to
    remain from 16th June, 2010 until 28th  February,  2011,  during  which
    time she undertook the final year  of  a  degree  course  at  level  6.
    Between February 2011 and February 2013 the appellant was granted leave
    as a Post-Study worker and was granted a third extension of leave as  a
    student from 8th April, 2013 until 28th June, 2014 when  she  undertook
    an MBA degree programme at study level 7.

4.   On 23rd June, 2014 the appellant made application for leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student Migrant.  Her application was
    refused by the respondent on 8th July, 2014 as a result  of  which  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones recorded  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant.   He  noted  that  the  appellant  studied  English  and   a
    Foundation course, initially and then undertook a  BA  (Hons)  Business
    Studies Programme at London School  of  Commerce.  She  was  granted  a
    period of post-study work leave  between  February  2011  and  February
    2013, and then undertook  an  MBA  course  between  February  2013  and
    February 2014.

6.   The respondent refused the appellant's application of 23rd  June  2014,
    because the appellant had previously been granted leave to study  a  BA
    (Hons) Business Studies Programme for four years four months and twenty
    four days and was granted further leave to study a Masters in  Business
    Administration degree, at School of Business  and  Law,  for  one  year
    sixteen days. Her  current  application  was  to  study  a  Masters  in
    International Management at London School  of  Commerce  for  one  year
    twenty-nine days.

7.   Having completed a course at degree  level  in  the  UK  of  a  minimum
    duration of four years, the respondent noted that the applicant was now
    applying to study a course at Master's degree level and, therefore, the
    total duration of the appellant's study at degree level and above would
    be more than six years.  The application was  refused  under  paragraph
    245ZX(ha), which makes it clear that grants of entry or leave to remain
    for Tier 4 applicants to undertake studies at degree level or above are
    limited to a maximum period of five years save for  certain  exceptions
    such as medical students and students  who  took  a  four  year  degree
    course.  They are set out in the rules and do not apply here.

8.   Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the  appellant  argued  that  the
    respondent  had  incorrectly  included  her  post-study  work   between
    February 2011 and February 2013 when  calculating  the  length  of  the
    appellant's degree study.  The appellant argued  that  this  period  of
    work should not  be  counted  against  her  in  the  calculation  under
    Paragraph 245ZX(ha).  There was no Presenting Officer before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  who,  while  having  found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible,  found  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  as  to  the
    appellant's claim that her leave  had  been  granted  as  a  post-study
    migrant.  He dismissed the appeal.

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Clark confirmed that  the  grant  of  leave
    for the purpose of work, between January 2011 and  February  2014,  did
    not count in the calculation for the purposes  of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)
    and should not, therefore, have been included in the calculation of the
    study period. He accepted that this was a material  error  of  law,  so
    that the judge's determination should be set aside and remade by me.

10.  However, Mr Clark suggested, the decision of the  respondent  taken  on
    8th July, 2014 to refuse to grant the appellant further leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant was correct.  He told me that the
    relevant grants of leave for calculating the five year period are:-

    -    the leave which was granted on 19th October, 2006 until June 2010;
    and
    -    the leave between 16th June, 2010 and 28th February, 2011.

11.  Mr Adophy suggested  that  the  periods  of  study  undertaken  by  the
    appellant at level 3 and 4  could  not  possibly  be  at  degree  level
    because, completion of the individual courses did not lead to a  degree
    and  were  self-contained  courses  in  themselves.    There   was   no
    requirement, he suggested, for the appellant to go on  and  complete  a
    degree and the courses were properly described as being at NQF level  3
    and level 4.  I adjourned briefly to consider the submissions.

Determination

12.  Periods of study for a qualification below degree  level,  are  capable
    of being counted as time spent studying at degree level for the purpose
    of paragraph 245ZX(ha), if the period of  study  is  taught  at  degree
    level, and when the qualification itself  is added to other periods  of
    study, resulting in the award of a degree.

13.  A Degree Foundation course is one such period of study,  because,  when
    added to other degree level study it is capable of comprising part of a
    Batchelor's degree.  An appellant might only have  pursued  the  Degree
    Foundation course and then ended her studies.   They  would  have  been
    awarded a NQF level 3 qualification but it would  have  amounted  to  a
    period of study at degree level.

14.  An Advanced Diploma in Business Studies is not a degree and is  at  NQF
    level 4. However, it too is a period of study at degree  level  and  is
    capable of accounting for one-third of the total credits required for a
    Batchelor of Arts degree. If studied alone, the period of  study  leads
    to a level 4 qualification but it is a period of study at degree level.

15.  The appellant's Degree Foundation Course, undertaken by  the  appellant
    between 3rd June, 2006 and June 2007 was a course of study leading to a
    Foundation level 3 qualification, but it was also a period of study  at
    degree level which, counted for 120 of the 360 qualifying points  which
    comprised her degree. Similarly, the second period of study  from  June
    2007 to February 2008 when she undertook her  Advanced  Diploma  is  in
    respect of a qualification at level 4, but was a course at degree level
    and it also qualified for 120 credits towards the total of 360  credits
    required for the appellant's degree.

16.  The appellant was granted a period of one year sixteen days to study  a
    Masters in Business Administration and her current application was  for
    a Masters degree in international management for a  further  period  of
    one year twenty-nine days.

17.  Despite the fact that the respondent should not  have  included  within
    the calculation  the period of work study  leave,  the  respondent  was
    correct in refusing the application, because to grant  it   would  mean
    that the appellant has been studying at degree level  or  above  for  a
    period of more than five years.

18.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  of
    law.  I do not set the decision aside but order  that  it  shall  stand
    because the error is not material.

Notice of Decision

18.  The appeal is dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules.   No  anonymity
    order direction was made.  I  make  no  fee  award  in  favour  of  the
    appellant.

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

