

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Patel (Tier 4 - no '60-day extension') India [2011] UKUT 00187 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                      |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 March 2011                           |                           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                          Mr Justice Edwards-Stuart
                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson


                                   Between

                        Jiginashaben nitinkumar patel

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr Soloman, instructed by APP Immigration Advocates
LPP
For the Respondent: Ms Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer

1) Where a sponsor's Tier 4 licence is withdrawn, the UKBA  Policy  Guidance
   as at November 2009 (page 52) operates to restrict  the  remaining  leave
   granted to 60 days where a student has  more  than  six  months'  of  the
   original leave remaining.  It has no effect on periods of less  than  six
   months.

   2) The policy does not operate to extend leave and in particular, it does
      not provide a 60 day extension of leave to remain in a case where that
      leave to remain has already expired.

   3) The 60 day restriction, if applicable, rums from  the  time  when  the
      Secretary of State notifies the  student  of  the  imposition  of  the
      restriction following the withdrawal of the licence.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal, with  the  permission  of  the  Senior  Immigration
      Judge,  against  a  Determination  of   Immigration   Judge   Buchanan
      promulgated on 11 November  2010  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
      against the refusal of leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
      Migrant on 9 September 2010.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of India. She was born on 30 July 1973. She
      came to the United Kingdom in September 2008. She then  undertook  and
      completed a Diploma in Business Administration and had applied to take
      an Advanced Diploma in Business Management from BC  College  of  North
      West London.

   3. Unfortunately, after she applied the college was  withdrawn  from  the
      list of Tier 4 licensed providers.

   4. At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  counsel  for  the
      appellant, who was not counsel who appeared before us, suggested  that
      the appeal could be  conducted  on  the  basis  of  submissions  only.
      However, during the course of the hearing a point arose  which  needed
      clarification and the Immigration Judge put the relevant  question  to
      the appellant. She did not understand the question and it then emerged
      that her command of English was apparently limited. It transpired that
      her counsel had throughout taken  instructions  from  the  appellant's
      husband and was not aware of her poor command of English.

   5. Whilst, on the facts as we have just  summarised  them,  there  is  no
      reason to believe that counsel was deliberately trying to mislead  the
      tribunal by concealing the appellant's lack of  English,  we  wish  to
      make it perfectly clear that we regard it as  quite  unacceptable  for
      any advocate to submit that an appeal could be dealt with  by  way  of
      submissions only in order to avoid revealing to the tribunal the  fact
      that his or her client has a very poor command of English.

The facts

   6. The appellant's case  was  that  she  had  completed  her  Diploma  in
      Business Administration  and  had  been  issued  with  an  appropriate
      certificate on 18 September 2009. Having been granted a place  on  the
      course for  the  Advanced  Diploma  in  Business  Management  from  BC
      College, on 18 November 2009  she  submitted  an  application  to  the
      respondent for an extension of her leave to remain under  the  Tier  4
      system, her existing visa being due to expire on the 30 November 2009.

   7. But sadly, in December 2009, the appellant  discovered  that  she  had
      breast cancer, for which she had to undergo treatment. This  prevented
      her from starting the proposed course  of  study  at  BC  College.  In
      January 2010 she contacted the college and explained why she  had  not
      been  able  to  start  the  course.  However,  later  that  month  she
      discovered that the college was no  longer  recognised  as  a  Tier  4
      provider. She said that she then tried to contact  the  respondent  in
      order to find out about the  progress  of  her  application,  but  was
      simply told that it was pending.

   8. On 9 September 2010 she was told  that  her  application  was  refused
      because BC College was not a Tier 4 sponsor. She  said  that  she  had
      tried to enrol on other courses  but  could  not  do  so  because  the
      respondent had retained her  passport.  However,  she  did  eventually
      obtain a conditional place on a recognised course provided  by  Khalsa
      College and she produced a letter of confirmation of the offer dated 3
      November 2010. This was for an Associate Degree in Business Management
      that was due to start on 27 November 2010. This letter of confirmation
      was written two days before the hearing before the tribunal.

The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

   9. At paragraph 19 of his determination the Immigration Judge noted that:

           "Both parties accepted at the hearing that this application  was
           not going to succeed under the Rules and although there may well
           be scope for the appellant to make a fresh application within 60
           days after the notice of refusal, and although [counsel for  the
           appellant] made it clear that she would be doing so  immediately
           after the hearing, the issues raised relate only  to  Article  8
           ECHR."

  10. The grounds of appeal, prepared by counsel  who  appeared  before  the
      Immigration Judge, asserted that this was not the case.  It  was  said
      that the submission to the Immigration Judge  was  that  the  tribunal
      could allow the appeal on the basis that the respondent had failed  to
      follow her own policy.

  11. In relation to Article 8, it was submitted on behalf of the  appellant
      that she "had been robbed of her expectations to be  able  to  study".
      The Immigration  Judge  said  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant had taken any real steps either to pursue the respondent for
      a decision on her application for the extension of her leave to remain
      or to investigate the availability of alternative courses  during  the
      intervening period.

  12. In addition, the Immigration Judge said that there must also be a very
      real concern as to whether the appellant really did have  the  ability
      to take the proposed course, bearing in mind the very limited  command
      of English that she had exhibited at the hearing.

Discussion

  13. Mr Solomon, who represented the appellant before  us,  made  it  clear
      that he did rely on the "so-called "60 day  extension".  He  submitted
      that the policy of the respondent was to grant a minimum  of  60  days
      from the date of notification of refusal in a case  where  the  course
      provider's licence had been withdrawn in order to enable  the  student
      to find an alternative course.  He said that in this case that  policy
      had not been followed.

  14. Mr Solomon referred us to the Policy Guidance document for the Tier  4
      of the Points Based System, in the version that was in  force  from  5
      October 2009 onwards. The relevant guidance  is  at  page  52  of  the
      document.

  15. This deals with the situation where a  sponsor's  Tier  4  licence  is
      withdrawn. In this situation the document says that "all confirmations
      of acceptance for studies and visa letters will become invalid". There
      is a table which sets out what will happen if the licence is withdrawn
      at various stages of the application process. The first two situations
      set out in the table cover the position before a student has travelled
      to the United Kingdom. The third situation arises where the student is
      "already in the United Kingdom studying".   In  this  situation  "What
      will happen" is described as follows:

           "We will limit the student's permission to stay to:

           60 days if the student was not involved in the  reason  why  the
           Tier 4 sponsor had their licence withdrawn (we  will  not  limit
           the student's permission to stay if he/she  has  less  than  six
           months left. The student may want to  apply  for  permission  to
           stay with another Tier 4 sponsor during this time).

           Immediately if we think the student was involved in the  reasons
           why the Tier 4 sponsor's licence was withdrawn."

  16. We consider that the language  of  this  is  perfectly  clear:  it  is
      imposing a restriction on the innocent student's  permission  to  stay
      (or, more accurately, leave to remain) in cases where the student  has
      more than 6 months left of his/her leave to remain. In that  case  the
      student's leave to remain is limited or restricted to 60 days.

  17. What it does not mean is that where a student's leave  to  remain  has
      only a few days remaining, or has actually expired, a further 60  days
      leave to remain will be granted. That would amount  to  an  extension,
      not a limitation.

  18. In reaching this conclusion we derive support from two decided  cases.
      The first case is SSHD v JA [2011] UKUT 52 (IAC), a decision of  Irwin
      J and SIJ Gill.  In relation to the part of the  table  that  we  have
      quoted above, they said this, at paragraph 12:

           "As a matter of  language,  if  there  is  no  question  of  any
           contribution to the circumstances leading to the  withdrawal  of
           the sponsor's licence, the policy  is  clear.  If  the  existing
           leave to remain is longer than six months it could be limited to
           60 days. If the existing  leave  to  remain  is  less  than  six
           months, it will not be further limited. In neither case  on  the
           face of the  language  does  the  policy  contemplate  a  direct
           extension to the student's leave to remain."

  19. The second case is SSHD v MM & SA [2010] UKUT 481 (IAC), a decision of
      Lord Bannatyne and SIJ Peter Lane.  They said, at paragraph 18:

           "It is clear from the guidance that the limitation to 60 days is
           not to be treated as an indication that the Secretary  of  State
           will, in the case of licence withdrawal, grant of the student  a
           further 60 days' leave. On the contrary, the guidance  makes  it
           plain that the 60 day period is a restriction and that  where  a
           student has less than six months' leave,  the  remaining  period
           will be left unaffected."

  20. Since the appellant's leave to remain had expired on 30 November 2009,
      at the time when the  college's  licence  was  withdrawn  she  had  no
      remaining leave to remain that could be restricted. Accordingly the so-
      called "60 day extension" had no application  to  her  case.  That  is
      sufficient to dispose of the appeal on this ground.

  21. But even if we are wrong in this conclusion, the appellant  would  not
      have been a student who could  have  benefited  from  any  anticipated
      extension of her leave to remain because she was not "studying" at the
      relevant time.  Although  Mr  Solomon  submitted  that  this  included
      someone who was in the United Kingdom as a student awaiting permission
      to take a course, we consider that the application of  the  policy  is
      confined to those students who are actually in a course  of  study  at
      the Tier 4 sponsor's establishment for which leave to remain has  been
      requested or given when the sponsor's licence  is  withdrawn.  In  the
      present case the appellant had never started the  course  in  question
      because of her ill-health. By the time that she might have been  in  a
      position to start a course, she discovered that  the  college  was  no
      longer recognised as a Tier 4 institution.

  22. However, there is one point on which the table is not clear.  That  is
      the point in time from which the 60 day  restriction,  if  applicable,
      would take effect. Like Irwin J and SIJ Gill in JA, we  consider  that
      this cannot be at the time when the sponsor's  license  is  withdrawn,
      because otherwise a student  could  find  herself  the  subject  of  a
      restriction on her leave to remain without even being aware of it.  It
      seems to us that the 60 day restriction, if applicable, can  only  run
      from the time when the Secretary of State notifies the student of  the
      imposition of the restriction following the withdrawal of the licence.

  23. However, we note that this could have rather capricious  effects.  For
      example, if the Secretary of State took the decision in the case of  a
      particular student when she had, say, 6� months left,  that  student's
      leave to remain would then be limited to 60 days. But if the Secretary
      of State delayed a further three weeks before notifying the student of
      the withdrawal of the licence, it would make no difference at all: the
      student would then have less than  6  months  left  of  her  leave  to
      remain, and so no restriction would fall to be imposed.

  24. We are not the first to point out these  apparent  anomalies  in  this
      part of the scheme, but it may well be that there was a perfectly good
      reason for setting up the system in this way and that we have not been
      told what it is. However, the point that we wish to make  clear,  once
      and for all, is that the 60 days can only operate as a restriction  of
      the permission to remain: it  applies  in  the  case  of  an  innocent
      student who has more than six months left  of  his  or  her  leave  to
      remain when notified by the Secretary of State of  the  withdrawal  of
      the sponsor institution's licence.  What the policy does  not  provide
      is a 60 day extension of leave to remain in a case where that leave to
      remain has already expired.

  25. In relation to Article 8, Mr Solomon referred us to the general policy
      considerations relating to  the  admission  of  foreign  nationals  as
      students, which were summarised by Sedley LJ,  sitting  with  Longmore
      and Moses LJJ, when giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Goo
      v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 747, at paragraph 4:

           "Before we turn in detail to our  reasons,  it  is  relevant  to
           recall that the admission of foreign nationals to study here  is
           not an act of grace. Not only does it help to  maintain  English
           as the world's principal language of commerce, law and  science;
           it furnishes a source of revenue (at rates which, by  virtue  of
           an exemption from the Race  Relations  Act  1976,  substantially
           exceed those paid  by  home  students)  of  frequently  critical
           budgetary importance to the United  Kingdom's  universities  and
           colleges as well as to many independent  schools.  We  therefore
           find it unsurprising that the legislation and  rules,  correctly
           construed, do not place arbitrary or unnecessary restrictions on
           what foreign students  can  study  here.  It  does  not  require
           evidence to remind us that it is not uncommon for a  student  to
           realise that he or she has made an unwise choice, or perhaps  is
           being poorly taught, and to change courses or institutions  with
           beneficial results. A rule preventing students from making  such
           a change might well be arbitrary or unnecessary in  the  absence
           of case-specific reasons."

  26. Mr Solomon then went on to make a number of general points in relation
      to this particular appeal:


          a) The appellant was not at fault in relation to the withdrawal of
             the licence.

          b) At the date of the appellant's application the college  was  on
             the register.


          c) The policy of the Secretary of State is not to tell  a  student
             in the event that a college is suspended (as opposed to  having
             had its licence withdrawn).


          d) Students are likely to be  unclear  as  to  whether  or  not  a
             college has been withdrawn from the register.


          e) A student will not be able to make a fresh application once  he
             or she has become an unwitting overstayer as a  result  of  the
             withdrawal of the sponsor institution's license.


          f) Any refusal of leave to remain following the withdrawal of  the
             sponsor  institution's  licence  will  not  be  an   appealable
             decision.


          g) The student's future applications may be prejudiced  by  having
             had leave to remain refused without  a  proper  opportunity  to
             find another course.


          h) The withdrawal of the sponsor institution's license  shall  not
             have the consequence that the student has to go to the  lengths
             of travelling abroad in order to reapply for leave to enter.

  27. In addition, Mr Solomon submitted that his construction of the "60 day
      extension" would accord with the view of the ordinary  man,  and  that
      students would have a legitimate expectation that any  decision  would
      be based on a reasonable policy and that  this  would  involve  giving
      students a period of grace within which to find another institution on
      being  notified  by  the  Secretary  of   State   that   the   sponsor
      institution's licence had been withdrawn.

  28. Finally, Mr Solomon repeated the submission made  to  the  Immigration
      Judge that the appellant was a genuine student who was being  deprived
      of the opportunity to continue her studies in the United  Kingdom  and
      that to interfere with this by  depriving  her  of  further  leave  to
      remain would constitute a disproportionate response  and  therefore  a
      breach of her Article 8 rights.

Conclusions

  29. Attractively and eloquently as Mr Solomon presented  his  submissions,
      we reject them.  We reject the submissions in relation to the "60  day
      extension" point for the reasons that we have already given.

  30. Where a sponsor's  Tier  4  licence  is  withdrawn,  the  UKBA  Policy
      Guidance as at November  2009  (page  52)  operates  to  restrict  the
      remaining leave granted to 60 days where a student has more  than  six
      months' of the original leave remaining.  It has no effect on  periods
      of less than six months.

  31. The policy does not operate to extend leave and in particular, it does
      not provide a 60 day extension of leave to remain in a case where that
      leave to remain has already expired.

  32. In relation to the claim under Article 8, we share the concern of  the
      Immigration Judge that it is highly questionable  that  the  appellant
      has a sufficient command of English to make her  a  serious  candidate
      for an Advanced Diploma in Business Management. In addition, like  the
      Immigration Judge, we are not satisfied that the  appellant  made  any
      serious attempt to find another course once  she  discovered  in  late
      January 2010  that  BC  College  was  no  longer  a  licensed  Tier  4
      institution.

  33. In these circumstances we do not consider that the refusal of leave to
      remain is a disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article
      8 rights.

  34. We should add that we appreciate and understand that the appellant has
      genuine problems with her health, but this does not make her claim any
      stronger. On the contrary, it may be another reason why she may not be
      in a position to undertake a further course of study. However, this is
      not a factor to which  we  have  had  any  regard  when  reaching  the
      conclusion set out above.

Disposal

  35. Accordingly, we find no error of law in this Determination and so this
      appeal must be dismissed.


      Signed




      Mr Justice Edwards-Stuart
            Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


