
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

   AD (reporting criteria - unreported cases) Somalia [2011] UKUT 00189(IAC)

                               THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On 4 April 2011
                                                   Determination Promulgated


                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Jordan


Between:
                                    A.D.
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:     Mr R. Toal, Counsel, instructed by IAS (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


   (1) The decision in AM (Somalia) [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC)  decided  that  the
   evidence failed to establish the generalised or  indiscriminate  violence
   was at such a high level along the route from Mogadishu to Afgoye  (which
   travels across the K4 junction) that an appellant would be a  real  risk.
   Although the Tribunal in the  unreported  case  of  Ahmed  Farah  Mohamed
   reached a different conclusion, it did not fully address the findings  in
   relation to this issue in the earlier country guidance case of  AM  &  AM
   [2008].
   (2) Given the criteria for reporting cases and the process  of  preparing
   decisions for reporting, it is likely  to  be  rare  that  an  unreported
   decision will contain sufficient material within it to offer  significant
   assistance as guidance to decision-makers, practitioners or other  judges
   in other cases.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and immigration history


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia, was born on 29 August  1977.   He
      is now 33 years old.  He arrived in Britain on  2  August  1997,  then
      aged 20, and has remained here ever  since,  now  some  13�  years,  a
      significant period were it not for the fact that, during this time, he
      had been sentenced to periods  of  imprisonment  totalling  11  years,
      although the time served is less.


   2. The appellant claimed asylum on arrival.   He  was  granted  temporary
      admission, refused asylum on 13 April  1998  but  granted  exceptional
      leave to remain for one year.  The appellant sought further  leave  to
      remain.  No decision was made but, on 28 June 2004, he was served with
      a notice of intention to make a deportation order as a result  of  his
      offending.  No further action was taken on that decision.  On 1  March
      2006, following a further conviction, he was asked for representations
      why he should not  be  the  subject  of  a  decision  to  deport.  The
      appellant has an extensive criminal record beginning on  2  June  1998
      and continuing until 18 November 2009.

   3. On 19 June 2006, following his conviction on  4  May  2005  at  Harrow
      Crown Court for an offence of burglary for which he was  sentenced  to
      2� years imprisonment, he was served with a notice of decision to make
      a deportation order.  He appealed but the appeal and the decision were
      withdrawn.  On 6 August 2007 a  further  decision  was  made  refusing
      asylum and making a fresh decision to make a deportation order.

   4. The appellant's appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Gillespie and Mr
      A. Smith on 24 January 2008 and dismissed (the  first  determination).
      On a renewed application for permission to  appeal,   Owen  J  granted
      permission on 22 April 2008.  On 20 June 2008 Senior Immigration Judge
      Warr found a material error of law in the determination and the second
      stage hearing took place on 3 August  2008  before  Immigration  Judge
      Mayall and Mr M E A Innes, (resulting in the second determination).

   5. The appeal was again dismissed.  On appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal,
      Sullivan LJ ordered by consent that the  appeal  be  allowed  "to  the
      extent that it is remitted back to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
      for reconsideration limited to the issue of whether the  appellant  is
      entitled to human rights protection under Article 3 of the ECHR".  The
      order of Sullivan LJ, dated 12 January 2010, referred to the statement
      of reasons.  The statement noted that the application to the Court  of
      Appeal had been stayed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  pending  a  ruling
      regarding Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive in the cases of
      AH (Iraq) and QD (Iraq).  The statement of  reasons  went  on  to  say
      that:

           "4. ...On 17 August 2009 the respondent made a proposal  to  the
           appellant that the parties  ought  to  apply  to  the  court  by
           consent to have the matter allowed on terms.  Those  terms  were
           that in light of AH and QD the appeal ought to  be  remitted  to
           the AIT for reconsideration limited to the issue of whether  the
           appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection under paragraph
           339C of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant and the respondent
           understand the response for proposals are based upon the court's
           decision to stay the proceedings.

           5. The appellant's grounds rely upon Article 3 of the  ECHR  not
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  and  thereby  the
           appeal cannot be allowed and remitted to the AIT on humanitarian
           protection grounds.  The appellant and the respondent agree that
           permission ought to be granted and the  appeal  allowed  to  the
           extent it is remitted back to the AIT for reconsideration of the
           appellant's appeal on the grounds advanced  in  the  appellant's
           skeleton argument."


   6. The grounds and the skeleton argument (a copy of which was supplied to
      me) refer to Article 3 of the ECHR.


   7. On 5 March 2010 SIJ Latter gave directions following remittal  by  the
      Court of Appeal that the appeal be listed for  hearing  to  reconsider
      the issue of Article 3 in  accordance  with  the  consent  order.   He
      ordered  witness  statements,  a  paginated  bundle  and  a   skeleton
      argument.  He stated that the appeal should be  listed  on  the  first
      available date after 30 June 2010.

   8. The appeal was listed for hearing on 5 July 2010.  On 22 June 2010 the
      appellant's representatives, Refugee  Migrant  Justice,  formerly  the
      RLC,  made  an  application  stating   that   they   had   gone   into
      administration from 16 June 2010 and therefore could not act  for  the
      appellant. The appeal was taken out of the list.

   9. On 13 July 2010 the Immigration Advisory Service  wrote  to  say  that
      they were now instructed and asked that the hearing not be listed  for
      four weeks to enable them to prepare for the hearing. The  appeal  was
      listed for, but adjourned on 13 December 2010 on  application  by  the
      appellant.  At the hearing before Senior Immigration  Judge  McGeachy,
      it was accepted that the appeal turned on  the  issue  of  appellant's
      removal to Mogadishu.  Mr  Avery  confirmed  that  this  was  how  the
      appellant would be sent to Somalia.

  10. The appellant has been in immigration detention since January 2010.

  11. The appellant is a Marehan which is a  sub-clan  of  the  Darod  clan.
      Whilst in Somalia, the appellant had lived in Mogadishu, although  the
      Marehan's home area is Gedo. The  principal  challenge  to  the  first
      determination was the improperly reasoned consideration of the  expert
      evidence provided by Dr Hoehne and, in particular, that the  appellant
      would be at risk immediately on his return to Mogadishu and  en  route
      to Gedo owing to the perception that as a person coming from abroad he
      would be perceived as wealthy.

  12. In the skeleton argument, the second determination was  challenged  on
      four grounds. First, that the panel had improperly concluded that  the
      appellant would be able to obtain adequate protection in Mogadishu  as
      a Marehan returnee. Second, that the panel failed to determine whether
      there was a real risk that the appellant would be internally displaced
      and thereby at risk of treatment in violation of his Article 3  rights
      in accordance with the Tribunal's guidance  in   HH  (Somalia)  [2008]
      UKAIT 00022. Thirdly, that the  generalised  violence  in  and  around
      Mogadishu had deteriorated to such an extent that  there  was  then  a
      real risk of a violation of his Article  2  and  3  rights  simply  by
      reason of the appellant's presence in that area,  notwithstanding  the
      finding in HH (Somalia) that there was no such risk in 2008.  Finally,
      that the second Tribunal was wrong in requiring an appellant  to  show
      differential impact in  Article  3  cases.  It  is  possible  for  any
      potential member  of  the  civilian  population  to  be  eligible  for
      subsidiary protection,  provided  that  the  level  of  indiscriminate
      violence is high enough in the war zone to which he is to be returned.
      If there are any factors  special  to  the  applicant,  either  as  an
      individual or as a member of a group, which increase the risk  to  him
      or her over that faced by the general population, the risk of  serious
      harm must be assessed  taking  those  factors  into  account,  see  HH
      (Somalia) and others v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 426, paragraph 31.

No Article 8 claim

  13. The direction provided by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  supported  by  the
      consent of the parties, limited the scope of the hearing before me  to
      a consideration of the Article 3 issues. The appellant has a  son,  R,
      who was born 7 August 2005 whilst the appellant  was  in  prison.  The
      child's mother, Sara, suffered from problems associated  with  alcohol
      and cannabis abuse. The appellant told me she  is  no  longer  in  the
      country but in Norway. The appellant's son  is  looked  after  by  his
      aunt, Asha Omar. Although she provided a statement, this is  dated  18
      January 2008 at a time when the appellant was imprisoned where he  had
      remained ever since the birth of  his  son.  The  statement  does  not
      address R's interests save to say that she  would  be  happy  for  the
      appellant to have custody. In the appellant's fourth  statement,  made
      on 30 March 2011  in  anticipation  of  the  hearing  before  me,  the
      appellant spoke of wanting to rebuild his life, wishing to  resume  or
      rebuild his relationship with his son and of his having stopped taking
      drugs and alcohol. No formal  care  proceedings  have  been  taken  in
      relation to R  although,  the  appellant  told  me,  Southwark  Social
      Services have been involved  in  his  care.    No  material  had  been
      adduced from them.  Realistically and properly, Mr Toal did  not  seek
      to advance an Article 8 claim given the sparsity of  the  information.
      The aunt's statement is now over three years old and no information is
      provided as to the current situation.  The  respondent  had  not  been
      provided with any notice that the  appellant  sought  to  enlarge  the
      scope of the appeal to include an Article 8 claim.

The claim

  14. The appellant's father, a member of the Marehan clan, who worked as  a
      customs officer, was killed in 1991 in the  inter-clan  violence.  The
      appellant's mother was killed in a road traffic accident in 1993.  The
      family lived in Mogadishu and was subjected to violence at  the  hands
      of the militia of the  Hawiye  clan.  The  appellant  claimed  he  was
      detained and tortured and bears the scars of this  ill-treatment.   At
      some point, a car in which he was travelling was  hit  by  a  roadside
      bomb which caused an injury. Both he and  his  brother  Mohammed  fled
      Mogadishu in July 1997, travelling to  the  Kenyan  border  where  his
      brother was detained. The appellant  travelled  alone  to  the  United
      Kingdom. One of his brothers, a sister and the aunt  who  had  brought
      him up following the death of  his  mother  are  also  in  the  United
      Kingdom.


  15. In his second statement,  in  response  to  the  Home  Office  refusal
      letter, the appellant spoke of being unable to return to Mogadishu  or
      to relocate to Gedo or to seek clan protection. He also spoke of being
      unable to follow the tenets of Islam and being at risk because of  his
      tattoos. In a statement signed  on  8  March  2007  he  described  the
      tattoos. One on his right arm is in Chinese script, and  one  has  his
      name on it. He has other tattoos on his left arm. He also spoke of his
      family, including an uncle who arranged for the appellant's travel  to
      the United Kingdom. He described him as a businessman.

The appellant's evidence before me

  16. In the course of the hearing before me, the appellant  confirmed  that
      the contents of his short statement of 30 March 2011  were  true.  The
      substance of this statement  is  that  the  appellant  has  nobody  to
      protect him in Somalia as he has lost contact  with  the  country  and
      those within it. He  states  that  he  does  not  know  of  any  other
      relatives and that his aunt  and  cousins  live  in  London  and  they
      themselves no longer have any contact with Somalia.  He said that  the
      uncle who had assisted him whilst in Somalia had passed away  in  2001
      and that he had found out  about  this  in  2003  from  his  aunt.  He
      accepted in cross examination that in  neither  of  the  two  previous
      hearings had he mentioned that  his  uncle  was  dead  and  sought  to
      explain this by reference to the fact that no one had asked him. Apart
      from a statement  from  Hudda  Abukar,  which  does  not  advance  the
      appellant's Article  3  claim,  I  have  sufficiently  summarised  the
      evidence produced by the appellant and his aunt for  the  purposes  of
      this appeal.

The reports of Dr Hoehne

  17. Dr Hoehne  has  sufficiently  established  his  expertise  before  the
      Tribunal. He has worked with Dr Virginia Lulling  and  Professor  I.M.
      Lewis, both distinguished experts on the Horn of Africa. In his report
      of 12 December 2010, he speaks of how the situation  in  southern  and
      central Somalia has changed radically since his earlier report  of  21
      August 2008. The Transitional Federal Government (the  TFG)  has  been
      fighting with militant Islamic groups such as Al  Shabbab  and  Hizbul
      Islam since May 2009. Somali government forces supported by troops  of
      the African Union (AMISOM) have been involved in constant  clashes  in
      Mogadishu and the surrounding area. This has resulted  in  the  deaths
      and displacement of many thousands of people, many of those  displaced
      have fled to refugee camps in southern Somalia as IDPs. Civilians  are
      often victims of the fighting.  Al  Shabbab  occupies  a  considerable
      proportion of  the  territory  in  Somalia  and  enforces  an  extreme
      interpretation of Islamic Shari  'a  law.  The  humanitarian  problems
      caused by the conflict have resulted in almost 50% of the  population,
      calculated in  August  2009,  requiring  livelihood  and  humanitarian
      support. Both sides  of  the  conflict  commit  serious  human  rights
      abuses.


  18. Dr Hoehne describes how in southern Somalia much of the  territory  is
      under the control of Al Shabbab, an area stretching from Mogadishu  up
      to Beletweyne and Gedo.  Hizbul Islam has been in  control  of  Afgoye
      since early 2010 although there is rivalry between the two groups.

  19. Dealing with the specific risks faced  by  the  appellant,  Dr  Hoehne
      describes the appellant as lacking first-hand information  of  current
      Somali affairs as a result of his long absence in the  United  Kingdom
      and of becoming disorientated in the situation in southern and central
      Somalia and thereby unable to deal with the Al Shabbab militias, local
      gangsters or the TFG. Dr Hoehne considers that the tattoos on his arms
      are a major cause for concern as tattoos are forbidden  by  Islam.  If
      news of the appellant's  past  were  to  become  known,  he  would  be
      perceived as one  who  has  broken  fundamental  Islamic  laws.  As  a
      returnee from the United Kingdom,  he  would  be  of  interest  to  Al
      Shabbab, an assessment that is consistent with the evidence of a UNHCR
      Protection  Officer,  Mr  Alex  Tyler,  who  specifically   identified
      returnees as at risk of serious harm. Indeed, Dr Hoehne  suggests  the
      risk may reach the level of being at risk of execution by  stoning  as
      an adulterer.

  20. Dealing with relocation to  the  Gedo  region,  Dr  Hoehne  gives  his
      opinion that the appellant could not  avoid  encountering  Al  Shabbab
      militias and checkpoints operated  by  TFG  soldiers,  Al  Shabbab  or
      criminals. Even TFG soldiers do not function in 'a benign way'.  There
      are examples of local aid  workers  being  kidnapped  for  ransom.  In
      February 2009, as a result of  an  armed  clash  at  a  checkpoint  in
      Mogadishu, soldiers and civilian passengers were injured. As a  person
      who  does  not  demonstrate  compliance  with  Al  Shabbab  rules  and
      policies, Dr Hoehne considers that the appellant would be at risk.  As
      a member of the Marehan clan,  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  in
      Mogadishu  and  its  surroundings.  Many  members  of  Al  Shabbab  in
      Mogadishu are Hawiye. Clan protection would not be available to him on
      the way to Gedo.

  21. I have considered an earlier report of Dr  Hoehne  dated  9  September
      2007. Its contents are largely subsumed in the later report.   In  his
      assessment Dr  Hoehne  considered  that  the  appellant's  account  of
      political developments was consistent  with  the  objective  evidence.
      Further, although the appellant's knowledge of the  Marehan  clan  was
      very limited, this was consistent with the level  of  knowledge  of  a
      young man who, having fled Somalia 10 years  before,  had  had  little
      involvement with  the  Somali  diaspora  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
      considered the appellant had limited religious knowledge.  Along  with
      his tattoos which  would  be  revealed  in  the  course  of  a  ritual
      ablutions and his history of  drug  and  alcohol  abuse  and  criminal
      activity, this would result in a risk of harm. As a failed �migr�  who
      has dishonoured his family through misconduct, Dr Hoehne considered it
      unlikely  that  fellow  clan  members  would  offer  him  support   or
      acceptance. Dr Hoehne concluded in paragraph  27  that  the  appellant
      would be facing an even higher risk of serious bodily harm as a result
      of these factors and would "most probably be persecuted" in  Mogadishu
      and other regions of southern Somalia including the Gedo region.


  22. For the hearing before the second panel which apparently took place on
      30 August 2008, Dr Hoehne had provided a further report on  21  August
      2008. The contents  of  this  report  are  summarised  in  the  second
      determination in paragraphs 20 to 37 and no suggestion was made to  me
      that the detailed summary is anything but adequate and  accurate.  The
      report spoke of the deteriorating situation.  The  TFG  government  is
      seen largely as a Darod government. The TFG  had  been  confronted  by
      clan militias belonging to the Hawiye clan family who  are  still  the
      majority of all inhabitants of Mogadishu. More  than  half  a  million
      people had been caused  to  flee  Mogadishu  in  the  last  two  years
      notwithstanding the presence of the African Union Mission to  Somalia.
      The TFG's control of  Mogadishu  does  not  afford  complete  control.
      Whilst elements of the conflict were a pure clan war between Darod and
      Hawiye, it would be an oversimplification to  see  it  only  in  these
      terms. A UN Security Council Report of November 2007 referred  to  the
      volatile situation in Mogadishu with daily attacks by  insurgents  and
      counter-attacks. Somalia  was  awash  with  arms  and  civilians  were
      regularly caught up in the fighting. In the course  of  the  conflict,
      human rights violations continued to be perpetrated by both sides.  He
      would be at risk in Mogadishu as a member of  the  Darod  clan  family
      and, in this regard, his view contradicted  statements  in  the  Fact-
      Finding Mission of July 2007 which  indicated  there  was  no  routine
      targeting of members of particular clans. It  would  not  be  safe  to
      travel to Gedo and the Marehan would not provide assistance. He  might
      even be at risk from other sub-clans of the  Darod.  He  disputed  the
      Tribunal's findings in HH and, in particular, the finding that the TFG
      had cleared away most militia checkpoints.

The medico-legal evidence


  23. Dr Arnold provided a report on 15 September 2007, after an examination
      of the appellant's scarring. It is clear that the appellant has bullet
      wounds and  scarring  highly  consistent  with  knife  wounds  and  an
      explosion from an IED.  He concluded:

           "Taken in the round as required by  the  Istanbul  Protocol  the
           'overall  evaluation'  leads  me  to  conclude   that   although
           individual scars may have been the result of events  other  than
           torture, there is a reasonable likelihood  that  he  was  indeed
           tortured."

  24. There is a reference in paragraph 27 of the first determination  to  a
      report of Dr Kahtan to the effect that Dr Kahtan did not consider  the
      appellant presenting a suicide risk in late 2007  or  early  2008.  Mr
      Toal did not advance the claim on this basis. There is no more  recent
      medical evidence.


The first determination


  25. In the first determination, the panel rejected  significant  parts  of
      the appellant's account. It rejected his claim that his  aunt  paid  a
      ransom following his abduction in 1996 because, by that time, she  had
      left Somalia. In order to  meet  this  objection,  the  appellant  had
      altered the date on which he claimed his abduction  had  taken  place.
      The Tribunal considered that the discrepancies could not  legitimately
      be ascribed to loss of memory or an inability to  recall  dates.   The
      Tribunal, however, accepted that the appellant should be regarded as a
      member of the Marehan sub-clan of the Darod.


  26. In paragraph 24 of its determination, the panel considered that it was
      'incontestable' that  the  appellant,  prior  to  his  departure  from
      Somalia, would have been able to access clan acceptance and protection
      and would not have remained in an area of Somalia where  he  would  be
      vulnerable to violence and victimisation at the hands  of  the  Hawiye
      without having recourse to this protection. The Tribunal accepted that
      the appellant's scars were the result of his having been wounded.  The
      wounds could have been inflicted in the circumstances alleged  by  the
      appellant but, equally,  they  could  have  been  inflicted  in  other
      circumstances. In view of the adverse credibility finding made in  the
      first determination, the panel did not accept the appellant's  account
      of the manner in which his injuries had been inflicted. On  the  basis
      of these findings of fact, it concluded in paragraph 26 of  the  first
      determination that whilst accepting the appellant was a  member  of  a
      majority  clan  in  Somalia,  it  rejected  his  allegations  of  past
      persecution or abuse.

  27. In the course of the first hearing, the Secretary of State relied upon
      the appellant's dismal record of offending as excluding him  from  the
      protection of the Refugee  Convention  by  the  operation  of  Article
      33(2). The Tribunal set out why it concluded that the  appellant  was,
      indeed, excluded by reason of his offending. It also gave its  reasons
      why it considered the appellant constituted a danger to the  community
      although, this appeal being confined to Article 3,  that  is  entirely
      irrelevant. It explains, however, the importance that  is  now  placed
      upon the operation of Articles 2 and 3. In  the  first  determination,
      the panel concluded that the appellant was not at risk from  any  past
      persecution, past adverse exposure to the authorities or any  interest
      in him shown by them. The sole basis of risk  was  identified  as  his
      status on return as a failed asylum seeker and a deported criminal. In
      parenthesis, this must have included the fact that, as he came to  the
      United Kingdom in 1997, he could point to a significant period of time
      he has been here.

  28. When dealing with Dr Hoehne's report, the panel did  not  accept  that
      the evidence of the tattoos on his arms constituted a  deviation  from
      traditional or religious norms such as to place the appellant at risk.
      The photographs showed the tattoos on his right forearm to  spell  out
      his name 'Ahmed'. The tattoo on his left arm appeared  to  be  on  the
      inner aspect of the limb, faint and indistinct, and could not be  read
      in the photograph. The photographs also demonstrated, as  the  medical
      report described, that the tattoos were partially obscured  by  scars.
      It did not therefore consider that the tattoos in themselves would  be
      considered objectionable in Somalia  or  that  they  would  place  the
      appellant at risk.

  29. The panel went on to consider the situation  in  Mogadishu.  It  found
      that the TFG was in essence a Darod institution and would not  present
      the appellant with a hostile environment. It did not accept  that  the
      appellant's history of alcohol and substance  abuse  or  his  criminal
      offences would become known as  there  would  be  no  reason  for  the
      appellant to reveal it and it could circulate by no  other  means.  It
      recorded that it was Dr Hoehne's view that the appellant would be able
      to avail himself of protection by the  Marehan  if  he  were  able  to
      relocate in Gedo, the Marehan centre. It did not accept the  appellant
      would be at risk while travelling from Mogadishu to Gedo. Finally,  it
      did not accept the appellant was without family  members  in  Somalia.
      Recalling the appellant's evidence that his  uncle  was  a  successful
      businessman in Mogadishu in 1997, the panel  hearing  the  appellant's
      appeal in January 2008 could not have been told his  uncle  had  died.
      The appellant's subsequent evidence was that his uncle  died  in  2001
      and the appellant became aware of it in 2003 in which event  it  would
      have been likely to have featured  in  the  evidence  at  the  earlier
      hearings.

The error of law

  30. The appellant sought reconsideration of the first determination on the
      basis that the panel failed to have  regard  to  the  relevant  expert
      evidence to the effect that the appellant would be unable to  relocate
      to the Gedo region in safety. It  challenged  the  panel's  assessment
      that the appellant had failed to establish he would be at  risk  while
      travelling  from  Mogadishu  to  Gedo.  In  Ground  3,  the  appellant
      criticised the panel for finding that his presence  in  Mogadishu  was
      consistent with his having recourse to protection. In Ground 4 it  was
      said that the panel failed to provide adequate reasons  for  rejecting
      the expert evidence to the effect that members  of  the  Marehan  clan
      would not accept the appellant given, his history of substance  abuse,
      the tattoos on his arms and  the  likelihood  that  his  past  deviant
      behaviour would have become known in the diaspora and thence  to  clan
      members in Somalia.

  31. In finding that the first determination was  flawed  by  legal  error,
      Senior Immigration Judge Warr noted that the Presenting Officer before
      him accepted that the analysis of the risks for the appellant en route
      to Gedo was not sufficiently analysed. He continued:


           "... The panel refers to the expert's opinion that the appellant
           would be in danger in Mogadishu and en route to Gedo.  Going  to
           and through Mogadishu was part of the relocation process. If the
           panel were finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  in
           Mogadishu then why go on  to  consider  the  issue  of  internal
           relocation?  If  the  panel  were  making  a  finding   in   the
           alternative, then  the  panel  should  have  made  the  position
           clearer.


           Accordingly, it being conceded that the risks en  route  to  the
           potentially safe haven were insufficiently analysed and  it  not
           being established that the panel's findings were  not  necessary
           or material to its determination the error is a material one. It
           is to be noted that in  between  the  panel's  hearing  and  the
           signing of the determination the case  of  HH  [2008]  is  UKAIT
           00022 CG was published (on 29 January 2008) and  this  case  may
           have a bearing on the risks in Mogadishu and en route.


           ...[The appellant's counsel] indicated that it was  unlikely  to
           be disputed that Gedo was a safe haven. The Tribunal  will  need
           to see if the further  evidence  establishes  the  risk  to  the
           appellant in Mogadishu or en route to the  safe  haven.  If  the
           evidence indicates the appellant is not  at  risk  in  Mogadishu
           then the question of relocation does not arise."


  32. It was on the basis of these directions that the  appeal  came  before
      the second panel and on which the  second  determination  came  to  be
      made.

The second determination

  33.  The  appeal  was  heard  on  3  August  2008  and  the  determination
      promulgated on 30 September 2008. For the purpose of the  hearing,  Dr
      Hoehne had provided his further up-dated report on 21 August 2008, see
      paragraph 22 above.


  34. It was accepted by the appellant's counsel (see paragraph  52  of  the
      second determination) that the Tribunal in HH had  concluded  that  in
      general people were safe in Mogadishu, subject to the proviso that the
      position might be otherwise where there was a real risk that a  person
      would encounter a non-TFG checkpoint.

  35. It was also common ground that  the  Tribunal  should  first  consider
      whether the appellant would be at risk of a violation of his Article 3
      right of return to  Mogadishu  and  that  only  if  such  a  risk  was
      established that the Tribunal should go on to consider  the  appellant
      travelling to Gedo. It does not appear to  have  been  suggested  that
      Gedo would not provide a safe haven to the appellant.  The  issue  was
      confined to that of a risk to the appellant in Mogadishu or  en  route
      to Gedo.

  36. In paragraph 63 of the second determination, the Tribunal decided that
      the original panel's findings in relation to the risk as a  result  of
      the tattoos on him and other associated matters could not be  said  to
      be affected by any error of law. This was accepted by counsel for  the
      appellant. Accordingly, the  second  determination,  correctly  in  my
      judgment, did not disturb those findings of fact. It was,  of  course,
      accepted that the burden lay upon the appellant to the lower standard.

  37. The panel's assessment of the  evidence  and  of  risk  faced  by  the
      appellant is found in paragraphs 65 to 78 of the second determination.
      Adopting the decision of the Tribunal in HH as its starting point,  it
      referred to paragraph 301 that there  was  no  evidence  that  persons
      arriving at the airport  near  Mogadishu  would  have  any  difficulty
      travelling into Mogadishu and that they would not need an  escort.  In
      general, a person was not at real risk of serious harm by reason  only
      of his presence in Mogadishu. It did not  consider  that  the  updated
      report of Dr Hoehne established that the appellant would be at risk if
      returned to Mogadishu notwithstanding a general deterioration  in  the
      situation there.  The second determination concluded in paragraph 77:

           "Thus we do not  accept  that  the  Marehan  are  not  generally
           present in Mogadishu. In any event we do not consider that  this
           would mean that he would be [un]able to access  protection  from
           the main Darod clan. There is no evidence whatsoever to  suggest
           that the Darod would not give protection to one of  the  Marehan
           sub-clan. The evidence is,  if  anything,  the  other  way.  The
           previous panel found, which is incontestable, that he must  have
           had protection before he left. There is nothing to suggest  that
           in the intervening years the protection of the  Darod  clan  has
           suddenly become unavailable to the members of the  Marehan  sub-
           clan. In these circumstances we conclude that the appellant is a
           member of a majority clan, as a member of the majority clan that
           largely backs the TFG forces, and as a person  who  has  enjoyed
           protection in the past would be able  to  access  adequate  clan
           protection in Mogadishu. We do not consider that  there  is  any
           real risk of the circumstances set out in the proviso  contained
           in paragraph 302 of HH arising."


  38. As I have set out above, the grounds of appeal to the Court of  Appeal
      were limited by the Court  to  a  reliance  upon  Article  3  and  the
      parties' consent that the appeal should  be  allowed  on  the  grounds
      advanced in the appellant's skeleton argument which I have  summarised
      in paragraph 12 above.


  39. I make no excuses for this lengthy outline of the stages through which
      this appeal has advanced. Like geological strata, sedimentary deposits
      leave traces in the form of findings which had to be  incorporated  or
      omitted (as the case may be) from the current assessment; incorporated
      where they have been found to sustainable and omitted  when  found  to
      have been unsustainable.

Case law


  40. In HH & others (Mogadishu: armed conflict:  risk)  Somalia  CG  [2008]
      UKAIT 00022, the Tribunal summarised its findings in relation  to  the
      matters which concern me in these terms:


    (5) Neither the TFG/Ethiopians nor the Union of Islamic Courts and  its
    associates are targeting clans or groups for serious harm. Whilst  both
    sides in the conflict have acted from time to time in such a way as  to
    cause  harm  to  civilians,  they  are  not  in  general  engaging   in
    indiscriminate violence.


    (6) Clan support networks  in  Mogadishu,  though  strained,  have  not
    collapsed. A person from a majority clan or whose background  discloses
    a significant degree of assimilation with or acceptance by  a  majority
    clan will in general be able to rely  on  that  clan  for  support  and
    assistance, including at times of displacement as a result of  security
    operations, etc. Majority clans continue to have access to arms, albeit
    that their militias no longer control the city.


    (10)  Subject to sub-paragraph (9) above,  outside  Mogadishu  and  its
    immediate  environs,  the  position  in   southern   Somalia   is   not
    significantly different from that analysed in NM and Others (Lone women-
    Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076


    (11)  Air travel to and  from  Mogadishu  has  not  been  significantly
    interrupted; nor has the mobile telephone network in southern Somalia.

    In its determination, the Tribunal  in  HH  and  others  made  specific
    reference to the position of clans and  groups  in  Mogadishu  and  the
    attitudes and behaviour of the combatants:

    Majority clans


    294.    Although the Hawiye clan were dominant  in  Mogadishu  and  its
         environs until  2006,  the  emergence  of  the  UIC  in  that  year
         effectively negated the power of  the  Hawiye  warlords  and  their
         militias. Despite what might superficially seem to be the import of
         the evidence noted in paragraphs 239 and 240 above, the fall of the
         UIC has not led to a return of the previous state of affairs, since
         the entry into the city of the TFG and  the  Ethiopian  forces  has
         significantly changed the dynamics of the situation.  We agree with
         Dr Luling's  view  that  the  Hawiye  militias  no  longer  control
         Mogadishu (paragraph 120 above).   That is  not  to  say,  however,
         that both the UIC, in its present, insurgent form, and the  TFG  do
         not have a "strong clan character" (paragraph 149 above); but  that
         character is, we find, more complex than that suggested in parts of
         Professor Lewis's evidence,  in that,  whilst  the  TFG  is  Darod-
         dominated, there are plainly Hawiye elements supporting it.


    295.    ...The background evidence shows that those ranged against  the
         TFG/Ethiopians primarily conduct their operations against  specific
         targets, although, particularly where these attacks involved  bombs
         or mortars, nearby civilians are put at risk (paragraphs 76 and 189
         above).   By  the  same  token,  whilst  there  have  plainly  been
         instances of overreaction and insufficiently focused retaliation by
         the TFG/Ethiopians, the evidence read as a whole indicates that the
         objects  of  retaliation  are  those  attacking  the  TFG/Ethiopian
         forces.  Thus, despite the one source referred to in paragraph 4.03
         of the Fact Finding Mission  report  of  July  2007  (paragraph  76
         above), a journalist from an international news agency  was  quoted
         at paragraph 4.09 as considering  that  the  TFG  had  "managed  to
         effect some level of peace and  security",  whilst  paragraph  4.17
         recorded the efforts of the TFG to effect disarmament in the  city.
          At paragraph 4.28, it was said to be "rare for an ordinary  Somali
         to be randomly targeted in  the  shooting"  and  that  despite  the
         "often over-zealous retaliatory action on the  part  of  [the  TFG]
         forces", the level of violence in  Mogadishu  as  at  mid-2007  was
         "fairly low" and that, notwithstanding high levels of crime, people
         could and did move around, although on the whole they  intended  to
         stay in  their  home  areas  (paragraph  78  above).   It  is  also
         significant that the mass movement of people over  the  weekend  of
         27/28  October  2007  from  Mogadishu  was  in  response   to   "an
         announcement advising those living in districts surrounding Bakhara
         Market to vacate the area due to security operations" (paragraph 81
         above)...


    296.    For their part, the UIC and their allies or associates are, the
         evidence shows,  targeting  TFG/Ethiopian  military  and  political
         personnel.  The evidence does not  indicate  that  members  of  the
         Darod clan or the Abgal sub-clan of the Hawiye are, in either case,
         as such at real risk of persecution or serious harm at the hands of
         the UIC and others fighting against the  TFG/Ethiopians.   In  this
         regard, it is also worth observing that, during the time  of  their
         dominance  in  Mogadishu,  the  UIC  were   widely   perceived   as
         establishing a system of law and order in the city  that  benefited
         all of the clans and other groups residing there (and  more  widely
         throughout southern Somalia).   The more extreme religious elements
         of the UIC took action against those engaged in what were perceived
         as un-Islamic activities such as the  consumption  of  alcohol  and
         khat but this was not pursued by reference to a  person's  clan  or
         group.


    The general security position in Mogadishu and the  relevance  of  clan
    areas and support networks


    299.    Whatever misgivings one might have about the rule of  the  UIC,
         it is manifestly the case that  life  in  Mogadishu  for  the  vast
         majority of its citizens was considerably better under the UIC than
         that which pertained before or, it  must  be  said,  has  pertained
         since.   So far as 2007 is concerned, the mass migrations evidenced
         in the background  materials  disclose  a  very  serious  state  of
         affairs.  A person who has been displaced from his or her  home  in
         Mogadishu, without being able to find a place elsewhere  (including
         in another part of that city) with clan members or friends, and who
         as a result, is likely to have to spend any significant  period  of
         time in a makeshift shelter  alongside  the  road  to  Afgoye,  for
         example, or in an IDP camp,  may  well  experience  treatment  that
         would be proscribed by article 3 of ECHR.


    300.    That said, the position  in  2007  has  been  characterised  by
         significant movements of civilians, not only out of Mogadishu,  but
         also back again, as soon as the security position in the  city  has
         allowed (see e.g. paragraph 165 above).  Thus, one security  source
         was able to say in April 2007, that the position in  Mogadishu  was
         "Mogadishu quiet", whilst the  government  "gave  broadly  accurate
         warnings to civilians to leave certain areas of the city  to  avoid
         the violence, although the source was in no doubt that  bombardment
         within these areas was indiscriminate"  (paragraph  73  above).   A
         significant factor in the movement of  people  is  Bakhara  Market,
         which plays an important role in the  provision  of  food  for  the
         inhabitants of Mogadishu.  The  UIC  insurgents  have  on  occasion
         targeted  the  market,  eliciting  a  military  response  from  the
         TFG/Ethiopians.   Following a warning that a security operation was
         to take place in the market, there was a significant exodus in late
         October 2007, as we have already noted.  However,  closure  of  the
         market appears to  have  lasted  only  five  days,  and  Dr  Mullen
         accepted (paragraph 168 above) that it had re-opened, according  to
         the information produced in early November 2007.  The resilience of
         the market is, we consider, of some significance.    We  also  note
         that several sources questioned by the Fact finding Mission of June
         2007 stressed "a need to understand 'normal life' in the  Mogadishu
         sense, where there is an  acceptance  of  a  mobile  type  of  life
         created by displacement" (R2, page 600).


    301.    Notwithstanding the Tribunal's generally positive impression of
         the  evidence  of  Dr Mullen,  we  have  seen  how,  under  cross-
         examination, he was unable to sustain the stance that clan  support
         networks had completely broken  down  during  2007.    Despite  the
         fierce fighting in early  2007,  the  Danish  Refugee  Council  and
         Danish Immigration Service, in  their  report  published  in  2007,
         noted the continuing ability of clans to protect their own,  albeit
         that someone returning from abroad might receive assistance "in the
         long term" (paragraph 134 above).   The same report,  at  paragraph
         20.08 (paragraph 135 above), whilst noting the  source's  inability
         to be "certain" that someone would enjoy clan protection in Central
         and southern Somalia,  nevertheless  recorded  his  acknowledgement
         that in principle one could expect to be  protected  by  one's  own
         clan. The source quoted at paragraph 4.31 of the July Fact  Finding
         Mission report as saying that there is little protection from one's
         own clan (R2, page 612) appears  to  have  based  his  view  on  an
         anecdote involving a friend who was for some reason shot  at  by  a
         fellow clan member. Similarly, the source referred to at  paragraph
         4.32, who said returning Somalis who had left for economic  reasons
         would be considered as traitors, based that view  in  part  on  the
         experience of someone she knew. The source's view is, in any event,
         out of step with the preponderance of the evidence.  It appears  to
         be the case that certain areas of  Mogadishu  (namely,  the  south)
         have remained better off than  other  areas,  such  as  the  north,
         during the disturbances of 2007 and that the educational  NGO  with
         whom Professor Lewis is in contact appears  to  have  continued  to
         function throughout the relevant time.  As noted at paragraph  4.06
         of the Fact Finding Mission  report  of  July  2007  (paragraph  76
         above) a relevant department of the UN is  quoted  as  saying  that
         "most clans had some network in operation in Mogadishu, though most
         people were now playing on personal rather than clan  connections".
         We  also  observe  that  Professor  Lewis's  United   Kingdom-based
         contacts were able to travel to and from Somalia and that Dr Mullen
         told us the airports outside Mogadishu were functioning at the date
         of the hearing.


    [Having considered evidence given to the Fact Finding Missions of April
    and July 2007, the Tribunal in HH continued:]


        Although  this  evidence  is  in   some   respects   qualified   or
        contradicted by other  sources  to  whom  the  Mission  spoke,  its
        provenance is,  in  our  view,  such  that  it  cannot  lightly  be
        discounted. It also chimes  with  the  evidence  regarding  Somalis
        travelling back and forth between Somalia and  the  United  Kingdom
        and with the UN source (R2, page 617),  who  said  that  passengers
        "arriving at MIA or K50 airports  should  generally  not  have  any
        difficulty travelling into Mogadishu or anywhere else" and  that  a
        passenger bound for Mogadishu "would not need a protective escort".


    302.    Looking at the evidence as a whole, the Tribunal does not  find
         that the current situation in Mogadishu is  such  that  any  person
         living there is at real risk of serious harm.  (We shall deal later
         with the issue of armed conflict).  In  making  this  finding,  the
         Tribunal has had  regard  to  the  issue  of  checkpoints.   Within
         Mogadishu itself, we accept the information contained in the report
         of the Fact Finding Mission of June 2007, that  there  had  been  a
         "remarkable reduction in checkpoints",  a  finding  with  which  Dr
         Luling said she had no reason to disagree (paragraph 129 above) and
         that as  at  mid-2007,  the  TFG  had  cleared  away  most  militia
         checkpoints (paragraph 161 above).  Although Dr Mullen demurred  on
         this issue, his evidence was to the effect that non-TFG checkpoints
         were run by those whose purpose was to extort  money,  irrespective
         of clan, and that tariffs "would be adjusted according to  capacity
         to pay". The Tribunal concludes that those moving around  Mogadishu
         and its environs, including those taking refuge  with  fellow  clan
         members, will in  general  not  be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  at
         checkpoints.  The position may, however, be otherwise  where  there
         is a real risk that a person will encounter  a  non-TFG  checkpoint
         alone, without friends, family or other clan members.


    309. The significance of belonging  to,  or  otherwise  being  able  to
         secure the protection of, a majority clan was identified in  NM  as
         lying in the fact  that  majority  clans  had  their  own  militias
         (paragraph 122 of the determination; paragraph 11 above).Whilst  we
         find that the  evidence  shows  that  in  Mogadishu  majority  clan
         militias are no longer in control (and have not been since the rise
         of the UIC), and that members of majority clans  have  on  occasion
         been compelled to leave their home areas during 2007 as a result of
         fighting and other  security  operations,  the  evidence  does  not
         indicate that the majority clans have lost their militias  or  that
         they have otherwise become unprotected. As  Dr  Mullen's  testimony
         shows, large numbers of  guns  of  all  kinds  are  being  sold  in
         Mogadishu and the written materials confirm both this and the  very
         limited success of the TFG/Ethiopians in attempting to  disarm  the
         population.  Accordingly,  the  distinction  drawn  in  NM  between
         majority clans and minority clans  and  groups  continues  to  hold
         good, both in Mogadishu and the rest of southern Somalia.


    The position outside Mogadishu


    310.    The security situation in Mogadishu is, we  find,  peculiar  to
         that city and its immediate environs.  The areas beyond remain much
         as before.   According to Dr Mullen (paragraph 180  above),  Middle
         and Lower Shebelle are more stable  than  Mogadishu.   Although  he
         considered that (internal) refugees in Afgoye had had an effect  on
         stability there, we note at paragraph 8.07 of  the  report  of  the
         Fact Finding Mission of April  2007,  one  source  said  that  "the
         provinces had been relatively unaffected by the main fighting,  and
         that life there remained much the same as it had always been,  with
         little impact from IDPs most of whom remained on the  outskirts  of
         Mogadishu,"  although  he  "thought  that  other  areas  would   be
         increasingly affected if the war carried on".    "Normal  life"  in
         those areas was, the source said, characterised by local  disputes,
         usually about water rights, and that, although  not  comparable  to
         western   standards,   the   local   administration   and   justice
         administered by local clans were "reasonably fair"  (paragraph  237
         above).   In the South, Kismayo appears to be  unstable.  According
         to a UN security officer (R3, page 1130): "it was an area that  was
         always likely to see instability: there were many clans  there  but
         none was dominant so it was inherently unstable and volatile."


    311.    Dr Mullen considered the Bay and Bakool regions  to  have  some
         stability, albeit that two  sub-clans  of  the  Rahanweyn  were  in
         conflict.   There was, in particular,  stability  in  the  town  of
         Baidoa, which was being used by the Ethiopians as a supply base for
         Mogadishu.  Finally, according to Dr Mullen the "other area with  a
         degree of stability was  Hiran,  which  enjoyed  a  very  good  and
         enlightened local government" (paragraph 180 above).


  41. In AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG  [2008]  UKAIT
      00091, the Tribunal summarised its findings as follows:

      1. When considering the question of whether a person is eligible for
      refugee protection on the basis of exposure to armed conflict, Adan
      [1998] 2 WLR 703 does not permit decision makers to reject their
      claims per se.


      2. A person may be able to succeed in a claim to protection  based  on
      poor socio-economic or dire humanitarian living conditions  under  the
      Refugee Convention or Article 15 of  the  Qualification  Directive  or
      Article 3, although to succeed on this basis alone  the  circumstances
      would have to be extremely unusual.


      5. Before the Tribunal will take seriously a challenge to the historic
      validity  of  a  Tribunal  country  guidance  case,  it   would   need
      submissions which  seek  to  adduce  all  relevant  evidence,  for  or
      against, the proposed different view. The  historic  validity  of  the
      guidance given in HH is confirmed.


      6. However, as regards the continuing validity of the  guidance  given
      in HH, the Tribunal considers that there have been significant changes
      in the situation in  central  and  southern  Somalia,  such  that  the
      country guidance in that case is superseded to the following extent:


       (i)There is now an internal armed conflict  within  the  meaning  of
       international humanitarian  law  (IHL)  and  Article  15(c)  of  the
       Refugee Qualification  Directive  throughout  central  and  southern
       Somalia, not just in and around Mogadishu. The armed conflict taking
       place in Mogadishu currently amounts to indiscriminate  violence  at
       such a level of severity as to  place  the  great  majority  of  the
       population  at  risk  of  a  consistent  pattern  of  indiscriminate
       violence. On the present evidence Mogadishu is no longer safe  as  a
       place to live in for the great majority of returnees whose home area
       is Mogadishu;


       (ii) Assessment of the extent to which internally displaced  persons
       (IDPs) face greater or lesser hardships, at least outside  Mogadishu
       (where security considerations are particularly  grave,)  will  vary
       significantly depending on a number of factors;


       (iii) For those whose home area is not Mogadishu, they will  not  in
       general be able to show a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm
       or ill treatment simply on the basis that they  are  a  civilian  or
       even a civilian internally displaced person (IDP) and from such  and
       such a home area, albeit much will depend on the  precise  state  of
       the background evidence relating to their home area at the  date  of
       decision or hearing;


       (iv) As regards internal relocation, whether those whose  home  area
       is Mogadishu (or any other part of  central  and  southern  Somalia)
       will be able to relocate in safety and without undue  hardship  will
       depend on the evidence  as  to  the  general  circumstances  in  the
       relevant parts of central and  southern  Somalia  and  the  personal
       circumstances of the applicant. Whether or not  it  is  likely  that
       relocation will mean that they have to live for a substantial period
       in an IDP camp, will be an important but not necessarily a  decisive
       factor;


        iv) As a result of the current conflict between the  TFG/Ethiopians
       and the  insurgents,  the  Sheikhal  clan  (including  the  Sheikhal
       Logobe), by virtue of the hostile attitude taken towards them by  Al
       Shabbab, is less able to secure  protection  for  its  members  than
       previously, although both as regards their risk of  persecution  and
       serious harm and their protection much will depend on the particular
       circumstances of any individual clan member's case.


  42.  The  reasoning  in  AM  and  AM  is  detailed  and  instructive.   In
      particular, the analysis provided in paragraphs 156 to 209  should  be
      read as if incorporated into this determination.  I can summarise some
      of the Tribunal's most significant findings but this is  not  intended
      as a substitute for a comprehensive consideration of the determination
      itself.   The  numbers  in  square  brackets  refer  to  the  relevant
      paragraph in the determination.


  43. The material outlined by the Tribunal did not  persuade  it  that  the
      situation in central and southern Somalia generally  had  reached  the
      threshold where civilians per se or Somali civilian IDPs per se  could
      be said to face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or
      treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR, [156].   The  Tribunal  placed
      weight on what was said by Mr Alex Tyler, the Protection  Officer  for
      UNHCR, Somalia, [159] in his 1 September 2008 interview:


       "...As mentioned above,  there  has  been  a  dramatic  increase  in
       criminality in Mogadishu,  and  persons  perceived  as  wealthy  are
       attractive targets  for  robbery  or  abduction  -  returnees  would
       certainly attract attention and be assumed to  have  money.  If  the
       individual has been outside of Somalia for a significant  period  of
       time, he or she  will  not  possess  the  knowledge  and  experience
       necessary to be able  to  manage  and  avoid  risk  in  the  current
       situation. Al Shabbab cells are likely to investigate  any  newcomer
       to their areas to determine whether the individual is connected with
       the TFG or otherwise opposed to them..."


  44. The Tribunal found the treatment  of  IDPs  would  vary  significantly
      depending on a non-exhaustive list of factors identified in  paragraph
      160 to which I shall return later in this determination.


  45. The Tribunal accepted that when compared with  the  early  1990s  clan
      protection is no longer as effective as it was but it  did  not  agree
      with Mr Toal's submission that the clan or sub-clan has somehow ceased
      to be the primary entity to which individuals turn for protection  for
      the reasons it gave.


  46.  Dealing  with  Mogadishu,  whose  population  was  estimated  by  the
      International Crisis Group in January 2007 at 1.5 million, it recorded
      UN sources as having estimated (at various times) that 400,000, up  to
      as many as 750,000 (or around one third to a half), of the  population
      of Mogadishu have been displaced. An 8 April  2008  Voice  of  America
      report states that two thirds of Mogadishu has  been  turned  into  an
      urban battleground. Another source stated that Mogadishu is  a  "ghost
      town" and that only the most vulnerable  remain  there,  [172].  In  a
      situation many sources described as 'anarchical' it was difficult  for
      the Tribunal to gain a precise picture of the spread  of  violence  in
      Mogadishu but things had changed a great deal from mid-2007  when  the
      BIA fact finding mission estimated it as being  'fairly  low',  [174].
      The violence in Mogadishu had  exhibited  particularly  dire  features
      over a concerted period of time. Its nature  has  become  increasingly
      indiscriminate, [175], reaching 'a new intensity' with  the  exchanges
      of fire in September 2008. The UN Secretary General in his  July  2008
      and October 2008 said [176] that:


       "The  incessant  level  of  harassment  and  intimidation   by   all
       militarised actors in the city is making living conditions  for  the
       civil population intolerable".

  47. The Tribunal concluded:


      178. In light of the above, we accept that since HH the  situation  in
      Mogadishu has changed significantly, both in terms of  the  extent  of
      population displacement away from  the  city,  the  intensity  of  the
      fighting and of the security conditions there. On the present evidence
      we consider that Mogadishu is no longer safe as a place  to  live  for
      the great  majority  of  its  citizens.   We  do  not  rule  out  that
      notwithstanding the above there may be certain individuals who on  the
      facts may be considered to be able to live safely  in  the  city,  for
      example if they are likely to have  close  connections  with  powerful
      actors in Mogadishu, such as prominent businessmen or  senior  figures
      in the insurgency or in  powerful  criminal  gangs.  However,  barring
      cases of this kind, we consider that in the case of persons  found  to
      come from Mogadishu who are returnees from the UK, they would face  on
      return to live there a real risk of persecution or serious harm and it
      is reasonably likely, if they tried staying  there,  that  they  would
      soon be forced to leave or that they would decide not to try and  live
      there in the first place.

  48. This significant finding led the Tribunal to consider the prospect  of
      those who would have returned to Mogadishu travelling to another  part
      of the country. Whilst the Tribunal rejected the submission  that  the
      level of violence in all parts of the country was sufficient to engage
      the "by reason of" test within Article 15(c), it found that the  great
      majority of those from Mogadishu were  indeed  facing  a  serious  and
      individual threat by reason of  the  indiscriminate  violence  in  the
      armed conflict. Thus, such a person need only  show  that  he  had  no
      viable internal relocation alternative in order to succeed.


  49. Internal re-location is considered in paragraphs 186 onwards in AM and
      AM  beginning  with  the  recital   that,   although   the   test   of
      'reasonableness' was a stringent one, it was not to be equated with  a
      real risk that  the  claimant  would  be  subjected  to  in  human  or
      degrading treatment or punishment sufficient to engage Article 3.  The
      Tribunal did not consider that all those relocating, even  in  respect
      of Mogadishu, faced a reasonable likelihood of becoming an IDP. Whilst
      many from Mogadishu have indeed become IDPs, equally sizeable  numbers
      appear to have made their way to the areas of southern  Somalia  where
      they have traditional clan connections. Nor did  the  Tribunal  accept
      that those who end up, after relocating,  in  an  IDP  camp  face,  in
      general, a real risk of an Article 3 violation,  although  this  would
      depend  on   circumstances.   These   would   include   both   general
      circumstances, such as the prevalence of ongoing fighting and personal
      circumstances such as whether the applicant is reasonably likely to be
      isolated or unprotected, has  family  connections  and  comes  from  a
      majority clan.


  50. The Tribunal then went on  to  consider  the  safety  of  travel  from
      Mogadishu   International   airport.   In   paragraph   191   of   the
      determination, the Tribunal listed the attacks on the airport  between
      January 2008 and October 2008. It then went on to consider checkpoints
      in and around Mogadishu. This led on to  a  general  consideration  of
      traffic movement to and from the airport. The  Tribunal  considered  a
      Voice of America report dating from April 2008 that the 4 km road from
      the airport to the first main junction being clogged with people, cars
      and trucks and a significant level of activity  that  takes  place  in
      order to support the business community  in  Mogadishu.  The  Tribunal
      concluded  in  paragraph  195   that,   whilst   the   situation   was
      characterised  by  arbitrariness,  travellers  from  the  airport   to
      Mogadishu did not face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

  51. One of the appellants in AM and AM was described as a young man in his
      early 20s, a member of the Sheikhal  clan,  able-bodied  and  in  good
      health with family in Mogadishu and elsewhere. He had,  however,  left
      Somalia when he was still a minor, had been absent for over five years
      and would be less adept than persons living there currently at dealing
      with ongoing difficulties. It was  reasonably  likely  that  it  would
      become known he had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  perceived  as
      someone with access to relative wealth. It concluded the appellant, in
      the circumstances  of  his  case,  did  not  have  a  viable  internal
      relocation alternative and would face a violation  of  his  Article  3
      rights. It therefore allowed the appeal in his case.


  52. In AM (Evidence - route of return) Somalia [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC), heard
      on  18  November  2010,  the  Tribunal  (Lord  Bannatyne  and   Senior
      Immigration Judge Latter) concluded that:


           (i) In HH (Somalia) v Secretary of State [2010] EWCA Civ 426  at
           para 84 the Court of  Appeal  when  referring  to  the  Claimant
           raising a cogent argument that there might not be a  safe  route
           of return was not  setting  down  a  threshold  requirement  for
           cogent evidence before it was open to the Tribunal  to  consider
           the issue but making the point  that  the  issue  need  only  be
           considered if there was a proper evidential basis for doing so.
           (ii)  In  the  light  of  the  comprehensive  rejection  of  the
           appellant's credibility, the issue of the  safety  of  returning
           from Mogadishu to Afgoye had to be assessed in the light of  the
           general background  evidence  on  this  issue:  MA  (Somalia)  v
           Secretary of State [2010] UKSC 49 applied.
           (iii) The general evidence before the Upper Tribunal  failed  to
           establish that generalised or  indiscriminate  violence  was  at
           such a high level along this route that the appellant would face
           a real risk to his life or person entitling him to  a  grant  of
           humanitarian protection.

     The appellant had not  established  that  he  was  from  the  minority
     Benadiri clan or  that  he  had  ever  encountered  Al  Shabbab,  been
     questioned by them or subjected to an attempt to recruit him.  Even if
     he were from a minority clan, he would be able to access protection on
     his return from a majority clan.  He  and  his  wife  both  had  close
     relatives living in Afgoye who were  apparently  able  to  live  there
     without having encountered security problems and he would be  able  to
     secure the protection of members of a majority clan. It  was  accepted
     that he had been returned from Saudi Arabia in early 2009 and had then
     been able to travel from Mogadishu to his home area of Afgoye.  He had
     returned safely from Afgoye back to Mogadishu in  the  company  of  an
     agent paid for by his uncle.

  53. Reliance was placed on a report of Dr Hoehne. It was submitted by the
      appellant that even within Mogadishu, the appellant risked  having  to
      cross  checkpoints  with  the  attendant   risk   from   undisciplined
      soldiers.  He would then have to go  through  Al  Shabbab  checkpoints
      where he would be at risk if he was seen to  be  behaving  in  an  un-
      Islamic way. Dealing with the route  from  Mogadishu  to  Afgoye,  Dr
      Hoehne said that there were  many  checkpoints  which  are  places  of
      heightened risk as armed guards are often not responsible to any over-
      arching authorities  and  they  prey  on  passengers  by  looting  and
      raping.  Even the checkpoints operated by TFG soldiers do not function
      in any 'benign way'.


  54. The Upper Tribunal also considered the Fact-Finding Mission to Nairobi
      of October 2010.  At paragraph 1.14, the report says that  the  Afgoye
      corridor is not under the control of TFG; Al Shabbab is in control  of
      the access, and the whole of the area surrounding  it.   Hizbul  Islam
      normally controls the Afgoye corridor, although in recent months there
      had been localised skirmishes between the two militias.  There were  a
      total of around 15-18 flights arriving in Mogadishu  Airport  per  day
      and it was reported that returning Somalis can make arrangements  with
      family to ensure they have someone to meet them  at  the  airport  and
      somewhere to stay on arrival.  Somalis returning  to  Mogadishu  would
      need a lot of preparation and would need to ensure they have  contacts
      in  Mogadishu  but  the  Somali  diaspora  travel  back   to   Somalia
      frequently.

  55. The report then went on to deal with travel from Mogadishu Airport  to
      the city where the road is  controlled  by  the  TFG  with  an  AMISOM
      presence.  One report is to the effect that  Somali  citizens  do  not
      need or use armed escorts.  Ordinary Somalis  would  not  be  able  to
      afford this and, even if they could, such guards would draw  attention
      to their importance and wealth and make them more  attractive  targets
      for robbing and kidnapping.

  56. So far as travelling outside Mogadishu was concerned  it  is  reported
      that many people travel  within  the  areas  under  the  influence  or
      control of Al Shabbab.  There are checkpoints where travellers will be
      asked where they are travelling to and why but so long as they obey Al
      Shabbab's rules, they are generally allowed  to  continue  with  their
      journey.  There are buses  and  lorries  that  will  carry  passengers
      between towns.  It is said that Al Shabbab have reduced the number  of
      checkpoints in the area they control and have made travelling by  road
      more secure  against  criminals  but  they  commit  their  own  abuses
      including  the  recruitment  of  young  men  from  buses  stopped   at
      checkpoints.

  57. Another source stated that  it  is  possible  to  travel  anywhere  in
      Somalia as long as you have money and contacts.   There  are  numerous
      checkpoints operating that seek to establish who is  travelling  where
      and why but the Somali population can  generally  pass  through  these
      checkpoints safely.  Another report says  that  the  old  clan  system
      still functions as a  protection  mechanism  for  Somalis  wishing  to
      travel  and  that  it  is  generally  safe  to  travel  through  areas
      controlled by Al Shabbab.

  58. The Upper Tribunal approached the appellant as someone  who  had  been
      found not to have  told  the  truth  about  his  clan  membership  and
      contacts with Al Shabbab.  When assessing the risks arising  from  the
      route of  return,  the  Tribunal  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant was a Southern Somali and that his home area is Afgoye.   On
      his  account  he  was  returned  to  Somalia  by  the  Saudi   Arabian
      authorities in 2009 and was able to travel to his home area in Afgoye.
       The Upper Tribunal accepted, in the light  of  the  evidence  in  the
      report of the Fact-Finding Mission to Somalia,  that  travel  was  not
      only possible but takes place  with  some  degree  of  frequency  from
      Mogadishu Airport into the city of Mogadishu and into other  areas  in
      Somalia.  It accepted that there are regular, even if limited, flights
      into Mogadishu, some fifteen to eighteen a day, the  report  referring
      to their being just over 12,000 passengers in eight months.  Buses and
      taxis operate between the airport and the city and travel is  possible
      to other cities and through the Afgoye corridor.

  59. It was argued that there would be a real risk to AM as he had to  pass
      through TFG and Al Shabbab checkpoints.  The  Tribunal  found  the  Al
      Shabbab checkpoints were generally well disciplined and their  concern
      was whether travellers comply with the rules and  norms  of  behaviour
      required. The Tribunal was not satisfied that there was any  substance
      in the argument that the appellant would be at  real  risk.   (He  had
      lived in Yemen and Saudi Arabia.)  So far as the TFG checkpoints  were
      concerned, there was nothing about the appellant to  put  him  at  any
      particular risk and the Upper Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      evidence supported a finding that all those  who  travel  through  the
      checkpoints can be regarded as being at real risk or that AM would  be
      so simply because he was being returned from the United Kingdom.   For
      similar reasons the Tribunal were not satisfied that there is  a  real
      risk of enforced recruitment by Al Shabbab: the general evidence  does
      not support a finding that all men or young men are at such  risk  and
      in the light of  the  credibility  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal the appellant was unable to show that there was  anything  in
      his particular circumstances or profile which would put him at risk.

The Tribunal's decision in Ahmed Farah Mohamed

  60. Turning to the case before me, Mr Toal applied to cite a determination
      which has not been  reported  and,  in  support  of  his  application,
      produced a copy of  the  determination  of  Senior  Immigration  Judge
      Latter in Ahmed Farah Mohamed (Appeal Number: IA/16568/2007), heard on
      17 June 2010.  I note that, had this been reported, it would have been
      the fourth Somali case cited to me and bearing the 'identifying' title
      "AM".


  61.  In  deciding  Mr  Toal's  application,  I  have  had  regard  to  the
      Immigration and Asylum Chambers' Practice Direction  11.   Insofar  as
      this decision is relevant and comes from the same  Senior  Immigration
      Judge who decided AM [2011] (above),  I  feel  that  I  am  materially
      assisted by its citation.  As it is not a reported  decision,  I  have
      appended it to this determination  as  an  annex.  Senior  Immigration
      Judge Latter stated:


    18. I am  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  internal
        relocation is a viable option in this appeal in the  light  of  the
        detailed evidence produced about the location of Mogadishu  Airport
        in relation to Mogadishu and the fact that the only apparent way by
        road through and from the airport out of Mogadishu is to go through
        parts of Mogadishu which are in a state of internal armed conflict.
         The evidence satisfies me that the Hodan area continues to be the
        subject of indiscriminate violence and there is  also  evidence  of
        mortar attacks on the airport.  No other route of return other than
        by way of Mogadishu Airport has been proposed.  On this basis I  am
        satisfied that the appeal should succeed on humanitarian protection
        grounds.


      It should also be pointed  out  that  the  appellant  in  Ahmed  Farah
      Mohamed was not a person whose claim had been believed.  Although  the
      Immigration Judge did  not  deal  specifically  with  the  appellant's
      evidence about what had happened to him and his family, it  was  clear
      that he rejected the central core of the appellant's  account.   There
      was no evidence of the appellant  or  his  family  being  specifically
      targeted on the basis of their clan membership.

The Fact Finding Mission of September 2010

  62. I was referred to the  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Nairobi  report  (8
      October 2010) conducted between 8 and 15 September 2010.  As  Mr  Toal
      points out, the informants are not identified and it is not  therefore
      possible to assess their expertise.  Nevertheless, I  am  prepared  to
      accept that this was a genuine study which was intended to provide  an
      accurate assessment of the position gained from the views of those who
      are likely to have been selected because they were able  to  speak  on
      these matters.  I am not prepared to approach the document  as  if  it
      were a propaganda exercise aimed at supporting a pre-conceived view of
      the situation.  Like much of  the  background  material,  the  precise
      weight  that  can  properly  be  attached  to  it  cannot  be   gauged
      mathematically but that is no reason, in my judgment, why it should be
      disregarded altogether.


  63. The Executive Summary states that most of southern and central Somalia
      was controlled by Al Shabbab, with only  the  Galmudug  region,  small
      pockets around the Ethiopian border and  key  strategic  locations  in
      Mogadishu controlled by the Transitional Federal Government  (TFG)  or
      elements sympathetic to it.  There were some areas that were nominally
      under the control of Hizbul Islam, most notably Haradheere and part of
      the Afgoye corridor, however, Al Shabbab influence in these areas  was
      such that they hold most of the power.

  64. There were regular flights into Somalia,  most  notably  to  Mogadishu
      International Airport which was under the control of the TFG  and  the
      African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops.  Over  1,000  people
      travel into the country every month. From the airport Somali civilians
      can use taxis to travel to the city; the road  from  the  airport  was
      controlled by the TFG (supported by AMISOM troops). Views differed  on
      the scope for individuals to  travel  within  Mogadishu  however  most
      sources stated that  Somali  civilians  could  move  around  the  city
      without much difficulty. [Executive Summary]

  65. Travel within Al Shabbab-controlled  areas  of  southern  and  central
      Somalia  was  common  and  considered  relatively  safe.  There   were
      checkpoints operated by  the  organisation  and  these  were  used  to
      monitor  the  movement  of  people.  For  Somali  civilians  with   no
      affiliation to the TFG there were usually no problems passing  through
      checkpoints as long as Al Shabbab's rules were  followed.  There  were
      buses that will take civilians between  towns.  Travel  between  Belet
      Weyne, Mogadishu and Kismayo is popular. [Executive Summary]

  66. Civilians were at risk of being  caught  in  the  cross  fire  of  the
      conflict  rather  than  being  targeted.   Outside  Mogadishu  all  of
      southern and central Somalia has seen conflict since 2007 although the
      level of conflict is now much reduced and most areas were described as
      stable. Only Beletweyne was  specifically  mentioned  as  an  area  of
      ongoing conflict (for control of the town).[Executive Summary]

  67. The  situation  in  Mogadishu  is  fluid  with  AMISOM  identified  as
      responsible for the majority of civilian deaths, mostly as a result of
      shelling  residential  areas  such  as  Bakara  Market.  Al  Shabbab's
      military tactics and attacks have become  more  sophisticated  as  the
      influence of foreign elements in the organisation has increased.  They
      have  targeted  TFG  and  AMISOM  interests,  for  instance  Mogadishu
      airport. Day to day life continues in Mogadishu  and  the  economy  is
      functioning. [Executive Summary]

  68. Dealing with the road between Mogadishu and the Airport, the following
      material emerges:


      "The road between the airport  and  Villa  Somalia  (the  presidential
      compound) is kept open but there has been some fighting and  the  road
      is dangerous for TFG-connected people. For ordinary  Somali  civilians
      it should not be particularly dangerous apart from being in the  wrong
      place at the wrong time. Somalis  of  excessively  western  appearance
      would be noticed as members of the Somali diaspora but this  does  not
      mean they would be necessarily  targeted  by  AS.    Ordinary  Somalis
      could not afford armed escorts but they are  not  needed  in  general.
      They are likely to use minibuses and the drivers may have to buy their
      way through checkpoints." [A diplomatic source]


      "The organisation uses armed escorts to travel from the airport to the
      city. However, the organisation sees the route between the airport and
      city  as  safe  ('surprisingly  OK')  for  Somalis  to  travel."   [An
      international NGO]

  69. In relation to Mogadishu, it is said that sources had differing  views
      on the ease of movement within Mogadishu.  Most  sources  stated  that
      Somalis were able to travel around the city without much restriction.

      "There are four main roads in Mogadishu and three  are  controlled  by
      AS. There are no checkpoints on the AS main road, and the TFG does not
      carry out checks on vehicles on the one road it controls. People  move
      freely in Mogadishu but can be hit by stray bullets, and they tend  to
      make sure they travel before fighting  begins  in  the  afternoon,  if
      possible. There are no limitations on travel based on  prayer  times."
      [An international NGO]

      Outside Mogadishu, it is said that many people travelled within  areas
      controlled by Al Shabbab.  In  these  areas  there  were  checkpoints,
      mostly operated by Al Shabbab, where travellers were asked where  they
      were travelling to and why. However, as long as they obey Al Shabbab's
      rules they were generally allowed to continue with their journey. Road
      travel between Mogadishu and Beletweyne, and Mogadishu and Kismayo was
      frequently used; there were buses and lorries  that  carry  passengers
      between towns.

      The security situation in Mogadishu was changeable. The African  Union
      Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) was named as being responsible for most of
      the civilian deaths in the city as a result of shelling of areas  with
      high numbers of civilians, particularly Bakara  Market.  Al  Shabbab's
      tactics were increasingly to focus on Transitional Federal  Government
      (TFG)  and  AMISOM   targets.   The   attacks   were   becoming   more
      sophisticated, as seen in the Muna Hotel attack [24 August  2010]  and
      the failed attack on the airport.

           "AS carries out targeted attacks against Ugandan  and  Burundian
           troops, as well as TFG ministers and MPs, but  they  also  carry
           out random killings of civilians in Mogadishu to create disorder
           and chaos. It is  not  even  safe  to  be  in  Medina  hospital.
           Civilians are particularly in danger in  Bakara  market  and  in
           areas close to those controlled by AMISOM. However,  apart  from
           some areas, you can see normal life in Mogadishu, like  children
           playing in the street. Most of the city is  traversable  but  it
           depends who you are. Everybody who is not  Somali  is  at  risk,
           including AMISOM and NGOs. For ordinary  Somalis  who  go  about
           their day-to-day life Mogadishu is reasonably safe. They can  go
           shopping and to the market, children  go  to  school.  There  is
           public  transport,  minibuses  and  taxis  are  available.   The
           Mogadishu economy  is  booming  and  thriving  on  the  lack  of
           regulations. Quite a lot of people have left Mogadishu but there
           is still evidence of a normal life. It is difficult to establish
           how many civilians have left the city but estimates indicate  up
           to 500,000 might have left." [A security advisor]

  70. Outside Mogadishu it is said that areas controlled by Al Shabbab  were
      considered to be stable. There was some  fighting  in  Beletweyne  and
      occasional clan conflicts in other areas.  The human rights  situation
      was described in these terms:

           "The AS interpretation of Sharia law is not in  accordance  with
           the beliefs of ordinary Somalis, however the  harsh  punishments
           inflicted by them are not carried out on a regular basis -  i.e.
           they are not daily or weekly. Petty thieves  and  adulterers  in
           particular have been targeted. Men have been  attacked  for  not
           having the correct style of beard.


           "Al Shabbab in the Gedo region are not  as  harsh  as  in  other
           regions as they are run by a local administration."

The Operational Guidance Note (OGN)

  71. The Secretary of State relied upon the  contents  of  the  Operational
      Guidance Note.  It is necessary to exercise some caution here.  An OGN
      is not to be considered as Country Guidance  emanating  from  the  RDS
      unit and prepared under the direction of  academics.   Rather,  it  is
      policy developed by decision-makers.  Whilst this is no indication  of
      bad faith, it should be viewed critically with no implied hall-mark of
      objectivity.  Insofar  as  it  is  properly  sourced  from  background
      material, it is as accurate as the background  material  to  which  it
      refers, no more and no less.  If it is comment, it should  be  treated
      in the same way as if it were a  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State: it has to be evaluated on its merits.  It  is  not
      subject to the same quality control as COIS reports in  that  it  does
      not fall under the scrutiny  of  the  Independent  Advisory  Group  on
      Country Information.  I was referred to the following passages in  the
      OGN by Mr Bramble:


           3.6.2...However, a fall in clashes between government troops and
           insurgents has led to a  substantial  drop  in  the  numbers  of
           civilians killed in fighting in Mogadishu in 2009.  Rebels  have
           focused more on attacking government targets and  African  Union
           (AU) peacekeepers with suicide  bombs  and  mortar  shells.  The
           Mogadishu-based Elman Peace and Human Rights Organisation states
           that 1,739 civilians were killed in fighting in 2009, down  from
           7,574 in 2008 and 8,636 in 2007. At least 4,911  civilians  were
           wounded  and  3,900  families  displaced  by  clashes  in  2009.
           [Although  this  passage  is  sourced,  it  cannot  possibly  be
           accurate that only 3,900 families have been  displaced.   Whilst
           Mr Toal, with some justification,  described  this  as  'grossly
           inaccurate and unreliable', it does not require me to  disregard
           the entire passage or, for that  matter,  the  entire  OGN.   It
           merely requires that I exercise due caution.]


           3.6.5 Al-Shabbab governs with local administrations:  region-by-
           region and city-by-city. It reportedly raises  money  by  taxing
           international aid organisations, collecting zakat from citizens,
           levies on the international khat  trade,  receiving  remittances
           from abroad and financial  support  from  Eritrea.  It  provides
           government services  to  its  constituents,  enforces  a  strict
           interpretation of shari'a law, and maintains its grip  on  power
           by using violence and  intimidation.  The  group  also  conducts
           terror  operations,  including  suicide  bombings,  against  its
           perceived enemies and views itself as part of the  global  jihad
           movement. Human Rights Watch reported in  April  2010  that  al-
           Shabbab has brought greater stability than many parts of Somalia
           have known for years. Even critics have credited the group  with
           bringing peace and order to communities that had been plagued by
           crime and insecurity since the collapse of the Somali state. The
           group are said to have wiped out banditry and freelance militias
           but that stability had often come at a high cost  to  the  local
           population, especially women.


           3.6.6 Al-Shabbab currently controls much of southern and central
           Somalia, including large portions  of  Mogadishu.  The  TFG  has
           maintained control of a few areas in the south east of the city,
           government installations, the Presidential palace and  strategic
           locations such as the airport and seaport.  Al-Shabbab  controls
           large portions of Mogadishu including the north  and  north-east
           parts of the city, the main stadium  and  the  main  market.  It
           controls nearly all of Middle  and  Lower  Jubba  regions,  Gedo
           region, Bay region, Bakool region, and parts of  Lower  Shabelle
           region. In some parts of the country (i.e. Mogadishu), it  works
           closely with Hizbul Islam, and in other  parts  of  the  country
           (i.e.  Kismayo  and  Diif)  it  has  battled  Hizbul  Islam  for
           territory.  Hizbul Islam  controls  Beledweyne  and  administers
           Hiraan region as well as Afgoi district near Mogadishu.


           3.6.9 The TFG's respect for human rights improved in 2009 and it
           was  not  responsible  for   politically   motivated   killings,
           executions or disappearances. Incremental improvements in  human
           rights awareness were taking place in some areas of the country.
           Allegations against TFG security forces decreased and its police
           and prison personnel were generally responsive on  human  rights
           problems.


           3.6.17 Throughout 2009, al-Shabbab has continued to  consolidate
           its control in large parts  of  central  and  southern  Somalia.
           There are many parts of central and southern Somalia where there
           is no ongoing fighting  because  territorial  control  has  been
           established. In the areas now fully  under  al-Shabbab  control,
           the human rights situation is poor but there are low  levels  of
           generalised violence. In areas controlled by the TFG, the  human
           rights position is less problematic but there are likely  to  be
           high levels of generalised violence due to continued  challenges
           by insurgents.


           3.6.18 Checkpoints operated by the TFG have decreased and  there
           were no reports of armed clan factions operating checkpoints  in
           2009. Al-Shabbab has established checkpoints at  the  exit/entry
           routes of the towns under its control for security  reasons.  It
           checks goods,  searches  people  and  ensures  that  its  strict
           Islamic codes are enforced, but does not  collect  money.  There
           were no reports of checkpoints between towns or within towns, as
           was common in previous years with  the  exception  of  Mogadishu
           where there are checkpoints in the city.


           3.6.19 There are several checkpoints on the route from Mogadishu
           towards  the  Central  Regions  and  some  precautions  may   be
           necessary particularly during militia fightings. During overland
           trips clan protection is not required unless ongoing animosities
           between two rival clans are involved. The transporter is most of
           the time the guarantor of the safety of the  passengers  because
           he is familiar with the route, militias and all the checkpoints.
           Within south central and Puntland, people mostly travel on buses
           and minibuses.


           3.6.20 Restrictions on movement have  reduced  significantly  as
           compared to the situation considered by  the  AIT  in  AM  where
           illegal checkpoints had proliferated to  excessive  levels.  Al-
           Shabbab has reportedly eradicated extortion, robbery and  murder
           from bandits in areas it controls. There  is  no  evidence  that
           those not of adverse interest to the TFG, al-Shabbab  or  groups
           such as Hizbul Islam or ASWJ who have a presence  in  particular
           areas, would be unable to pass through checkpoints safely. There
           may be some security incidents whilst travelling in Somalia and,
           although individuals will not generally need an escort, if  they
           consider an escort necessary, it is feasible for them to arrange
           one either before or after arrival.


           3.6.22 Given the generally lower  levels  of  fighting  and  the
           relative ease of travel within many areas of Somalia, the  risks
           of  travel  are  likely  to  be  less  problematic  than   those
           considered by the AIT. It will be feasible for many to return to
           their home areas from Mogadishu airport as most areas  are  more
           accessible  than  previously.  Mogadishu  airport  continues  to
           function normally. There are scheduled air services to a  number
           of  destinations  in  Somalia  -Mogadishu,  Bosasso,   Hargeisa,
           Berbera, Burao and Galcaiyo.

Additional background material

  72. I was referred to additional background material  in  part  C  of  the
      appellant's bundle. This was principally directed to  the  appellant's
      likely direction of travel having arrived at  Mogadishu  International
      Airport, the place to which the respondent says the appellant will  be
      returned. The airport road, at kilometre 4, (K4), reaches a T-Junction
      in the Hodan district; in one direction the road travelling to central
      Mogadishu and in the other to the Afgoye corridor. The journey to  the
      Gedo region involves travel to Baydhaba and then on in  the  direction
      of Baardheere.


  73. The junction at K4 is described in an AP report of  25  November  2009
      [p.C49] as 'a  strategic  roundabout  where  snipers  or  mortar  fire
      targets Ugandan soldiers in a bullet-pocked  building  three  or  four
      times a week.' The same location was the site of a suicide bombing and
      a subsequent fire-fight on 24 January 2009 in which 22 civilians  were
      killed.  K4 is in the Hodan district of Mogadishu in which  there  was
      fighting reported on 24 and 25 February 2009  [p.C101],  17  September
      2009 [p.C112], 24 December 2009 [p.C37], 29 January 2010  [p.C32]  and
      15 February 2010 [p.C29].  Reuters reported a further 14  were  killed
      [p.C103] in March 2009 in the capital on the road linking K4 with  the
      presidential palace. There was a further report of fighting  in  Hodan
      in August 2009, [p.C112].

  74. Mogadishu International Airport was attacked on 14 April 2009  [p.C68]
      according to the Washington Post in an incident  in  which  insurgents
      had fired mortar rounds at an aircraft carrying a US congressman as he
      left Mogadishu Airport killing 5 civilians on the ground.  There  were
      further attacks on the airport  on  17  September  2009  [p.C115],  22
      October 2009 [p.C52] and 26 January 2010  [p.C30].  In  all  of  these
      instances civilians were killed. There is further evidence of fighting
      in this general area in March and April 2010 [p.C4 and 6].

  75. An Amnesty International report of March  2010  entitled  'No  end  in
      sight: the ongoing suffering of Somalia's civilians' [p. C8] refers to
      the civilian deaths in Mogadishu and other cities and the  attacks  in
      September and October  2009  including  one  at  the  AMISON  base  in
      Mogadishu and another at  the  Martini  hospital.  There  are  further
      references to the September 2009 suicide attacks  on  pages  C112  and
      C115. In January and February 2010,  there  was  intense  fighting  in
      Dhusamareb and Beletweyne involving large numbers of displaced persons
      and the deaths of civilians. Section  D  of  the  appellant's  bundle,
      summarised in paragraph 10 of the appellant's skeleton argument  of  4
      April 2011 provides further examples of violent  clashes  between  TFG
      and insurgents in which civilians are also casualties. Most  of  these
      incidents took place in Mogadishu between July and October 2010.

The formulation of the appellant's case before me

  76. On the basis of this evidence, the appellant argues that he  would  be
      exposed to real risk of serious harm upon arrival at Mogadishu airport
      and whilst travelling to any other place. It is claimed that  he  does
      not have an internal relocation alternative. Reliance is  placed  upon
      what are said to be the inconsistent findings in AM (Evidence -  route
      of return)  Somalia  [2011]  UKUT  54  and  Ahmed  Farah  Mohamed.  In
      particular, it is said that I should not place  greater  weight  on  a
      reported decision, albeit not designated as country guidance, than  on
      an unreported decision for that reason alone.


  77. As Practice Direction 11 makes clear, there is a difference between  a
      case that has been selected  for  reporting  and  one  that  has  not.
      Further light as to the difference is shed by the  published  criteria
      for reporting decisions:

                CRITERIA FOR REPORTING    (15 February 2010)

       1. In deciding whether a decision should be reported  the  Reporting
          Committee will apply the criteria set out below.


       2. A  decision  will  be  reported  where  the  Reporting  Committee
          considers that it has general significance  and  utility  in  the
          development of the Upper Tribunal's  case  law,  is  sufficiently
          well reasoned and is consistent with binding statutory provisions
          or precedent of the senior courts.


       3. Decisions selected for reporting will  have  at  least  one,  and
          normally more than one, of the following features:-
           a. the Tribunal has considered  previous decisions on the  issue
              or issues and  has had sufficient  argument on them;
           b. the decision considers a novel point  of  law,  construction,
              procedure or practice, or develops previous decisions in  the
              same area;
           c.  the  decision  gives  guidance  likely  to  be  of   general
              assistance to other judges, the parties or practitioners;
           d. the decision contains an assessment of facts of a  kind  that
              others ought to be aware of, because it is likely  to  be  of
              assistance in other cases;
           e. there is some other compelling reason why the decision  ought
              to be reported.

  78. Senior Immigration Judges are aware of these criteria and can be taken
      to weigh them carefully when deciding whether or  not  to  submit  for
      reporting and, in turn,  the  decision  by  the  Tribunal's  reporting
      committee on whether to report a  case  will  be  based  on  the  same
      criteria. Given the process of preparing decisions for  reporting,  it
      is likely  to  be  rare  that  an  unreported  decision  will  contain
      sufficient material within  it  to  offer  significant  assistance  as
      guidance to decision-makers, practitioners or judges in other cases.


  79. Country Guidance cases are, of course, governed by Practice  Direction
      11.  In relation to cases that are not reported as  country  guidance,
      however, the principle that like cases should be decided alike  should
      also apply, but it must be borne in mind that fact-finders  are  often
      not faced with wholly or even essentially similar material. This seems
      particularly likely in  a  jurisdiction  which  is  faced  with  great
      difficulty in the  collection,  and  analysis,  of  often  scanty  and
      inconsistent background material from a variety of sources of  varying
      weight: I have a pretty fair idea  of  what  is  happening  now  along
      Oxford Street and, if I did not,  a  surveillance  camera  would  soon
      provide the detail; I have much less of an idea, in spite of  COI,  of
      what is happening along the principal street in Mogadishu.

  80. In deciding this case, however, it is unnecessary for me  to  rely  on
      the fact of there being a difference between reported  and  unreported
      decisions.  For the purposes of this appeal, I am prepared to  proceed
      on the basis urged by Mr Toal that I take into account both  decisions
      but it remains in the final analysis a matter for me in the context of
      all the material that I have attempted to summarise  above  to  decide
      whether and how much they  assist.   My  approach  is  to  assess  the
      overall merits  of  the  decisions  which  I  have  agreed  should  be
      considered by me.


  81. It seems to me that the decisions in AM (Evidence - route  of  return)
      [2011] and Ahmed Farah Mohamed are  distinguishable  in  a  number  of
      ways.  First, AM (Evidence - route of  return)  [2011]  is  the  later
      case.  Second, this case had the benefit of a new Fact Finding Mission
      report which I have summarised above and  contains  significant  fresh
      material that was not before the Tribunal in Ahmed Farah Mohamed.   In
      addition, there are also factual differences.  Both decisions have  to
      be examined in the light of existing  Tribunal  country  guidance,  in
      particular, AM and AM.

The analysis


  82. In paragraph 160 of AM & AM, the Tribunal found the treatment of  IDPs
      would  vary  significantly  depending  on  a  non-exhaustive  list  of
      factors:


      (a) IDPs from more influential clans or sub-clans  appear  to  have  a
      better chance of being tolerated in the area to which they have fled;
      (b) IDPs who  have  a  traditional  clan  area  they  can  travel  to,
      especially if in that area they have family, or friends, or close clan
      or sub-clan affiliations, appear to have better prospects  of  finding
      safety and support, although not if  the  area  concerned  is  already
      saturated with fellow - IDPs;
      (c) those who lack recent experience of living in Somalia appear  more
      likely to have difficulty dealing  with  the  changed  environment  in
      which clan loyalties have to some extent fractured;
      (d) persons returning to their home area from the UK may be  perceived
      as having relative  wealth  and  be  more  susceptible  to  extortion,
      abduction and the like as a result;
      (e) those who live in areas not particularly affected by the  fighting
      and which are seen as not important strategically to any of  the  main
      parties  to  the  conflict  would  appear  less  subject  to  security
      problems;
      (f)   gender;
      (g)  age and health;
      (h) economic conditions.


  83. In the context of this appeal there are additional risk factors  which
      have been raised:


      (i) The appellant returns from  the  United  Kingdom  lacking  current
      information of, and disoriented by,  the  situation  in  southern  and
      central Somalia.
      (j) He faces a specific risk in Mogadishu.
      (k)He is a man with tattoos.
      (l)He is a man said to be an 'adulterer' with a criminal record and  a
      person with a history of drug and alcohol abuse.
      (m)He will be required to travel through checkpoints.
      (n)He is a Marehan/Darod at risk from the Hawiye or even sub-clans  of
      the Darod.
      (o)He will be required to travel to Gedo.
      (p)He has been in the United Kingdom since August 1997.
      (q)He is unable to follow the tenets of Islam.
      (r)He has no uncle or family support in Somalia.

Specific risk factors

  84. Common to my consideration of whether the  appellant  is  at  risk  in
      Mogadishu or in the Marehan homeland of Gedo or upon  his  journey  to
      Gedo from Mogadishu Airport is an assessment of the  specific  factors
      mentioned in the preceding paragraph and relied on by the appellant in
      the particular circumstances of  his  case.   My  decisions  on  these
      matters will inform my thinking upon the wider examination of risk.


  85. First I shall assess the additional risk faced  by  the  appellant  by
      reason of his having tattoos.  In his statement of  8  March  2007  he
      described a  tattoo  on  his  right  arm  as  in  Chinese  script  and
      photographs showed one tattoo on his right forearm to  spell  out  his
      name 'Ahmed'. The tattoo on his left arm appeared to be on  the  inner
      aspect  of  the  limb,   faint   and   indistinct.   The   photographs
      demonstrated, as the medical report described, that the  tattoos  were
      partially obscured by scars.  Dr Hoehne considered that the tattoos on
      his arms amounted  to  a  major  cause  for  concern  as  tattoos  are
      forbidden by Islam. The  panel,  however,  did  not  accept  that  the
      evidence of the tattoos on  his  arms  constituted  a  deviation  from
      traditional or religious norms such as to place the appellant at risk.
      It did not therefore consider that the tattoos in themselves would  be
      considered objectionable in Somalia  or  that  they  would  place  the
      appellant at risk.   On the grounds of appeal asserted that the  panel
      failed to provide adequate reasons for rejecting the  expert  evidence
      to the effect (amongst other matters) that his tattoos placed  him  at
      risk.  That was rejected on appeal.


  86. I see no reason to depart from those findings.  Were I required to re-
      make the assessment, I am not satisfied on the material before me that
      it is sufficient to establish a risk. First, there  is  a  distinction
      between  societal  disapproval  of  tattoos  in   general   and   such
      disapproval resulting in harm. No  background  material  was  provided
      that demonstrated  those  carrying  tattoos  have  been  subjected  to
      punishment  by  Islamists  who  disapprove.  Second,  the   well-known
      rejection of representational art in Islam is of a different character
      to a tattoo, all the more so if the  tattoo  is  non-representational.
      Third, I am unable to discern from Dr Hoehne precisely  the  scope  of
      the objection to tattoos. If it is because a tattoo may be figurative,
      this  would  suggest  anything  figurative  or   representational   is
      prohibited in an Islamic country but this would appear to go too  far.
      If it is because no decoration is permitted on the  human  body,  then
      this would suggest that no  make-up,  hair-dyes  or  nail  varnish  is
      permitted.  This, too, would appear to go too far.  Fourth,  there  is
      little evidence that the appellant's tattoos are of such  a  character
      as to attract attention. Some are indistinct and all  may  be  covered
      over by a shirt. If, in the course of ritual ablutions,  some  may  be
      visible, the mechanism by which this will lead to harm is not  obvious
      to me. For  these  reasons,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  Dr  Hoehne's
      reference to  tattoos  being  un-Islamic  is  a  risk  factor  in  the
      particular circumstances of the appellant's case or enhances the  risk
      the appellant faces for other reasons.


  87. It is also suggested that  the  appellant  will  be  perceived  as  an
      adulterer and a man with a criminal record. In this context, I do  not
      consider that any assistance is provided by the thinking developed  by
      the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  A person should not be
      expected to lie in order to avoid harm.  It is one  thing  to  conceal
      one's  identity  in  circumstances  where  the   concealment   is   an
      infringement; quite another, where  the  concealment  is  the  natural
      desire of anybody who has a past that they would prefer not to reveal.
       There is no real likelihood  of  the  appellant  revealing  his  past
      unless he chooses to do so.

  88. Further, the appellant has failed to establish how information  as  to
      his past behaviour will filter back to Somalia.  Whilst, there is well-
      documented evidence of the Somali diaspora being in contact with those
      remaining in Somalia, that does not suggest there is a means by  which
      the appellant's conduct (either good or ill) will become known to  the
      persons with whom the appellant will come into contact on return.

  89. Even if it is known that the appellant has offended, and this  results
      in his being shunned by those who disapprove of his past conduct, that
      is a far cry from his being persecuted as a result of it.  It  is  not
      suggested that there is the likelihood of his being re-tried  for  the
      offences he has committed in the United Kingdom.  I am  not  satisfied
      that his past conduct will become known on return or that, were it  to
      do so, this would put him  at  risk  or  enhance  the  risk  he  might
      otherwise face.


  90. It was Dr Hoehne's view that the appellant was at risk in Gedo because
      the appellant would return as a failed �migr� who had dishonoured  his
      family through misconduct.  For the reasons I have given, I would  not
      categorise the appellant's return in this way and so I do not consider
      it likely that fellow clan members would refuse to support  or  accept
      him for that reason.

  91. The appellant claims that he is unfamiliar with the  practice  of  his
      religion and that this would put him at risk.  He  does  not  put  his
      case on the basis that he is an agnostic or atheist and  is  otherwise
      unable to participate in any religious activity.  He has put  it  that
      he 'does not know how to pray'.  The appellant was born  in  1977  and
      arrived in the United Kingdom in 1997, having spent the first 20 years
      in Somalia.  It is unnecessary for  me  to  determine  the  depth  and
      nature of the appellant's  participation  in  the  religious  life  of
      Somalia when he left it but he does not  suggest  that  the  level  at
      which he participated caused him to be at risk of harm whilst he lived
      there.  He cannot have forgotten the basic tenets of Islam.  In  broad
      terms, he will return to whatever level of knowledge and commitment he
      once had.  If it was sufficient for him in 1997 I see no reason why it
      should be insufficient on return.  Even if he has ceased  to  practice
      his faith since his arrival in the United Kingdom, I would not  regard
      that as surprising given the different  circumstances  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Not would I regard it as  exceptional  for  members  of  the
      diaspora to be less  familiar  with  religious  practice  since  their
      departure.  There is no evidence that those remaining in  Somalia  are
      hostile to returning Muslims because they have been less committed  in
      the practice of Islam during their absence and every reason  to  think
      that their co-religionists would welcome their return to the  practice
      of their faith.


  92. I am not satisfied that the appellant was telling the  truth  when  he
      said that the uncle, a businessman, who had helped  him  come  to  the
      United Kingdom, died in 2001 and that the appellant received the  news
      of his death in 2003.  It seems to me that the  appellant  would  have
      immediately appreciated the  significance  of  this  as  a  factor  in
      deciding what support he might encounter on return.   It  was  obvious
      this was material and he did not require  a  lawyer  to  extract  this
      information from him by asking direct questions to  that  effect.   It
      was as obvious as his volunteering the information that his father was
      killed in clan violence and could not, by  implication,  protect  him.
      However, he did not reveal this information in  the  first  or  second
      hearings.  He explained this by reference to his not having been asked
      about it.  I reject that explanation.  This was not an abstruse  legal
      issue about which he would not be expected to attach any  significance
      but part of his account of past events which had obvious significance.

  93. This leaves me in the position where the appellant has failed to offer
      credible evidence of  at  least  one  family  member  who  remains  in
      Somalia.   Furthermore,  this  was  not  an  oversight   because   his
      volunteering the information before me demonstrated that he  was  well
      aware of its significance as materially affecting his  claim  that  he
      cannot return to Somalia because no such support mechanisms exist.


  94. Thus, the appellant will return as a 33 year-old  man,  apparently  in
      good health, who has been in the United Kingdom since August 1997  and
      lacks recent experience of living in Somalia  and  is  therefore  more
      likely to have difficulty dealing with the  changed  environment.   He
      will also be returning in circumstances where he may be  perceived  to
      be relatively wealthy.  That said, the appellant has failed to satisfy
      me that he has no relatives to whom he could turn for support although
      I do not regard this factor as decisive.  Indeed, my decision would be
      the same were he to have satisfied me he has no relative in Somalia.

The risk in Mogadishu

  95. The starting point for my consideration is whether the appellant is at
      risk of serious harm on return to Mogadishu. Mr  Toal  rightly  relies
      upon paragraph 178 of the decision in AM & AM to the effect that since
      the Tribunal made its decision in HH, the situation in  Mogadishu  has
      changed significantly, both in  terms  of  the  extent  of  population
      displacement away from the city, the intensity of the fighting and  of
      the security conditions there. In AM & AM the Tribunal concluded  that
      Mogadishu was no longer safe as a place to live for the great majority
      of its citizens.  It did not rule out the possibility that there would
      be exceptions in the form of persons who may be considered to be  able
      to live safely in the city, perhaps through having  close  connections
      with those wielding power in Mogadishu, such as prominent businessmen,
      senior figures in the insurgency or those in powerful criminal  gangs.
      Save for such cases as these, identified on a case-by-case basis  upon
      the facts, all those  found  to  have  come  from  Mogadishu  who  are
      returnees from the United Kingdom would face on return to live there a
      real risk of persecution or serious harm.


  96. For the reasons I have given  in  paragraphs  92  and  93  above,  the
      appellant has failed to offer credible evidence of at least one family
      member who remains in Somalia.  As I find the appellant has  not  been
      frank as to this element of his appeal, I must go on to  consider  its
      consequences.  Whilst I am satisfied that the appellant's uncle  lived
      in Mogadishu  and  had  sufficient  surplus  monies  to  pay  for  the
      appellant's travel to the United Kingdom (and the appellant has sought
      to hide this information), the evidence is not sufficient  to  satisfy
      me that this same uncle remains in Mogadishu and that exceptionally he
      is one of those wielding power in Mogadishu, in the sense of  being  a
      prominent businessmen, let alone a senior figure in the insurgency  or
      a member of a powerful criminal gang.

  97. For this reason, I find that Mogadishu is no longer safe as a place to
      live for this appellant.  The current background material does  little
      to undermine the approach adopted by the Tribunal in paragraph 178  of
      AM & AM; indeed, in some respects it strengthens it, whilst in  others
      it may have the opposite effect.  For example, whilst the Fact Finding
      Mission speaks of being able to get around, its tone is cautionary and
      balances conflicting opinion. Suffice it to say that the evidence does
      not yet show that the nature of the violence has sufficiently  changed
      to merit the Tribunal adopting a different approach. As the  appellant
      comes from Mogadishu, the enquiry moves on to  consider  internal  re-
      location.   In  the  circumstances  of  this  appeal,  re-location  is
      identified in terms of re-location to Gedo.

The risk in the Gedo area

  98. After the  first  hearing,  Immigration  Judge  Warr  noted  that  the
      Presenting  Officer's  concession  that  the   first   determination's
      analysis of the risks for the appellant en  route  to  Gedo  were  not
      sufficiently analysed, not his conclusion that  Gedo  was  safe.   The
      appellant's counsel then conceded 'that it was unlikely to be disputed
      that Gedo was a safe haven.'

  99. Although Dr Hoehne gave his opinion that the appellant was at risk  in
      Gedo, he did so on the basis that the appellant  was  returning  as  a
      failed �migr� who had dishonoured his family through  misconduct  and,
      as a result of this, Dr Hoehne considered it unlikely that fellow clan
      members would offer him support or acceptance.    For  the  reasons  I
      have given, this is not the approach I have adopted.  I have concluded
      the appellant has failed to establish his misbehaviour will  be  known
      about in Gedo or en route there.

 100. Whilst the decision in AM and AM speaks of the additional  risk  faced
      by those living in areas particularly affected by the fighting and  of
      strategic importance, I would not regard the Gedo  region  as  falling
      into either of these classifications.

 101. It  is  noteworthy  that  the  background  material  included  in  the
      appellant's bundle  and  referred  to  in  the  skeleton  argument  is
      principally concerned with the risk in Mogadishu and the roads leading
      from Mogadishu International Airport.  It is not directed  to  arguing
      there  is  no  internal  relocation  in  Gedo  or  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable for the appellant to settle there if there were no  other
      factors preventing it.

 102. For these reasons, I have concluded that Gedo is  a  potentially  safe
      area for members of  the  Marehan  clan.   In  paragraph  82  of  this
      determination, I set  out  some  relevant  factors,  derived  from  my
      analysis of AM and AM when considering the  treatment  that  IDPs  are
      likely to encounter.  My conclusion is consistent with the  background
      material that IDPs from more influential clans or  sub-clans  such  as
      the appellant's own clan, the Marehan, appear to have a better  chance
      of being tolerated in the area to which they have fled; all  the  more
      so when Gedo is the traditional clan area of the Marehan.  As  I  have
      already found, the appellant has not been frank in his evidence of the
      support he continues to have in Somalia.  Even if I am wrong  on  this
      and his uncle is dead or his whereabouts unknown, I consider that  the
      clan or sub-clan affiliations would better his  prospects  of  finding
      safety and support.  Further, the evidence does not establish that the
      numbers of refugees in Gedo are so great as to provide  the  appellant
      with  an  additional  difficulty.   Mr  Bramble   helpfully   supplied
      information about the level of IDPs in the various parts  of  Somalia.
      This does not establish that the Gedo area is saturated with IDPs.


 103. The principal issue, therefore, is whether the appellant can arrive at
      Mogadishu International Airport and travel to Gedo  without  being  at
      real risk of a violation of his Article 3 rights.  In approaching this
      issue, the ability of the appellant to travel is an integral  part  of
      the Article 3 assessment, HH and others [2010] EWCA Civ 426.

The airport and the route to K4 and the Hodan district of Mogadishu

 104. I have summarised in  paragraphs  72  and  73  above  the  reports  of
      incidents in the K4 area: the three or four  times  weekly  sniper  or
      mortar fire at the Ugandan soldiers at the K4 roundabout, the  attacks
      of 24 January 2009, 24 and 25 February 2009, March 2009 in the capital
      on the road linking K4 with the presidential palace, the  fighting  in
      Hodan in August 2009, the attacks on 17 September  2009,  24  December
      2009, 29 January 2010 and 15 February 2010.  There are  also  reported
      attacks specifically on Mogadishu International Airport: 14 April 2009
      (the incident in which  insurgents  had  fired  mortar  rounds  at  an
      aircraft carrying a US congressman), 17  September  2009,  22  October
      2009 and 26 January 2010. Apart from the  regular  sniper  and  mortar
      fire on the soldiers, there are at least 14 separate incidents over  a
      period that spans more than a year and they  continue.   It  would  be
      wrong to treat these as the only incidents in the  area  of  Mogadishu
      and its outskirts.


 105. My assessment of risk also takes into account the  decision  in  Ahmed
      Farah Mohamed.  Mr Mohamed was accepted as being a  Tunni  Digil.   In
      paragraph 13 of the determination,  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Latter
      referred to  the  background  material  that  Mogadishu  International
      Airport was in the Waaberi district and those leaving it had to travel
      by road through the district of Hodan which remained a conflict  area.
      Mr Toal had submitted that  it  must  follow  that  no  one  could  be
      returned to Mogadishu Airport. Paragraph 18 of that determination  was
      based upon the Senior Immigration Judge's  perception  that  the  only
      road from the airport was to travel through parts of  Mogadishu  which
      were in a state of internal armed conflict. The evidence satisfied him
      that the Hodan  area  continued  to  be  subjected  to  indiscriminate
      violence. There was also evidence of mortar attacks on the airport. On
      that basis, Senior Immigration Judge Latter  was  satisfied  that  the
      appeal should succeed on humanitarian protection grounds.


 106. I am satisfied on the basis of significantly greater evidence than was
      before Senior Immigration Judge Latter in Ahmed Farah Mohamed that the
      area that was described to me as the K4  square  (a  reference  to  an
      inset in the map of Mogadishu produced by UNHCR) has been the location
      of a series of violent gun battles between the opposing  forces.  This
      is the only route available from the airport.  When such an attack  is
      taking place, I have no doubt at all that the passage of all civilians
      attempting to use the junction between the airport and the  centre  of
      Mogadishu will stop. However, there is no credible evidence  that  the
      fighting is continuous by day or by night.    Indeed  the  reverse  is
      quite obviously established. This leads me to conclude that  the  road
      is open for  civilian  traffic.  The  preponderance  of  the  evidence
      indicates that during 2010  to  the  present  significant  numbers  of
      people pass and re-pass along these routes  in  the  course  of  daily
      business. There is incontrovertible evidence that buses and taxis  ply
      the route.

 107. It is simple logic that the airport would not operate, at least as far
      as civilian flights are concerned, if those landed at the airport  are
      unable to move away from it. Every person  who  arrives  at  Mogadishu
      International Airport leaves it at some time or another, just as those
      on departing flights from it  make  the  journey  from  Mogadishu  and
      elsewhere. There is no evidence that  those  arriving  remain  at  the
      airport for any significant period of time. I have no doubt  that  the
      background material would refer to conditions at the airport if  large
      numbers of passengers were unable to  leave.  As  the  only  available
      route from the airport is via the K4 junction, it follows that for all
      the many thousands of people travelling to Mogadishu  airport  in  the
      course of a year, every one of them will  pass  through  this  transit
      point.

 108. This is not to say, of course, that  it  is  as  safe  as  an  average
      European airport. However, the airport would simply  not  operate  for
      civilian flights if willing passengers from the diaspora were to vote,
      as it were, by their boarding cards and refuse to  travel.  It  simply
      cannot be right  that  all  those  civilian  volunteers  to  Mogadishu
      airport have failed to assess the risk and have overlooked that  their
      journey will involve becoming embroiled  in  a  gun  battle  with  the
      obvious risk  to  their  lives.  If  civilian  passengers  voluntarily
      return, it is perverse to treat  those  who  return  involuntarily  as
      being as at greater risk from  the  level  of  violence  that  applies
      indiscriminately to  all  returnees.  Mr  Toal  was  simply  wrong  in
      submitting in June 2010 that no-one could  be  returned  to  Mogadishu
      airport.


 109. I agree with Senior Immigration Judge Latter when  he  said  in  Ahmed
      Farah Mohamed that the Hodan area  continued  to  be  the  subject  of
      indiscriminate violence and this included evidence that there had been
      mortar attacks on  the  airport.  I  respectfully  reach  a  different
      conclusion when it comes to the assessment of the level of  risk  that
      such violence engenders. In my judgment if the level of violence  were
      such as to render Mr Mohamed's return so risky as to be impossible, it
      would  also  render  this  appellant's  return  impossible;  but  more
      importantly, it would render impossible the return of  any  civilians.
      Yet the uncontested evidence is that they can and they do.

 110. This was, in essence, the decision reached by the Tribunal the country
      guidance case of AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia  CG
      [2008] UKAIT 00091 (see paragraph 41 above) as well as in AM (Somalia)
      [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC) which decided that the  general  evidence  before
      the  Upper  Tribunal  failed   to   establish   the   generalised   or
      indiscriminate violence was at such a high level along the route  from
      Mogadishu to Afgoye (which travels across the  K4  junction)  that  AM
      would be a real risk. Although the Tribunal  in  Ahmed  Farah  Mohamed
      reached a different conclusion, it did not fully address the  findings
      in relation to this issue in the earlier country guidance case of AM &
      AM [2008].  In particular, if the Tribunal intended to depart from the
      earlier guidance about safety of travel on the roads leading from  the
      airport (summarised in  paragraph  50,  above),  it  was  required  to
      identify the evidence that supported such a departure.   The  Tribunal
      spoke of a deteriorating humanitarian situation in paragraph 22 but it
      did not address evidence as to increasing levels of violence which, if
      found, might have justified the outcome.

 111. This does not, of course, mean that  I  disregard  the  evidence  that
      civilians  are  sometimes  caught  up  in  the  violence  with   fatal
      consequences. 'Caught in the cross-fire' and 'being in the wrong place
      at  the  wrong  time'  (see  paragraphs  65  and  67  above)  are  apt
      descriptions of what ordinary citizens may face.   However,  the  fact
      that this occurs has to be assessed  against  the  overall  background
      evidence that these incidents do not prevent ordinary  citizens  going
      about their business and this is, for my part, a more solid  indicator
      of risk than the statistical data provided in a list of incidents.   I
      am satisfied that central  Mogadishu  remains  unsafe.  This  was  the
      decision of AM and AM in 2008 and this  remains  the  best  assessment
      available to decision makers at present.

 112. Adopting as his starting-point paragraph 178  of  AM  and  AM  to  the
      effect that the Tribunal considered that Mogadishu is no  longer  safe
      as a place to live for the great majority of  its  citizens,  Mr  Toal
      argues in paragraphs 1 to  9  of  his  skeleton  argument  that  other
      Tribunals have  failed  to  understand  that  Mogadishu  International
      Airport is in the Waaberi district of Mogadishu and that the K4 square
      is in the Hodan district of  Mogadishu.  Accordingly,  the  Tribunal's
      determination in AM and AM at paragraph 178 extends,  by  implication,
      to prohibiting anybody returning to Mogadishu International Airport or
      the K4 square en route to other parts  of  Somalia  because  both  are
      situated within Mogadishu.  I am quite satisfied that this is  a  mis-
      reading of what the Tribunal was saying. Both the  airport  and  Hodan
      are on the outskirts of  Mogadishu.   Had  the  Tribunal  intended  to
      include the airport and the road leading from it within  the  area  of
      Mogadishu that they considered unsafe, they would  have  said  so  and
      concluded no-one can return to Somalia via the route proposed  by  the
      Secretary of State.  Instead, the Tribunal did the reverse, concluding
      ( as I have done) that the level of violence en route  from  Mogadishu
      to Afgoye is not at such a level to entitle a person to  international
      protection.


 113. Accordingly, I do not accept Mr Toal's  principle  argument  that  the
      fact that the appellant is to be  returned  to  Mogadishu  Airport  is
      sufficient to entitle him to succeed in accordance with what was  said
      in HH and others.  Indeed, Sedley LJ recorded in paragraph 49  of  the
      Court's judgment that  all  current  returnees  arrived  at  Mogadishu
      airport and that passengers could get from the airport into  the  city
      without undue risk.  That reflects my conclusion based on an  analysis
      of the background material of past events in relation to the  airport,
      the K4 square and the road leading to it from the airport.

The Afgoye corridor

 114. In assessing the question of safety along the Afgoye corridor, I  take
      into account the reported decision in  AM  although  that  has  to  be
      viewed in the light of the further background evidence now before  me.
      The junction at K4 is the place where the road from the airport  meets
      one of the principal routes from Mogadishu as  it  travels  north-west
      into the  interior  of  Somalia.   Many  of  those  wishing  to  avoid
      Mogadishu must travel to Afgoye where the road continues on eventually
      into the Gedo region. This section of the road is known as the  Afgoye
      corridor.  I accept that the evidence of fighting between the TFG  and
      Al Shabbab or fighting between Al Shabbab  and  Hizbul  Islam  is  not
      restricted to  the  area  around  Mogadishu,  although  the  level  of
      violence may be greater around Mogadishu than  elsewhere.   The  fact,
      however, that there are well-recorded incidents  of  violence  between
      the opposing forces, does not establish that travel  is  prevented  as
      would be the case if those embarking on the journey believed it unsafe
      to do so.  In particular, given the evidence that travel  is  effected
      by buses, taxis and trucks, the drivers of these  vehicles  would  not
      engage in regular passages across Somalia if it were too dangerous  to
      do so.  Hence, the conclusion that I have reached is  that  travel  is
      possible and, more importantly, takes place on a  day  to  day  basis.
      Doubtless, there will be occasions when the local  situation  prevents
      continued passage but, where this  occurs,  it  will  be  a  temporary
      cessation and the journey is likely to  continue  when  the  localised
      fighting is past.  This approach is similar  to  the  consideration  I
      have given to the assessment of risk along the road from  the  airport
      of K4.


 115. The evidence suggests that there are many thousands of IDPs  who  have
      settled in the Afgoye corridor, probably having fled the  violence  in
      Mogadishu.  I would not regard the appellant as likely to relocate  in
      an IDP camp in the  Afgoye  corridor  but,  were  he  to  do  so,  the
      background material does not establish that the situation for IDPs  in
      these camps amounts to treatment sufficiently  serious  to  involve  a
      violation of his Article 3 rights.  Instead,  I  consider  that  as  a
      Marehan, there is the safer and  better  prospect  of  continuing  his
      journey  to  Gedo.   His  route  does  not  involve  passing   through
      Beletwayne where I have recorded there have been specific difficulties
      in the past.

Conclusion

 116. As a Darod, sub-clan Marehan, the appellant might properly be  classed
      as from one of the more influential clans or sub-clans and more likely
      to have a better chance of being tolerated in the Gedo area which is a
      traditional clan area to which  it  possible  he  can  travel  without
      serious difficulties.  Whilst the appellant's evidence as  to  family,
      or friends is not clear, I have found the reason for this  is  because
      his evidence on this aspect has  not  been  entirely  frank.  He  has,
      therefore, failed to establish there is no one in Somalia to  whom  he
      could turn for assistance. The background material does not  establish
      that Gedo is already saturated with IDPs.  The Gedo region appears  to
      be relatively less affected by the fighting and to be of no particular
      strategic importance, with the corollary that  it  appears  to  suffer
      fewer security problems.  He is a fit young man who has shown  himself
      to have adapted to life in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  have  shown
      resilience to the challenges of life here, although not  always  in  a
      way that British society has found acceptable.  These factors weigh in
      his favour and against the evident reality that  the  appellant  lacks
      recent experience of living in Somalia  and  may,  therefore  be  more
      likely to have difficulty dealing with the changed environment  there.
      Whilst as a returnee from the United Kingdom he may  be  perceived  as
      having greater relative wealth, there is little evidence as to how, in
      the appellant's case, this will result in harm.  If as he  claims,  he
      is not wealthy and has no-one in Somalia who can  affect  his  release
      and this is readily apparent, the  increased  risk  of  abduction  and
      extortion have an air of unreality about them.  I do not discount them
      entirely but I do not regard them as decisive in his favour.  If he is
      able to draw upon family  or  clan  support  then  such  support  will
      operate in his favour, not against him.


 117. Thus, on my examination of the factors outlined  in  AM  &  AM,  taken
      together with the further evidence before me,  does  not  support  the
      appellant's claim that his return is likely to result in  a  violation
      of his Article 3 rights.

The appellant's skeleton argument

 118. Mr Toal submits that the appellant's body is covered with  scars  [A46
      and following] which were accepted as being 'associated  with  gunshot
      wounds; lacerations; sutures; cigarette burns and  the  like'.   [B33]
      It followed that the medical evidence made it sufficiently plain  that
      the appellant had been the victim of violence whilst in  Somalia.   Mr
      Toal did not develop  this  argument  before  me.  The  fact  that  an
      individual has received injuries likely to have  been  the  result  of
      violence in a country that is known to be violent does not,  for  that
      reason alone, increase the risk of further  harm.  Assuming  that  the
      injuries are readily discernible on examination, they do not establish
      that the injuries were reasonably likely to have been  caused  by  the
      appellant's participation with the forces that  were  opposed  to  the
      person who is  now  examining  him.  Neither  the  case  law  nor  the
      background material establish that there is a separate  risk  category
      for those who have been scarred by the violence in Somalia or that  it
      is even a risk factor.  I would not readily infer that the evidence in
      relation to Sri Lanka (where it has been established by evidence  that
      scarring may be  a  relevant  factor)  should  be  imported  into  the
      assessment of risk in other countries unless there is good  reason  to
      do so. I am  not,  therefore,  persuaded  that  the  medical  evidence
      submitted by the appellant to the effect that he has  bodily  scarring
      will create in those who become aware of his  scars a perception  that
      will ultimately cause him harm.


 119. Insofar as Mr Toal  submits  that  there  is  continuing  violence  in
      Mogadishu and this is established if by no other means by  the  cogent
      and reliable figures of the numbers who have fled  Mogadishu  in  2007
      and 2008 and that the  exodus  continued  in  2010,  the  evidence  is
      entirely consistent with the conclusion I have reached elsewhere  that
      it is unsafe for the appellant to return to Mogadishu  but  in  saying
      this I make a distinction between central Mogadishu and the route from
      the airport to  other  parts  of  Somalia.   I  therefore  reject  his
      principal contention that the case law establishes this section of the
      route falls into the wider classification that it is unsafe to  return
      to Mogadishu. For the reasons I have given I do not consider that  the
      conclusion in the unreported case of Ahmed Farah Mohamed supports  the
      proposition that anyone travelling to or from the airport is  of  risk
      of harm and I prefer the more recent, reported decision of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in AM Somalia [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC) in which SIJ  Latter  also
      participated that the background evidence does not establish  that  it
      is too dangerous to travel this route.


 120.  I  reach  this  conclusion  without   having   to   draw   upon   any
      jurisprudential distinctions between reported and unreported cases but
      simply drawing upon my analysis of the underlying background material.
       In the circumstances of this case, I consider the decisions in AM and
      AM [2008] and AM (Somalia) [2011] more  properly,  (as  well  as  more
      recently in the later case),  address  the  risk  on  return  for  the
      reasons I have provided above.

 121.  Mr  Toal  submits  that  evidence  showing  individuals   voluntarily
      returning to Mogadishu is not evidence of want of real risk of serious
      harm to those present in  Mogadishu,  any  more  than  the  fact  that
      millions of young men  voluntarily  journeyed  to  the  western  front
      during the Great War is evidence  that  there  was  no  real  risk  of
      serious harm there.  The analogy is not a useful  one,  as  historical
      comparisons rarely are: the extraordinary feature of those who  signed
      up for service in the Great War is not that  they  were  in  the  most
      parts volunteers but that many did so in the  knowledge  of  the  risk
      they faced.  There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  those  currently
      travelling to Mogadishu do so in the knowledge that there are  putting
      their lives at real risk.


 122. Mr Toal also submits that the reporting of AM (Somalia) but not  Ahmed
      Farah Mohamed, creates a real appearance of bias both on the  part  of
      the reporting body and on the part of the Tribunal.  However,  I  know
      of no  reason  to  suppose  the  author  of  that  determination  ever
      suggested it should be reported, and there is  no  reason  at  all  to
      think that, at any stage, a decision was taken that it should  not  be
      reported.  Inevitably, a decision of the Tribunal made by a panel that
      includes a Judge of the Outer Court of Session is more likely to  come
      forward as suitable for reporting.  It is to dispel the charge of bias
      that I have decided to annex the decision in Ahmed  Farah  Mohamed  to
      this determination.  Whilst Mr Toal argues  that  the  differences  of
      outcome between AM (Somalia) and Ahmed Farah Mohamed show  that  there
      is a real issue in relation to Article 3 in cases such  as  these,  my
      decision is an attempt to resolve those differences by an  examination
      of the underlying facts upon which those decisions have been made.

 123. It is anticipated that later this summer the Tribunal will consider  a
      number of  linked  appeals  dealing  with  the  current  situation  in
      Somalia.  It is hoped that these  will  provide  country  guidance  of
      general application.  Nothing in this determination is intended to pre-
      empt any country  guidance  that  may  emerge.   This  case  is  being
      reported in order to address the issues raised by the decision  in  AM
      (Evidence - route of return) Somalia [2011] UKUT 54  and  Ahmed  Farah
      Mohamed.


DECISION

      I re-make the decision dismissing the appeal under Article 3.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 11 May 2011
                                  Appendix
                                    [pic]
AI v2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/16568/2007


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 17 June 2010                      |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                             Ahmed Farah Mohamed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Wilson,
                       Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:          Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

1.       The appellant is a citizen  of  Somalia  born  in  June  1982.   He
    arrived in this country on 18 June 2004 and claimed asylum on  arrival.
    He had left Mogadishu by air the previous  day  travelling  via  Dubai.
    His application was refused and  an  appeal  dismissed  on  22  October
    2004.  He made two attempts to enter Ireland in 2005 and  claim  asylum
    but on both occasions he was removed to the UK and then  on  2  October
    2005 repeated his claim for asylum here.  He  says  that  having  heard
    nothing about this claim he made a further claim under  a  false  name.
    In March 2007 he was arrested trying to leave the UK for Canada using a
    false passport.  He was convicted  and  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'
    imprisonment, the judge making a recommendation for deportation.  On  9
    October 2007 the respondent made a  decision  to  deport  him  and  his
    appeal against this decision was  dismissed  by  a  panel  (Immigration
    Judge P John Brewer and Mrs E Hurst JP) in a determination issued on 24
    May 2008.

2.       At a hearing on 6 January  2009  I  found  that  the  Tribunal  had
    materially erred in law for the following reasons:

         "1.    This  is  the  reconsideration  of  an  appeal  against  the
             respondent's decision  made  on  9 October  2007  to  make  a
             deportation  order   against   the   appellant   following   a
             recommendation made by the Crown Court when sentencing him for
             offences of obtaining leave to enter or remain in  the  UK  by
             deception and possession of a false identity document.


         Background


         2.      The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who  claims  to  have
             arrived in the UK on 18 June 2004 at Heathrow Airport using  a
             forged Dutch passport.  He claimed asylum when this  deception
             was discovered.   His application was refused  and  an  appeal
             dismissed in a determination issued on 22 October  2004.   The
             appellant next came to the respondent's attention when he  was
             returned  by  the  Irish  authorities  on  2  September   2005
             following  a   request   that   the   UK   Government   accept
             responsibility for an asylum claim.  He repeated his claim for
             asylum on 2 September 2005.  This was refused and certified on
             12 October 2005.   It  was  discovered  that  the  appellant's
             fingerprints matched those of a claimant  who  had  identified
             himself as Khalid Sharif Hassan.  The appellant made a further
             claim for asylum on  28 March  2006  asserting  that  he  had
             arrived in the UK that day.


         3.      On 1 March 2007 the appellant was arrested by  the  Gatwick
             Immigration Prosecution Unit for possessing a forged  passport
             and on 19 March 2007 convicted  of  offences  at  Lewes  Crown
             Court  and  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'  imprisonment  and
             recommended for deportation.  The respondent decided to make a
             deportation order on 9 October 2007.


           The Hearing before the Tribunal


         4.      The Tribunal heard the appeal against this decision  on  14
             May 2008.   The appellant relied on a witness statement  dated
             1 July 2007 and gave oral evidence.  He said that he had  been
             born in Mogadishu and had spent his life there  until  leaving
             Somalia and that his two sisters and brother had  been  killed
             after he had left.  He accepted that he had made three  claims
             for asylum and on one occasion had used a false name.  He  had
             no alternative as otherwise he might suffer the  fate  of  his
             siblings.   He  had  been  arrested  in  2007  at  Gatwick  in
             possession of a Swedish passport with a ticket for Canada


         5.      The Tribunal found that the appellant  had  no  outstanding
             claims under the Refugee Convention  commenting  that  he  had
             claimed asylum on three occasions.   His  appeal  against  his
             first claim,  heard  in  2004  by  an  Adjudicator,  Professor
             Ritson, had been dismissed on both  asylum  and  human  rights
             grounds.  Professor Ritson had found the appellant not  to  be
             credible and opportunistic in his decision to  leave  Somalia.
             The Tribunal said that the appellant's asylum claims had  been
             lost and  if  required  to  do  so  it  would  reinforce  that
             decision.


         6.       It  went  on  to  consider  the  appeal  on   humanitarian
             protection and human rights grounds.  It referred  to  HH  and
             others (Mogadishu - armed conflict: risk)  Somalia  CG  [2008]
             UKAIT 00022.  It noted that the  appellant  claimed  that  his
             home area was Mogadishu and said that there was  little  doubt
             that there had been fighting there.  It referred to  documents
             in the appellant's supplementary bundle but said that  it  was
             bound by the country guidance case of HH.  It found  that  the
             appeals under articles 2 and 3 should be dismissed  as  should
             the deportation appeal in the  light  of  the  presumption  in
             favour  of   deportation   unless   there   were   exceptional
             circumstances outweighing the public interest.


         The Grounds and Submissions


         7.      In the grounds it is argued that  the  Tribunal  materially
             erred in law in a number of ways.  When  directing  itself  it
             said that  immigration  and  human  rights  issues  (save  for
             article 3) had to be considered as at the date of decision. It
             had failed  to  take  into  account  post  decision  facts  in
             accordance with s.85(4) of the 2002 Act.   The  appellant  had
             sought  to  argue  that  he  was  entitled   to   humanitarian
             protection and had produced  180  pages  of  further  evidence
             relating to the situation after HH.   The Tribunal had  failed
             to consider or make findings on this evidence.   It  had  also
             erred in law by regarding itself  as  bound  by  HH.   It  had
             further erred by failing to consider whether the situation  in
             Mogadishu was such that there would be a real risk of a breach
             of article 3 on return or how the appellant would be  able  to
             reach any area suggested as  safe  for  his  clan,  the  Digil
             Tunni, in Lower Shabelle, Bay or Bakool.   It  had  failed  to
             make any findings on  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  or  to
             regard Professor Ritson's determination as being the  starting
             point rather as determinative of the appellant's claim.

         The Material Error of Law


         8.      At the hearing before me Ms  Isherwood  conceded  that  the
             Tribunal had materially erred in law in the way it  had  dealt
             with the asylum and humanitarian protection appeals.   It  had
             not made findings on the evidence produced in support  of  the
             submission that the situation had deteriorated  since  HH  was
             heard and had also failed to make findings of fact in relation
             to events after the dismissal of his claim for asylum.


         9.      Mr Toal submitted that this was a case where on  the  basis
             of the findings already made a decision could  be  substituted
             allowing the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds.   In
             his determination Professor Ritson, whilst not  regarding  the
             appellant as credible, had accepted that he was from Mogadishu
             and was a Digil Tunni.  Mr Toal referred to paras 178, 179 and
             183 of AM and AM (Armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia  CG
             [2008] UKAIT  00091  which  had  found  that  on  the  present
             evidence Mogadishu was no longer safe as a place to  live  for
             the great majority of its citizens.   He submitted that  there
             was no reason to believe that the appellant would fall  within
             the exceptional categories who might be  safe  there  such  as
             those with close connections with powerful actors in Mogadishu
             such  as  prominent  businessmen  or  senior  figures  in  the
             insurgency or in powerful criminal gangs (see para 178 of  AM)
             nor was there any basis on which it could be said there was  a
             viable internal relocation alternative  (para  183).   In  the
             alternative, he submitted that the appeal should be  adjourned
             to a second stage so that proper findings  of  fact  could  be
             made on the appellant's background and in  particular  whether
             he was from Mogadishu.


         10.    Ms Isherwood submitted that the proper course would  be  for
             further evidence to be heard.  She agreed that the appellant's
             evidence had been substantially  rejected  both  by  Professor
             Ritson and the Tribunal hearing the present appeal  There  was
             no adequate factual basis on which a decision  could  properly
             be  made  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
             grounds.


         11.    The concession that the original Tribunal  materially  erred
             in law is rightly made.  The Tribunal failed to make  findings
             of fact on the appellant's evidence about his  background  and
             on events which had taken place after the previous appeal.  It
             also failed to make adequate findings on the evidence produced
             in support of the argument that the situation had deteriorated
             since the country guidance  in  HH.    The  issue  for  me  is
             whether I can properly substitute my own decision on the basis
             of the findings of fact made by Professor Ritson when he heard
             the appeal in 2004.  He said that  he  did  not  consider  the
             appellant to be a  credible  witness  and  gave  a  number  of
             reasons.   He  found  that  the  appellant's  emigration  from
             Somalia appeared to have  been  opportunistic  as  opposed  to
             being dictated by  persecutory  treatment.   He  rejected  his
             evidence that he would be regarded as  a  Bravanese  Tunni  as
             opposed to a Digil Tunni.  He also commented that there was no
             evidence that the appellant's siblings or his father  were  at
             risk in Somalia at the time of the hearing.   He said that  in
             view of his conclusions that the appellant was a Digil  Tunni,
             he did not consider that the objective evidence placed  before
             him justified a conclusion that he would be at risk as such on
             return to Mogadishu.


         12.    I am not satisfied that  I  can  safely  infer  either  from
             Professor Ritson's determination or the  Reasons  for  Refusal
             Letter of 30 July 2004 that the appellant is  from  Mogadishu;
             or even if I could, that this would be an adequate  basis  for
             substituting a decision allowing the  appeal  on  humanitarian
             protection grounds. The Tribunal in AM made it  clear  firstly
             that there may be some individuals who could  live  safely  in
             Mogadishu and secondly that the issue of  internal  relocation
             needed to be considered.   In my judgment the guidance set out
             in AM can only properly be  applied  on  the  basis  of  clear
             findings of fact about the  appellant's  identity,  background
             and personal history including any recent history relating  to
             his family in Somalia.  The findings of  Professor  Ritson  in
             his  determination  form  only  the  starting  point  of  that
             enquiry.  I am, therefore, satisfied that the proper course is
             for this reconsideration to be adjourned for further  evidence
             and submissions on whether the appeal  should  be  allowed  or
             dismissed."

3.       After some delay the appeal was  listed  for  rehearing  at  Taylor
    House but then adjourned the request of the respondent.  The matter was
    finally relisted  for  hearing  before  me.   The  reconsideration  now
    proceeds as an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by virtue  of  transitional
    provisions.

4.       The appellant's first claim for asylum was  based  on  an  argument
    that he would be at real risk of persecution as a Bravanese Tunni.  The
    adjudicator, Professor Ritson, who heard his appeal on 11 October  2004
    said that he did not find the appellant to be credible for reasons  set
    out in four bullet points in para 6 of his determination.  Firstly,  he
    did not accept the appellant's explanation as to why he  had  not  left
    Somalia sooner in the light of the account he gave  of  events  between
    1991 and 2003 about members of  his  family  being  killed,  robbed  or
    raped.  He took the view that the appellant's  emigration  appeared  to
    have been opportunistic as opposed to  being  dictated  by  persecutory
    treatment directed at him by majority clans.   Secondly,  although  the
    judge appears to have accepted that the appellant was a member  of  the
    Tunni clan, in the light of the evidence before him, he found that only
    members of that clan perceived to be identified with the Bravanese clan
    would be at risk on return.   He  found  that  there  was  no  adequate
    evidence that the appellant would be so regarded as opposed to a  Tunni
    Digil.  The adjudicator found there was no evidence  of  the  appellant
    and his family being specifically targeted on the basis of  their  clan
    membership  in  the  violence  that  characterised  the  civil  war  in
    Somalia.  He was not satisfied that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk
    simply  as  a  Tunni  Digil.   Thirdly,  the  adjudicator  specifically
    rejected the appellant's evidence about the fact that he  was  able  to
    pursue his studies in English due to the intervention  of  his  teacher
    who himself was a member of a minority clan and fourthly he referred to
    further objective evidence and concluded that the appellant  would  not
    be at risk as a Tunni Digil.

5.       At the  hearing  of  this  appeal,  the  Tribunal  noted  Professor
    Ritson's determination and the fact  that  the  appellant  had  claimed
    asylum on three separate occasions under a false name and  on  a  false
    basis.  It said that this appellant's asylum claims had been lost  and,
    if required to do so, the Tribunal reinforced that decision.   However,
    the Tribunal did go on to consider Articles 2 and 3 and  the  issue  of
    humanitarian protection.  It found that it was  bound  by  the  country
    guidance determination in HH (Mogadishu; armed conflict; risk)  Somalia
    [2008] UKAIT 00022 and the appeal was dismissed on this basis.

6.       At the hearing before me on whether there was a material  error  of
    law it was submitted that I could properly substitute my  own  decision
    but I was not satisfied that I could properly infer from  the  previous
    findings that the appellant was from Mogadishu or that this  in  itself
    would be an adequate basis for  allowing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds in the light of AM  and  AM  (Armed  conflict:  risk
    categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 0091.  In the light of findings  in
    that determination that there might be some individuals who could  live
    safely in Mogadishu and for those who could not, the issue of  internal
    relocation would need to be considered, I was not satisfied that  there
    was a sufficiently clear factual basis to make a decision  without  the
    parties having the opportunity of giving further  evidence  and  making
    further submissions.

7.       However, the position has moved on in a number  of  respects  since
    January 2009.  Firstly the respondent accepts  or  at  least  does  not
    contest the appellant's assertion that he is from  Mogadishu  and  does
    not seek to reopen the issue of whether  he  is  a  Tunni  Digil.   The
    respondent maintains his assertion that the appellant is an  unreliable
    witness and that it is implicit in the previous determinations that his
    account of events in Somalia has been rejected whereas Mr  Toal  argues
    that previous findings  relating  to  credibility  do  not  necessarily
    impinge upon the appellant's evidence about what  happened  to  him  in
    Somalia and that there were no clear findings about  his  own  personal
    history.

8.       The appellant seeks to pursue his claim on asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection grounds whereas the respondent argues that difficult  though
    the situation is in Somalia and in particular Mogadishu, the  appellant
    would be able to look to the Tunni Digil clan for  protection.   Whilst
    it is accepted that on present evidence Mogadishu is no longer  a  safe
    place to live for the great majority of its citizens, the  respondent's
    case is that the appellant in the light of the lack of  credibility  of
    his evidence has failed to show that he would be unable to relocate  in
    safety with relatives elsewhere.  He would be able to travel to an area
    outside Mogadishu where, as an intermediate clan member, he could  find
    protection.  The evidence showed that those who  relocated  to  an  IDP
    camp did not in general face a real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious
    harm.

Evidence

9.       I heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his  documentary
    evidence is set out in  five  separate  bundles  1A-5A.   The  evidence
    relied on by the respondent is set out in  a  case  law  bundle  and  a
    supplementary bundle.

The Appellant's Evidence

10.     The appellant adopted his witness statements of 4 April 2008  (1A39-
    58) and 28 January 2010 (3A398-400).  He said that after he was refused
    asylum in this country he was scared of being sent back to Somalia  and
    this was the reason he attempted to travel to Canada.  His  family  had
    been killed in Somalia and he was scared that he also would  be  killed
    and he wanted to be safe.  He had no information about the  whereabouts
    of his wife and surviving brother.  When he last  heard  of  them  they
    were in Mogadishu where he had lived in Hamair Jad Wardhigle in  Hamar,
    a district of Mogadishu.  He had never  lived  in  any  other  part  of
    Somalia.  Originally his family had come from Brava but he did not know
    anyone from there.

11.     In cross-examination he said that he had not had  the  cash  himself
    to fund his journey but it had been arranged by  a  maternal  uncle  in
    Saudi Arabia who contacted an agent.  He had travelled with this  agent
    to Dubai.  He had married in 2004 but his uncle had not  been  able  to
    finance his wife's departure from Somalia  and  for  the  sake  of  the
    family it was decided that he was the one who would be sent abroad.

Submissions

12.     Ms Tanner submitted that the substantive issue in  this  appeal  was
    whether the appellant could  be  expected  to  relocate  on  return  to
    Mogadishu.  She accepted that he could not reasonably  be  expected  to
    stay there in the light of the current evidence but she argued that  he
    could relocate in safety.  In the light of the findings in the previous
    hearings no weight could be attached to what the appellant  said  about
    his past history and it could not be accepted as he asserted  that  his
    family and siblings had been killed.  The likelihood was  that  he  had
    family in Somalia.  He had said that he did not know where his wife was
    but that evidence should be treated with caution.  The appellant  would
    not be at risk simply as a Tunni Digil which  the  background  evidence
    established was an intermediate clan between the majority and  minority
    clans.  In any event the situation  about  whether  there  was  a  risk
    arising  from  clan  membership  was  now  much  more  fluid  than  had
    originally been thought.  She referred to the Somali Country Report for
    May  2010  and  in  particular  those  paragraphs  dealing  with   clan
    membership at 18.01-18.31.  So far  as  the  humanitarian  issues  were
    concerned the respondent did not deny that  there  were  many  problems
    but the appellant failed to show that he had no relatives  in  Somalia.
     He had lied about his past and had failed to show that relocation was
    not a viable option.

13.     Mr Toal submitted that the facts which were not in dispute, that  he
    was a Tunni Digil from Mogadishu, established that he would be able  to
    succeed  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   He  referred  to  the
    judgments of the Court of Appeal in HH (Somalia) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426
    and in particular to the finding that when  the  route  and  manner  of
    return were known or could be implied,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must
    consider whether the appellant would be at risk  if  returned  by  that
    route.  He then referred to maps of Mogadishu to support  his  argument
    that the airport was in Waberi District and that the only  way  out  by
    road would lead through the district of Hodan which remained a conflict
    area.  He submitted that it must follow that no-one at this stage could
    be returned to Mogadishu Airport.  He further argued that there was  no
    basis for rejecting the appellant's account of what had happened to him
    and his family in Somalia.  He was  a  person  who  was  likely  to  be
    attacked with relative impunity and although  on  his  account  he  had
    received some support from some majority clan neighbours, this did  not
    alter the fact that he would be at real risk on return.   His  position
    should be  treated  as  analogous  to  Town  Tunnis,  described  in  MN
    (Somalia) CG [2004] UKIAT 00224.

14.     Mr Toal referred to para 183 of the Tribunal's determination  in  AM
    and AM where it said that returnees to Mogadishu would be at real  risk
    of serious harm and in order to succeed they need only show they had no
    viable internal relocation alternative.  He submitted that  the  proper
    approach was to consider whether it had been shown  that  there  was  a
    part of the country where there was no relevant risk and to  which  the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to go.  This  was  the  approach
    adopted by the Court of Appeal in Jasim v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 342 and in AA (Uganda) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 579  where  it  was  held
    that the Tribunal had erred  in  law  by  finding  that  there  was  an
    internal relocation alternative where an appellant had failed  to  show
    that it was unreasonable to expect her  to  relocate  to  Kampala.   He
    submitted that in any event the internal relocation option was not open
    because inevitably the appellant would have to  pass  through  an  area
    where there would be a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm.   It
    was not reasonable to expect him  to  become  an  internally  displaced
    person or to relocate in an IDP camp.

Assessment of the Issues

15.     I shall deal firstly with the issue of humanitarian protection.   In
    AM and AM the Tribunal said at paragraph 178:

         "178. In the light of the  above,  we  accept  that  since  HH  the
             situation in Mogadishu  has  changed  significantly,  both  in
             terms of the extent of population displacement away  from  the
             city, the intensity  of  the  fighting  and  of  the  security
             conditions there.  On the present evidence  we  consider  that
             Mogadishu is no longer safe as a place to live for  the  great
             majority  of  its  citizens.   We  do  not   rule   out   that
             notwithstanding the above there may be certain individuals who
             on the facts may be considered to be able to  live  safely  in
             the city, for  example  if  they  are  likely  to  have  close
             connections  with  powerful  actors  in  Mogadishu,  such   as
             prominent businessmen or senior figures in the  insurgency  or
             in powerful criminal gangs.  However, barring  cases  of  this
             kind, we consider that in the case of persons  found  to  come
             from Mogadishu who are returnees from the UK, that they  would
             face on return to live there a real  risk  of  persecution  or
             serious harm and  it  is  reasonably  likely,  if  they  tried
             staying there, that they would soon be forced to leave or that
             they would decide not to  try  to  live  there  in  the  first
             place."

16.     In paragraph 183 the Tribunal said:

         "183. The question  we  have  to  decide,  however,  is  how  these
             findings assist applicants  for  international  protection  or
             article 3 protection who are in the UK presently.  If they are
             from Mogadishu, then, on our earlier finding (that  the  great
             majority of persons facing return to  Mogadishu  would  be  at
             real risk of persecution or serious harm there,  in  order  to
             succeed they need only show that they have no viable  internal
             relocation alternative.  We shall come back to  this  scenario
             in a moment."

17.     Mr Toal takes issue with the way the Tribunal  expressed  itself  on
    the basis that in substance it was imposing a burden on  the  appellant
    to prove a negative.  I doubt if this is what the Tribunal intended but
    in any event I am satisfied that the proper approach is  as  summarised
    by Sedley LJ in Jasim where he said at paragraph 16:

         "16.  The possibility of internal protection is relevant to refugee
             and human rights claims because it may demonstrate that a fear
             of persecution or harm, though warranted  by  the  applicant's
             experience in his place of  origin,  is  not  well-founded  in
             relation to other parts of the  state  whose  duty  it  is  to
             protect him.  But rather two issues - fear  and  relocation  -
             all go ultimately to  the  single  question  of  safety,  they
             cannot be decided in the same breath.  Once the judge of  fact
             is satisfied that  the  applicant  has  a  justified  fear  of
             persecution or harm if returned to his home  area,  the  claim
             will ordinarily be made out unless the judge is satisfied that
             he can nevertheless be returned safely to another part of  his
             country or origin.  Provided the second issue has been flagged
             up, there may be  no  formal  burden  of  proof  on  the  Home
             Secretary (see GH [2004] UKIAT 00248); but this does not  mean
             that the judge of fact can reject  an  otherwise  well-founded
             claim  unless  the  evidence  satisfies  him   that   internal
             relocation is a safe and reasonable option.


         17.    It is  necessary  to  stress  both  adjectives  -  safe  and
             reasonable.  It is well established that relocation to a  safe
             area is not an answer to a claim  if  it  is  unreasonable  to
             expect the applicant to settle there.  There may be no work or
             housing.  He may not speak the language.  Similarly relocation
             to an area may be perfectly reasonable by these standards  but
             unsafe, for example because of the risk of continued  official
             harassment - or - as in this case - revenge seeking."

18.     I  am  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  internal
    relocation is a viable option in  this  appeal  in  the  light  of  the
    detailed evidence produced about the location of Mogadishu  Airport  in
    relation to Mogadishu and the fact that the only apparent way  by  road
    through and from the airport out of Mogadishu is to go through parts of
    Mogadishu which are  in  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict.   The
    evidence satisfies me that the Hodan area continues to be  the  subject
    of indiscriminate violence and there is also evidence of mortar attacks
    on the airport.  No  other  route  of  return  other  than  by  way  of
    Mogadishu Airport has been proposed.  On this basis I am satisfied that
    the appeal should succeed on humanitarian protection grounds.

19.     I now turn to the issue of asylum.  Mr Toal  sought  to  argue  that
    the evidence supports a finding that there was at  least  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that the appellant would be at a differential risk
    of harm as a Tunni and he should be treated as if a Town Tunni.   I  am
    satisfied that there are good  reasons  for  treating  the  appellant's
    evidence about past events with considerable caution.  Although in  his
    determination in 2004 Professor Ritson did not deal  specifically  with
    the appellant's evidence about what had happened to him and his family,
     it is clear that he rejected the  central  core  of  the  appellant's
    account and he did comment in paragraph 6.3 that there was no  evidence
    of him or his family being specifically targeted on the basis of  their
    clan membership in the violence that characterised  the  civil  war  in
    Somalia.

20.     His findings on the circumstances in which the  appellant  had  left
    Somalia and the fact that he had been able on his own account to remain
    to continue his studies in English clearly indicate  that  he  did  not
    find the appellant to be credible about evidence central to the way  in
    which  his  claim  was  being  put  at  that  time.   The   appellant's
    credibility has been further undermined by the fact  that  in  2006  he
    made a new asylum claim under a false name, giving the explanation that
    this was because he had heard nothing about the claim he  had  made  on
    his return from Ireland.  The appellant then  attempted  to  use  false
    documents to leave the UK for Canada leading to his conviction for  the
    possession of a false identity document.  I am not  satisfied  that  on
    the evidence before me that there  is  any  basis  for  me  to  take  a
    different view of the credibility of the appellant's account of  events
    in Somalia.

21.     However, I am satisfied that the  general  background  situation  in
    Somalia has significantly moved on (see in particular para 18.30 of the
    COI report Somalia May 2010) when assessing where there is  a  risk  to
    the appellant from his clan membership, particularly in  respect  of  a
    non-minority clan such as the Tunni Digil. There is  no  basis  in  the
    evidence for a finding that the appellant should be treated as  a  Town
    Tunni.  I am not satisfied that the appellant's  clan  membership  puts
    him at a differential risk of serious harm.  His risk  is  of  being  a
    victim  of  the  indiscriminate  violence   which   now   characterises
    Mogadishu.  For these reasons I am not  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    faces a real risk of persecution as a result of his clan membership.

22.     Finally, reverting to the issue of relocation I  am  not  satisfied,
    even if contrary to my previous  findings  the  appellant  is  able  to
    return in safety to Mogadishu and then make a safe exit, that there  is
    adequate evidence before me from which I can properly  make  a  finding
    that it has been shown that he could relocate in  safety  elsewhere  in
    Somalia.  It is clear from the most recent COI  Report  that  there  is
    very little clear information about the  Tunni  and  the  Digil,  about
    where they live  or  the  kind  of  protection  they  might  expect  to
    receive.  I am also not satisfied that it is reasonable to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate in an IDP camp.  On the evidence produced at this
    hearing it is clear that the humanitarian  situation  has  deteriorated
    since AM and AM was heard.  There is evidence that  the  activities  of
    the UN and humanitarian workers are being  increasingly  threatened  by
    those involved in the conflict and there are threats to the  supply  of
    humanitarian assistance.  There is no adequate evidence  before  me  to
    support a conclusion that the appellant could relocate  and  then  lead
    anything resembling a  relatively  normal  life  without  facing  undue
    hardship.

Decision

23.     The previous Tribunal erred in law and I  set  aside  that  decision
    replacing it with a decision dismissing the appeal  on  asylum  grounds
    but allowing it on humanitarian protection grounds.

24.     I am satisfied that when the order for reconsideration was made  the
    appeal had substantial prospects of success and  assuming  that  it  is
    necessary to make an order in a transitional case,  I  order  that  the
    costs of the  application  for  reconsideration,  the  preparation  for
    reconsideration and the hearing be paid from the relevant central fund.


Senior                Immigration                Judge                Latter
                                                 Dated: 23 July 2010
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


