
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Cudjoe (Proxy marriages: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00180 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 September 2015                         |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                           SHIRLEY NANA AMA CUDJOE
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:      Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel, instructed by Bedfords
Solicitors


 1. It will be for an appellant to prove that their proxy marriage  was  in
    accordance with the laws of the country in which  it  took  place,  and
    that both parties were free to  marry.  The  burden  of  proof  may  be
    discharged  by  production  of  a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a
    competent authority of the country in which the  marriage  took  place,
    and reliance upon the statutory presumption of validity  consequent  to
    such production. The reliability of marriage certificates and  issuance
    by a competent authority are matters for an appellant to prove.

 2. The means of proving that a proxy marriage was contracted according  to
    the laws of the country in which it took place is not  limited  to  the
    production of a marriage certificate, as is recognised in Kareem (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).

 3. In cases where a divorce has taken place prior to  the  proxy  marriage
    and there is an issue as to whether the parties were free to marry,  it
    is for an appellant to  show  that  the  dissolution  of  the  previous
    marriage was in accordance with the laws of the  country  in  which  it
    occurred.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By a decision promulgated on 23 December  2014,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul found that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in  law
    when allowing the appeal of the respondent  (whom  we  shall  call  the
    claimant) against the decision of the Secretary of State (whom we shall
    call the respondent), dated 8 January 2014, refusing to issue her  with
    a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the Regulations) as  confirmation  of  her  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse  of  a  Dutch  national
    exercising Treaty rights. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul's error  of  law
    decision is set out in full at Annex A.

 2. In summary, it was found that First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen erred by
    relying solely on an item of Dutch legislation  entitled  "Conflict  of
    Law Rules for Marriages" to conclude that the claimant's proxy marriage
    to her husband in Ghana was valid for the purposes of Dutch  law.  This
    approach was contrary to the decisions in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT  00024  (IAC)  (Kareem)  and  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) (TA).

 3. It is important to note that although the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was set aside,  certain  findings  were  expressly  preserved:
    first, that the previous customary marriage  of  the  claimant's  Dutch
    husband, Mr Raymond Awuah, had been validly dissolved in 2012;  second,
    that the proxy marriage contracted between the claimant and Mr Awuah in
    Ghana was valid according to the law of that country.

 4. Thus, as was clearly stated in the error of  law  decision,  the  issue
    before us now is a narrow one: is the marriage in  question  valid  for
    the purposes of Dutch law?

History of directions issued by the Upper Tribunal

 5. Contained within the  error  of  law  decision  were  clear  directions
    relating to the provision of evidence  on  proxy  marriages  and  their
    validity under Dutch law.  As  regards  the  crucial  issue  of  expert
    evidence, specific questions were to be  addressed  by  "either  party"
    wishing to submit such evidence.

 6. The appeal then came back before the Upper Tribunal on 26  March  2015,
    whereupon further directions were given, including a provision for  the
    Respondent to put any questions about the expert opinion on  Dutch  law
    relied on by the claimant to her solicitors, in order that the relevant
    expert could address them.

 7. The claimant's solicitors produced a further expert report,  served  on
    27 May 2015. Nothing by way of evidence  or  questions  to  the  expert
    having emanated from the Respondent  thus  far,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul issued further directions to  the  parties  on  20  July  2015.
    Direction 3a stated that:

          "Any material or  expert  evidence  in  response  to  the  expert
          evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant  must  be  served  by   the
          respondent on the appellant and on the Upper Tribunal at least 21
          days before the hearing."

 8. The directions also required  skeleton  arguments  from  both  parties,
    addressing all relevant issues including the recent apparent occurrence
    of registration of the marriage with the Dutch Embassy in Accra.

The hearing before us

 9. On the morning of the hearing, Mr Melvin,  who  has  appeared  for  the
    Respondent throughout proceedings in the Upper  Tribunal,  provided  us
    with a skeleton argument and various additional materials gleaned  from
    the websites of  the  Dutch  Embassy  in  Accra  and  the  Netherland's
    Immigration and Naturalisation Service. The service of these  documents
    was very late in the  day,  and  there  was  no  explanation  from  the
    Respondent for this. Nonetheless, we admitted the skeleton argument and
    additional evidence. What we have made of this  evidence  is  discussed
    later on in our decision.

10. The evidence we have considered in making our decision on the appeal is
    as follows:

       a) The bundle prepared by the Respondent for the  appeal  before  the
          First-tier Tribunal;

       b) The bundle from the Appellant  relied  on  before  the  First-tier
          Tribunal, indexed and paginated 1-109;

       c) The expert report, dated 25 May  2015,  of  Dr  Ian  Curry-Sumner,
          founder of Voorts Juridische Diensten, a  legal  services  company
          based in Utrecht, the Netherlands;

       d) A letter from the Ghanaian High Commission in London, dated 2 July
          2014;

       e) Documents from the Ghanaian authorities  previously  submitted  by
          the  Appellant  in  respect  of  her  marriage  to  Mr  Awuah  and
          subsequently stamped by the Dutch Embassy in Accra;

       f) The Internet materials provided by Mr Melvin and  referred  to  in
          the previous paragraph.

11. We were provided with the originals of the relevant Ghanaian documents.



12. The claimant and her husband attended the hearing but were  not  called
    upon to give oral evidence.



Ms Ofei-Kwatia's initial submissions

13. In her succinct opening, Ms Ofei-Kwatia relied on the expert report and
    submitted that it was comprehensive and sufficient for us  to  conclude
    that the claimant's marriage was recognised  under  both  Ghanaian  and
    Dutch law.

Relevant legal framework

14. We remind ourselves that matters of foreign law are questions  of  fact
    for us to determine and that it is for the Appellant to prove the facts
    relied upon in support of her  case.  For  the  reasons  identified  in
    Kareem and  TA,  the  issue  here,  as  noted  above,  is  whether  the
    claimant's marriage is valid for the purpose of  Dutch  law.  Paragraph
    [68] of Kareem states:


      "We make the following general observations.

    a) A person who is the spouse of an EEA national  who  is  a  qualified
       person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement  and
       residence if proof of the marital relationship is provided.

    b) The production of a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a  competent
       authority (that is, issued according to the registration laws of the
       country where the marriage took place) will usually  be  sufficient.
       If not in English (or Welsh in relation to proceedings in Wales),  a
       certified translation of the marriage certificate will be required.

    c) A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not  raise
       a presumption of the marriage it purports to record  unless  it  has
       been issued by an authority with legal power to  create  or  confirm
       the facts it attests.

    d) In appeals where there is no  such  marriage  certificate  or  where
       there is doubt that a marriage certificate  has  been  issued  by  a
       competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved  by
       other evidence.  This will require the Tribunal to determine whether
       a marriage was contracted.

    e) In such an appeal, the starting point will be to  decide  whether  a
       marriage was contracted between  the  appellant  and  the  qualified
       person according to the national law  of  the  EEA  country  of  the
       qualified person's nationality.

    f)    In all such situations, when resolving issues that arise  because
       of conflicts of law, proper respect must be given to  the  qualified
       person's rights as provided by the European Treaties, including  the
       right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.

    g) It should be assumed that, without independent and reliable evidence
       about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of  the  EEA
       country and/or the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place,  the
       Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence has
       been provided to discharge the burden of proof.  Mere production  of
       legal materials from the EEA country or country where  the  marriage
       took place will be insufficient evidence because  they  will  rarely
       show how such law is understood or applied in those countries.  Mere
       assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for similar  reasons,
       carry no weight.

    h) These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person is  a
       spouse for the purposes of EU law.  It  does  not  relate  to  other
       relationships that might be regarded as similar to marriage, such as
       civil partnerships or durable relationships."


15. The headnote of TA reads:
    "Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]
    UKUT 24, the determination of whether there is a  marital  relationship
    for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must  always
    be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State from  which
    the Union citizen obtains nationality."

16. At paragraph [20] of TA, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor held:

    "Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to see how the Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem could have been any clearer in its  conclusion  that
    when  consideration  is  being  given  to  whether  an  applicant   has
    undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes of the  2006  Regulations,
    such consideration has to be assessed by reference to the laws  of  the
    legal system of the nationality  of  the  relevant  Union  citizen.  Mr
    Akohene's submissions to the contrary are entirely misconceived and are
    born out of a failure to read the determination in Kareem as a whole."

Our findings

The claimant's husband as a qualified person

17. We take first a matter that has never been in dispute  and  find  as  a
    fact that Mr Awuah has been and is exercising his Treaty rights in  the
    United Kingdom. He is employed by ISS, as evidenced in the  Appellant's
    bundle, and is therefore a worker for the purposes of Regulation  6  of
    the Regulations.

The validity of the marriage according to Ghanaian law

18. We have no hesitation in finding that the  claimant's  marriage  to  Mr
    Awuah was valid according to Ghanaian law. That finding, and a  finding
    that, contrary to the respondent's assertion, Mr Awuah was indeed  free
    to marry as his previous marriage had in fact been validly dissolved in
    2012, are part of the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal and  are
    preserved. In any event, there is the letter  from  the  Ghanaian  High
    Commission in London, which states unequivocally that both the  divorce
    and marriage were valid according to law.  In  absence  of  any  cogent
    evidence to the contrary, it would not be appropriate to go behind  the
    clear statement of the competent authority of the country in which  the
    events took place.



19. Although Mr Melvin raised an issue in respect of the Ghanaian documents
    and the issue of the registration of the claimant's marriage  with  the
    Dutch Embassy in Accra,  he  expressly  declined  to  submit  that  the
    documents were forgeries. He  did  however  submit  that  the  Ghanaian
    authorities had "distanced themselves" from the marriage certificate in
    particular by only attesting to the authenticity of the  signatures  of
    officials. When the preserved  finding  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dineen relating to the validity of the marriage under Ghanaian law  was
    pointed out to him, Mr Melvin accepted that if this was  the  case  his
    submission on this point failed.

The validity of the marriage according to Dutch law

20. We turn now to the core issue in this appeal, namely  the  validity  of
    the proxy marriage according to Dutch  law.  This  necessarily  entails
    dealing with the expert evidence in some detail.

21. In respect of Dr Curry-Sumner's suitability as an expert in  the  field
    of Dutch law, we simply refer to paragraph 10 of Mr  Melvin's  skeleton
    argument, in which he states that, "No issue is taken  with  Dr  Curry-
    Sumner's expertise in the area in question." There is  nothing  in  the
    evidence to cast any doubt on this concession, and we need say no  more
    about the matter. The report before us is  from  a  suitably  qualified
    source.

22. Within the section of the report entitled "Assignment", Dr Curry-Sumner
    sets  out  the  instructions  from   the   claimant's   solicitors,   a
    comprehensive list of the relevant documents provided to him in advance
    of the report's production, and the specific questions posed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul in his error of law  decision.  A  statement  of
    truth is also included, as is a declaration of his impartiality in  the
    case and a lengthy curriculum vitae. To this extent there is compliance
    with the requirements of paragraph 10 of the  Practice  Directions  for
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    Upper Tribunal.

23. Mr Melvin submitted that weight should not be  attached  to  Dr  Curry-
    Sumner's report for, in summary, the following reasons:

    a) The sources cited by the expert in his report were in Dutch and  had
       not been translated for the benefit of the Respondent or  the  Upper
       Tribunal and so the Upper Tribunal could not rely on what the expert
       said. It followed, that there was no evidence before us to show that
       the expert's assertions were correct.

    b) The fact that the author of the report was not  at  the  hearing  to
       give oral evidence was relevant. We assume that this submission went
       to the question of weight.

    c) The expert made references in his report to marriages contracted  in
       Las Vegas, USA, and Pakistan (paragraph 2.4).  These  could  not  be
       relevant to the present case and  so  the  weight  attached  to  the
       report was thereby undermined.

24. We reject Mr Melvin's first submission.  Dr  Curry-Sumner's  report  is
    fully sourced, in footnote form,  as  to  academic  works,  legislative
    provisions and case-law; the respondent has  conceded  that  Dr  Curry-
    Sumner is a suitably qualified expert; and, it is the  function  of  an
    expert to provide their opinion on the issues in question. Particularly
    in the context of matters of foreign law,  it  is  the  expert  opinion
    which constitutes the evidence to be assessed, not the  primary  source
    materials upon which that evidence  is  based.  As  is  made  clear  in
    Kareem, simply examining legal materials from a particular  country  is
    unlikely to be of any assistance  in  deciding  questions  of  fact  in
    relation to foreign law. Further, no  authority  has  been  put  to  us
    supportive  of  the  contention  that  the  absence   of   translations
    effectively renders the report valueless.

25. We note  that  paragraph  10.9  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Practice
    Directions does not include a requirement for materials  in  a  foreign
    language relied on to be translated. On Mr Melvin's case,  the  expert,
    or in reality the claimant's solicitors,  would  have  had  to  provide
    translations of not only the relevant Dutch legislative provisions, but
    also extracts of all academic works and court judgments  cited  in  the
    report. In our view, this would amount to a disproportionate burden. It
    is also contrary to the purpose of instructing an expert when  disputes
    as to foreign law arise; the need for the expert is because a  Tribunal
    in  the  United  Kingdom  cannot  interpret  foreign  laws,   even   if
    translated, as Kareem makes abundantly clear.

26. Finally, there is the respondent's conduct in this case.  At  no  stage
    prior to the production of the skeleton argument on the morning of  the
    hearing before us has the respondent taken the  absence  of  translated
    source materials as a point against the expert report, a  report  which
    has been in her possession since May 2015. No questions for the  expert
    relating to the source materials (or indeed any other matter) have ever
    been provided by the respondent, and of course she has not provided  an
    expert report of her own. In light of this, even  if  translations  had
    been produced, it is unlikely in the extreme that any further  evidence
    would have emanated from the respondent. With all  due  respect  to  Mr
    Melvin, the reality is that all he could have done  would  be  to  make
    submissions on translated legal materials in relation to which  he  had
    no expertise.

27. In view of the above, the absence of  translations  of  primary  source
    materials does not materially detract from the weight we attach  to  Dr
    Curry-Sumner's report.

28. We can deal briefly with two further  criticisms  made  of  the  expert
    report. The fact that Dr Curry-Sumner did not give oral evidence has no
    material bearing on the weight we attach to his report. There has never
    been any indication from the respondent that she had any  questions  to
    put to him. The history of the respondent's failure to engage with  the
    expert evidence in this appeal rather suggests that there were no  such
    questions. Mr Melvin did not allude to any matters he might have wished
    to raise with Dr Curry-Sumner.

29. The second point made is Dr Curry-Sumner's citation of two judgments of
    the Dutch courts in his report:  the  first  relating  to  a  Pakistani
    Islamic marriage (footnote 5  on  page  5);  the  second  concerning  a
    marriage in Las  Vegas  in  paragraph  2.4.  These  were  clearly  just
    examples of how the Dutch courts had applied the law  when  considering
    the validity of marriages contracted outside of the Netherlands,  which
    may not have been  permitted  within  the  domestic  jurisdiction.  The
    examples were relevant and we fail  to  see  how  they  could  possibly
    undermine the substance of the report.

30. Before moving on to the substance of the expert report, we need to  say
    something more about  the  respondent's  engagement  with  this  appeal
    following the error of law decision  in  December  2014.  As  mentioned
    previously, she has not provided any expert evidence of her  own.  This
    is despite having had ample time in which to do so, not only since  the
    possibility of such evidence was flagged up  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul in his initial directions, but more importantly since she  came
    into possession of an expert report back in May which  clearly  favours
    the claimant's case. There has been no obligation on the respondent  to
    commission a report in this appeal, but we regard it as a pity that she
    has seemingly declined to take any steps whatsoever to assist with  the
    accumulation of the best evidence possible on an  issue  affecting  not
    only the claimant but quite  probably  numerous  other  individuals  in
    similar situations.

31. It does not follow  that  the  absence  of  expert  evidence  from  the
    respondent has the effect of increasing the weight to be attached to Dr
    Curry-Sumner's report: it does not (see SI (expert evidence - Kurd - SM
    confirmed) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00094). We  have  assessed  the  expert
    evidence on its own merits. Having said that, the respondent's inaction
    on this issue means that there  is  no  expert  evidence  from  her  to
    contradict or qualify that provided by Dr Curry-Sumner.

32. The only  evidence  produced  by  the  respondent  is  of  very  little
    probative value. The materials  are  printouts  from  websites,  albeit
    official Dutch government ones. They do not even allude to  substantive
    legislative provisions of relevant Dutch law  regarding  the  issue  in
    this appeal.  Indeed,  as  we  shall  discuss  later,  the  information
    contained in the printouts is irrelevant to the question of whether the
    marriage is valid under Dutch law. In our view, these materials are  of
    even less assistance than the legal materials considered  and  rejected
    by the Upper Tribunal in Kareem and TA.

33. In light of everything said above, we attach significant weight to  the
    expert evidence of Dr Curry-Sumner. In this  context,  we  address  the
    relevant parts of his report.

34. Dr Curry-Sumner refers to the relevant aspects of the Dutch Civil  Code
    by reference to its constituent  Books  (of  which  there  are  ten  in
    total). The Book relating to Private International Law  (and  thus  the
    issue of overseas marriages with which we are concerned)  is  Book  10.
    The key Articles of Book 10 are 31 to 34.  For  the  avoidance  of  any
    confusion, we note that in Kareem the Upper Tribunal  referred  to  the
    relevant provisions using the format of  the  Book  number  immediately
    followed by the particular article, whereas Dr Curry-Sumner cites  them
    in reverse order. This makes no difference  to  the  substance  of  his
    conclusions.

35. The first conclusion provided  by  Dr  Curry-Sumner  is  that  the  law
    applicable to the issue of whether the  claimant's  marriage  is  valid
    under Dutch law is contained in Articles 27-34 of Book 10 of the  Dutch
    Civil Code, and not in the Hague Marriage Convention  1978  (paragraphs
    2.1 to 2.2 of the report). The reason provided for this  conclusion  is
    that although under the Dutch  Constitution  international  instruments
    will take precedence over domestic private law, Articles  5,  6  and  7
    (with reference to Article 8) of the Convention exclude proxy marriages
    from its scope. We rely on this conclusion and find as a fact that this
    is the case.

36. The expert confirms that by virtue of Article 34, the provisions of the
    Dutch Civil Code only apply to marriages  contracted  after  1  January
    1990. We find this to be so.

37. Dr Curry-Sumner then sets out his opinion  on  the  core  provision  of
    Article 31(1) of Book 10. It is as well to quote the relevant  passages
    contained in paragraph 2.4 of his report:

           "The main rule is that  a  marriage  concluded  outside  of  the
           Netherlands will be regarded as valid and thus recognised  as  a
           valid marriage if it is concluded in accordance with the law  of
           the State where the marriage took place...Automatic  recognition
           only occurs, however, on the premise of the satisfaction of  two
           cumulative conditions, namely firstly that the marriage is valid
           according to the law of the place where the marriage took place,
           and secondly that no exception ground is at stake...Contrary  to
           the requirements for entering into a marriage in the Netherlands
           before the civil registrar, foreign informal marriages and other
           forms of marriages not  permitted  in  the  Netherlands  may  be
           recognised  if  conducted  properly  abroad.  This  means   that
           informal or  religious  marriages  that  are  concluded  validly
           abroad will be recognised as such in the Netherlands."

38. In view of the significant weight we attach to his report  in  general,
    for reasons elucidated previously, we find as a fact that the operation
    of Article 31(1) of Book 10 is as stated  by  Dr  Curry-Sumner  in  the
    passage quoted above.

39. Paragraph 2.5 of the report is  concerned  with  the  validity  of  the
    marriage under Ghanaian law, that being a prerequisite for  recognition
    under Dutch law. Whilst Dr Curry-Sumner deals with the matter  in  some
    detail, this issue has already been decided in the claimant's favour by
    virtue of the preserved findings of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dineen,
    or, in the alternative, by our own conclusion on the evidence from  the
    Ghanaian authorities. However, it is important to  reiterate  that  the
    question of whether a marriage is valid according to Ghanaian  law  (or
    indeed the law of any other country) is one of fact for  the  Tribunal.
    This particular fact-finding exercise must take place in advance  of  a
    consideration of whether the marriage is valid under Dutch  law.  If  a
    favourable finding is made in relation to validity according to the law
    of the country in which the marriage took place, it will in the  normal
    course of events follow  that  the  marriage  is  recognised  as  valid
    according to Dutch law, given what we say about the absence  of  public
    policy objections, below.

40. In terms of how a claimant in any given case may be able to  prove  the
    validity of their marriage under Ghanaian law, there are various means,
    as discussed in Kareem, none of which  are  discounted  by  the  expert
    evidence  before  us.  These   are   not   without   their   evidential
    difficulties, but in the context of the present  appeal  none  of  this
    concerns us, given the favourable findings already made on the issue.

41. Having viewed the evidence of Dr Curry-Sumner as a whole we  find  that
    under Article 31(4) of Book 10 of the Dutch  Civil  Code,  there  is  a
    statutory presumption to the effect that where a  marriage  certificate
    issued by a competent authority is  produced,  the  marriage  shall  be
    deemed to be valid until the contrary is established  -  see  paragraph
    2.5.2 of the report. According to an academic source cited in the  same
    paragraph, the term "competent  authority"  should  be  interpreted  as
    meaning that the authority in question is competent in the  country  in
    which the marriage took place. We emphasise that it is for  the  person
    adducing a marriage certificate in any given case  to  prove  both  its
    reliability and issuance by a competent authority.

42. Aside from the question of validity of the marriage under Ghanaian law,
    the second matter that must be shown for recognition  of  the  marriage
    under Dutch law is that it is not regarded as being contrary to  public
    policy: in other words that no exception ground exists. This  issue  is
    dealt with in the section of the report entitled, "Non-recognition  and
    public policy". Dr Curry-Sumner explains that Article  32  of  Book  10
    provides for the withholding of recognition  of  foreign  marriages  on
    grounds of public policy. Importantly,  and  relying  upon  explanatory
    notes accompanying the introduction of the legislation in question,  Dr
    Curry-Sumner is of the opinion that it would be "quite hypocritical" of
    the Dutch authorities to deny recognition of proxy marriages  when  the
    notes themselves acknowledge the possibility of such unions under Dutch
    law. He concludes by stating:

           "Accordingly, it would appear  that  the  recognition  of  proxy
           marriages are not to be regarded as  contrary  to  Dutch  public
           policy."

43. As with other aspects of his report, we place significant  weight  upon
    this conclusion, and in the absence of any evidence from the respondent
    to found a contrary position, we rely on it and find as a fact that  on
    the evidence before us there is no public policy objection in Dutch law
    to the recognition of proxy marriages conducted abroad.

44. A matter which consumed a considerable amount of time in this appeal is
    whether  the  claimant's  marriage  was  registered  with   the   Dutch
    authorities, and whether in turn this made a difference to its validity
    under Dutch law. Whilst in essence Ms Ofei-Kwatia's position  was  that
    it had no bearing on the core question of validity, Mr Melvin  appeared
    to us to be suggesting that it did. Indeed, the materials  he  provided
    went solely to the issue of registration.

45. At the hearing we indicated that this issue might have  been  something
    of a distraction from the  core  question  of  validity.  The  evidence
    provided by Mr Melvin said nothing at all about  registration  being  a
    necessary requirement for the purposes of validity. At paragraph 2.4 of
    his report, Dr Curry-Sumner states that, "Registration of the  marriage
    in the registers of the Personal Records Database is not a constitutive
    requirement for the validity of the marriage." The database referred to
    is the very one mentioned in the website  materials  relied  on  by  Mr
    Melvin. In light of this we have no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the
    issue of registration is a purely procedural  matter  relating  to  the
    requirements of residence in  the  Netherlands  following  an  overseas
    marriage. It has no bearing on the validity of the marriage itself.

46. The final matter addressed by Dr Curry-Sumner in his report is that  of
    Mr Awuah's divorce. It is said that under Dutch law, the recognition of
    divorces obtained outside of the European Union and in countries  which
    have not ratified either the Hague Divorce Convention or the Luxembourg
    Divorce Convention is governed by Article 57 of  Book  10:  recognition
    occurs if the dissolution is obtained,  as  Dr  Curry-Sumner  puts  it,
    "through a proper divorce procedure." We find that this is  indeed  the
    correct legal position. In the context of the expert's evidence, it  is
    clear to us that the "proper divorce procedure" must mean one which  is
    in accordance with the laws of the country in which it takes place.

47. In summary, drawing together what is said in Dr Curry-Sumner's  report,
    we find that the following propositions as to Dutch law are made out:

    a) A proxy marriage contracted outside of the Netherlands will  in  the
       normal course of events be recognised as valid  according  to  Dutch
       law provided that it was so contracted in accordance with  the  laws
       of the country in which it took place, and  that  the  parties  were
       free to marry.

    b) Proxy marriages are not regarded as being contrary to  Dutch  public
       policy.

    c) It is for an applicant to prove that their  proxy  marriage  was  in
       accordance with the laws of the country in which it took place,  and
       that both parties were free to marry.

    d) The burden of proof may be discharged by production  of  a  marriage
       certificate issued by a competent authority of the country in  which
       the marriage took place, and reliance upon the statutory presumption
       of validity  consequent  to  such  production.  The  reliability  of
       marriage certificates and issuance  by  a  competent  authority  are
       matters for an applicant to prove

    e) The means of proving that a proxy marriage was contracted  according
       to the laws of the country in which it took place is not limited  to
       the production of a  marriage  certificate,  (as  is  recognised  in
       Kareem).

    f) In cases where a divorce has taken place prior to the proxy marriage
       and there is an issue as to whether the parties were free to  marry,
       it is for the claimant to show that the dissolution of the  previous
       marriage was in accordance with the laws of the country in which  it
       occurred

48. In respect of the last of these propositions, as with the issue of  the
    validity of the marriage in Ghana, the issue of the divorce has already
    been resolved in the claimant's favour by the First-tier Tribunal in  a
    finding preserved by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.

49. The ultimate conclusion of Dr Curry-Sumner is unambiguous: on the basis
    of the information provided to him, the marriage between  the  claimant
    and Mr Awuah is valid according to Dutch law. Having regard once  again
    to the weight attached to the report as a whole, the preserved findings
    of fact, the location  of  the  burden  of  proof  and  its  applicable
    standard, we are more than satisfied that when the six propositions set
    out above are applied to this case, the claimant's  proxy  marriage  is
    recognised as valid according to Dutch law.

Conclusions in this appeal

50. We have found that the claimant's marriage to Mr Awuah was and  remains
    valid according to Dutch law. We have found that Mr Awuah was  free  to
    marry the claimant.  As she was  and  remains  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national, she is therefore a family member of an EEA national  who  has
    been at all material times a qualified person, and thus, she was and is
    entitled to the issuance of a residence card under Regulation 17(1)  of
    the Regulations.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

We re-make the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


Signed                                       Date: 29 November 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






Annex A: the error of law decision


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 December 2014                           |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                           SHIRLEY NANA AMA CUDJOE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:      Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel, instructed by Bedfords
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen promulgated on 15  September  2014  in
    which he allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse to issue the claimant with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right of residence in the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of a Dutch national exercising treaty rights.

 2. The claimant's case is that she is lawfully married  to  Raymond  Ofosu
    Awuah, a Dutch citizen who is working in the United Kingdom.  They were
    married by proxy in Ghana, his previous marriage having been previously
    dissolved.  The respondent's case is that the  claimant's  husband  was
    not free to marry her as he had  already  been  married,  the  date  of
    divorce being 24  September  2013,  substantially  after  the  date  of
    marriage which was 15 March 2013, and thus the marriage was not  valid.
    It  is  not  accepted  either  that  the  couple  were  in  a   durable
    relationship.

 3. On appeal, Judge Dineen found that:-

       i) the customary marriage between Mr Awuah and his previous wife was
          validly dissolved on 14  November  2012,  albeit  not  registered
          until 24 September 2013;

      ii) on the basis of  the  marriage  and  the  materials  before  him,
          including a marriage certificate and a letter from  the  Ghanaian
          High Commission in London, that the  marriage  had  been  validly
          entered into according to the laws of Ghana; and

     iii) having had regard to the decision in Kareem [2014] UKUT 00024 and
          the Dutch legislation presented to  him  that  the  marriage  was
          valid according to the law of the Netherlands;

      iv) having given the  respondent  time  until  7  September  2014  to
          produce  evidence  to  show  that  the  marriage  had  not   been
          recognised in Holland, this had not been provided.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  Judge
    Dineen  had,  in  reaching  his  decision,  based   his   decision   on
    documentation  previously  disregarded  by  the  Upper   Tribunal   and
    considered that it did not show that  the  Netherlands  recognised  the
    validity of proxy marriages.

 5.  On  21  October  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  granted
    permission, noting that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
    accepting that the proxy marriage would be recognised under Dutch law.

 6. The issue in this case is a narrow one: is  the  marriage  in  question
    valid for the purposes of Dutch law?  That is a relevant issue for  two
    reasons: first if a Dutch national's marriage  is  not  valid  for  the
    purposes of his own domestic law it is difficult to see how he is being
    treated differently or in a discriminating manner  by  a  Member  State
    which does not also recognise  his  marriage.   Second,  the  issue  of
    capacity to enter into a marriage is (for the purposes of English  law)
    governed by the law of the individual's  domicile.   As  was  noted  in
    Wilkinson v Kitzinger [2006] EWHC 2022 at paragraph 15:


       By the rules of private  international  law,  whereas  the  form  of
       marriage (subject to certain minor  and  immaterial  exceptions)  is
       governed  by  the  local  law  of  the  place  of  celebration  (see
       Berthiaume - v- Dastous [1930] AC 79 and Rule 67 of Dicey &  Morris,
       The Conflict of Laws (13  ed)  Vol  2  651  at  para  17R-001),  the
       capacity of the parties to marry is generally governed by the law of
       each   party's   ante-nuptial   domicile:   see   Padolecchia    -v-
       Padolecchia[1968] P 314 at 338 and Rule 68 in Dicey & Morris 671  at
       para 17R - 054. Occasionally, the courts will judge  the  matter  of
       capacity by reference to the intended matrimonial home  (Lawrence  v
       Lawrence (1985) FLR 1097 at 1105D-1106C)  or  by  reference  to  the
       jurisdiction with which the marriage is adjudged to  have  its  most
       substantial connection (Vervaeke -v- Smith  [1983]  AC145  per  Lord
       Simon of Glaisdale at 166D). In this case as already indicated,  the
       parties are both domiciled in England and Wales and, following their
       marriage, returned to live here. It is  thus  clear,  that,  on  any
       ordinary application of the  rules  of  private  international  law,
       their capacity to marry is governed by the law of England.


 7. Capacity goes beyond mental capacity  and  factors  such  as  age;  the
    degrees of consanguinity permissible in marriage vary from  country  to
    country, some prohibiting marriage between first cousins,  others  not.
    It is not arguable, nor has it been expressly submitted that this is  a
    case in which Mr Awuah's capacity should be adjudged by anything  other
    than Dutch Law

 8.  In Kareem the Tribunal held:-

         "g.       It  should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and
             reliable evidence about the recognition of the marriage  under
             the laws of the EEA  country  and/or  the  country  where  the
             marriage took place, the Tribunal is likely to  be  unable  to
             find that sufficient evidence has been provided  to  discharge
             the burden of proof. Mere production of legal  materials  from
             the EEA country or country where the marriage took place  will
             be insufficient evidence because they  will  rarely  show  how
             such law is understood or applied  in  those  countries.  Mere
             assertions as to the effect of such  laws  will,  for  similar
             reasons, carry no weight."


 9. I accept that the questions of foreign law are questions  of  fact.   I
    accept also that the decision in Kareem is not that Dutch law does  not
    recognise proxy marriages; it is only that on the basis of the evidence
    before it it could not be satisfied that that is so.  Further  that  is
    exactly the position in TA and Others.

10. I consider that Judge Dineen did err in having regard only to the  copy
    of the Dutch act provided and in the absence  of  material  tending  to
    suggest  how  the  law  is  enforced.   Accordingly,  therefore,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision did involve the making of an error  of  law
    and I set it aside.

Directions

(1)   The decision of Judge Dineen is set aside only insofar as  it  relates
    to the finding that the claimant's marriage to her  husband  was  valid
    for the purpose of Dutch law.  The other findings are preserved.

(2)   The claimant is to serve on the Tribunal and  on  the  respondent,  21
    days before the hearing, such evidence upon which she  seeks  to  rely,
    showing that the applicant's marriage is valid according to Dutch  law.



(3)   The respondent is to serve on the Tribunal and on the claimant,  seven
    days before the hearing, any response thereto and any further  evidence
    which she wishes to rely showing that the marriage would not  be  valid
    according to Dutch law.

(4)   Any expert evidence upon  which  either  party  wishes  to  rely  must
    address:

    (a)    whether there are in Dutch law any specific  prohibitions  on  a
         Dutch citizen entering into a proxy marriage if that marriage  took
         place  outside  the  Netherlands  and  in  a  country  where  proxy
         marriages are permitted;


    (b)    whether a proxy marriage would  be  seen  as  invalid  from  its
         inception;  or,  whether  it  is  a  marriage  which  in   specific
         circumstances could be set aside as being contrary to Dutch  public
         order; if so, on what grounds  could  that  be  done,  whether  the
         marriage would therefore be seen valid until it was struck down and
         who would have the right to petition for the marriage to be  struck
         down - would it be simply the parties to the marriage or is there a
         role for the state.


Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


