
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


    Chowdhury (Extended family members: dependency) 2020] UKUT 00188 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


    |Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th March 2020                           |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between


                            MOSNU AHMED CHOWDHURY
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:


    For the Appellant:         Mr R de Mello and Mr T Muman, Counsel
    instructed by JM Wilson Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


    The words "and continues to be dependent" in regulation 8(2)(c) of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulation   2006,   properly
    characterised, require an applicant to establish  that  there  has  not
    been a break in their dependency on the EEA national sponsor.

        1. This appeal raises a simple but important  issue  regarding  the
           interpretation of regulation 8(2) of the  Immigration  (European
           Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006  No  1003)  ("the  2006
           Regulations"), and in particular, the requirement in  regulation
           8(2)(c) that the person "continues to be dependent upon" the EEA
           national or to be a member of his household.  Regulation 8(2) of
           the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  (SI
           2016 No 1052) is in similar terms.


    The background


        2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He arrived in the UK
           on 28th February  2011  and  presented  a  Bangladeshi  passport
           endorsed with entry clearance as a  Tier  4  (Student)  Migrant,
           issued on 8th February 2011 and valid until 10th May  2014.   He
           was interviewed at immigration control and because  of  concerns
           about his  inability  to  speak  English,  further  enquiry  was
           undertaken.   The  Immigration  Officer   concluded   that   the
           appellant's  standard  of  English  was  not  adequate  for  his
           intended course and following further  enquiry,  the  Admissions
           Officer of London Denning  College,  withdrew  its  sponsorship.
           The appellant's entry clearance was cancelled.  The  appellant's
           appeal against that decision was dismissed for reasons  set  out
           in a decision promulgated by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
           17th April 2011.


        3. The appellant remained in the UK unlawfully and in June 2011  he
           was treated as an absconder.   After  a  significant  period  of
           inactivity,  on  28th  January  2016,  the  appellant  made   an
           application for a Residence Card as the extended  family  member
           of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation  8(2)   of   the   2006
           Regulations.  The appellant claimed to  be  an  extended  family
           member of Mr Nashir Ahmed Chowdhury ("the EEA national"),  whose
           sister is the  appellant's  grandmother.   The  application  was
           refused by the respondent for reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
           dated 2nd August 2016.  The respondent was  not  satisfied  that
           the appellant is related to the EEA national as claimed and  was
           not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  provided   sufficient
           evidence that the appellant was a dependent of the EEA  national
           in Bangladesh or in the UK.


        4. The appellant's appeal was dismissed  by  FtT  judge  Asjad  for
           reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 29th October  2018.
           The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  the  EEA
           national.  The evidence of the EEA  national  is  summarised  at
           paragraph [6] of the decision.  Mr  Chowdhury  claimed  that  he
           moved to Italy in 1982 and that  he  continued  to  provide  his
           sister, with whom the appellant lived, with  money  whenever  he
           visited Bangladesh, and would send money via  friends  who  were
           visiting  Bangladesh  from  Italy.   The  judge   accepted   the
           appellant was part of the EEA national's household in Bangladesh
           until the appellant  left  Bangladesh  in  2011,  and  that  the
           appellant was at that time dependent on the EEA  national.   The
           judge states at paragraphs [10] and [11] as follows:


              "9.      The difficulty arises with what  happened  when  the
                appellant left Bangladesh. It was  Mr  Ahmed's  own  written
                evidence that the appellant joined his household in  the  UK
                and began to  live  with  him  in  December  2014.  In  oral
                evidence  he  said  it  was  February  2015.  As  noted   in
                Regulation 8 having shown that he was a member of Mr Ahmed's
                household and/or dependent upon him he must then  show  that
                he continued to be dependent upon him or was a member of his
                household. Both the appellant and Mr Ahmed  were  noticeably
                silent about where the appellant was living between 2011 and
                December  2014/February   2015   in   both   their   witness
                statements. Neither of them refers to this period at all and
                paragraph 8 in both  their  statements  simply  avoids  this
                period. There is mention in paragraph 12  to  the  appellant
                being dependent and  residing  with  his  grandfather  since
                coming to the UK - but that is not the case, as this started
                years later. The large number of photographs do  not  assist
                me with that question and nor do the remaining  documents  -
                all of which relate to the period after 2014. In answers  to
                questions under examination in chief, it  was  claimed  that
                the appellant lived with Imamul-Haq-Choudhury - who was  sat
                at the back of  the  court,  but  this  individual  gave  no
                evidence - oral or written.


              10.      It is not in dispute that the appellant's  visa  was
                revoked soon after his arrival in 2011 because he could  not
                speak English (that remains the case in 2018) and  that  his
                next application was for this residence card in  2016.  Yet,
                there is I find, no documentary evidence  of  any  financial
                support   or   dependency   between   2011   and    December
                2014/February 2015. Mr Ahmed's answer  to  what  support  he
                gave under cross-examination was vague and  unsupported.  He
                claimed that he used to send money and 'asked other  persons
                to help him out'. According to the  appellant's  examination
                in chief - he does not know what happened to  the  �2000  he
                claimed Mr Ahmed used for his student fees. The evidence was
                also that the appellant has no bank account and so any money
                he has been  receiving  has  been  cash  in  hand  from  his
                grandfather. There is no evidence  of  any  money  transfers
                from Italy to the UK between 2011 and  2014  either.  As  it
                stands I do not find that  the  appellant  continued  to  be
                dependent upon Mr Ahmed until after December 2014. Prior  to
                that date - i.e. from 2011 to December  2014  he  was  self-
                sufficient."


        5. The judge was not satisfied the appellant is an extended  family
           member as defined in regulation 8(2)(c) of the 2006  Regulations
           and dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was  refused  by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe on 26th November 2018  and  by
           Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 14th January 2019.  Upper Tribunal
           Judge Grubb stated:


               "The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Asjad)   dismissed   the
                appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  him  a
                residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006
                as an 'extended family member' of his great  uncle  (brother
                of his grandmother) an EEA national exercising Treaty rights
                in the UK. The judge accepted that  the  appellant  was,  as
                required by the Regulations, dependent upon his  great-uncle
                before coming to the UK in 2011; indeed,  he  also  accepted
                that he was a 'member of the household' of  his  great-uncle
                before coming to the UK. However, the judge did  not  accept
                that the appellant was dependent upon him or a member of his
                household after he came to the UK.


              There was a 'gap' in the documentary  evidence  between  2011
                and 2014/15 when it  could  not  be  established  where  the
                appellant lived or that he was dependent on his great uncle.
                That was a crucial 'gap' in  order  to  establish  that  the
                appellant was an EFM in reg 8(2). The judge was not bound to
                accept the oral evidence was, without documentary  evidence,
                sufficient  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof   on   the
                appellant. Nothing in the  grounds  persuades  me  that  the
                judge's decision and findings were  arguably  irrational  or
                otherwise unlawful and unsustainable."


        6. The appellant issued a claim for Judicial Review challenging the
           decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission  to  appeal.
           Permission to claim judicial review was granted  by  His  Honour
           Judge Wall QC on 18th June 2019.  He observed:


              "It is arguable that the FTT looked for a period of  unbroken
                dependency when this was not a legal requirement. If that be
                right, it is also arguable that the UT should  have  granted
                permission to allow this point to be argued.


              There is a public interest in further guidance being given as
                to the meaning of the phrase 'continues to be  dependent  on
                him' in Regulation 8(c).  This  is  an  important  point  of
                principle and one which is not confined to the facts of this
                case alone."


        7. The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  refusing  permission
           to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  quashed.   Permission  to
           appeal was granted, and the matter comes before us to  determine
           whether there is an error of law in  the  decision  of  the  FtT
           Judge, and if there is, to remake the decision.


    The Legal Framework


        8. Articles 20 and 21 of the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the
           European Union ("the TFEU") grant Union citizens the primary and
           individual right to move and reside in the  territory  of  other
           Member States. That right is  subject  to  the  limitations  and
           conditions set out  in  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
           Parliament and of the Council ("the Citizens Directive").


        9. A Union citizen's willingness to move to  another  member  state
           would be greatly reduced if he/she had to leave  his/her  family
           behind.  The  Citizens  Directive  therefore  grants  rights  of
           movement and residence to  two  distinct  categories  of  family
           member: those who  fall  within  Article  2(2)  ("direct  family
           members"), and those who fall within Article 3(2) ("other family
           members").  This appeal  concerns  "other  family  members",  or
           "Beneficiaries"  as  set  out  in  Article  3  of  the  Citizens
           Directive:


                "1. This Directive shall apply to  all  Union  citizens  who
                move to or reside in a Member State other than that of which
                they are a national, and to their family members as  defined
                in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them.


                2. Without prejudice to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
                residence the persons concerned may have in their own right,
                the host Member State shall, in accordance with its national
                legislation,  facilitate  entry  and   residence   for   the
                following persons:


                    (a) any other  family  members,  irrespective  of  their
                    nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2
                    of Article 2 who, in the country from  which  they  have
                    come, are dependants or members of the household of  the
                    Union citizen having the primary right of residence,  or
                    where  serious  health  grounds  strictly  require   the
                    personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;




                    (b) the partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a
                    durable relationship, duly attested.


       10. Article 10 provides that the right of residence of  a  non-Union
           citizen shall be evidenced by the issuing of a  document  called
           "Residence card of a family member of a Union citizen";  and  it
           sets out the criteria for the grant of such a document.


       11. The 2006 Regulations implemented the  Directive  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  In so far  as  'other  family  members'  or  'Extended
           family members', as they are referred to in the 2006 Regulations
           are concerned, Member States have more  limited  obligations  so
           far as entry and residence are concerned than the obligations in
           respect of 'family members. Regulation 8(2) states:


                8.- "Extended family member"


                (1)  In these Regulations "extended family member"  means a
                person who is not a family member of an EEA  national  under
                regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
                conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


                (2)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph  if
                the person is a relative of an EEA national, his  spouse  or
                his civil partner and-


                (a)   the person is residing in a  country  other  than  the
                United Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or  is
                a member of his household.


                (b)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and
                is accompanying the EEA national to the  United  Kingdom  or
                wishes to join him there; or


                (c)  the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a),
                has joined the  EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member of  his
                household.


The meaning of the phrase 'continues to be dependent on him'  in  regulation
8(c)


       12. Mr De  Mello  submits  that  Article  3(2)(a)  of  the  Citizens
           Directive does not lay down any requirement for there  to  be  a
           continuous unbroken period of dependency or a  requirement  that
           the person is a member of the  household  continuously,  in  the
           country of origin or in the host member State.  He refers to the
           Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and
           the Council - COM (2009) 313, that confirms  that  in  order  to
           maintain the unity of the family in a broad sense, the  National
           legislation must  provide  for  a  careful  examination  of  the
           relevant personal circumstances  of  the  applicants  concerned,
           taking into consideration their relationship with the EU citizen
           or any other circumstances, such as their financial or  physical
           dependence, as  stipulated  in  Recital  6.   The  communication
           states that the Directive does not lay down any  requirement  as
           to the minimum duration of  the  dependency  or  the  amount  of
           material support provided, as long as the dependency is  genuine
           and structural in character.


       13.  Mr  De  Mello  submits  that  the  2006  Regulations  must   be
           interpreted in accordance with the purpose and objective of  the
           Directive, and national authorities are required to construe the
           term 'dependency' in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
           Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  EU.   He  refers  to  the
           decision of the CJEU in SM -v- UK C-128/19 and the Supreme Court
           in SM (Algeria) -v- ECO [2018] UKSC 9.  Lady Hale said, at [21]


                "...decision-makers, whether in the Home Office  or  in  the
                appellate system, would also have to bear in mind  that  the
                purpose of the Directive is to simplify and  strengthen  the
                right of free movement and residence for all Union citizens,
                freedom of movement being one of the fundamental freedoms of
                the internal  market.  Having  to  live  apart  from  family
                members or members of the family in the wider sense may be a
                powerful deterrent to the exercise of that freedom."


       14. Mr De Mello submits that interpreting the  2006  Regulations  in
           light of those principles, if an applicant  like  the  appellant
           was a dependent or a member of the household of the EEA  sponsor
           in his country of origin, and then ceased to be so, but at  some
           later point the dependency or membership  of  the  household  is
           resurrected, then there is no reason to  exclude  him  from  the
           scope  of  Article  3(2)(a)  of  the  Citizens  Directive.   The
           appellant may cease to  be  dependent  for  a  period,  but  the
           dependency can be resurrected  when  the  occasion  arises,  but
           during that period he does not cease to be  an  extended  family
           member.  He submits regulation 8(2)(c) of the  2006  Regulations
           does not state the dependency and/or membership of household has
           to be unbroken and uninterrupted. Mr De Mello  submits  such  an
           interpretation  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  language  of
           Article 3(2)(a) and would offend  the  spirit  of  the  Citizens
           Directive.


       15. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Aboni adopts  the  respondent's
           skeleton argument dated  10th  February  2020.   The  respondent
           submits that  as  part  of  the  extensive  examination  of  the
           personal circumstances, the respondent is entitled  to  consider
           whether the appellant's presence is of any relevance to the  EEA
           national's  ability  to  exercise  treaty   rights.   Where   an
           individual has been or is independent, the  respondent  submits,
           it is difficult to see a general barrier to the  EEA  national's
           ability  to  exercise  treaty  rights.  Mrs  Aboni  submits  the
           requirement in regulation 8(2)(c) that the appellant has  joined
           the EEA national in the United  Kingdom  "and  continues  to  be
           dependent upon him or to be a member of his household", must  be
           interpreted  so  that  the  status  quo  as  to  dependency   or
           membership of the household is maintained on arrival in the  UK.
           She submits the purpose of the directive is  to  facilitate  the
           free movement of the EEA national, and she accepts that would be
           frustrated if the appellant had continued to be  dependent  upon
           the EEA national throughout.  Here, the appellant  travelled  to
           the UK independently of  the  EEA  national,  and  there  is  no
           evidence that he was dependent upon  the  EEA  national  between
           2011 and 2014/15.  There was no evidence that the  EEA  national
           was or would be deterred from exercising treaty rights, but  for
           the ability of the appellant to remain in the UK.


    Discussion


       16. Article 3(2) of  the  Citizens  Directive  makes  provision  for
           applications by a  broad  category  of  family  members  ("other
           family members")  who  are  dependants  or  members  of  the  EU
           citizen's household. The rights given to this category of "other
           family members" differ from the more extensive rights for family
           members within Article 2(2) of the Citizens Directive.   A  host
           Member State is only under an obligation  to  'facilitate  entry
           and residence'.


       17. In Rahman [2013] QB 249 (C-83/11), R,  a  Bangladeshi  national,
           married an Irish national working in the United  Kingdom;  three
           of R's relatives then obtained EEA family  permits  pursuant  to
           article 3(2) of the Directive to enable them to join  R's  wife,
           the relevant EU citizen, in  the  United  Kingdom;  after  their
           arrival in the United Kingdom they applied for  residence  cards
           to confirm their right of residence, but their applications were
           refused because they had not shown that they  had  resided  with
           R's wife in the same Member State before she came to the  United
           Kingdom or that they continued to be dependent on  her  or  were
           members of her  household  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Grand
           Chamber of the ECJ was asked to determine a number of  questions
           on the application of the Article 3(2) and the ability of Member
           States to impose particular  conditions  as  to  the  nature  or
           duration of dependence, and conditions applicable to  the  issue
           of a residence card under Article 10 of the  Directive.   As  to
           the nature of the host Member State's obligations under  Article
           3(2), the Court of Justice said:


                "21. ... the fact remains, as is clear from the use  of  the
                words 'shall facilitate' in art.3(2) ,  that  the  provision
                imposes an obligation on  the  Member  States  to  confer  a
                certain advantage, compared with applications for entry  and
                residence  of  other   nationals   of   third   States,   on
                applications submitted by persons who have a relationship of
                particular dependence with a Union citizen.


                22. In order to meet  that  obligation,  the  Member  States
                must, in accordance with the second subparagraph of art.3(2)
                of Directive 2004/38, make it possible for persons envisaged
                in the first subparagraph of art.3(2) to obtain  a  decision
                on  their  application  that  is  founded  on  an  extensive
                examination of their  personal  circumstances  and,  in  the
                event of refusal, is justified by reasons.


                23. As is clear from recital 6 in the preamble to  Directive
                2004/38, it is incumbent upon the competent authority,  when
                undertaking that examination  of  the  applicant's  personal
                circumstances, to take account of the various  factors  that
                may be relevant in the particular case, such as  the  extent
                of  economic  or  physical  dependence  and  the  degree  of
                relationship between the family member and the Union citizen
                whom he wishes to accompany or join.


                24. In the light both of the absence of more specific  rules
                in Directive 2004/38  and  of  the  use  of  the  words  'in
                accordance with its national legislation' in art.3(2) of the
                directive, each  Member  State  has  a  wide  discretion  as
                regards the selection  of  the  factors  to  be  taken  into
                account. Nonetheless, the host Member State must ensure that
                its legislation contains criteria which are consistent  with
                the normal meaning of 'facilitate' and of the words relating
                to dependence used in art.3(2), and  which  do  not  deprive
                that provision of its effectiveness."


       18. Insofar as the time at which an applicant is required to be in a
           situation of dependence in  order  to  meet  the  conditions  of
           Article 3(2), the Court said:


                "32. ... it is to be noted that, as follows from  Recital  6
                in the directive's preamble, the objective of [ article 3(2)
                ] is to 'maintain the unity  of  the  family  in  a  broader
                sense' by facilitating entry and residence for  persons  who
                are not included in the definition of family  members  of  a
                Union citizen contained in art.2(2) of Directive 2004/38 but
                who nevertheless maintain close and stable family ties  with
                a   Union   citizen   on   account   of   specific   factual
                circumstances, such as economic dependence, being  a  member
                of the household or serious health grounds.


                33. It is clear that such ties may exist without the  family
                member of the Union citizen having resided in the same State
                as that citizen or having been a dependant of  that  citizen
                shortly before or at the time when the latter settled in the
                host State. On the other hand, the situation  of  dependence
                must exist, in the country  from  which  the  family  member
                concerned comes, at the time when he  applies  to  join  the
                Union citizen on whom he is dependent.


                34. In the main proceedings, it is for the national tribunal
                to  establish,  on  the  basis  of  the   guidance   as   to
                interpretation provided above, whether  the  respondents  in
                the main proceedings were dependants of  the  Union  citizen
                ... in the country from which they have come ... at the time
                when they applied to join her in the United Kingdom.  It  is
                only if they can prove that dependence in the  country  from
                which they have come ... that the  host  Member  State  will
                have to facilitate their entry and residence  in  accordance
                with art.3(2) ....


                35. In the light of the foregoing, the answer to  the  third
                and fourth question referred  is  that,  in  order  to  fall
                within the category, referred to in  art.3(2)  of  Directive
                2004/38, of family members who are 'dependants' of  a  Union
                citizen, the situation  of  dependence  must  exist  in  the
                country from which the family member concerned comes, at the
                very least at the time when he applies  to  join  the  Union
                citizen on whom he is dependent."


       19. Finally, as to the particular requirements that a  Member  State
           may impose as to the nature or duration of dependence, in  order
           to satisfy itself that such dependence is genuine and stable and
           has not been brought about with the sole objective of  obtaining
           entry and residence, the Court said:


                37. As has been stated in answering the first and the second
                question, the  Member  States  have  a  wide  discretion  as
                regards the selection  of  the  factors  to  be  taken  into
                account when examining applications for entry and  residence
                submitted by family members  of  a  Union  citizen  who  are
                envisaged in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38.


                38.  ....Member  States  may,  in  the  exercise   of   that
                discretion,  lay  down  in  their   legislation   particular
                requirements as to the nature and duration of dependence, in
                order in particular to satisfy themselves that the situation
                of dependence is genuine and stable and has not been brought
                about with the sole objective of obtaining  entry  into  and
                residence in the host Member State.


                39      It is  necessary  however,  as  has  been  held  in
                paragraph 24  of  the   present   judgment,   that   those
                requirements be consistent with the normal  meaning  of  the
                words  relating   to   the   dependence   referred   to   in
                Article 3(2)(a) of Directive 2004/38 and do not deprive that
                provision of its effectiveness.


                40      Accordingly,  the  answer  to  the  fifth  question
                referred is that, on a proper construction of  Article 3(2)
                of Directive 2004/38, the Member States may, in the exercise
                of their discretion, impose particular requirements relating
                to the nature and  duration  of  dependence,  provided  that
                those requirements are consistent with the normal meaning of
                the  words  relating  to  the  dependence  referred  to   in
                Article 3(2)(a) of the directive and do  not  deprive  that
                provision of its effectiveness.


       20. As Mr De Mello acknowledges, the decision of the  Grand  Chamber
           of the CJEU does not directly provide the answer to the question
           that we are considering.  What is clear is that Article 3(2)  of
           the Citizens Directive does not oblige Member States to accord a
           right of entry and residence to persons who are family  members,
           in the broad sense, dependent on a Union citizen.  The provision
           imposes an obligation on the Member States to confer  a  certain
           advantage, compared with applications for entry and residence of
           other nationals of third States, on  applications  submitted  by
           persons who have a relationship of particular dependence with  a
           Union citizen.


       21. It is uncontroversial that the refusal of a host Member State to
           authorise 'other family members' of an EU citizen to  join  them
           in the host Member State is likely to discourage an  EU  citizen
           from continuing to reside there and encourage him  to  leave  in
           order to be able to lead family life in another Member State  or
           in a  third  country.  The  purpose  and  justification  of  the
           ancillary rights  granted  to  other  family  members  of  union
           citizens is therefore to support the  exercise  by  those  union
           citizens of  their  own  rights,  if  needs  be,  by  overriding
           domestic immigration law. That is why, to qualify, the relatives
           must be dependent upon the EEA national, or be a member  of  his
           household.


       22. It is useful to start with the  wording  of  regulation  8(2)(c)
           itself.  The regulation requires that "the person satisfied  the
           condition in paragraph (a), has joined the EEA national  in  the
           United Kingdom and continues to be dependent upon him or to be a
           member of his household".  The first  requirement  is  that  the
           applicant  "satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph  (a).   The
           applicant must have satisfied the requirement that the person is
           residing in a country other  than  the  United  Kingdom  and  is
           dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of his household.
            The focus is upon the past and prior dependency  or  membership
           of the household.  Here, the FtT judge found the appellant was a
           dependent of the EEA national, and part of  the  EEA  national's
           household in Bangladesh until the appellant left for the  UK  in
           2011.    The second  requirement  is  that  the  appellant  "has
           joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom".  In  Metock  and
           Others -v- Minister for Justice,  Equality  and  Law  Reform  C-
           127/08, the CJEU confirmed, albeit in  the  context  of  'family
           members', nothing in the Citizens Directive made its application
           conditional upon the applicant family member of a Union  citizen
           having previously resided in a Member State. The CJEU  held  the
           Citizens Directive is to  be  interpreted  as  applying  to  all
           nationals of non-Member States who  were  family  members  of  a
           Union citizen, irrespective of where they had resided  prior  to
           their arrival.  It does not matter whether it is the EU  citizen
           or the relative of the EU  citizen  who  arrives  first  in  the
           United Kingdom.


       23. It is the interpretation  of  the  third  strand  of  regulation
           8(2)(c); "and continues to be dependent upon  him  or  to  be  a
           member of his household", that is at the  heart  of  the  appeal
           before us.  The word "continues" as  an  ordinary  word  of  the
           English language is to carry on, keep up, maintain, go on  with,
           or persist in an action.  We  acknowledge  that  'to  carry  on'
           could also include to 'resume from  a  point  of  suspension  or
           interruption'.


       24. In our judgement the context is important.  In  considering  the
           interpretation of the words "and continues to  be  dependent..",
           in this context we must give  effect  to  the  purposes  of  the
           Directive which the 2006  Regulations  transpose.  The  material
           recitals to the Citizens Directive are recitals 1, 5 and 6.  The
           first objective  is  to  promote  the  free  movement  of  Union
           Citizens. Recital 5 records that the  right,  if  it  is  to  be
           exercised under objective conditions of freedom and dignity,  be
           also  granted  to  their   family   members,   irrespective   of
           nationality.


       25. The obligations on host  member  states  in  respect  of  'other
           family members' are explained in recital  (6)  to  the  Citizens
           Directive as follows:


                "In order to maintain the unity of the family in  a  broader
                sense  and  without  prejudice   to   the   prohibition   of
                discrimination on grounds of nationality, the  situation  of
                those persons who are not  included  in  the  definition  of
                family members under this Directive, and  who  therefore  do
                not enjoy an automatic right of entry and residence  in  the
                host Member State, should be examined  by  the  host  Member
                State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order
                to decide whether entry and residence could  be  granted  to
                such persons, taking into consideration  their  relationship
                with the Union citizen or any other circumstances,  such  as
                their  financial  or  physical  dependence  on   the   Union
                citizen."


       26. The obligations in  respect  of  'other  family  members'  under
           Article  3(2)  are  clearly  much  more  restricted   than   the
           obligations and rights conferred on family members under Article
           2.  Whereas  the  Directive  requires  that  the   primary   and
           individual right enjoyed by  EU  citizens  to  move  and  reside
           freely within the territory  of  Member  States  shall  also  be
           granted to family members as defined  within  Article  2(2),  by
           contrast, in the case of other family members  who  fall  within
           the scope of Article 3(2), the Directive imposes  an  obligation
           on Member States to "facilitate" their  "entry  and  residence".
           In Rahman, the CJEU made clear, at [32], that the  objective  of
           that provision is to 'maintain the unity  of  the  family  in  a
           broader sense' by facilitating entry and residence  for  persons
           who  are  not  included  in  the  definition  of  family  member
           contained  in  Article 2(2)  of  Directive  2004/38  but   who
           nevertheless maintain close and stable family ties with a  Union
           citizen on account of specific factual  circumstances,  such  as
           economic dependence  (our  emphasis),  being  a  member  of  the
           household or serious  health  grounds.   In  our  judgment,  the
           recognition in Rahman that  what  Article  3(2)  is  seeking  to
           promote is an ability to maintain close and stable  family  ties
           with  a  Union  citizen   on   account   of   specific   factual
           circumstances,  such  as  economic  dependence,   is   of   some
           significance.  It suggests that at least  one  facet  of  stable
           family ties, is economic dependence.


       27. Member States have a wide discretion as regards the selection of
           factors to be taken into account when examining applications for
           entry and residence submitted by 'other family members', and  in
           the exercise of that  discretion  Member  States  may  lay  down
           particular  requirements  as  to  the  nature  and  duration  of
           dependence, in order to satisfy themselves that the situation of
           dependence is genuine and stable.


       28. Regulation 8(2)(c) of the  2006  Regulations  requires  that  an
           applicant continues to be dependent upon the EEA national or  to
           be a member of his household.  Thus, the applicant  may  satisfy
           the requirement if he either continues to be dependent upon  the
           EEA national or continues to be a member of the  EEA  national's
           household.  If, as the appellant contends, all that is necessary
           is for the appellant to establish past dependency  so  that  the
           condition  in  paragraph  8(2)(a)  is  satisfied,  and   present
           dependency or membership of the EEA  national's  household,  the
           Regulations would have  used  the  words  "and  is  dependent.."
           rather than  the  words  "and  continues  to  be  dependent"  in
           regulation 8(2)(c).


       29. The language of Article 3(2) of the Citizens  Directive  and  in
           particular the requirement to 'facilitate' entry  and  residence
           for any other family members who 'are dependents or  members  of
           the household of the Union citizen having the primary  right  of
           residence,  establish  a  category  of  person  who  are   given
           privileged treatment in order to promote the objectives of  free
           movement and residence by EU citizens.   The  refusal  to  grant
           'other family members' a right of residence where there has been
           historic, but lapsed or broken dependency  or  membership  of  a
           household, does not in our judgment, undermine the objective  of
           removing obstacles to the Union citizens  freedom  movement  and
           residence rights.  The refusal to grant a right of residence  in
           such circumstances does not discourage or act as a deterrent  to
           the Union citizen from continuing to reside in the  host  Member
           State.  It is important to highlight that the policy of the 2004
           Directive, as Mr De Mello accepts, is not one of family reunion.




       30. In our judgment, the  requirement  for  there  to  be  continued
           unbroken dependency is consistent with the  rationale  that  the
           Directive seeks to preserve stable  family  ties  with  a  Union
           citizen,  where  there  has  been  stable   continued   economic
           dependence.  It follows that in our judgment, in  this  context,
           the words "and continues to be dependent" in regulation  8(2)(c)
           of the 2006  Regulations,  properly  characterised,  require  an
           applicant to establish that there has not been a break in  their
           dependency on the EEA National sponsor.


    The appeal before us


       31. The appellant was found to have  been  dependent  upon  the  EEA
           national in the past, but there was no evidence before  the  FtT
           judge that the appellant had been in any way dependent upon  the
           EEA national between 2011 and 2014/15.  There was a  significant
           and entirely unexplained break in the appellant's dependency  on
           the EEA national.  The judge notes, at [9], both  the  appellant
           and the EEA national were  noticeably  silent  about  where  the
           appellant was living between  2011  and  December  2014/February
           2015. The Judge found the appellant had  not  'continued  to  be
           dependent' upon Mr Ahmed and the appellant was  self  sufficient
           from 2011 to December 2014.


       32. There had clearly been a break  in  the  appellant's  dependency
           upon  the  sponsor  following  the  appellant's  departure  from
           Bangladesh. The ability of Mr Chowdhury to exercise  his  rights
           of free movement was not in any way dependent upon  the  ability
           of the appellant to remain in the UK.  The appellant arrived  in
           the UK independently of Mr Chowdhury and has been able  to  live
           in the UK for several years without  being  a  dependent  of  Mr
           Ahmed. In our judgement it was open to the Judge to dismiss  the
           appeal for the reasons given by him.


       33. Finally, we simply observe that at the hearing before us we were
           provided with  the  respondent's  report  regarding  the  events
           leading to the cancellation of the appellant's leave to enter on
           1st March 2011.  During the  interview,  the  appellant  claimed
           that he intended to study  an  ACCA  course  at  London  Denning
           College for three years and  his  father  paid  �2,000  for  the
           course.  It does not appear that  a  copy  of  that  report  was
           provided to FtT Judge Asjad, when the judge was considering  the
           extent to which  the  appellant  was  a  dependent  of  the  EEA
           national.










    NOTICE OF DECISION


       34. The appeal is dismissed





    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


    23rd March 2020








