
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BJ (Singh explained) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00184 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2016                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     BJ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by A.J. Paterson
Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Singh (No immigration decision - jurisdiction) [2013] UKUT  00440  (IAC)  is
authority for proposition that the First-tier Tribunal has  jurisdiction  to
hear an appeal only where there has been an immigration decision. It is  not
authority for the proposition that where an immigration  decision  has  been
made the First-tier Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear an  appeal  against
such decision unless the SSHD has first complied with her obligations  under
the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003.



                            DECISION AND REASONS
                    (Delivered orally on 22 January 2016)

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. At the core of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  the  issue  of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in  concluding  that  it  had  no
    jurisdiction to entertain an appeal brought by  the  appellant  against
    the respondent's 'decision' of 6 November 2014.

 2. The relevant factual background is as follows.  On  1  April  2011  the
    appellant's husband was granted leave to remain as a refugee  until  12
    February 2014.  On the same date the appellant  was  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on a discretionary basis,  also  until  12
    February 2014.  The appellant's husband applied for  settlement  on  29
    January 2014, using form  'SET  (Protection  Route)  version  08/2013'.
    Within that form the appellant's husband named  the  appellant  as  his
    dependant and answered 'yes' when asked 'is settlement  requested'  for
    her (the appellant).

 3. On 6 November 2014 the appellant's husband's application for settlement
    was refused but his leave was extended, it is said under paragraph 339Q
    of the Immigration  Rules,  for  a  further  three  years;  such  leave
    expiring on 5 November 2017.  On the same date the respondent said this
    in relation to the appellant's application:

         "You have applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom as the spouse of a person granted  asylum  or  humanitarian
         protection but your aspect of the application has been rejected.

         You have applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  as  the
         dependant of [SJ], however, as you have not been granted asylum  or
         humanitarian protection either in your own right or  in  line  with
         [SJ] nor have you been granted a family reunion visa,  your  aspect
         of the application has been rejected as  there  are  no  provisions
         under the settlement protection route to be  granted  leave.   Your
         last period of leave was granted on a discretionary basis.

         If you wish to remain in the United Kingdom  you  should  make  the
         appropriate application and  pay  the  correct  fee.   For  further
         advice on which application is relevant to you,  you  should  visit
         the Home Office website...

         I should remind you that as the application was made  in  time  you
         have 28 days to make a valid application, if you fail to regularise
         your stay you may be liable for removal action."

 4. The appellant did not make any further application but  instead  sought
    to appeal this 'decision' to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appeal  was
    considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Eames and in a decision  headed
    "Notice: No Jurisdiction" the judge concluded that there was  no  valid
    appeal before him, giving the following reasons for so concluding:

         "37. The letter of 6 November 2014, for all  that  it  purports  to
             deny the appellant (as I shall still call her for convenience)
             a status she had applied for, nevertheless is not a notice  of
             decision as defined.  The letter does not contain  any  notice
             of appeal rights, for one thing, much less any detail  of  how
             or where to lodge an appeal etc.  The relaxation of the  Rules
             on content effected by Regulation  5(6)  does  not  appear  to
             apply in the present case since the  appeal  rights  concerned
             (if there were any) could not only be exercised on the various
             grounds referred to in that paragraph.

         38.  But if I am wrong about the operation of Regulation  5(6)  the
             effect of Judge Kopieczek's judgment [in Singh (No Immigration
             Decision - jurisdiction) [2013] UKUT 00440] is that a  formal,
             compliant notice is required in order to generate  the  appeal
             rights the  appellant  seeks  to  exercise.   Whether  or  not
             Regulation 5(3), (4) or (5) were  observed,  5(1)(a)  was  not
             complied with.

         39.  The facts in Singh were that  no  decision  at  all  could  be
             located in the materials before the First-tier Tribunal.   But
             I do not think that affects the very simple principle in  that
             case: that a valid decision is needed before any appeal rights
             arise."

 5. At the hearing before us Mr Walker properly conceded that the appellant
    had made a valid application for leave to remain to  the  Secretary  of
    State. He further accepted that the consequence of: (a) the  fact  that
    the appellant had leave to remain at the time of making the application
    and (b) that the decision of 6  November  resulted  in  her  no  longer
    having leave, is that the decision of  6  November  is  an  immigration
    decision as defined in section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and, consequently, that the appellant had been entitled
    to bring an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against such decision..

 6. For reasons which follow, we agree with Mr Walker in each aspect of his
    concession.

 7. The application of 29 January 2014 was not required to  be  made  on  a
    specified form.  In a letter of 19 February 2014 sent to the appellant,
    the  respondent  "acknowledges  receipt  of  your   [the   appellant's]
    application.", and continues by confirming that the appellant's "status
    and entitlements, including  the  right  to  work,  continue  whilst  a
    decision is being made on your settlement application". At the  end  of
    this letter the respondent further observes that "If you fail to  enrol
    within fifteen working days and do not contact us with a  valid  reason
    your application may be rejected as invalid." There is no suggestion in
    this letter that the application by the appellant was not being treated
    as valid, indeed it provides support for the contrary position.

 8. We can find nothing else in the papers  before  us  that  supports  the
    proposition either that the appellant did not make an application on 29
    January 2014, or that any application  she  did  make  was  not  valid.
    Consequently, on the information before us we are inexorably  drawn  to
    conclude that the appellant's application of  20  January  2014  was  a
    valid application.

 9. Faced with a valid application, the Secretary  of  State  could  either
    treat it positively and grant the appellant  leave  or,  alternatively,
    refuse the application. Mr Walker could not  identify  any  alternative
    possible decision on the application lawfully open to the Secretary  of
    State.  Clearly, the Secretary of State did  not  grant  the  appellant
    leave in response to her valid application and,  accordingly,  we  find
    that she must have refused it - as was conceded to be the  case  by  Mr
    Walker.

10. Pursuant to s.82(2)(d) of the Immigration, Nationality and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as it was), an immigration decision includes a decision  refusing
    to vary a person's leave to enter or remain if  as  a  result  of  that
    refusal such person has no leave to  enter  or  remain.   Consequently,
    when a person applies for  leave  to  remain  during  the  currency  of
    existing leave but  receives  a  negative  decision  after  such  leave
    expires (excluding the effect of Section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971) that person has a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (see
    SA [2007]  UKAIT  00083).   This  is  exactly  the  position  that  the
    appellant found herself in.

11. When the Secretary of State makes  an  'immigration  decision'  she  is
    required, pursuant to the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003  ("the
    Notices Regulations), to provide specified information to the recipient
    of such decision - including, inter alia, notice of the existence of  a
    right to appeal.  It was the failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    comply with her obligations under  the  Notices  Regulations  that  led
    Judge Eames, in part, to conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to entertain the appellant's appeal.

12. However, there is ample authority from this Tribunal in support of  the
    proposition that an appellant may waive the requirements of the Notices
    Regulations (See: OI (Notice of decision:  time  calculations)  Nigeria
    [2006] UKAIT 00042, a decision of the Vice President, Abiyat and others
    (rights of appeal) Iran [2011] UKUT 00314 (IAC), a further decision  of
    the Vice President, and R (on the application of Khan) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (right of appeal  -  alternative  remedy)
    IJR [2015] UKUT  00353  (IAC),  a  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor).

13. On our reading, the  decision  in  Singh  (No  immigration  decision  -
    jurisdiction) [2013] UKUT 00440 (IAC),  relied  upon  by  Judge  Eames,
    provides no  support  for  a  contrary  conclusion.  That  decision  is
    properly distinguishable on  the  basis  that  there  was  no  relevant
    immigration decision before the Tribunal, in contrast  to  the  instant
    case in which we have found there was  an  immigration  decision.   If,
    however, we are not correct in so distinguishing the decision in  Singh
    then  we  decline  to  follow  it,  preferring  instead  the  line   of
    established authority set out in paragraph  12  above,  none  of  which
    cases were referred to by the Tribunal in Singh.

14. We have no hesitation in concluding that an applicant  is  entitled  to
    waive the Secretary of State's compliance with the Notice  Regulations,
    and that the instant appellant did so.

15. For  these  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  incorrect  in  its
    conclusion that it had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal  brought
    by the appellant and, accordingly, we set aside its  decision  to  this
    effect.

16. The next issue for  consideration  is  whether  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  it  to  determine  the  appeal
    brought before it, or whether the Upper Tribunal should  remain  seized
    of the appeal.  After discussion  between  the  parties  we  have  been
    greatly assisted in our  consideration  of  this  issue  by  Mr  Walker
    identifying that the Secretary of State now accepts that the  appellant
    is entitled to leave in line with that given to her husband.

17. On the basis of this concession we conclude that the appeal  should  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal. We re-make the decision on  appeal  for
    ourselves, allowing it with a direction that the  Secretary  of  State,
    grant the applicant leave until 5 November 2017.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is  set
aside.

We re-make the  decision  on  appeal  ourselves,  allowing  the  appellant's
appeal.

The Secretary of State is directed to grant  the  appellant  leave  until  5
November 2017.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor












