
[pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on  the  application  of  Chen)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department)  (Appendix  FM   -   Chikwamba   -   temporary   separation   -
proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                                                 Field House
                                                     Heard: 13 February 2015

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                      THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF
                                HIAHONG CHEN)
                           Applicant


                                     and


         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   Respondent



Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr I Palmer, of Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
                    solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Thelen, of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
                    Solicitor.


(i)   Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether  it
      would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to  return  to  his
      home country to make an entry clearance application to re-join  family
      members in the  U.K.  There  may  be  cases  in  which  there  are  no
      insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K.
      but where temporary separation to enable  an  individual  to  make  an
      application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases,
      it will be for the individual to place before the Secretary  of  State
      evidence   that   such    temporary    separation    will    interfere
      disproportionately with protected rights. It will  not  be  enough  to
      rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL
      40.

(ii) Lord Brown was not laying down  a  legal  test  when  he  suggested  in
      Chikwamba that requiring a claimant to make an application  for  entry
      clearance would only "comparatively rarely" be proportionate in a case
      involving children (per Burnett J, as he then was, in R  (Kotecha  and
      Das v SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin)).

(iii)    In an application for leave on the basis of  an  Article  8  claim,
      the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  obliged  to  consider  whether  an
      application for entry clearance (if one  were  to  be  made)  will  be
      successful. Accordingly, her silence on this issue does not mean  that
      it is accepted that the requirements for entry clearance to be granted
      are satisfied.

(iv) In cases where the Immigration Rules (the "IRs") do not  fully  address
      an Article 8 claim so that it is necessary (pursuant to R (Nagre))  to
      consider the claim outside the IRs, a failure by the decision maker to
      consider Article 8 outside the  IRs  will  only  render  the  decision
      unlawful if the claimant in fact shows that there has been (or,  in  a
      permission application, arguably has been) a substantive breach of his
      or her rights under Article 8.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                         delivered on: 24 March 2015
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Judge Gill:

Introduction


 1. The applicant is a 29-year-old national of  the  People's  Republic  of
    China (China). She has been granted permission to challenge a  decision
    of the respondent of 25 October 2013 (hereafter the "first decision" or
    the "first decision letter") refusing her application of  17  September
    2013 for leave to remain on the basis of Article 8 of the 1950 European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    ("ECHR") outside the provisions of the  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  (the  "IRs").  The  applicant's
    Article 8 claim was based on her marriage to a Raymond Hoi Wing Cheung,
    a British citizen born in the United Kingdom.

 2. The first decision considered whether  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to the applicant and Mr Cheung enjoying family life in  China
    but did not consider the possibility  of  the  applicant  applying  for
    entry clearance in China.

 3. Following the grant of permission, the respondent made a  supplementary
    decision on 21 November 2014 (hereafter the "second  decision"  or  the
    "second decision letter"). This decision elaborated  upon  the  reasons
    why there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed
    in China. It then went on to consider the possibility of the  applicant
    making an application for entry clearance in China in order to join  Mr
    Cheung as his spouse.

 4. At the hearing, I granted Mr Palmer's  application  for  permission  to
    amend the applicant's grounds in order to include a  challenge  to  the
    second decision. I also granted permission to apply for judicial review
    of the second decision. As  a  consequence,  the  issue  before  me  is
    whether the respondent (in the  second  decision)  unlawfully  used  an
    "exceptionality test" or a  threshold  of  exceptionality  in  applying
    Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  UKHL  40
    when she considered the possibility of the applicant applying for entry
    clearance in China.

Background facts:

 5. The applicant entered the United Kingdom as a student on 30 March 2007.
    Her leave as a student expired on 30 November 2009 from which time  she
    has remained in the United Kingdom without leave. In November 2008, she
    met Mr Cheung, who was born in the United Kingdom on 30 September  1984
    of parents who were born in Hong Kong. Their relationship began  on  18
    July 2010. They began living  together  on  1  January  2012  and  were
    married on 1 October 2012.

The decision letters

 6. In the first decision letter, the respondent noted (in the  context  of
    the assessment of the applicant's case under para 276ADE  of  the  IRs)
    that the applicant had parents and siblings who reside in  China.  This
    was  based  on  the  information  provided  by  the  applicant  in  her
    application for leave, at A138.

 7. On 30 October 2014, the applicant was granted permission to  apply  for
    judicial review. In giving his reasons, the Upper Tribunal Judge stated
    that he had regard to the concession of Mr. Mandalia  representing  the
    Secretary of State in R (Iqbal) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2014] EWHC 1822 (Admin) expressed as follows:

         "there could therefore conceivably be cases  where  there  were  no
        insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of family life outside
        the UK, but the requirement to return to the applicant's country of
        origin to make an application  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
        Immigration Rules would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
        their Article 8 rights."

 8. In the light of this concession, the judge considered it arguable  that
    "the [first decision letter was] unlawful because the respondent failed
    to give any consideration  (or  if  she  did  this  is  not  adequately
    reasoned) to whether or not the applicant should be permitted to remain
    outside the rules on the basis of  the  principles  considered  by  the
    House of Lords in Chikwamba and subsequently by the Court of Appeal  in
    [Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  Treebhowan;  Hayat  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1054]".

 9. After permission had been  granted,  the  respondent  made  the  second
    decision on 21 November 2014, as stated above. The respondent concluded
    that the applicant had not demonstrated that there were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being enjoyed in China and that she  therefore
    did not satisfy paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM. She  also  considered
    the applicant's case in the light of Chikwamba  outside  the  IRs.  The
    relevant paragraphs read:

         "Insurmountable obstacles


        Although it is also recognised that your client and her husband are
        in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  we  are  required  to
        consider whether the exceptions [sic] paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix
        FM  can  be  applied  to  your   client's   case.    This   entails
        consideration of whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
        family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.


        It is firstly noted that your client is  not  able  to  demonstrate
        insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  being  lived  in  China.
        However, for the sake of completeness in considering whether  there
        are insurmountable obstacles the following points are noted:


           . There is no information  to  show  that  your  client  and  her
             husband cannot return to China lawfully and live there.  A mere
             wish/preference  to  live  in  UK  would  not  amount   to   an
             insurmountable obstacle.


           . It is considered that your client and her  husband  were  fully
             aware of her immigration status since your client was  lawfully
             in the UK on a temporary basis as a student when they  met  and
             then remained here unlawfully since 30 November  2009.   It  is
             considered that both your client and  her  husband  would  have
             been aware that she may not be able to continue to live here.


           . While there may be a cultural barrier for your client's husband
             to live in China and that some adjustment may be  needed,  this
             is not sufficient to  amount  to  an  insurmountable  obstacle.
             Just as your client faced a change of culture to live in UK, it
             is not unreasonable to expect her husband to face a  change  of
             culture to live in  China  in  order  to  continue  their  life
             together.


           . It is submitted that your client's husband can speak  Mandarin.
             Nonetheless, a lack of knowledge of a language  spoken  in  the
             country in which the couple would be required to live would not
             usually amount to an insurmountable obstacle.  It is reasonable
             to conclude that the couple must  have  been  conversing  in  a
             commonly understood language whilst in the UK.   Therefore,  it
             is reasonable for that to continue outside the UK,  whether  or
             not the partner seeks to  learn  the  language  spoken  in  the
             country of proposed return.


           . Even if your client and her husband have adapted to life in the
             UK, it would not be unreasonable to expect them  to  return  to
             China and adapt to life there.   Although  they  are  receiving
             accommodation rent free here, because they live  with  her  in-
             laws, it is considered that your client and her  husband  could
             find work in China.  Although relocating to China together  may
             cause a significant degree of  hardship  or  inconvenience  for
             your  client  and  her  husband,  it  does  not  amount  to  an
             insurmountable obstacle.


        For these reasons it is asserted that there are  no  insurmountable
        obstacles to the family life between your client  and  her  husband
        continuing in Pakistan [sic].


        The  Secretary  of  State  has  also   considered   your   client's
        application in light of Chikwamba (Chikwamba v Secretary  of  State
        for  the  Home  Office  [2008]  UKHL   40).    Although   in   some
        (comparatively rare) circumstances, it might not  be  proportionate
        to require an applicant to return to their  country  of  origin  to
        seek entry clearance through the correct immigration channels, your
        client's case does not meet this threshold.  Your client  does  not
        have  any  children,  nor   are   there   are   other   exceptional
        circumstances which would mean  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
        require her to seek the appropriate entry clearance.


        Further consideration has been made in respect of Hayat  (Secretary
        of State for the Home Department v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ
        1054) which states that it is not only  cases  where  children  are
        involved in which the legitimate aim of controlling immigration  is
        outweighed by the  Applicant's  circumstances.   The  Secretary  of
        State submits that there are no other factors in your client's case
        which  would  offset  the  weight  of  the  Secretary  of   State's
        legitimate aim and that it is proportionate to expect her  to  seek
        entry clearance as a partner.


        There is a current immigration channel for your client to follow as
        a partner of a person present and settled  in  the  UK,  namely  to
        obtain an entry clearance visa from  her  country  of  origin.   As
        such, it considered to be appropriate for the Secretary of State to
        expect people to use these correct channels,  especially  in  cases
        such as those which do  not  involve  minors  and  any  exceptional
        circumstances.


        Summary


        In summary, the Secretary of State has  reviewed  the  decision  to
        refuse your client's  application  and  is  satisfied  that  it  is
        correct and maintains the original refusal decision.  The Secretary
        of State has carefully considered your client's  Article  8  rights
        and is satisfied that his [sic] removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
        would not be in breach of Articles 8 of the European Convention  on
        Human Rights (ECHR).  The Secretary of State does not consider your
        client's return to China to be disproportionate to the  permissible
        aim of maintaining an effective immigration control."


        (my emphasis)



The grounds

10. I should first make clear what is not challenged and the  grounds  upon
    which permission was refused.

11. The applicant has not challenged the  respondent's  conclusion  in  the
    first decision letter that she does not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    para 276ADE. In relation to para 276ADE(vi), the respondent  considered
    that the applicant had not shown that she had  no  social  or  cultural
    ties in her home country.

12. In the  first  decision  letter,  the  decision  maker  considered  the
    provisions of Ex.1 to Appendix FM. Ex.1 provides as follows:

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if
                  (a)
                  (i)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                           relationship with a child who-

                       (aa)     is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under
                               the age of 18 years when the  applicant  was
                               first granted leave on the basis  that  this
                               paragraph applied;
                       (bb)     is in the UK;
                       (cc)     is a British Citizen or has lived in the  UK
                               continuously  for  at  least  the  7   years
                               immediately   preceding    the    date    of
                               application; and
                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
           leave the UK; or

              (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                      with a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British
                      Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with  refugee
                      leave  or  humanitarian  protection,  and  there  are
                      insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  that
                      partner continuing outside the UK."

13. In the first decision, the respondent  considered  that  Ex.1  did  not
    apply because the applicant had not provided any evidence of a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a child and she had not  provided  any
    evidence that there were insurmountable obstacles to  her  family  life
    with Mr Cheung continuing in China.

14. Although the respondent's  conclusion  that  Ex.1  did  not  apply  was
    challenged in the grounds, permission was refused on this ground.

15. Para 7 of Mr Palmer's skeleton argument reads:

         "In this case it has to be accepted that  the  applicant  would  be
             unable to argue that there are "insurmountable  obstacles"  (as
             defined by case law) to returning to China to apply  for  entry
             clearance. The applicant however argues that it  not  necessary
             or justified and therefore  disproportionate  under  Article  8
             ECHR principles."

16. However, at the hearing,  Mr  Palmer  informed  me  that  it  was  only
    accepted that the applicant had not placed before  the  respondent  any
    evidence to show that it would be disproportionate  to  expect  her  to
    return to China. At the same time, he also informed me that he was  not
    able to put forward any exceptional circumstances because  he  had  not
    been told of any, nor had the  respondent  before  the  decisions  were
    made. This alone may suggest that this claim  should  never  have  been
    pursued.

Assessment

17.  Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules   HC   194   introduced
    requirements, with effect from 9 July 2012, set out in paras  398,  399
    and 399A in criminal deportation cases and paras 276ADE and Appendix FM
    in other cases, that are to be satisfied for leave to be granted on the
    basis of Article 8 under the IRs.  In R (Nagre) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Sales J  (as  he  then
    was) said (at para 29) that:

          "...the new rules do  provide  better  explicit  coverage  of  the
         factors identified in case-law as relevant to  analysis  of  claims
         under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many  cases
         the main points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will  be
         addressed by decision-makers applying the new rules. It is only if,
         after doing that, there remains an arguable case that there may  be
         good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
         reference to Article 8 that it will  be  necessary  for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  rules  to
         require the grant of such leave."

18. This two-stage approach was further explained  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (comprising Cranston J and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor)  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  It
    was approved by the Court of Appeal in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, although the  Court
    of Appeal held in MF (Nigeria) that  the  two-stage  approach  was  not
    applicable in deportation cases because the  provisions  of  the  Rules
    that are applicable in deportation cases are a "complete code".

19. In relation to non-deportation cases, the two-stage approach  has  been
    endorsed more recently by the Court of Appeal in  Singh  and  Khalid  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74 (at  para
    64).

20. It is now generally accepted that the new IRs do not provide in advance
    for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in  individual  cases.
    At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:


         "30. ... if, after the  process  of  applying  the  new  rules  and
             finding that the claim for leave to remain under  them  fails,
             the relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is  clear
             that the consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any
             family life or private life issues arising under Article 8, it
             would be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have to
             go on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the
             Rules. If there is no arguable case that  there  may  be  good
             grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
             reference to Article 8, there would be no point in introducing
             full separate consideration of Article 8  again  after  having
             reached a decision on application of the Rules."

21. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):


         "64. ... there is no need to conduct a full separate examination of
             article 8 outside the Rules where, in the circumstances  of  a
             particular case, all the issues have  been  addressed  in  the
             consideration under the Rules."

22. Given that the IRs do not provide for every nuance in  the  application
    of Article 8 in individual cases, it is  not  surprising  that  it  was
    accepted by Mr. V Mandalia for the respondent in R  (Iqbal)  that  para
    EX.1.1(b) to Appendix FM of the IRs did not include  any  consideration
    of "the Chikwamba point" (at para 34). Mr Palmer  and  Ms  Thelen  were
    therefore agreed that in any case  where  the  question  arises  as  to
    whether it is disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his
    or her home country to make an application for  entry  clearance,  this
    falls for consideration outside the IRs.

23. The judgment of Mr. Ian Dove QC sitting as Deputy High Court Judge  (as
    he then was) in R (Iqbal) states (at para 37) as follows:


        "37. ...in Mr  Mandalia's  submissions  it  is  accepted  that  the
              Chikwamba point is one of those potential issues relating  to
              proportionality which is not covered by the drafting  of  the
              Rules but which nonetheless if it arises, as it does in  this
              case, will need to be considered when the defendant  assesses
              whether or not, as an exercise of residual discretion outside
              the Rules, allowing leave might be appropriate.  There  could
              therefore  conceivably  be  cases   where   there   were   no
              insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of  family  life
              outside  the  UK,  but  the  requirement  to  return  to  the
              applicant's country of origin  to  make  an  application  for
              leave  to  enter  the  UK   would   be   a   disproportionate
              interference with their Article 8  rights.  So  much  is,  in
              effect, the submission made on behalf of the defendant by  Mr
              Mandalia."

24. This raises two questions, neither of which are material in the instant
    case because the instant claim falls to be dismissed  for  the  reasons
    given at para 26 onwards below. However, as they have  been  raised  at
    the hearing before me, I shall deal  with  the  issues,  which  are  as
    follows:

    i.   Mr Palmer took issue with the suggestion  that,  in  assessing  an
        Article 8 claim outside the  IRs,  the  respondent  is  considering
        whether or not the grant of  leave  might  be  appropriate  in  the
        exercise of her residual discretion outside the  IRs.  I  take  the
        view that a policy which provides for leave to be  granted  in  the
        exercise of residual discretion if removal would be  in  breach  of
        Article 8 is not  contrary  to  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.  The
        obligation of the United Kingdom to secure the rights  set  out  in
        Article 8 of the ECHR (amongst other rights) to individuals on  its
        territory does not require it to grant any particular form of leave
        or to provide for leave to be granted  as  of  right.  The  state's
        obligation is not to remove the individual in breach of his or  her
        rights under Article 8.  A grant of leave pursuant to the  exercise
        of the executive's residual discretion suffices.

    ii.  I raised the question whether, if an individual accepts that there
        are no "insurmountable obstacles" to family life being  enjoyed  in
        his or her home country, it would be in  breach  of  Article  8  to
        require the same individual to return to his or  her  home  country
        temporarily for the purpose of  making  an  application  for  entry
        clearance. Neither Mr. Palmer nor Ms Thelen addressed  me  on  this
        issue but, having reflected on it, I am inclined to the  view  that
        Mr Mandalia was right to suggest in R (Iqbal) that there  may  well
        be cases in which there are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
        continuation of family life outside the UK, but the requirement  to
        return to the applicant's country of origin to make an  application
        for leave to enter the UK would be a disproportionate  interference
        with their Article 8 rights. The latter may  apply  to  individuals
        affected  by  the  decision  being  separated  temporarily  because
        circumstances  arise   which   make   such   temporary   separation
        disproportionate but which would not arise if they were to continue
        their family life abroad. This possibility was envisaged in  Hayat,
        where (at para 18) Elias LJ said:
              "It may at first blush seem odd that Article 8 rights  may  be
              infringed by an unjustified  insistence  that  the  applicant
              should  return  home  to  make  the  application  [for  entry
              clearance], even though a subsequent decision to  refuse  the
              application on the merits will not. The reason is  that  once
              there is an interference with family  or  private  life,  the
              decision maker must justify that interference. Where what  is
              relied  upon  is  an  insistence  on  complying  with  formal
              procedures  that  may  be  insufficient  to  justify  even  a
              temporary disruption to family  life.  By  contrast,  a  full
              consideration of the merits  may  readily  identify  features
              which justify a refusal to grant leave to remain."

25. I turn to the other issues raised at the hearing.

26. Firstly, Mr Palmer submitted  that  the  respondent  had  analysed  the
    judgment in Iqbal and that of Jay J in  R  (Mohammed)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 4392 (Admin) (at para 13)  to
    reach the conclusion that only exceptional cases can succeed under  the
    Chikwamba principle. He submitted that this  conclusion  was  erroneous
    because para 13 of Mohammed was based upon a misunderstanding  of  para
    30(e) of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Hayat.

27. In Hayat, Elias LJ considered Chikwamba and three subsequent  Court  of
    Appeal judgments[1] and summarised the relevant principles that emerged
    from these judgments at para 30 as follows:


        "30   In  my  judgment,  the  effect  of  these  decisions  can  be
        summarised as follows:
           0.
                 1. a) Where an applicant who does  not  have  lawful  entry
                    clearance pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal of the
                    claim on the procedural ground that the policy  requires
                    that the applicant should have made the application from
                    his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute
                    a disruption of family or  private  life  sufficient  to
                    engage Article  8  ,  particularly  where  children  are
                    adversely affected.
                 0.
                 1.  b)  Where  Article  8  is  engaged,  it   will   be   a
                    disproportionate interference  with  family  or  private
                    life to  enforce  such  a  policy  unless,  to  use  the
                    language of Sullivan LJ, there is a sensible reason  for
                    doing so.
                 0.
                 1. c) Whether it is sensible to enforce  that  policy  will
                    necessarily be fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified
                    certain potentially relevant factors in Chikwamba.  They
                    will  include  the  prospective  length  and  degree  of
                    disruption of family life and whether other  members  of
                    the family are settled in the UK.
                 0.
                 1. d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there is  no  sensible
                    reason for enforcing  the  policy,  the  decision  maker
                    should determine the Article 8 claim on its  substantive
                    merits,  having  regard   to   all   material   factors,
                    notwithstanding that the applicant has no  lawful  entry
                    clearance.
                 0.
                 1. e) It will be a very rare case where it  is  appropriate
                    for the Court of Appeal, having concluded that  a  lower
                    tribunal has disproportionately interfered with  Article
                    8  rights  in  enforcing  the  policy,   to   make   the
                    substantive Article 8 decision for itself. Chikwamba was
                    such an exceptional case. Logically the court would have
                    to be satisfied that there is only one proper answer  to
                    the Article  8  question  before  substituting  its  own
                    finding on this factual question.
                 0.
           1. f)  Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter  the  way  the
              courts should approach substantive Article 8 issues  as  laid
              down in such well known cases as Razgar and Huang.
                 0.
           1. g)  Although the cases do  not  say  this  in  terms,  in  my
              judgment if the Secretary of State has no sensible reason for
              requiring the application to be made from the home state, the
              fact that he has failed to do so should not thereafter  carry
              any weight in the substantive Article 8 balancing exercise."

28. Mr Palmer submitted that at para 30.e), Elias LJ was not  referring  to
    Chikwamba being an exceptional case on its facts but to the  fact  that
    the House of Lords had taken the exceptional  course  in  Chikwamba  of
    reaching its own view of the substantive Article 8 decision (as opposed
    to remitting the case to the Tribunal to make  a  fresh  decision).  He
    submitted  that  para  30.e)  had  therefore  been  misinterpreted   in
    Mohammed, where at para 13, Jay J said:

     "13.     In my judgment the issue is whether the Secretary  of  State's
         decision, which is to the effect that this case  does  not  possess
         exceptional  features,  is   a   decision   which   is   Wednesbury
         unreasonable. The Secretary of State has at least grappled with the
         issue. Chikwamba appears to  have  turned  on  its  own  particular
         facts.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  Hayat  noted  that  it  was  an
         exceptional case. In the circumstances of that case  there  was  no
         sensible reason to require Mr Chikwamba  to  return  to  Harare  in
         Zimbabwe and make an application from that jurisdiction."

29. Ms Thelen accepted that the Court of Appeal did  not  suggest  at  para
    30.e) of Hayat that Chikwamba was an exceptional case on its  facts  as
    to the Article 8 analysis, as opposed to it being an example of one  of
    those very rare cases in which it will be appropriate for the Court  of
    Appeal to make the substantive Article 8 decision for itself instead of
    remitting the case to the Tribunal. I do  not  think  that  Jay  J  was
    saying at para 13 that Chikwamba was an exceptional case on its  facts.
    Mr Palmer's submission appears to  misconstrue  the  second  and  third
    sentences of para 13 of Mohammed and fails to consider the paragraph as
    a whole.

30. Secondly, Mr Palmer  submitted  that  the  respondent  had  applied  an
    exceptionality  test  in  considering  whether  the  applicant  can  be
    expected to return to China to make an application for entry  clearance
    pursuant to Chikwamba. I agree with Ms Thelen that the  respondent  had
    not  unlawfully  applied  an  exceptionality  test  for  the  following
    reasons:

    i)   The mere fact that the word "exceptional" is used  does  not  mean
         that the test of exceptionality is being applied  contrary  to  the
         guidance of the House of Lords in Huang v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.  In MF (Nigeria), the Court  of
         Appeal accepted (at paras 40 and 41)  the  submission  advanced  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State that the phrase "it will  only  be
         in  exceptional  circumstances  that   the   public   interest   in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors" in para 398, which
         applies in deportation cases, served  the  purpose  of  emphasising
         that, in the balancing exercise, great weight should  be  given  to
         the public interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  do  not
         satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.  At para 42 of MF (Nigeria), the
         Master of the Rolls said, in effect, that the  use  of  the  phrase
         "exceptional circumstances" does not necessarily mean that  a  test
         of exceptionality is being applied. The explanation given  at  para
         42 of MF (Nigeria) was as follows:

             "...it is only  in  "exceptional"  or  "the  most  exceptional
             circumstances" that removal of the non-national family  member
             will constitute a violation of article 8.   In our view,  that
             is not to say that a test of exceptionality is being  applied.
             Rather it is that, in  approaching  the  question  of  whether
             removal is a proportionate interference with  an  individual's
             article 8 rights, the scales are heavily weighted in favour of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             "exceptional") is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal.  In our view, it is no coincidence  that  the  phrase
             "exceptional circumstances" is used in the new  rules  in  the
             context of weighing the  competing  factors  for  and  against
             deportation of foreign criminals."

     ii) Although MF (Nigeria) was a deportation case, there  is  no  reason
        to think that the use of  the  word  "exceptional"  or  the  phrase
        "exceptional circumstances"  outside  the  IRs  in  non-deportation
        cases means that  the  test  of  exceptionality  is  being  applied
        contrary to Huang, especially given that:

         a)   Strasbourg case-law  indicates  that,  where  family  life  is
             established when the immigration  status  of  the  claimant  is
             precarious,  removal   will   be   disproportionate   only   in
             "exceptional cases" (Nagre at (41)); and

         b)   the guidance applied by the case-workers in assessing  Article
             8 claims outside  the  IRs  defines  "exceptional"  as  follows
             (Nagre at para 14):

                  ""Exceptional" does not mean "unusual" or "unique". Whilst
                  all cases are to some extent unique, those unique  factors
                  do not generally render them exceptional. For  example,  a
                  case is not exceptional just because the criteria set  out
                  in EX.1 of Appendix FM have been missed by a small margin.
                  Instead,  "exceptional"  means  circumstances   in   which
                  refusal would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
                  for the individual such that refusal  of  the  application
                  would not be proportionate. That is likely to be the  case
                  only very rarely."

              At para 14 of Nagre, Sales J accepted that the  definition  of
             "exceptional circumstances" which  is  given  in  the  guidance
             equates  such  circumstances  with  there  being  unjustifiable
             hardship  involved  in  removal   such   that   it   would   be
             disproportionate - i.e. would involve a breach of Article 8.

31. Yet, I regularly encounter objections by applicants to the use  of  the
    word  "exceptional"  or  the  phrase  "exceptional  circumstances"   by
    decision-makers in assessing Article 8 claims outside the  IRs  on  the
    ground that it shows that the respondent  has  unlawfully  applied  the
    test of exceptionality contrary to Huang. The mere use of these phrases
    is not enough to show that the test of  exceptionality  is  being  used
    contrary to Huang. An applicant must point to a  defective  process  of
    reasoning that shows that  the  test  of  exceptionality  was  in  fact
    applied.

32. In the instant case, the decision-maker plainly considered the question
    of proportionality. This is evident not only from  the  fact  that  the
    words "proportionate" and "disproportionate" were used a total of three
    times in the second decision letter in the assessment of the Article  8
    claim outside the IRs and once in the "Summary" at  the  end  but  also
    from the reasoning (see the words in bold in the quote  at  my  para  8
    above) which shows that the decision-maker looked for factors to  weigh
    against the state's interests.

33. I therefore reject Mr  Palmer's  submission  that  the  respondent  had
    unlawfully applied the test of exceptionality contrary to  guidance  in
    Huang.

34.  The  third  argument  concerned  the  proposition  advanced   on   the
    applicant's behalf, in reliance  upon  Chikwamba,  that  it  will  only
    rarely be proportionate to expect a foreign national  who  is  enjoying
    family life in the United Kingdom to return to his or her home  country
    in order to make an application for entry clearance. In R (Kotecha  and
    Das) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]  EWHC  2070
    (Admin), Burnett  J  (as  he  then  was)  considered  the  judgment  in
    Chikwamba and concluded, at para 48:

         "48. In suggesting that the course proposed  by  the  Secretary  of
             State [of requiring a claimant to make an application for entry
             clearance  from  his  or   her   home   country]   would   only
             'comparatively rarely' be proportionate  in  a  case  involving
             children I do not understand Lord Brown to  be  laying  down  a
             legal test. Rather, he was expressing the  expectation  of  the
             Committee  that,  having  undertaken  the  careful   evaluation
             explained on the same  day  in  EB  (Kosovo),  the  balance  on
             proportionality would fall in favour of the individual in cases
             such as Chikwamba.  Put  differently,  such  cases  would  fall
             within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords  in  Huang,
             or more generally the exceptions referred to in the  Strasbourg
             Court,  in  which  article  8  would  provide  an  obstacle  to
             removal."

35. Thus, it is misconceived to suggest, in reliance upon  Chikwamba,  that
    it is only rarely that it will be proportionate to expect a claimant to
    make an application for entry clearance from abroad irrespective of his
    or her individual's circumstances.  Lord  Brown  specifically  said  in
    Chikwamba (at para 42) that:

         "42. In an article 8 family case the prospective length and  degree
             of family disruption involved in  going  abroad  for  an  entry
             clearance certificate will always be highly relevant".

36. Mr Palmer relied upon para 30 c) and d) of Hayat to suggest that  there
    must be a "sensible  reason"  to  require  an  individual  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance from abroad.  I reject the  submission.
    I do not accept that, in using the phrase "sensible reason",  Elias  LJ
    was setting out the test for applying the guidance  in  Chikwamba,  nor
    that he reversed the burden of  proof.  The  burden  remains  upon  the
    applicant to place before the Secretary of State all material  that  he
    or she relies upon to suggest that removal pursuant to the  refusal  of
    leave would breach Article 8 (Kotecha, at para 56).

37. Mr Palmer also relied upon the judgment of Turner  J  in  R  (Zhang)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin),  in
    particular, paras 74 and 77, which I will now set out,  including  para
    78:


     "74. Counsel for the Secretary of State referred to a number  of  cases
             in an effort to  persuade  the  court  that,  in  the  face  of
             repeated authoritative pronouncements to the contrary,  it  was
             still only in exceptional (or a small minority) of  cases  that
             Article 8 would frustrate the  requirement  that  an  applicant
             should leave the country before making an application.  Despite
             his strenuous  efforts  to  extract  some  forensic  crumbs  of
             comfort from a number of the  fifty  or  more  cases  in  which
             Chikwamba has been recently considered none of these could bear
             the weight of the his argument.


        Conclusion on requirement (h)(i)


     77.  I, therefore, come to the clear view that save in particular cases
             (such as those involving a poor  immigration  record  -  as  in
             Ekinci v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA
             Civ 765 or where the engagement of Article 8 is very tenuous  -
             as in R (Mdlovu) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2008] EWHC 2089) it will be rare indeed that  the  immigration
             priorities of  the  state  are  such  as  to  give  rise  to  a
             proportionate answer to Article 8 rights to family  life  where
             requirement (h)(i) is engaged.


          1. It must follow from this that the application  of  the  blanket
             requirement  to  leave  the  country   imposed   by   paragraph
             319C(h)(i) of the immigration rules  is  unsustainable.  It  is
             simply not  consistent  with  the  ratio  of  the  decision  in
             Chikwamba that this  paragraph,  as  presently  worded,  should
             continue to form part of the rules. I am not prepared, however,
             to make a formal declaration on  the  matter.  It  is  not  the
             function of the court to redraft the rules but I would  predict
             that the Secretary of State would in future  face  difficulties
             in enforcing requirement (h)(i) as presently worded in all  but
             a small number of cases in which Article 8 is engaged."

38. Mr Palmer relied upon para 74 of Zhang to support the proposition  that
    it is only in a small minority of  cases  that  a  claimant  should  be
    required to leave the United Kingdom to make an application  for  entry
    clearance. However, as paras  77  and  78  make  clear,  Turner  J  was
    considering the blanket requirement imposed by para 319C(h)(i)  of  the
    IRs  the  effect  of  which  precluded  the  claimant  from  making  an
    application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  but  not   from
    making an application for entry clearance.  Rule  319C  was  framed  in
    mandatory and unambiguous terms (paras 20 and 21 of  Zhang).  In  other
    words, Turner J was considering a rule that required  the  claimant  to
    leave the United Kingdom for no reason other than that  rules  must  be
    obeyed irrespective of the circumstances. It is in  that  context  that
    para 77 of Zhang should  be  considered.  In  my  judgement,  Zhang  is
    entirely consistent with the other authorities discussed above.

39. In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual (the burden being upon
    him or her) that an application for entry clearance from  abroad  would
    be granted and that there would be significant interference with family
    life by temporary removal, the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  formal
    requirement of obtaining entry clearance is reduced. In cases involving
    children, where removal would interfere with the child's  enjoyment  of
    family life with one or other  of  his  or  her  parents  whilst  entry
    clearance is obtained, it will be easier to show that  the  balance  on
    proportionality falls in favour of the claimant than in cases which  do
    not involve children but where  removal  interferes  with  family  life
    between parties who knowingly entered  into  the  relationship  in  the
    knowledge that family life was being established whilst the immigration
    status of one party was "precarious". In other  words,  in  the  former
    case, it would be easier to show that  the  individual's  circumstances
    fall within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords  in  Huang  or
    the exceptions referred to in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter
    case. However, it all depends on the facts.

40. In Chikwamba, it was accepted that an application for  entry  clearance
    would succeed and that went in the claimant's favour. It is  unresolved
    whether, conversely, the Secretary of State's view that an  application
    for entry clearance would be unlikely to succeed (if she took that view
    in any individual case)  means  that  the  Chikwamba  principle  cannot
    apply. I did not hear argument on this  point.  I  therefore  reach  no
    concluded view on it. However, in my experience, applicants  frequently
    rely upon the Secretary of State's silence on this point as  synonymous
    with an acceptance by her that an application for entry clearance would
    succeed, in that, it is said that the Secretary of State has  not  said
    that an application would not succeed. To  state  the  obvious,  if  an
    individual makes an application for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8, the Secretary of State is only obliged to reach  a  decision
    on that application. She is not obliged to consider  further  (although
    she is not prevented from  doing  so  if  she  wishes  to)  whether  an
    application for entry clearance would succeed.

41. In the instant claim, the applicant has relied upon  the  Chikwamba  to
    make good her Article 8 claim. She has not placed before the respondent
    any evidence to show that her removal (if removal notionally took place
    consequent upon the refusal of leave to remain on the basis of  Article
    8) would interfere with any family life  being  enjoyed.  It  has  been
    accepted on her behalf that there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed between her and Mr Cheung in China. Mr Palmer
    appeared to retract  from  para  7  of  his  skeleton  argument,  which
    specifically states that it has to be accepted that  the  applicant  is
    unable to argue that there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    returning to China to apply for entry clearance.  Even  if  it  is  the
    case that this was not a concession as to the  facts,  the  reality  is
    that the applicant has not placed any  evidence  of  her  circumstances
    and/or those of Mr Cheung. The couple do not have children.  There  was
    quite simply no  evidence  before  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
    decision would result in any interference with family life.

42. The applicant has  relied  solely  upon  the  case-law  concerning  the
    Chikwamba principle in an attempt to make  good  her  Article  8  claim
    outside  the  IRs.  Unfortunately,  this  misguided  approach  is   not
    uncommon. Indeed, in the instant claim, it would be correct to say that
    such evidence as there was before the respondent undoubtedly shows that
    the respondent was fully entitled to take the view  that  it  would  be
    proportionate to require the applicant to make an application for entry
    clearance from China,  pursuant  to  the  guidance  in  Chikwamba.  Her
    parents  and  siblings  live  in  China.  There  was  no  evidence   or
    explanation why, even if there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed on a  permanent  basis  in  China,  temporary
    separation for the purpose of making an application for entry clearance
    would  interfere  with  family  life.  The  applicant  simply  has  not
    descended into any detail about her Article 8 claim,  choosing  instead
    to rely upon legal principles. She made no  case  as  to  any  form  of
    hardship that she and/or her husband would suffer if  she  were  to  be
    required to make an application for entry clearance.

43. Against all this was the fact that the applicant's  leave  had  expired
    well before she and Mr  Cheung  began  their  relationship.  They  were
    married in the full knowledge that the applicant did not have leave and
    that her immigration status was precarious. There was  no  evidence  of
    the length of the disruption to family life (if family life was  indeed
    disrupted) if the applicant  returned  to  China  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance. Weighing all of the factors in the balancing exercise, there
    was plainly only one answer, on any legitimate view.

44. Finally, I turn to  consider  Mr  Palmer's  argument  that  the  second
    decision was prompted by the grant of permission.  Ms  Thelen  did  not
    accept that the respondent was forced to make the  second  decision  by
    the grant of permission. In this respect, she relied upon paras 70  and
    71 of Singh and Khalid, where the Court of Appeal considered point 3 of
    para 9 of the judgment of Mr. Michael Fordham QC sitting  as  a  Deputy
    High Court Judge in R (Ganesabalan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin). Para 9 of Ganesabalan reads:


           "Where a person seeks leave to remain, relying on  private  life
           or family life or both, and relying on Article 8, and where  the
           claim fails at the first stage by reference  to  the  applicable
           Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE):


           (1)    There is always a "second stage" in which  the  Secretary
                 of State must consider the exercise of  discretion  outside
                 the Rules and must be in a position to demonstrate that she
                 has done so.


           (2)    The extent of that consideration and the  extent  of  the
                 reasoning  called  for  will  depend  on  the  nature   and
                 circumstances of the individual case.


           (3)    In a case in which  the  consideration  or  reasoning  is
                 legally inadequate, and leaving aside cases in which  there
                 is a right of appeal to a  tribunal,  it  is  open  to  the
                 Secretary of State to resist the grant of  judicial  review
                 if she is able  to  demonstrate  that  the  decision  would
                 inevitably have been the same."

45. In the case of Khalid in Singh and Khalid, the decision letter  treated
    the fact that Ms Khalid could not satisfy the requirements of  the  IRs
    as definitive. There was no record of any consideration of whether  her
    claim  under  Article  8  involved  issues  that  were  not  adequately
    addressed by reference to the IRs. She had relied  upon  the  Chikwamba
    principle. The Court of Appeal said at para 68 of the judgment in Singh
    and Khalid that there was no reference to the possibility  of  a  claim
    outside the IRs at all and, at paragraph 69, that Mr. Blundell for  the
    Secretary of State rightly did not seek  to  defend  the  Secretary  of
    State's failure the address the question of whether  Ms  Khalid  had  a
    claim outside the IRs.

46. The question then arose whether the Secretary  of  State's  failure  to
    consider Ms Khalid's Article 8 claim outside the  IRs  meant  that  the
    decision was unlawful. Underhill LJ noted that Mr. Fordham at point (3)
    of Ganesabalan treated the failure to  consider  the  Article  8  claim
    outside the IRs as itself rendering the decision unlawful  but  if  the
    overlooked claim  was  hopeless  the  Court  would  not  grant  relief.
    Underhill LJ considered the decisions of the House of Lords in  Belfast
    City Council v Miss Behavin' Limited [2007] UKHL 19 and R  (Nasseri)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2009]  UKHL  23  which
    establish  that  "when  a  claimant  seeking  judicial  review  alleged
    infringement of a Convention right the court is concerned not with  the
    quality of the decision-making process but with whether the  claimant's
    rights had been ... violated".

47. Underhill LJ concluded that a procedural failure of the sort  that  had
    occurred in the case of  Ms  Khalid  did  not  necessarily  render  the
    Secretary of State's  decision  unlawful.  Underhill  LJ  accepted  the
    submission of Mr. Blundell for the Secretary of State that it  did  not
    matter whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  consciously  to
    consider whether Ms Khalid had an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  IRs
    unless there was in fact such a claim or, in the case of  a  permission
    application, unless there was arguably such a claim (para 70  of  Singh
    and Khalid). Underhill LJ held that Ms Khalid could only challenge  the
    Secretary of State's decision by showing a substantive  breach  of  her
    rights under Article 8 and that this was in form a  different  approach
    from that advanced by Mr. Fordham at point (3) of his summary at para 9
    of Ganesabalan, albeit that "in substance the two  approaches  come  to
    much the same thing".

48. Para 71 of Singh and Khalid is very important and is worth emphasising.
    In cases where the IRs do not fully address an Article 8 claim so  that
    it is necessary (pursuant to Nagre) to consider the claim  outside  the
    IRs, a failure by the decision-maker to consider Article 8 outside  the
    IRs will only render the decision  unlawful  (and  thus  liable  to  be
    quashed) if the claimant in fact shows that there has been  (or,  in  a
    permission application, arguably has been) a substantive breach of  his
    or her rights under Article 8.

49. I agree with Ms Thelen that, even if the second decision had  not  been
    made and the only issue before me was whether the  first  decision  was
    lawful, it is clear that the first decision was lawful  notwithstanding
    the failure of the decision-maker  to  consider  the  applicant's  case
    (that it would be disproportionate to require her to  apply  for  entry
    clearance) outside the IRs. This is because she had no Article 8  claim
    outside the IRs, for the reasons given above.

50. For all of the reasons given above, the first decision and  the  second
    decision are lawful.

     Decision

     The claim is therefore dismissed.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date:  24 March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

-----------------------
[1] TG (Central Africa Republic) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2008] EWCA Civ 997; SZ (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 590 and MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 953.

