
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2016                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                           MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

                             GEORGE JOSEPH CHEGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Alasdair Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by
                  Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:  Mr Zane Malik, Counsel, instructed by the Government
Legal Department


 1. The question whether the appellant "is  a  persistent  offender"  is  a
    question of mixed fact and law  and  falls  to  be  determined  by  the
    Tribunal as at the date of the hearing before it.

 2. The phrase "persistent offender" in s.117D(2)(c) of the 2002  Act  must
    mean the same thing as "persistent offender" in paragraph 398(c) of the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. A "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on breaking the law.  That
    does not mean, however, that he has to keep on offending until the date
    of the relevant decision or that the continuity of the offending cannot
    be broken. A "persistent offender" is not a permanent status  that  can
    never be lost once it is acquired, but an individual can be regarded as
    a "persistent offender" for the purpose of the Rules and the  2002  Act
    even though he may not  have  offended  for  some  time.  The  question
    whether he fits that description will depend on the overall picture and
    pattern of his offending over his entire offending history up  to  that
    date. Each case will turn on its own facts.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M.
    Whalan promulgated on 22 July 2015 following a hearing on 15 May  2015,
    dismissing the appeal  of  the  Appellant,  ("Mr  Chege")  against  the
    Respondent's decision to deport him, made under s.3(5)(a) and s.5(1) of
    the Immigration Act 1971, on the basis that his  deportation  would  be
    conducive to the public good.

2.   The decision to make a deportation order  was  made  after  Mr  Chege's
    most recent conviction for affray on 22  April  2013,  an  offence  for
    which he was sentenced to 9 months' imprisonment. The deportation order
    was signed on 13 November 2013 and served on Mr Chege  on  15  November
    2013.

3.   Mr Chege's case has been considered by the Upper Tribunal once  before.
    The Respondent ("the Secretary of State") successfully appealed against
    a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan made on 22 October  2014
    allowing Mr Chege's original appeal against the decision to deport him,
    under Article 8 of the ECHR under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

4.   The Secretary of State's appeal was heard by the Upper Tribunal  before
    a panel comprising Mr Justice Nicol and Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  on
    15th January 2015. Their decision, promulgated  on  5  March  2015,  is
    reported at [2015] UKUT  00165  (IAC)  ("Chege  (No.1)").  It  contains
    detailed guidance on the approach to be  adopted  by  the  tribunal  in
    respect of Part 5A  (ss117A-D)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") as inserted by s.19 of the Immigration
    Act 2014.  The  panel  concluded  that  the  assessment  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Morgan was legally flawed and set aside the decision  to
    be re-made. The appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-
    heard, with no findings preserved.

5.   At the time when Chege (No 1) was considered by the Upper Tribunal,  as
    recorded in paragraph 34 of that decision, there was  no  challenge  to
    the assessment made by the Secretary  of  State  that  Mr  Chege  is  a
    "persistent offender". However, at the hearing of the  remitted  appeal
    before Judge Whalan, Mr Mackenzie (who appeared on behalf of Mr  Chege,
    as he did before us) withdrew that concession. As Judge  Whalan  stated
    in paragraph 37 of his decision, Mr Chege's appeal now turned, at least
    in the first instance, on the contention that he is  not  a  persistent
    offender and consequently not a "foreign criminal" for the purposes  of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

6.   If he is not a foreign criminal, when the First-tier Tribunal  came  to
    consider the question  whether  the  decision  to  deport  him  was  an
    unjustified interference with his  Art  8  rights,  the  considerations
    under s.117C of the 2002 Act would not  apply,  although  s.117B  would
    apply in any event.

7.    "Foreign criminal" is defined by s.117D (2) as:

         "a person -

           a) who is not a British citizen,

           b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of  an  offence,
              and

           c) who -

                 i) has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at
                    least 12 months,

                ii) has been  convicted  of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                    serious harm, or

               iii) is a persistent offender."

8. There is no dispute as to Mr Chege's criminal record. Over  a  period  of
   at least 15    years from October 1997 to April 2013 he amassed  numerous
   convictions for a wide variety of offences including crimes of  violence,
   public order, drugs, significant motoring offences and breaches of  court
   orders. He received short custodial sentences of between 4 and  9  months
   on at least five separate occasions, but he  was  never  sentenced  to  a
   period of imprisonment of 12 months or more. His offending history can be
   summarised as follows:

           i. Between October 1997 and March 1998 he was convicted (on  two
              occasions) for  three  driving  offences,  including  driving
              whilst disqualified, for which  he  was  sentenced  to  three
              months' imprisonment.

          ii.  Between  March  2002  and  May  2003  he  accumulated  three
              convictions for various offences, including  handling  stolen
              goods and failing to surrender to custody.

         iii. On 15th May 2004, at Highbury Corner Magistrates'  Court,  he
              was convicted for driving whilst disqualified and failing  to
              surrender to bail, for which he was sentenced to a  total  of
              five months' imprisonment (four months of  which  related  to
              the driving offence).

          iv. Between May 2007 and  September  2008,  he  accumulated  four
              convictions for various offences, including possession  of  a
              Class A drug (heroin) criminal  damage,  common  assault  and
              disorderly behaviour.

           v. On 17th September 2008 at Blackfriars  Crown  Court,  he  was
              convicted of failing to surrender to custody,  for  which  he
              was sentenced to 7 days' imprisonment;

          vi. On 6th October 2008 at Highbury Corner Magistrates' Court, he
              was convicted for destroying/damaging property and breach  of
              a suspended sentence (imposed for the earlier  assault),  for
              which he was sentenced to  5  months'  imprisonment.  He  was
              issued with a letter from the Secretary of State warning  him
              that he was liable to deportation as a consequence of  having
              offended, but indicating  that  deportation  action  was  not
              being pursued at that time.

         vii. Despite that warning, between June  2010  and  July  2010  he
              accumulated another three convictions, the last of which  was
              on 30th July 2010;

        viii. On 20 May 2011 he was cautioned for affray;

          ix. On 22 April 2013 at Wood Green Crown Court he pleaded  guilty
              to what  the  sentencing  judge  described  as  an  identical
              offence of affray. He was sentenced to 9 months' imprisonment
              and made the subject of a restraining order for a period of 3
              years.

 9. Section 56A of the UK Borders Act 2007 exempts certain immigration  and
    nationality decisions from the scope of section 4 of the Rehabilitation
    of Offenders Act 1974. In practical terms, this means that the  concept
    of a conviction becoming spent does not apply to decisions taken  under
    the Immigration Act or the Immigration Rules relating to the ability of
    a foreign national to remain in the UK.

10. Given the length  and  nature  of  Mr  Chege's  offending  history,  Mr
    Mackenzie realistically did not dispute that the Secretary of State was
    entitled to take the view at the time of her  decision  to  deport  him
    that he was a persistent offender. His submission rested on the premise
    that, since Mr Chege had committed no further offences  in  the  period
    since he was released on bail from immigration detention in  June  2013
    after serving the custodial period of his latest sentence, he could  no
    longer be characterised as a persistent offender.

11. Both Mr Mackenzie and Mr Malik,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State,  accepted  that  the  question  whether  the  appellant  "is   a
    persistent offender" is a question of mixed fact and law and  falls  to
    be determined by the Tribunal as at the date of the hearing before it.

12. The meaning of the expression "is a persistent offender" in  s.117D  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is a  matter  of  some
    importance on which there is no settled authority or guidance. That  is
    the reason why permission to appeal was granted. Before turning to  the
    specific facts of Mr  Chege's  case,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  to
    consider that phrase in  the  specific  context  in  which  it  arises,
    bearing in mind the policy expressed by Parliament in part  5A  of  the
    2002 Act and reflected in the Immigration Rules (as amended).

13. Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides that a person  who
    is not a British Citizen is  liable  to  deportation  from  the  United
    Kingdom if the Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive
    to the public good. The person concerned need not  have  committed  any
    criminal offence, let alone a  criminal  offence  attracting  a  prison
    sentence of any length.  The  decision  that  a  person  is  liable  to
    deportation  involves  the  exercise  of  a  discretion,  and  is   not
    appealable: see Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability  to  deport)  [2012]  UKUT
    00196 (IAC) at [32].

14. If he is liable to deportation, the next question for the Secretary  of
    State is whether he should be deported. That  decision  is  made  under
    s.5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and it  is  also  discretionary.  At
    that stage, it will become necessary for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider whether a human  rights  or  protection  claim  precludes  his
    deportation. If it does, no deportation order  can  be  made.  That  is
    reflected in paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules.

15. If the person concerned has established a private or family life in the
    UK and claims that his removal would be a disproportionate interference
    with his rights under Art 8 ECHR, and he has  a  criminal  record,  the
    fact of his offending and  its  nature  and  extent  will  be  relevant
    factors when the question whether he can and should be  deported  comes
    to be considered by the Secretary of State. They will also be  relevant
    when that question comes to be considered by a Tribunal  on  an  appeal
    against the refusal by the Secretary of State of the human rights claim
    upon which he has sought to rely in order to resist deportation.

16. At the stage when the person's offending history is considered  by  the
    Secretary of State, it will fall to be considered under the Immigration
    Rules, which were amended at the same time as ss.117A to 117D came into
    effect. By virtue of paragraph A362,  where  the  prospective  deportee
    raises an Art 8 point, the claim under Art 8 will  only  succeed  where
    the requirements of the Rules as at 28 July 2014 are met, regardless of
    when the notice of intention to deport or  the  deportation  order  was
    served. Therefore although the  decision  under  appeal  pre-dated  the
    amendments to the Rules, we are only concerned with the current version
    of those Rules.

17. The Explanatory Notes published with the Immigration  Act  2014,  which
    introduced the new Part 5A into the 2002 Act, stated  at  paragraph  21
    that "the Act gives the force of primary legislation to the  principles
    reflected in [the Immigration Rules]". That indicates  that  Parliament
    intended the Rules and the 2002 Act to be interpreted in a manner  that
    is consistent. Consequently, where part 5A of the Act repeats a  phrase
    that appears in the Rules, such as "persistent offender,"  it  must  be
    given the same meaning. We shall address the  meaning  of  that  phrase
    later in this decision, when we come to consider s. 117D(2).

18. The initial assessment which the Secretary of State  will  be  carrying
    out when deciding whether or not to make  a  deportation  order  is  an
    assessment as to whether removal would breach the  individual's  rights
    under Art 8 ECHR.

19. Paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules provides,  so  far  as  material
    that:

         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation..."

    Paragraph 397 underlines this by providing that where deportation would
    not be contrary to the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
    the  Human  Rights  Convention  "it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
    circumstances that the public interest in deportation  is  outweighed."
    However, before that paragraph can apply, a decision  has  to  be  made
    that deportation would not be contrary to the  UK's  obligations  under
    those Conventions.

20. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules states as follows:

             "Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

                 a) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                    to the public good and in the  public  interest  because
                    they have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they
                    have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at
                    least 4 years;

                 b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                    to the public good and in the  public  interest  because
                    they have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they
                    have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less
                    than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                 c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                    to the public good and in the public interest   because,
                    in the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  the  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A."

21. Mr Chege does not satisfy the requirements  of  sub-paragraphs  (a)  or
    (b). So far as sub-paragraph (c) is concerned, the Secretary  of  State
    has to form a view that the offending has caused serious harm  or  that
    the person concerned is a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law (or conceivably, both). Once that view is formed,
    then for the purposes of the Rules the deportation of the individual is
    taken to be conducive to the public good.

22. In the decision letter, the official making the decision on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State  did  not  express  the  view  that  Mr  Chege's
    offending had  caused  serious  harm.  Instead,  after  describing  his
    convictions in paragraph 52, and referring to the  relevant  provisions
    of the Rules, she concluded in paragraph 55 that it was considered that
    paragraph 398(c) applied in his case because in the last  15  years  he
    had  committed  25  offences  resulting  in  16  convictions,  and  was
    therefore deemed to be a persistent offender. Although the  words  "who
    shows particular  disregard  for  the  law"  do  not  appear  again  in
    paragraph 55, the decision maker cannot be taken to have  ignored  them
    in reaching the conclusion, set  out  in  that  later  paragraph,  that
    paragraph 398(c) applied. In paragraph 53 she had already  referred  to
    the fact that the Secretary of  State  must  take  the  view  that  the
    persistent offender shows a particular disregard for the law before she
    goes on to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A of the Rules applies.
    Read in context, it is clear that the phrase "persistent  offender"  in
    the last sentence of paragraph 55 of the decision letter was being used
    as shorthand for  "persistent  offender  of  the  type  falling  within
    paragraph 398(c)". The decision maker was explaining that, in the light
    of the information set out in paragraph  52,  she  considered  that  Mr
    Chege fell under that limb of paragraph 398 (c).

23. For reasons that are not explained in the Explanatory Notes, the  words
    "who shows a particular disregard for the law" do not appear in Part 5A
    of the 2002 Act.  The meaning of that phrase  was  not  a  matter  that
    arose directly for consideration in this appeal. Nevertheless, it  must
    have some bearing on the meaning of "persistent offender" in  the  Act,
    because in  principle  the  Rules  and  Part  5A  must  be  interpreted
    consistently. Whilst the Tribunal must  make  up  its  own  mind  about
    whether the appellant is a "foreign criminal" as at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before it, Parliament cannot have intended that  a  person  who
    fails to satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  398(c)  of  the  Rules
    could nevertheless fall within the scope of s.117D(2)(c)  of  the  2002
    Act. The better view is that only those types of "persistent  offender"
    who have already been held to  satisfy  paragraph  398(c)  qualify  for
    consideration as to whether they meet the requirements of  s.117D(2)(c)
    if they appeal against the refusal of their human rights claim.

24. On the face of it, in order for this limb of paragraph 398(c) to apply,
    it is insufficient for the Secretary of State to take the view that the
    person concerned is a persistent offender; she must also form the  view
    that he shows a particular disregard for the law.

25. Most offenders could be said to show some  disregard  for  the  law  by
    virtue of their commission of a crime, unless the  offence  is  one  of
    strict liability. On one view, the "particular disregard for  the  law"
    required by the  Rule  could  just  be  what  is  demonstrated  by  the
    persistence  of  the  offending,  and  the  phrase  adds   nothing   of
    significance to  the  meaning  of  "persistent  offender".  That  might
    explain why it was not repeated in s.117D. The  Immigration  Rules  are
    not to be interpreted with the same rigour as a statute or a  statutory
    instrument: see Lord  Brown  in  Mahad  (Ethiopia)  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2009] UKSC 16 at [10].

26. On the other hand, as Lord Brown went on to say, the  Rules  should  be
    construed sensibly, according to the natural and  ordinary  meaning  of
    the words used. One would not readily conclude that they include  words
    that are surplus to requirements unless  there  is  no  other  sensible
    interpretation that could be placed on  them.  As  a  matter  of  plain
    English,  to  "disregard"  something  is  to  take  no  notice  of  it.
    "Particular" can mean "specific"; it can also mean "especially great or
    intense." Bearing in mind that the offending in question will not  have
    attracted a sentence of imprisonment of 12 months or  more,  or  caused
    serious harm, we  do  not  consider  that  the  word  "particular"  was
    intended to add a requirement that the offending has achieved a certain
    level of seriousness.

27. Therefore a "particular disregard" for the law  appears  to  connote  a
    specific, or deliberate, decision to take no notice of it or to turn  a
    blind eye to it. On  that  basis,  the  phrase  "particular  disregard"
    signifies that the offences committed by the individual concerned  must
    either be of a nature that demonstrates a  certain  state  of  mind  or
    attitude to the laws of this jurisdiction - knowledge by the individual
    concerned that he was breaking the law, or recklessness as  to  whether
    he was breaking the law - or committed in a way that demonstrates  that
    state of mind or attitude.  That  makes  sense  in  the  context  of  a
    decision  whether  or  not  the  removal  of  that  person   from   the
    jurisdiction would be conducive to the public good.

28. This would not necessarily mean that intention or recklessness  has  to
    be an ingredient of the offence which the prosecution had to prove. Or,
    for example, it could readily be inferred from the  fact  that  someone
    has committed numerous separate offences of simple possession of  drugs
    on regular occasions over a period of some  months  that  he  was  well
    aware that he was breaking the law (and, indeed, that he was determined
    to go on doing so).  An intention  to  break  the  law  could  also  be
    inferred from the very  nature  of  certain  offences  -  for  example,
    driving whilst disqualified, or breaches of a restraining order. On the
    other hand, such an inference as to the offender's cavalier attitude to
    the laws of this country may be more difficult to draw merely from  the
    commission of several strict liability offences, such as  certain  road
    traffic offences, even if they are committed over a significant  period
    of time.

29. Since a person can show that he has a particular disregard for the  law
    by reason of his past behaviour, the fact that the Rule is expressed in
    the present tense does not mean that the person concerned must still be
    committing offences up to or just before the date of the decision  that
    his deportation would be conducive to the public good. To import such a
    requirement would be likely to preclude the Rule from  being  operative
    in the types of case for which it was  clearly  designed.  It  must  be
    borne in mind that the twin aims sought to be achieved in  deporting  a
    foreign criminal are (a) the prevention of future harm from him and (b)
    the deterrence of others who might decide to follow  his  example.  The
    deterrent element may still justify deportation even  if  there  is  no
    longer a risk of future harm. In the present context, the message  sent
    out by way  of  deterrence  is  that  foreign  offenders  who  keep  on
    deliberately breaking the law or whose repeated offending involves  not
    caring whether what they are doing is unlawful, will  be  removed  from
    the jurisdiction, even if they do not qualify for automatic deportation
    by reason of the imposition on them  of  a  custodial  sentence  of  12
    months or more and even if their offending is  not  such  as  to  cause
    serious harm.

30. That interpretation of "particular disregard" not only  fits  with  the
    natural meaning of the language used, but is consistent with  a  policy
    that  those  foreign  nationals  who  demonstrate  by  their  offending
    behaviour that they are not prepared to  abide  by  the  laws  of  this
    country should be removed, unless their removal would breach  the  UK's
    obligations under international conventions. Where, as in  the  present
    case, the nature and pattern of the offences committed by the  offender
    over a  very  long  period  of  time  self-evidently  demonstrates  the
    requisite state  of  mind  or  attitude,  it  is  unnecessary  for  the
    Secretary of State to spell this out in her decision  or  to  give  any
    further  explanation  of  why  she  has  formed  the  view   that   the
    requirements of  this  limb  of  paragraph  398(c)  are  met.   If  the
    requisite state of mind or attitude to the laws of this country is  not
    self-evidently  demonstrated  by  the  nature  and  frequency  of   the
    offences, but reliance  is  placed  on  the  particular  facts  of  the
    offending, the Secretary of State would probably need  to  explain  her
    reasons more fully.

31. Where the foreign offender does not fall within  sub-paragraph  (a)  or
    (b) of Paragraph 398, it is a  necessary  precondition  of  the  matter
    being considered by the Tribunal under s117Cthat the Secretary of State
    has formed a view that he falls within sub-paragraph (c),  as  in  this
    case she did. We endorse the view expressed by  the  Vice-President  of
    the Upper Tribunal in the unreported decision of Secretary of State for
    the  Home  Department  v  Bennett  (DA/01409/2014),  promulgated  on  2
    September 2015, that if the Secretary of  State  has  not  formed  that
    view, it is not open to the Tribunal to substitute its own view on  the
    matter, and the restrictive provisions of paragraphs 399  and  399A  of
    the Rules would not apply in such a case.

32. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules, as amended, is  underpinned  by
    part 5A of the 2002 Act. Sections 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act set out
    Parliament's considered view as to the public interest in an Article  8
    analysis in respect of foreign criminals.

33. Section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act provides for three separate  routes  by
    which an offender  might  qualify  as  a  "foreign  criminal"  for  the
    purposes of section 117C, namely:

     a. A sentence of imprisonment of at least 12 months;

     b. Conviction of an offence that has caused "serious harm";

     c. Being a persistent offender.

    However since, in order for s.117D(2)(c) to be engaged,  the  Secretary
    of State must already have formed the view that paragraph 398(c) of the
    Rules applies, the Tribunal would not  be  applying  s117C  to  anyone,
    however persistent their offending, that the Secretary of State has not
    already considered showed a particular disregard for  the  law  in  the
    sense explained above.

34. In order to fall within sub-paragraph (c) of  s.117D(2)  an  individual
    need not have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment at  all.   The
    three limbs of that section are independent of, and alternate to,  each
    other. It is clear, however, that the first two limbs would be  engaged
    on conviction of a single qualifying offence, regardless of how old the
    conviction for the offence causing "serious harm" might be, or how long
    ago the sentence of 12 months or more was served (if it was  served  at
    all).

35. The lack of time constraints is understandable because  the  individual
    concerned might have absconded, or he might have adopted  an  alias  or
    taken other steps which prevented his coming to the  attention  of  the
    relevant authorities until many years later. However, the lack of  time
    constraints and the inability to argue that the conviction  is  "spent"
    means that, at least  in  theory,  someone  who  committed  an  offence
    causing "serious harm" many years ago, but who has not offended  since,
    would not only have  the  prospect  of  deportation  hanging  over  him
    indefinitely  but  be  subject  to  strong  adverse   presumptions   in
    consequence of the mandatory application of s.117C, albeit that such  a
    person might appear on the face  of  it  to  have  cogent  grounds  for
    argument that his removal would be a disproportionate interference with
    his Art 8 rights.

36. The third limb of s.117D(2) is not engaged unless the individual "is  a
    persistent offender". There was no dispute that an "offender", in  this
    context, means a person who has committed a criminal offence (proof  of
    which is established by a conviction or a caution, or a request by  him
    that the offence be taken into consideration when  sentence  is  passed
    for other offences, which  is  an  admission  that  he  committed  it).
    However, the person concerned must be a "persistent offender"  and  the
    question whether he meets that description must be answered at the time
    when the Tribunal is looking at the matter, not at some  earlier  time,
    because the question is whether he  "is"  a  persistent  offender,  not
    whether he "was" a persistent offender.

37.  The two  main  definitions  of  "persistent"  in  the  Oxford  English
    Dictionary are "continuing firmly or obstinately in a course of  action
    ... especially against opposition" or "continuing  to  exist  or  occur
    over a prolonged period, enduring."

38. Mr Malik's primary argument was that "persistent offender" is a  status
    or label that, once acquired, is never lost. A persistent  offender  is
    someone who persists in committing criminal offences.  The  persistence
    is, in effect, a characteristic of a certain type of offender. Thus, he
    submitted, someone will be a persistent offender for  the  purposes  of
    the Rules and the 2002 Act once he has repeatedly committed  sufficient
    criminal offences sequentially over a sufficiently long period of  time
    to warrant being so described, even if he has not committed a  criminal
    offence for a significant period since the last such  offence.  Such  a
    person remains a persistent offender; he is just a persistent  offender
    who is not currently  offending.  That  interpretation  of  "persistent
    offender" would also be consistent with the deterrent  element  of  the
    policy behind  the  discretionary  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,
    because even if someone could be said to pose no future threat of  harm
    through offending because he had become completely  rehabilitated,  his
    removal  would  serve  to  discourage  other  foreign  nationals   from
    persistently disobeying the law.

39. The attraction of that approach is that it  would  avoid  the  Tribunal
    having to consider whether the person concerned has become  a  reformed
    character, a consideration which would have no  bearing  on  whether  a
    person qualified as a "foreign criminal" under either of the other  two
    limbs of Section 117(D)(2).

40. Moreover there will inevitably  be  some  lapse  of  time  between  the
    commission of the last offence and the decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, and a further lapse  of  time  between  that  decision  and  the
    decision by the First-tier Tribunal, during which period or periods the
    individual concerned would  be  extremely  foolish  to  commit  further
    criminal offences if he is not detained. It seems highly unlikely  that
    Parliament would have intended it to be open to such an  individual  to
    argue that he cannot be regarded as a "persistent" offender due to  the
    lack of continuation of his offending behaviour whilst he faces removal
    from the jurisdiction.

41. Mr Mackenzie's response to Mr Malik's primary argument  was  that  this
    was an unnatural interpretation of the phrase, and in particular of the
    word "persistent" which, in its natural meaning, involves continuation.
    He laid stress on the fact that Parliament has deliberately  chosen  to
    use the present tense, and submitted that a person cannot be  described
    as a persistent offender if he is no longer continuing to offend.

42. Moreover, Mr Mackenzie submitted that  if  the  status  of  "persistent
    offender" could never be lost, there would be no incentive for a  petty
    criminal of the  kind  likely  to  be  caught  by  the  third  limb  of
    s.117(D)(2) to mend his ways, since the  threat  of  deportation  would
    always be hanging over him regardless of whether  he  became  a  wholly
    respectable and law-abiding member of society. Mr  Mackenzie  submitted
    that it cannot be right to interpret the Rules and the Act  in  such  a
    way that part 5A would operate so as to make it extremely difficult, if
    not impossible, for a person who had demonstrably  reformed  to  resist
    deportation. He pointed out that such a person would never be  able  to
    acquire British Citizenship, even if he was not deported, and thus  the
    consequences of his past criminality would still be visited upon him in
    a meaningful way.

43. One problem with the latter argument is that the  two  other  limbs  of
    s.117(D)(2) are capable of operating in precisely that way, as we  have
    already pointed out. If anything, that fact could lend some support  to
    Mr Malik's argument, because it indicates an intention on the  part  of
    Parliament that once a person fulfils the requirements of one of  those
    limbs by virtue of his past offending he will become, and will  remain,
    a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of the 2002 Act.  Consistency  of
    interpretation might require a similar approach to  be  taken  to  sub-
    paragraph (c). The fact that it might operate harshly in an  individual
    case is irrelevant.

44. On the other hand, that begs the question of when  the  offender  would
    fulfil the requirements of  that  third  limb  which,  by  its  nature,
    encompasses offending that is unlikely to be  as  serious  as  anything
    falling under either of the first two limbs. Unlike those other  limbs,
    which would apply after the commission of a single qualifying  offence,
    the third limb requires a pattern of continuing offending over a period
    of time.

45. Mr Mackenzie's point on the language has more force. It would have been
    open to Parliament to provide a  definition  of  "persistent  offender"
    that conferred that status on a person once they met certain  specified
    criteria, for example, being convicted of or  cautioned  for  three  or
    more criminal offences over a defined period, but  Parliament  has  not
    done so. Since there is no special definition in the Act,  the  natural
    meaning of the words should be adopted.

46. Mr Mackenzie submitted that, on that basis, a  persistent  offender  is
    one "between whose offences there is some connection in  nature  and/or
    time and/or who displays  a  degree  of  obstinacy  or  refusal  to  be
    corrected by punishment".  He  sought  to  draw  analogies  with  other
    contexts in which the words  "persistently"  or  "persistent  offender"
    have been used, relying primarily upon the use of such phrases  in  the
    context of sentencing for youth offending. He referred to cases such as
    R v L [2012] EWCA Crim 1336, [2013] 1 Cr.App R. (S) 56 in which earlier
    authorities on the question of what might or  might  not  amount  to  a
    "persistent offender" for the purposes  of  passing  a  sentence  of  a
    detention and training order on a young offender  were  considered.  In
    that  case,  the  Court  of  Appeal  (Criminal  Division)  held,  quite
    understandably, that multiple offences committed on a  single  occasion
    within a minute or two of each other  could  not  be  characterised  as
    "persistent offending" for the purposes of s.91 of the  Powers  of  the
    Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000.

47. However, it would be very  unwise  for  this  Tribunal  to  import  the
    interpretation placed on a phrase used in another statute, in a context
    to which very different policy considerations apply, into  part  5A  of
    the 2002 Act, even if the words used are identical. In the  context  of
    youth offending, where a custodial  sentence  is  regarded  as  a  last
    resort, there are valid reasons for adopting a narrow approach  to  the
    question whether the requirements for exercising  the  jurisdiction  to
    make such an order have been fulfilled. There are no reasons to justify
    adopting  a  similarly  restrictive  approach   in   the   context   of
    deportation.

48. In any event, the Court of Appeal stated in R  v  L  that  the  earlier
    authorities on s.91 signified that the term "persistent offender" is an
    ordinary term of the English language and falls to be  applied  in  its
    clearly understood meaning.  They also endorsed the observation  in  an
    earlier  case  by  the  then  Recorder  of  Liverpool  that  "the  term
    "persistent offender" is a wide one,  allowing  for  some  latitude  of
    interpretation of the facts of particular cases."

49. Mr Mackenzie also referred to the case of In Re Arctic Engineering  Ltd
    [1986] 1 WLR 686 in which the central issue was  whether  a  liquidator
    had been "persistently in default" in sending returns or  abstracts  to
    the  Registrar  of  Companies  so  as   to   render   him   liable   to
    disqualification. However, apart from the observation by Hoffmann J (as
    he then was) at p.692B  that  the  word  "persistently"  connotes  some
    degree of continuance or repetition,  that  case  also  affords  us  no
    assistance, particularly as the Companies Act 1981 contained provisions
    from which it could be inferred how  many  defaults  would  qualify  as
    "persistent" for the purposes of disqualification proceedings.

50. What, therefore, is the  natural  meaning  of  the  phrase  "persistent
    offender" in this specific statutory context? It can certainly be said,
    without unnecessarily straining the natural meaning of the word that an
    "offender" acquires that status by virtue of committing  a  crime,  and
    having once offended he does not lose that  status  even  if  he  never
    commits another crime. In other words,  once  an  offender,  always  an
    offender. The fact  that  Parliament  has  deliberately  legislated  to
    remove the concept of spent convictions  in  this  context  also  lends
    force to the view that "offender" means someone who has offended in the
    past, however long ago that may have been.

51. However, Parliament did not use the phrase "repeat offender" or "serial
    offender". It used the phrase "persistent offender",  and  persistence,
    by its  very  nature,  requires  some  continuation  of  the  behaviour
    concerned, although it need not be continuous or  even  regular.  There
    may be circumstances in which it would  be  inappropriate  to  describe
    someone with a past history  of  criminality  as  being  a  "persistent
    offender" even if there was a time when  that  description  would  have
    been an accurate one.

52. Take, for example, the case of an  individual  who  in  his  youth  had
    committed a series of offences between the ages of 14 and 17 which  led
    to a string of minor convictions, but in adulthood had led a  blameless
    existence for 20 years. Whilst it would be accurate to describe him  as
    an offender, the natural response to the question whether he is  now  a
    persistent offender would be no. It would still be no if at the end  of
    that long period of good behaviour he committed another minor  criminal
    offence, even one involving proof of intention or recklessness. That is
    why, both logically and as a matter  of  the  natural  meaning  of  the
    language, Mr  Malik's  proposition  that  "persistent  offender"  is  a
    permanent status cannot be correct.

53. Put simply, a "persistent offender" is someone who  keeps  on  breaking
    the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to keep on  offending
    until the date of the relevant decision or up to a certain time  before
    it, or that the continuity of the offending cannot be broken. Whilst we
    do  not  accept  Mr  Malik's  primary  submission  that  a  "persistent
    offender" is a permanent status that can  never  be  lost  once  it  is
    acquired, we do  accept  his  submission  that  an  individual  can  be
    regarded as a "persistent offender" for the purpose of  the  Rules  and
    the 2002 Act even though he  may  not  have  offended  for  some  time.
    Someone can be fairly described as a person who keeps breaking the  law
    even if he is not currently offending. The  question  whether  he  fits
    that description will depend on the overall picture and pattern of  his
    offending over his entire offending history up to that date. Each  case
    will turn on its own facts.

54. Plainly, a persistent offender is not simply someone who  offends  more
    than once. There has to be repeat offending but that repetition, in and
    of itself, will not be enough to show persistence. There has  to  be  a
    history of repeated criminal conduct carried out  over  a  sufficiently
    long period to indicate that the person concerned is someone who  keeps
    on  re-offending.  However,  determining  whether  the   offending   is
    persistent is not just a mathematical exercise. How long a  period  and
    how many offences will be enough will depend very much on the facts  of
    the particular case and the nature and circumstances of the  offending.
    The criminal offences need not  be  the  same,  or  even  of  the  same
    character as each other. Persistence may be shown by the  fact  that  a
    person keeps committing the same type of offence, but it may equally be
    shown by the fact that he has committed a  wide  variety  of  different
    offences over a period of time.

55. We agree with Judge Whalan that it is unnecessary that the offences  be
    committed within what Mr Mackenzie described as  "a  reasonably  short"
    space of time. Indeed, the longer the period over which  the  offending
    occurs, and the greater the number of offences, the more likely it  may
    be that persistence is established. The  offences  must  be  sequential
    (i.e. not properly regarded as part of the  same  incident),  otherwise
    the necessary characteristic of repetition will  be  absent.  The  time
    over which they are committed will of  course  be  a  relevant  factor.
    Sporadic instances of isolated offending over a course of several years
    are unlikely to suffice. On the other hand, the facts  may  demonstrate
    that although he  has  committed  very  few  offences,  the  offender's
    experience of  the  criminal  justice  system  has  provided  him  with
    insufficient deterrence and that he is plainly someone who is going  to
    keep on re-offending.

56. Mr Mackenzie submitted that offending twice over a period of time would
    never be enough to establish persistence. However we are  not  prepared
    to put a gloss on "persistent" by finding that it  necessarily  implies
    that three sequential offences is a minimum requirement. Whilst  it  is
    perhaps unlikely that only two sequential offences would be regarded as
    sufficient to demonstrate persistence, it is not impossible.

57. In order to  answer  the  question  whether  someone  is  a  persistent
    offender, the decision-maker (be it the Tribunal or  the  Secretary  of
    State) must consider the whole  history  of  the  individual  from  the
    commission of the first offence up to the date of the decision and  ask
    themselves whether he can properly be described as someone who keeps on
    committing criminal offences. Factors to be  taken  into  account  will
    include  the  overall  pattern  of  offending,  the  frequency  of  the
    offences, their nature, their number, the period or periods over  which
    they are committed, and (where relevant)  any  reasons  underlying  the
    offending, such as an alcohol or drug dependency  or  association  with
    other criminals. This is  in  line  with  the  guidance  given  in  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions, Chapter 13, version 5.0 (dated 28
    July 2014) to which Mr Malik referred, which states that  a  persistent
    offender is "a repeat offender who shows a pattern of offending over  a
    period of time". The guidance goes on to say "this can mean a series of
    offences committed in a fairly short timeframe, or  which  escalate  in
    seriousness over time, or a long history of minor offences."

58. If the person concerned has been  out  of  trouble  for  a  significant
    period or periods within the overall period under  consideration,  then
    the length of such periods and the  reasons  for  his  keeping  out  of
    trouble may be important considerations, though of course the  decision
    maker is entitled to bear in mind that the mere fact that  someone  has
    not been convicted for some time does not necessarily signify  that  he
    has seen the error of his ways. It may simply mean that he  has  paused
    in his offending. It is the  overall  picture  of  his  behaviour  that
    matters.

59. If during those periods of apparent good behaviour the person concerned
    was serving the custodial part of a short sentence, or was  too  unwell
    to go out and commit the kinds of offences he  is  generally  prone  to
    commit, there may be an explanation for the hiatus in  offending  which
    is not inconsistent with his being properly regarded  as  a  persistent
    offender. Likewise, if he had a very strong  incentive  not  to  commit
    further offences, such as being subject to  a  community  order,  or  a
    suspended sentence, or he is on bail, or he  has  been  served  with  a
    notice of deportation, the  fact  that  he  has  committed  no  further
    offences during that period may be of little significance  in  deciding
    whether, looking at his history as a whole, he fits the description.

60. On the other hand, we agree with First-tier Tribunal Judge Whalan  that
    an established period  of  rehabilitation  may  lead  properly  to  the
    conclusion that an individual  is  no  longer  a  persistent  offender.
    Depending on the particular facts  and  circumstances,  a  former  drug
    addict who has ceased shoplifting to feed his habit after a  period  in
    rehabilitation, and who has been  out  of  trouble  for  a  significant
    period of time thereafter, might not  be  capable  of  being  termed  a
    "persistent offender" because when his history  is  looked  at  in  the
    round, it can no longer be  said  that  he  is  someone  who  keeps  on
    offending.

61. Mr Malik submitted that, whilst the view of the offender taken  by  the
    Secretary of State is not binding on the Tribunal, it is a factor  that
    should carry very great  weight  when  the  Tribunal  comes  to  decide
    whether someone is a "persistent offender" at the time the matter falls
    for consideration under s.117(D)(2).

62. The fact that the Secretary of State has decided  that  the  individual
    has met the requirements of that limb of paragraph 383(c) of the  Rules
    and that therefore, his deportation is conducive to the public good, is
    obviously something that the Tribunal is entitled to take into account,
    and it must be afforded due respect; but the Tribunal cannot substitute
    the Secretary of State's decision for its own  decision.  It  would  be
    wrong in principle for the Tribunal to start with the premise that  the
    appellant has been held  to  be  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law, and then  ask  whether  anything  has
    happened since that decision to change that view of him.  The  Tribunal
    must make up its own mind, looking at the entire offending history  and
    not just the period between the Secretary of State's decision  and  its
    own. That is precisely what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  in  the
    present case.

Mr Chege's Appeal

63. Mr Mackenzie's primary contention  was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was not entitled to find that Mr Chege is a "persistent offender"
    because he had not committed any criminal offences since  he  had  been
    granted immigration bail in July 2013 (ever since when he has  had  the
    threat of deportation hanging over  him).  Therefore  as  a  matter  of
    natural interpretation of the words it could not be said that he "is  a
    persistent offender" as he  was  not  continuing  to  offend.  For  the
    reasons stated above, we  reject  that  interpretation  of  "persistent
    offender," which would plainly defeat Parliament's objective by leaving
    it open to a prospective deportee, even one with a track record as  bad
    as Mr Chege's, to defeat the application of s.117D(2)(c) merely by dint
    of committing  no  further  offences  whilst  he  was  challenging  the
    decision to deport him.

64. The short answer to Mr Mackenzie's first ground of  challenge  is  that
    the Judge was not only entitled to make the finding that Mr Chege is  a
    persistent offender within the meaning of the Rules and the  2002  Act,
    but right to do  so.  Indeed  any  other  conclusion  would  have  been
    perverse. If one asked the question in July 2015  and  indeed,  if  one
    asks the question now, by reference to  his  overall  history,  "is  Mr
    Chege someone who keeps on offending?" the answer is plainly  yes.  The
    Judge made his assessment as at the date of the  hearing,  applied  the
    correct approach, and gave cogent reasons for his finding which  cannot
    be disturbed. There was no error of law. As the Judge  said,  Mr  Chege
    was sentenced to imprisonment on five occasions between March 1998  and
    April 2013 and this in itself was sufficient to characterise him  as  a
    "persistent offender" as at the time of the determination.  The  recent
    break in offending of over two years was not  such  as  to  render  the
    description of him as a "persistent  offender"  inaccurate,  when  that
    period was considered within the context of his  extensive  and  varied
    offending behaviour as a whole.

65. Mr Mackenzie further submitted that Judge Whalan erred in paragraph  43
    of his determination by appearing to find that the  onus  was  upon  Mr
    Chege  to  provide  evidence  to  change  his  "current  status"  as  a
    persistent offender, and that it was irrelevant to  the  assessment  of
    the situation whether Mr  Chege  had  or  had  not  been  a  persistent
    offender at any point in the past. The Judge did not reverse the burden
    of proof. He did not require Mr Chege to demonstrate that he had ceased
    to be a persistent offender since the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    that he was, or substitute her decision for his own.  He  was  applying
    his mind to the correct test by taking into account the entire relevant
    period up to the date of his own decision, looking at it  holistically,
    and asking whether (particularly bearing in mind  the  lack  of  recent
    offending, and any explanation given for it), Mr Chege could  still  be
    described as a "persistent offender".

66. Mr Mackenzie next submitted that Judge Whalan made a material error  of
    law in paragraph  42  of  the  determination  by  defining  "persistent
    offender"  as  involving  "repeated  offending  such  as  to  bring  an
    individual to the attention of the criminal authorities  on  more  than
    one occasion." He submitted that this  indicated  that  the  Judge  was
    wrongly equating persistence with repetition and,  moreover,  that  the
    Judge appeared to be saying that committing two offences would  suffice
    to constitute "persistence" in this context.

67. However, those submissions rely upon  taking  the  observation  of  the
    Judge out of context. It  was  made  in  the  course  of  rejecting  Mr
    Mackenzie's submission that in order to be characterised as persistent,
    the offending must "show a  consistent  pattern  over  and  above  that
    displayed by a course of recidivism" (our emphasis). Immediately  after
    the observation relied on by Mr Mackenzie, the Judge  went  on  to  say
    that he did not see it as necessary  for  an  individual's  history  of
    offending to demonstrate any other form of  "consistent  pattern"  save
    "that displayed by an antecedent history of repeated offending." It  is
    therefore quite obvious, when that paragraph is read as a  whole,  that
    he was not attempting to define "persistent offender" in that  passage,
    let alone to do so as meaning a person who offends more than once.  The
    phrases "a course of recidivism" and "antecedent  history  of  repeated
    offending" which appear  immediately  before  and  after  the  sentence
    relied on by Mr Mackenzie make that plain. The Judge was simply  making
    the valid point  in  response  to  counsel's  submission  that,  whilst
    persistence necessarily involves repetition, the repeat offending  does
    not have to display any particular pattern. In any event, even if there
    had been any error of law in setting  the  bar  too  low,  it  was  not
    material. The prolific number of Mr  Chege's  offences  was  more  than
    ample to justify the finding that  there  was  a  history  of  repeated
    offending sufficient to amount to persistence.

68. Mr  Mackenzie's  final  ground  of  appeal  (which  he  addressed  with
    admirable succinctness in his oral submissions) was  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion on the proportionality of deportation was flawed because  it
    played down the evidence of the risk to  Mr  Chege's  health  posed  by
    deportation, and in consequence there was  a  failure  to  make  proper
    findings about the consequences for Mr Chege of an enforced  return  to
    Kenya.

69. This ground focused on Mr Chege's HIV positive status and  the  alleged
    risk of his committing suicide. Mr Mackenzie rightly  did  not  contend
    that the Judge was wrong to find that paragraph 399  and  399A  of  the
    Rules did not apply. However, he submitted that  the  conclusion  under
    paragraph 398 and paragraph 397 of the Rules that deportation  was  not
    disproportionate was  not  reasonably  open  to  the  Judge  or  lacked
    adequate reasoning. It was  unclear  whether  the  Judge  accepted  the
    medical evidence and if he did, why he concluded that it did not amount
    to "very  compelling  circumstances".  In  order  to  amount  to  "very
    compelling circumstances" it was unnecessary to meet the high threshold
    that would engage Article 3 ECHR (as Mr Mackenzie very fairly  conceded
    this claim did not) or even that Art 8 should be engaged. The Judge had
    not properly balanced the public and private interests engaged in  this
    case.

70. Mr Mackenzie further submitted that although the Judge had set out  the
    problems facing Mr Chege earlier in  his  determination,  when  dealing
    with the submissions made about them, he understated their  seriousness
    by describing Mr Chege (in paragraph 60) as facing  "some  considerable
    life challenges". This alleged understatement was said to  disclose  an
    error of law.

71. Mr Malik referred to Akhula (health  claim:  ECHR  Article  8)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC) and submitted that the challenge was no more than
    an expression of disagreement with  a  decision  supported  by  legally
    sufficient reasoning.

72. In our judgment  there  is  no  substance  in  any  of  Mr  Mackenzie's
    criticisms.  We agree with Mr Malik's characterisation of  them  as  no
    more than an expression of disagreement  with  the  result.  The  Judge
    carefully considered the evidence and concluded, as he was entitled to,
    that there were no "very compelling circumstances" for the purposes  of
    Paragraph 398 of the Rules and no "exceptional circumstances"  for  the
    purpose of Paragraph 397. He followed the guidance in Chege (No 1)  and
    gave   sufficient   reasons   for   his   findings.   There   was    no
    mischaracterisation of the evidence, including  the  medical  evidence,
    which is set out extensively in paragraphs 27-31 of the  determination;
    it is quite clear that the Judge accepted the medical evidence, subject
    to the qualifications he expressed about the psychiatric  evidence  set
    out in paragraph 62 of the determination. However, for the reasons that
    he gave, he did not consider that Mr Chege satisfied the high threshold
    set by Paragraph 398  or  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    arising outside Art  8  under  the  residual  discretion  preserved  by
    Paragraph 397. The assessment of proportionality  was  consistent  with
    the First-tier Tribunal's statutory obligations and the case law.

73. The Judge was entitled to deal with the Art 8 health  claim  relatively
    briefly, because it obviously had  no  prospect  of  success.  He  gave
    proper and adequate reasons for his rejection of it  and  his  decision
    cannot possibly be castigated as irrational. As the  Judge  pointed  at
    paragraph 62, the appellant is not presently accessing any treatment in
    the UK for his HIV. The asserted suicide risk was found to be  illusory
    and not established by the evidence that Mr Chege chose to  put  before
    the Tribunal.

74. We would add that even if, contrary to our conclusions, the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law in reaching the conclusion that Mr  Chege
    was a "persistent offender" and thus that he was a  "foreign  criminal"
    to which s.117C of the 2002 Act applied, Mr Chege would  have  been  no
    better off under s.117B. His track record of  minor  criminal  offences
    would not cease  to  be  a  relevant  consideration  in  the  balancing
    exercise merely because he did not fall to be  treated  as  a  "foreign
    criminal," with all that that entailed. His removal would  plainly  not
    be a disproportionate interference with his Art 8 rights, for  all  the
    same reasons as were given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

75. On the facts as found, we accept Mr Malik's submission that, even on  a
    freestanding assessment under Article 8 outside  the  Rules,  the  same
    outcome was inevitable.




Notice of Decision

The first-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law and his determination  is
to stand.
Therefore the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed    [pic]
                                Date 9 March 2016

Mrs Justice Andrews DBE



