
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Tirabi (Deportation: "lawfully resident": s.5(1)) [2018] UKUT 00199 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|15 February 2018                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between


                        ABDIRASHID ABDIRAHMAN TIRABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Melville, instructed by Drummond Miller.
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer.


For the purposes of applying to para 399A of the Rules and s.  117C  of  the
2002 Act a definition of "lawfully resident" analogous to that in para  276A
(as mandated by SC (Jamaica)), the invalidation provisions  of  s.  5(1)  of
the 1971 Act are to be ignored.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a  national  of  Somalia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against  a  deportation  order  made  against  him  under  the
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 on 16  March  2016.   Judge  J  C
    Grant-Hutchinson dismissed his appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with
    permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appears to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  or
    before 24 October 2001, when he was nine years old.  He  was  with  his
    mother.  Her application for asylum was  refused  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed.  She was in due course granted indefinite leave  to  remain,
    and the appellant was granted leave in line with her.  When he  reached
    the age of eighteen on 22 July 2010 he accordingly already had leave.

 3. On 30 September 2015 the appellant  appeared  before  Glasgow  Sherriff
    Court and was convicted  of  being  concerned  with  the  supply  of  a
    controlled drug.  He was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.   It  was
    that event which prompted the making of the deportation order.

 4. The appeal was on a number of grounds.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    rejected it for the following reasons.  In reference to his claim based
    on article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  the  judge
    found that he would not be at risk of ill treatment, despite his belief
    that Somalia is a war zone, his claim that he had no family  there  and
    that he did not speak the Somali language, his worry that he  would  be
    targeted for kidnapping or murder, and his concern that  he  would  not
    survive either if his family  were  to  support  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Noting that in 2003, in her  asylum  claim,  the  appellant's
    mother said that she came from  Mogadishu,  the  judge  considered  the
    Country Guidance case MOJ and others (Return to Mogadishu) [2014]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC).  She analysed the evidence before her, and did not  accept
    that the appellant was  telling  the  truth  on  a  number  of  issues,
    including his command of the Somali language, and  the  whereabouts  of
    various relatives.  She did not accept the appellant's  claim  that  he
    had no useful skills.  She decided, based on MOJ, that he would not  be
    at risk on return.

 5. She then turned to the Human Rights argument, based on  the  length  of
    time he has been in this country.  She noted, correctly, that paragraph
    399A of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
    amended), and Section 117B-C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 apply to this case.   To  a  large  extent,  those  provisions
    overlap.  She considered the  exceptions  to  deportation  set  out  in
    paragraph 399A and Section 117C(4).  She found  as  follows.   (a)  The
    appellant had not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
    of his life, because he had been granted leave only in 2010.   (b)  The
    appellant had not socially and culturally integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom, as demonstrated by his offence.  (c) There would not  be  very
    significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into  Somalia,
    based on the findings of fact that she had  made  in  relation  to  the
    claim under article 3.

 6. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.  The grounds of appeal  challenge
    each of the four findings we have set out above.  We heard  submissions
    on them from Mr Melville and from Mrs O'Brien.

 7. Mr Melville made no  oral  submissions  specifically  directed  to  the
    judge's finding in relation to article 3.  It seems  to  us  that  that
    finding is, in essence, unassailable.  The judge  considered  the  case
    that the appellant was trying to make.   She  concluded  that,  in  the
    factors he raised which might have shown  that  he  would  be  at  risk
    within the criteria set out in MOJ, he was  not,  or  was  not  wholly,
    credible.  In those circumstances she had no obligation to believe  him
    on other similar matters.  It is perfectly clear that she was  entitled
    to reach the conclusion she did as to the appellant's  credibility  and
    as to his failure to establish the fact upon which he  relied  for  his
    article 3 claim.  So far as article 3 is concerned, therefore, we  have
    no hesitation in saying that the judge's conclusion was correct.

 8. We turn therefore to the three factors set out in paragraph 399A of the
    Immigration Rules and, in the same terms, in  Section  117C(4)  of  the
    2002 Act.  The  first  question  is  whether  the  appellant  has  been
    "lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life".   This  phrase  was
    the subject of interpretation by the Court of Appeal  in  SC  (Jamaica)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2112, in which the leading  judgment,  with  which  the
    other members of the Court agreed, was given by the Senior President of
    Tribunals.  At [53], the Senior President concluded that "most  of  his
    life" means "more than  half".   At  [54]-[57],  the  Senior  President
    considered the definition of "lawful  residence"  for  these  purposes.
    There is no definition made specifically applicable to either paragraph
    399A or Section 117C; but there is an unrelated  definition  of  lawful
    residence in  paragraph  276A(b)  of  the  Rules,  in  relation  to  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain:

          ""Lawful Residence" means residence which is continuous  residence
pursuant to:

          i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

              ii) temporary admission within section 11  of  the  1971  Act
                  where leave to enter of remain is subsequently granted."

    The reference to temporary admission has been the subject of  amendment
    following the coming into force of the Immigration Act 2016,  but  that
    has no impact on the present discussion.

 9. Faced with the alternative arguments that the requirement  in  relation
    to article 8 should be interpreted by analogy with  that  in  paragraph
    276A on the one hand, and that (as submitted by the Secretary of State)
    lawful residence could begin only when there was a grant of leave,  the
    Senior President preferred the former argument.  It thus  follows  that
    the definition in paragraph 276A  is  to  apply,  by  analogy,  to  the
    calculation in the present case.

10. The records are not complete, and Mrs O'Brien was not  able  to  supply
    exact details, but  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  likely  that  the
    appellant was granted temporary admission when  he  arrived,  and  that
    that temporary admission continued until his grant of indefinite  leave
    to remain.  He committed his offence in 2015, aged about 23,  of  which
    all but 9 years had been spent in the United Kingdom.  It would  appear
    to follow that he is to be treated as having been lawfully resident  in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life.

11. There is, however, a tension which was not explored  in  SC  (Jamaica).
    That case was, of course, a deportation case; otherwise paragraph  399A
    would not have been in issue.  The facts are set out in paragraphs  [2]
    - [8] of the Senior President's judgment.  There is no reference  there
    to the deportation order actually being made.  That is  potentially  of
    some importance, because Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    provides in part as follows:-

          "A deportation order against a person shall invalidate  any  leave
          to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  given  him  before  the
          order is made or while it is in force".

12. The latter half of that provision, equating the effect  on  a  previous
    grant of leave  to  a  grant  made  (presumably  accidentally)  when  a
    deportation order is actually in force, shows that  "invalidates"  must
    mean what it says: that the leave is to be regarded as a nullity.  But,
    if that is right, it would follow that in a case  where  a  deportation
    order had been made, a definition such as that in paragraph 276A  could
    not assist an appellant,  because  the  grant  of  leave,  which  would
    retrospectively have validated (so to speak) the  period  of  temporary
    admission, was itself retrospectively invalid.

13. However, it appears to us that the decision in SC  (Jamaica)  which  is
    certainly binding in England and Wales, and of the highest authority in
    Scotland in relation to cases where the appeal is against a deportation
    decision, must be taken equally to apply when a deportation  order  has
    been made.  At the time of the enactment of the 1971 Act, and for  many
    years afterwards, an appeal against a deportation decision was normally
    determined in advance of the deportation order being made.   But  under
    the 2007 Act, the order is often (though not always) made at  the  time
    of the decision.  The Senior President, no doubt, had these  points  in
    mind (he cites the 1971 Act) and we regard it as inconceivable that  he
    thought that the determination of this issue, which is essentially  one
    of the nature of the appellant's integration into the  United  Kingdom,
    should depend on the apparently random fact of  whether  a  deportation
    order happens to have been signed before the appeal is brought.

14. We note the provisions of Sections 78 and 79 of the  2002  Act.   Those
    provisions attempt to work through the question whether  a  deportation
    order can be made during the currency of an appeal, and,  if  so,  with
    what effect.  If an appellant has an  in-country  right  of  appeal,  a
    deportation order cannot be made against him while an appeal  could  be
    brought or is pending.  That rule does not apply to deportation  orders
    made under the 2007 Act, but Section 79(4) specifically  provides  that
    in those circumstances, the invalidation provisions of Section 5 of the
    1971 Act do not have effect until any appeal has ceased to be  pending.
    These provisions show that the draftsman had in mind, for the  purposes
    of the calculation of leave, the difficulties posed by the  date  of  a
    deportation order.  They do not, however, in our judgment have any real
    impact on the rationale  of  the  Senior  President's  decision  in  SC
    (Jamaica), which was that a person who has had a  period  of  temporary
    admission which is followed by a grant of leave is to be regarded,  and
    specifically, is to be regarded in the context of the assessment of the
    legality of a deportation decision under paragraph 399A,  as  a  person
    who during the period of temporary admission and during the  period  of
    leave has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom.  We  thus  hold
    that, for the purposes of applying to paragraph 399A and Section 117C a
    definition of "lawful residence" analogous to that in  paragraph  276A,
    in accordance with SC (Jamaica), the invalidation provisions of Section
    5(1) of the 1971 Act are to be ignored.  It follows that the  appellant
    succeeds on this ground: he should have been regarded as a  person  who
    had been lawfully in the United Kingdom for most of his life.

15. The second issue is whether he is "socially and  culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom".  As we have  said,  the  judge  decided  this
    point against the appellant because of his offence, which, when coupled
    with the  assessment  that  he  continued  to  pose  a  danger  to  the
    community, she decided  demonstrated  his  lack  of  integration.   Mrs
    O'Brien conceded that the judge was wrong about that, and we think  she
    was right to do so.  Bearing in mind again that these factors are being
    taken into account always in the context of the deportation of a person
    who has committed an offence, it is inconceivable that  it  could  have
    been intended that, in any general sense, the commission of an  offence
    would demonstrate a lack of integration.  The appellant has  been  here
    since he was a child, he has been educated here,  he  has  friends  and
    relatives here, he has lived on his own in Glasgow after his  relatives
    moved to London.  We have little hesitation in concluding  that  he  is
    socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.

16. The third question is whether there would be very significant obstacles
    to his integration in Somalia.  The grounds of appeal note, as we  have
    noted above, that in reaching her conclusion on that issue,  the  judge
    took account of the findings of fact that she had made in  relation  to
    article 3.  As the grounds point out, the question of whether a  person
    is at risk of ill treatment is different from the question  whether  he
    will be able to integrate into  the  community  abroad.   That  is,  of
    course, true: but it does not follow that facts and  assessments  which
    are relevant to one issue are not relevant to the other.   As  we  have
    said,  the  judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of  the
    difficulties he would face in relation to his claim under article 3: it
    was equally his task to establish  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Somalia.  As the  judge  found,  he  is
    educated to a considerable level, and he has work experience.  There is
    no suggestion that he cannot easily make friends.  There is  no  reason
    why, initially at least, he should not be supported  by  his  relatives
    outside Somalia; and there are some, admittedly more distant, relatives
    in Somalia.  Further, as the judge found,  he  was,  in  his  evidence,
    trying to minimise his connections with Somalia.

17.  In  his  submissions  before  us,  Mr  Melville  suggested  that   the
    appellant's good United Kingdom education would not be an advantage  to
    him in Somalia, simply because of the difference between  Scottish  and
    Somali educational standards.  We are unable to accept  that  argument,
    which verges on the bizarre.  The appellant's education will stand  him
    in exceptionally good stead on his return.  On his own account, he  has
    no nuclear family in Somalia, and it is of course fair to say  that  he
    has no real life experience of being there, but in the context of  this
    case,  and  with  the   appellant's   own   experience   and   personal
    characteristics, we are wholly unable to accept that the judge was  not
    entitled to find, as she did, that the appellant  had  not  established
    that there would be serious obstacles to  his  integrating  himself  in
    Somalia.

18. In order for the exception in paragraph 399A or Section 117C to  apply,
    the appellant would need to  establish  all  three  elements.   In  our
    judgement he fulfilled the requirements of the first two,  but  not  of
    the third.  The exception therefore does not apply to him.  Further, as
    the  judge  noted,  the  public  interest  continues  to   demand   the
    appellant's deportation, not merely because he is a  convicted  foreign
    criminal, but also because, in the only assessment which is being  made
    of him, he continues to pose  a  risk  to  the  public  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

19. For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that despite the judge's errors,
    her decision dismissing the appeal was not merely the appropriate  one,
    but which flows from  those  parts  of  her  determination  which  were
    without error.  We therefore decline to set  her  determination  aside.
    The appellant's appeal stands as dismissed.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 30 April 2018.

