
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Banger (EEA: EFM - Right of Appeal) [2019] UKUT 00194(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision promulgated on:      |
|20th March 2019                               |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               ROZANNE BANGER
                                                                  Respondent



Representation

For the Appellant:         Mr Eric Metcalfe, Counsel instructed by the
             Treasury Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A Metzer QC and Ms S Saifolahi Counsel acting  pro
             bono


The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016  Regs')
specifically  excluded  a  right  of  appeal  for  Extended  Family  Members
('EFMs').  The 2016 Regs have  been  amended  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area Nationals) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019,  with  effect
from 29th March 2019, so as to provide EFMs with a  right  of  appeal.  This
does not have retrospective effect.

It is open to those EFMs against whom a decision was  made  under  the  2016
Regs but before 29 March 2019 to request a new decision from  the  Secretary
of State in order to generate a right of appeal.

Alternatively the EFM may invoke the doctrine of direct effect under EU  law
in relation to a decision which falls  into  the  lacuna  between  the  2006
regulations and the amended 2016 regulations, and apply  under  rule  20  of
the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (IAC)  Rules  2014  for  an
extension of time to provide a notice of appeal to that Tribunal.



                                  DECISION

While the application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary of
State, we shall refer to the parties as they were described before the
First-Tier Tribunal.


The full background to this appeal is set out in the reported decision
Banger (Unmarried Partner of British National) [2017] UKUT 00125(IAC) and
will not be repeated here save for context.


The history

The essential facts were not in dispute.  Simply put, the appellant, a
South African national, appealed against the refusal of a residence card
under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  Her
partner, Mr Rado, is a British national with whom she formerly resided in
South Africa, from January 2008.  In May 2010, both migrated to The
Netherlands, where her partner worked.  They lived together in The
Netherlands for five years and the Appellant was granted a Dutch residence
card in her capacity of an extended family member (EFM) of an EU citizen.
Three years later the Appellant and her partner decided to move together to
the United Kingdom.  Prior to moving, the Appellant applied to the
Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State") for a
residence card.  On 26 September 2013, that application was refused in the
following terms:

         "Your application has been  considered  under  regulation  9  which
         states that to qualify as the family member of  a  British  citizen
         you must show that you are either the spouse or  civil  partner  of
         the British citizen.  An unmarried partner is not recognised as the
         family member of a British Citizen.  You do not  have  a  basis  of
         stay in the United Kingdom under the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006."

 1. The Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT"),  which
    allowed her appeal.  The Secretary of State was granted  permission  to
    appeal. The grant of permission to appeal is couched in  the  following
    terms:


         The Secretary of State for the Home Department  contends  that,  in
         holding that the  Surinder  Singh  principles  apply  to  unmarried
         partners, the Judge erred in law.  The Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department further contends that, in relying on an  unreported
         decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Cain  .......  Appeal   Number
         IA/40868/2013), which  apparently  held  that  the  Surinder  Singh
         principle did apply to persons  in  a  durable  relationship),  the
         Judge erred in law."


 2. The key question of law raised was whether the Appellant, being the non-
    EU partner of a British citizen/EEA national who had exercised  his  EU
    Treaty rights in another EU state but who  was  now  returning  to  his
    member State of origin, enjoyed the benefit  of  the  'Surinder  Singh'
    principle, whereby the spouse of such an EU  national  is  entitled  to
    enter and reside in that national's State of origin.  The Secretary  of
    State submitted that the Surinder Singh  principle  did  not  apply  to
    unmarried partners or extended family members of EU  citizens  but  was
    confined to spouses.

 3. In 2017 the Upper Tribunal stayed  the  proceedings  and  referred  the
    following questions to the CJEU for a preliminary ruling under  Article
    267 TFEU :


    (1)    Do the principles  contained  in  the  decision  in  Immigration
         Appeal Tribunal and Surinder Singh, ex parte Secretary of State for
         the Home Department (Case C-370/90) [1992] operate so as to require
         a Member State to issue or, alternatively, facilitate the provision
         of a residence authorisation to the non-Union unmarried partner  of
         a EU citizen who, having exercised his Treaty right of  freedom  of
         movement to work in  a  second  Member  State,  returns  with  such
         partner to the Member State of his nationality?

    (2)     Alternatively,  is   there   a   requirement   to   issue   or,
         alternatively,  facilitate  the   provision   of   such   residence
         authorisation  by  virtue  of  European  Parliament   and   Council
         Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of  citizens  of  the  Union  and
         their family members to move and reside freely within the territory
         of the Member States ("the Directive")?

    (3)    Where a decision to refuse  a  residence  authorisation  is  not
         founded on an extensive examination of the  personal  circumstances
         of the Applicant and is not justified  by  adequate  or  sufficient
         reasons is such decision unlawful as being  in  breach  of  Article
         3(2) of the Citizens Directive?

    (4)    Is a rule of national law which precludes an appeal to  a  court
         or tribunal against a decision of the executive refusing to issue a
         residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family member
         compatible with the Directive?

 4. On 12th July 2018 the CJEU gave a ruling on the interpretation  of  the
    Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of citizens of the  Union  and  their
    family members to move and reside freely within the  territory  of  the
    Member States: Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Banger
    (Citizenship of the European Union - Right of Union  citizens  to  move
    and reside  freely  within  the  territory  of  the  European  Union  -
    Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 (12 July 2018).


    First and Second Questions

 5. The first and second questions were answered by the CJEU at  paragraphs
    18 to 35 of the judgment.

 6. It was observed that the Directive could not confer a derived right  of
    residence on third country nationals who were  family  members  in  the
    Member  State  of  which  that  citizen  was  a  national.   The  Court
    acknowledged, however, in certain cases,  third  country  nationals  as
    family members of a Union citizen, who were not eligible on  the  basis
    of the Directive for a derived right of residence,  could  be  accorded
    such a right on the basis of Article 21(1) of the TFEU (see  Coman  and
    others [2018] EUECJ C-673/16 (5 June 2018)).   If  no  such  right  was
    granted, a Union citizen would be discouraged from leaving  the  Member
    State of which he was a national to exercise his right of residence  in
    another Member State.

 7. Ms Banger, as a partner in a durable relationship and not a  spouse  or
    civil partner, was not considered to be a 'family member' as defined by
    Article 2(2) of the  Directive.   However,  Article  3(2)  (b)  of  the
    Directive related to partners in a durable  relationship  and  although
    Article 3(2) of the Directive did not  require  the  Member  States  to
    accord a right of entry and residence to third  country  nationals  who
    were partners in  a  durable  relationship  (in  contrast  with  family
    members), it nevertheless imposed an obligation on those Member  States
    to confer certain advantages on applications submitted by  those  third
    country nationals.

 8. In conclusion at paragraphs 33- 35 the CJEU stated:-


      '33      In  a  situation  such  as  that  in  question  in  the  main
      proceedings, Directive 2004/38,  including  point  (b)  of  the  first
      subparagraph of Article 3(2) thereof, must be applied  by  analogy  as
      regards the conditions in which the  entry  and  residence  of  third-
      country nationals envisaged by that directive must be facilitated.
      34      That conclusion cannot be called in question  by  the  United
      Kingdom Government's argument according to which, in paragraph 63  of
      the judgment of 12 March 2014, O. and B. (C-456/12, EU:C:2014:135),
      the grant of a derived right of  residence  in  the  Member  State  of
      origin was confined  solely  to  third-country  nationals  who  are  a
      'family member' as defined in Article 2(2) of Directive  2004/38.  As
      the Advocate General observed in point 35 of his Opinion, although in
      that judgment the Court held that a third-country  national  who  does
      not have the status of a family member may  not  enjoy,  in  the  host
      Member State, a derived right of residence under Directive 2004/38  or
      Article 21(1) TFEU, that judgment  does  not,  however,  exclude  the
      obligation for that Member State to facilitate the entry and residence
      of such a national in accordance with Article 3(2) of that directive.
35     In the light of the  foregoing  considerations,  the  answer  to  the
first and second questions is that Article 21(1) TFEU must  be  interpreted
as requiring the Member State of which a Union  citizen  is  a  national  to
facilitate the provision of a residence authorisation  to  the  unregistered
partner, a third-country  national  with  whom  that  Union  citizen  has  a
durable relationship that is duly attested, where the Union citizen,  having
exercised his right of freedom of  movement  to  work  in  a  second  Member
State, in accordance with the conditions laid  down  in  Directive  2004/38,
returns with his partner to the Member State of which he is  a  national  in
order to reside there.







    Third Question


 9. The CJEU concluded that Member States should ensure  that  those  third
    country nationals who were unregistered partners of Union citizens, who
    had exercised the right of freedom of movement  to  work  in  a  second
    Member State in accordance with the Directive, should be able to obtain
    a decision with reasons founded on an extensive  examination  of  their
    personal circumstances.  States had a wide discretion as to the factors
    to be taken into account, but they should ensure  that  their  national
    legislation contained criteria which were consistent  with  the  normal
    meaning of  the  term  'facilitate'  and  which  did  not  deprive  the
    provision of its effectiveness.


    The fourth question

10. The Court considered whether persons governed by  Article  3(2),  which
    includes extended family members, required a redress procedure  whereby
    matters of both fact and law may be reviewed by the national  court  or
    tribunal.  It noted that a differently constituted Upper  Tribunal  had
    found that there was no right of appeal under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The Court found, however, that  Member
    States must make it possible for those to whom Article 3(2) applied, to
    obtain a decision on their application that was founded on an extensive
    examination of their personal circumstances and in the event of refusal
    was justified by reasons.  Further to the Directive and Article  47  of
    the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU, there must be an effective
    judicial remedy against a decision 'permitting a review of the legality
    of that decision as regards matters of both fact and law in  the  light
    of EU law' (Gaydarov [2011] EUECJ C-430/10 (17 November 2011)).


11. At [52] the Court held

    'In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the fourth
    question is that Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted
    as meaning that the third-country nationals envisaged in that provision
    must have available to them a redress procedure in order to challenge a
    decision to  refuse  a  residence  authorisation  taken  against  them,
    following which the national court must be able  to  ascertain  whether
    the refusal decision is based on a sufficiently solid factual basis and
    whether the procedural safeguards were complied with. Those  safeguards
    include the  obligation  for  the  competent  national  authorities  to
    undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the   applicant's   personal
    circumstances and to justify any denial of entry or residence'.

The Resumed Hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 20th March 2019


12. The parties were directed to make written submissions for  the  resumed
    hearing.


13. On 11th March 2019, the Secretary of State confirmed that on 8th  March
    2019 he had written to the appellant's legal  representatives  advising
    that she would be issued with a residence card and on  that  basis  the
    Secretary  of  State  invited  the  appellant  to  agree  to   'summary
    disposal'.  The Government Legal Department wrote  to  the  appellant's
    representatives in the following terms.


    'After careful consideration, the  SSHD  can  confirm  that  they  will
    arrange to issue your client with a  residence  card  on  the  accepted
    facts of her case.


    Although  the  SSHD  has  not  yet  finalised  the  finer  details   of
    implementing [of] the judgement of the CJEU, he can confirm that it was
    indicated in his  detailed  grounds  of  defence  in  the  lead  cases,
    regarding the appeal rights issues of Extended Family Members  who  are
    refused  residence  cards,  Prendi   (CO/2339/2018)   and   Ul   Hassan
    (CO/1000/2018),  that  the  SSHD  intends  to  lay  before   Parliament
    legislation  amending  the  2016  regulations  as  soon  as  reasonably
    practicable, in order to reintroduce appeal rights for extended  family
    members. The reintroduction of appeal rights is of  course  subject  to
    Parliamentary approval.  Since  your  client  will  be  issued  with  a
    residence card no issue can arise in this case as to the lawfulness  of
    the appeal provisions in the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

    For the above reasons, the SSHD considers that  in  the  circumstances,
    the most appropriate course of action is for the matter to be summarily
    disposed of by consent and the hearing listed in March 2019 vacated'.




14. The position statement of the Secretary of State referred to  paragraph
    52 of the CJEU judgement in Banger and advanced that the appeal was now
    academic and the fourth question regarding any right of appeal  to  the
    Tribunal was 'no longer relevant in the present case'.


15. The statement went on to say that the instant proceedings were governed
    by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, which  as
    the Supreme Court had now established in SM (Algeria)  [2018]  UKSC  9,
    did provide a right of appeal in cases of  this  nature.   The  Supreme
    Court had effectively overruled Sala (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]
    UKUT 00411 (IAC), which had previously found  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal for extended family members. As the appellant  would  be  issued
    with a residence card, the Secretary of State contended that  no  issue
    could arise in this case as to the lawfulness of the appeal  provisions
    in the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

16. Although the Secretary of State had  yet  to  finalise  completely  the
    implementation of the  CJEU's  decision,  he  intended  to  lay  before
    Parliament legislation amending the 2016 EEA  Regulations  as  soon  as
    practicable in order to  reintroduce  appeal  rights  for  EFMs.   That
    reintroduction was of course subject to Parliamentary approval.

17. The appellant's representatives responded in writing to  this  overture
    by the Secretary of State and objected  to  summary  disposal.  It  was
    submitted that there was no timeframe for issuing  the  residence  card
    and that the appeal was not merely academic.   The  (European  Economic
    Nationals) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 had been laid  before  Parliament
    on 7th March 2019 and by provision 3 amended the 2016  EEA  Regulations
    by 'reinstating the right of appeal for EFMs and extending Regulation 9
    to  Extended  Family  Members  of  British  Nationals'.   Those   draft
    Regulations were attached.

18. The appellant's representatives pointed out that further to rule 39  of
    The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  the   parties
    (obviously) must consent to any  consent  order  and  this  aspect  was
    ultimately subject to the jurisdiction  of  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    chronology of this case was characterised by delay  and  the  appellant
    was refused a residence card  as  long  ago  as  26th  September  2013.
    Following and appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal was finally
    heard by the Upper Tribunal on 13th April 2016.  On  19th  August  2016
    Sala was promulgated and a reference in these proceedings was  made  to
    the CJEU on 20th January 2017.  In November 2017, Khan  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755 had overturned Sala.

19. The appellant's representatives argued that the CJEU delivered judgment
    (as above) in these proceedings on 12th July 2018.  The Upper  Tribunal
    issued Case Management Review Hearing Directions on 19th September 2018
    and 28th February 2019, but not until 11th March 2019 was the Secretary
    of State's position statement filed and served.  The Secretary of State
    did not update the appellant for nearly 8  months  and  only  post  the
    laying of the legislative amendments.  This delay and  discourtesy  had
    caused the appellant and her partner considerable  distress.   She  had
    not been advised that the CJEU judgment was  to  be  acted  upon.   The
    amendments to the legislative framework would come into force  on  28th
    March  2019  and  were  a  direct  result  of  the  CJEU  judgment.   A
    significant number of cases had been stayed behind  this  instant  case
    and this was a  reported  case  of  considerable  public  interest  and
    importance.  The Secretary of State's approach from  the  time  of  the
    CJEU judgment to date had substantially contributed to delay, cost  and
    uncertainty to the appellant.  The Tribunal was invited  to  allow  the
    appeal on all grounds with full reasons and there should be no  summary
    disposal.


20. The hearing was not vacated, and oral submissions were  made.   At  the
    hearing we drew the attention of  the  parties  to  SM  (withdrawal  of
    appealed decision: effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00064 (IAC), the italic
    summary of which reads as follows:

           '(1) Rule 17 (withdrawal) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 does not enable the Upper Tribunal to
           withhold consent to the withdrawal by the Secretary of State of
           the decision against which a person appealed to the First-tier
           Tribunal.

           (2) Where such a decision is withdrawn in appellate proceedings
           before the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal,
           that Tribunal continues to have jurisdiction under the
           Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to decide whether the
           determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for
           error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision in the appeal,
           notwithstanding the withdrawal of the appealed decision. Such a
           withdrawal is not, without more, one of the ways in which an
           appeal under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and
           Asylum Act 2002 ceases to be pending.

           (3) When re-remaking a decision in a 2002 Act appeal where the
           decision against which a person appealed has been withdrawn by
           the Secretary of State, the Upper Tribunal will need to decide
           whether:-

           (i) to proceed formally to dismiss (or, in certain
           circumstances, allow) the appeal; or

           (ii) to determine the appeal substantively, including (where
           appropriate) making a direction under section 87 of the 2002
           Act.

           (4) In deciding between (i) and (ii) above, the Upper Tribunal
           will apply the overriding objective in rule 2 of the 2008 Rules,
           having regard to all relevant matters, including:-

           (a) the principle that the Secretary of State should,
           ordinarily, be the primary decision-maker in the immigration
           field;

           (b) whether the matters potentially in issue are such as to
           require the Tribunal to give general legal or procedural
           guidance, including country guidance;

           (c) the reasons underlying the Secretary of State's withdrawal
           of the appealed decision;

           (d) the appeal history, including the timing of the withdrawal;
           and

           (e) the views of the parties'.


21. In effect, the actions of the Secretary of  State  had  superseded  his
    decision to refuse to issue the card but following the reasoning in SM,
    the Tribunal retained jurisdiction.  We observed that the present  case
    thus appeared to  be  'on  all  fours'  with  SM,  although  Mr  Metzer
    attempted to persuade us that the Secretary of State had not  attempted
    to withdraw in a timely manner.


22. Mr Metzer argued that the Secretary  of  State  had  already  (the  day
    before) laid  the  Regulations  by  the  date  of  the  letter  to  the
    appellant, and yet that letter failed to mention this fact.  There  had
    been silence from the Secretary of State towards the appellant from the
    date of the CJEU judgment  until  8th   March  2019.    The  overriding
    objective of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  now
    required a full reasoned judgment from the Tribunal.  Summary  disposal
    was inadequate. The delay by the Secretary of State was inexcusable and
    there was no need to have  waited  8  months  to  amend   the  national
    legislation, following the CJEU judgment.  The Secretary of  State  had
    implicitly conceded the appeal. There was no reason  why  the  amending
    Regulations should only apply from 28th March 2019 and they should have
    retrospective effect. Post Khan, extended family members ('EFMs') had a
    right of appeal, but this related only to the 2006 EEA Regulations  and
    not to the 2016 EEA Regulations.   This  would  have  implications  for
    statutory appeals and judicial review.  Mr Metzer made clear that there
    was no application for costs on the part of the  appellant.    We  were
    also asked to rule  on  procedure  where  the  decision  had  not  been
    classically  withdrawn.   The  appellant  wanted  a   fully-   reasoned
    decision.

23. Mr Metcalfe argued that the retrospective effect of the new Regulations
    was not an issue for  the  appellant,  whose  appeal,  under  the  2006
    Regulations, was not in question.  Regulations such as  the  ones  just
    laid did not need to be retrospective, as the judgment of the CJEU  had
    direct effect.  It was open to an appellant to rely on  that  judgment.
    Mr Metcalfe apologised for the delay in updating the appellant, but the
    Secretary of State was attempting to resolve matters. Nothing was to be
    drawn from the wording in the letter from the GLD that the Secretary of
    State 'intends' to lay Regulations;  merely  that  the  GLD  not  fully
    apprised  of  the  precise  position  regarding  the  laying   of   the
    Regulations. There was  no  manipulation  of  events.  The  prospective
    Regulations addressed various matters in the same legislative  vehicle.
    There was no right of the appellant to be consulted on the drafting  of
    those Regulations.  The CJEU's decision was binding on all  courts  and
    tribunals and there was no lingering  interest  in  the  disposal  from
    other courts such as the Supreme Court. The CJEU spoke for  itself  and
    the ruling was clear and binding. The Secretary of State had  now  laid
    Regulations.   There was no dispute between the parties.  The appellant
    had or was about to receive a residence card.  The delay point did  not
    necessitate a reasoned decision.   If, however, the Tribunal was minded
    to produce such a decision,  there  would  be  no  objection  from  the
    Secretary of State.  There was no matter of law outstanding.


    Discussion


24. The Tribunal cannot dispose of the appeal of by way  of  consent  under
    rule 39 as the appellant did not consent to that method of disposal.

25. We agree that the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  26th
    September 2013, the target  of  the  statutory  appeal,  had  not  been
    formally  withdrawn  but  has  been  effectively  superseded   by   the
    acknowledgment of the findings  of  the  CJEU  and  the  issue  of  the
    residence card.  Further to  SM,  however,  we  consider  the  Tribunal
    retains  jurisdiction  to  decide  the  appeal,   notwithstanding   the
    Secretary of State's actions.

26. Bearing in mind the overriding objective and having regard to the  long
    duration of the present proceedings not least through the reference  to
    the CJEU, we did not consider that a summary disposal was  appropriate.
    As we have noted,  Mr Metcalfe did not object to  a  reasoned  judgment
    being given and, in the circumstances,  we consider it  is  appropriate
    to issue a full judgment.  There has been a considerable lapse of  time
    since the initial decision in 2013 and we appreciate that the appellant
    has experienced ongoing uncertainty in connection with her  immigration
    status.  We were advised that she was  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse under the Immigration Rules in November 2016, but this  was  for
    limited leave to remain  only  and  is  due  to  expire  shortly.    We
    understand the appellant has been assured in writing by  the  Secretary
    of State that she will be granted a residence card imminently.

27. The application for permission to appeal was granted to  the  Secretary
    of State on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in
    law and misdirected itself by extending the Surinder Singh principle to
    unmarried partners.  It was argued  that  Surinder  Singh  referred  to
    spouses only. The Upper Tribunal  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on 8th January 2016 and on rehearing  stayed  the  appeal  and
    referred the matter to the CJEU.   On 12th July  2018  the  CJEU  ruled
    unequivocally  that  the  Surinder  Singh  principle  does  extend   to
    unmarried partners in a durable relationship as  envisaged  by  Article
    3(2) (b) of the Directive.


28. The appellant was entitled to an appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations.
     Although the question was placed in doubt by Sala, Khan v SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755 held that Sala was wrongly decided and  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (IAC) had jurisdiction to hear an appeal from  a  refusal
    by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  to  exercise  her
    discretion to grant a residence card to a  person  claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member.  Khan was decided in relation to the  2006  EEA
    Regulations only, but prior to the  CJEU's  judgment  in  Banger.   The
    Supreme Court in SM (Algeria)(Appellant)  V  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    United Kingdom Visa Section [2018] UKSC 9, specifically approved Khan.


29. In view of that judgment and the new Regulations,  Mr  Metcalfe  argued
    that there was no legal issue between the  parties.    The  Immigration
    (European Area Nationals) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 came into force on
    28th March 2019.  Those Regulations amend  the  definition  of  an  EEA
    decision in order to include  decisions  refusing  to  issue  documents
    under Regulations 12(4), (EEA family permit to extended family member),
    17(5) (registration certificate for extended family member)  and  18(4)
    (residence card for extended family member).

30. At present Regulation 9 reads as follows:-

    9.- (1) If the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
    Regulations apply to a person who is  the  family  member  ("F")  of  a
    British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national


31. Regulation 9 of 2016 Regulations is amended to include a  reference  to
    extended family members with the addition of this new paragraph:

    '(1A) These Regulations apply to a person who is  the  extended  family
    member ("EFM") of a BC as though the BC were an EEA national if -


    a) The conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied; and
    b) The EFM was lawfully resident  in  the  EEA  State  referred  to  in
       paragraph (2)(a)(i)."

32. In addition, regulation 36 of the 2016  Regulations,  entitled  'Appeal
    Rights' now includes a reference at regulation 36(6)  to  EFMs.   These
    amended provisions overall reflect the judgment of the CJEU and grant a
    right of appeal to  EFMs  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  relevant
    refusal decisions (see above).


33. The question remains as to the position of  those  EFMs  for  whom  the
    decision and thus  right  of  appeal,  neither  falls  under  the  2006
    Regulations  nor  under  the  amended  provisions.     The   2016   EEA
    Regulations specifically excluded a right of appeal for  EFMs  and  the
    EEA (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 amend that legislation but, as  we  have
    seen, not retrospectively.

34. Accordingly, this new  right  of  appeal  does  not  affect  those  who
    received a decision from the Secretary of State  which  post-dated  the
    2006 Regulations or was not caught by the  transitional  provisions  of
    the 2016 Regulations and predates the introduction of the new right  of
    appeal.


35. We consider that it is open to those  so  affected  to  request  a  new
    decision from the Secretary of State which would generate a  new  right
    of appeal following 29th March 2019.

36. Nonetheless, Mr Metcalfe confirmed that  the  CJEU  ruling  has  direct
    effect and we observe that  this  direct  effect  must  extend  to  the
    finding in the CJEU judgment in relation to appeals which in conclusion
    was as follows:-

    'Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted as meaning that
    the third-country nationals  envisaged  in  that  provision  must  have
    available to them a redress procedure in order to challenge a  decision
    to refuse a residence authorisation taken against them, following which
    the national court must  be  able  to  ascertain  whether  the  refusal
    decision is based on a sufficiently solid factual basis and whether the
    procedural safeguards were complied with. Those safeguards include  the
    obligation for the  competent  national  authorities  to  undertake  an
    extensive examination of the applicant's personal circumstances and  to
    justify any denial of entry or residence'.

37. There are two points which indicate  from  the  judgment  that  a  full
    merits appeal and thus a statutory  appeal  is  required.   First,  the
    judgment refers to a redress procedure which must  be  able  to  decide
    whether the refusal  decision  was  founded  on  a  sufficiently  solid
    factual basis.  The nature of that redress procedure  is  more  aligned
    with the process in a statutory appeal than judicial review.  Secondly,
    the Secretary of State has effectively recognised this  aspect  of  the
    judgment by  producing  legislation  in  express  recognition  of  that
    ruling, which offers a statutory appeal.


38. The doctrine of  direct  effect  means  that  where  an  obligation  is
    sufficiently clear, precise, and unconditional it is capable of  direct
    enforcement under the 'vertical direct  effect'  concept.   Individuals
    who have free movement rights or who otherwise are able  to  invoke  EU
    law, such as EFMs, which the UK has failed to implement in its domestic
    legislation, may invoke the doctrine.

39. As set out in Dieter Kraus v Land  Baden-W�rttemberg  [1993]  EUECJ  C-
    19/92 and with respect to Articles 48 and 52 of the EEC Treaty (as they
    then were).


    '31. Furthermore,  Member  States  are  required,  in  conformity  with
    Article 5 of the Treaty [now article 5 CFEU], to take  all  appropriate
    measures, whether general or particular, to ensure  fulfilment  of  the
    obligations arising out of the Treaty and to abstain from any  measures
    which could jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty.


40. It is open to those who received a decision  which  falls  between  the
    2006 Regulations and the introduction of the new right  of  appeal,  to
    apply under rule 20 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 for an extension of time to
    provide a notice of appeal to that Tribunal. It would be  open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider whether to extend  time  to  facilitate
    those appeals by applying the overriding objective under rule 2 of  the
    2014 Rules, which charges the Tribunal 'to deal with cases  fairly  and
    justly'.

41. Turning to the instant appeal, we find that  it  has  been  established
    that the Surinder  Singh  principle  operates  so  as  to  require  the
    Secretary  of  State  to  facilitate  the  provision  of  a   residence
    authorisation to the non-Union unmarried partner of an EU citizen.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was under appeal was in  fact
    set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 8th  January  2016.   Owing  to  the
    judgment given by the CJEU and the reasoning given  above,  we  re-make
    the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.




Decision

Appeal allowed.



Signed                 Helen Rimington.

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
