
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Rehman (EEA Regulations 2016 - specified evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated on       |
|07 February 2019                              |..............................|
|                                              |.....                         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                               ASAD UR REHMAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr S. Mustafa, instructed by Prime Law
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

The principles outlined in Barnett and Others (EEA Regulations;  rights  and
documentation) [2012] UKUT 00142 are equally applicable to  The  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. Section 1 of Schedule 1 to  these
regulations provides that the sole ground of appeal  is  that  the  decision
breaches the appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in  respect  of  entry
to  or  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  provisions  contained  in
regulations 21 and 42 must be interpreted in the  light  of  European  Union
law. In  some  cases,  this  might  involve  ignoring  the  requirement  for
specified evidence altogether if a document  is  not  in  fact  required  to
establish a right of residence.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This decision considers whether the Secretary of State can  refuse  an
      application for a  residence  card  under  The  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations  2016")  on  the
      sole ground that specified  evidence  relating  to  the  EEA  national
      sponsor  was  not  provided  in  accordance  with  regulation  21  and
      regulation 42.

2.    The appellant is a Pakistani national who was issued with a  residence
      card as the spouse (family member) of an  EEA  national  on  12  March
      2014. On 16 October 2017 he applied for a residence card to  recognise
      a right of residence as a family member who has retained  a  right  of
      residence following divorce.

3.    The  respondent  refused  the  application  in  a  decision  dated  13
      February 2018 in the following terms:

           "Your application has been assessed and it has been  noted  that
           you have failed to provide a valid passport or identity card  as
           evidence of your sponsor's identity and nationality.


           While it is accepted that you are divorced  from  your  sponsor,
           you have failed to provide any evidence that you have in any way
           attempted  to  obtain  the  ID  document   required   for   this
           application. As such, this department  is  unable  to  establish
           that you have exhausted all routes to demonstrate that you  have
           are (sic) a former family member of  an  EEA  national  who  has
           retained the right of residence in the UK.


           Furthermore it is noted that although your divorce was finalised
           on 19 June 2017, you have provided this department with evidence
           of employment and residence in the name of your sponsor from  05
           April 2014 to 24 June 2017; with this therefore showing us as  a
           department that you had contact with  your  sponsor  after  your
           divorce, and that your sponsor is therefore more than willing to
           co-operate with your application.


           Without sight of a valid passport or ID card  for  your  sponsor
           this department cannot accept that you  are  the  former  family
           member of an EEA national as claimed and therefore that you have
           any right to rely on the provisions of the EEA Regulations."

4.    The appellant appealed the decision. He asked the First-tier  Tribunal
      to determine the appeal on the papers. His grounds  of  appeal  argued
      that regulation 18 of the EEA Regulations 2016 did not require him  to
      produce the passport of his former spouse.

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  G.A.  Black  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision promulgated on 18 June 2018. The judge concluded:

           "7.   There was no issue taken with any of the provisions  under
                 Regulation 10(5) EEA Regs. The appellant argued that he had
                 provided  the  respondent  with  the  required  documentary
                 identity evidence at the time his residence card was issued
                 in 2014. The appellant has not provided any explanation  or
                 documentation of any attempts that he has made  to  contact
                 his former wife in order to get the necessary  passport  or
                 identity card of the EEA national. Regulation 18 requires a
                 valid passport to be produced.  The  respondent's  guidance
                 states that the decision maker must be satisfied  that  the
                 applicant cannot get the evidence themselves  and  at  that
                 stage the respondent will make their own enquiries.


           8.    The appellant has failed to provide any explanation as  to
                 why he is unable to produce the passport or valid  identity
                 card of his ex spouse. It is not sufficient to simply  rely
                 on  the  divorce  itself  as  a  reason  why  the  identity
                 documentation cannot be produced.  The  appellant  has  not
                 stated whether or not he has made attempts to  contact  her
                 at home or  work,  and  whether  there  was  any  animosity
                 between them and if he has made contact with  her  what  is
                 her reason for not wishing to produce the documentation."

6.    The appellant appeals the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the  ground
      that he was not required to  produce  a  valid  passport  or  identity
      document of his former spouse in order to establish a  retained  right
      of residence under European law.

Legal Framework

The Citizens Directive

7.    Article 3 of the Citizens Directive (2004/58/EC)  recognises  a  right
      of residence as the family member of an EEA national who is exercising
      rights of free movement under European law.

8.    Article 13 of the Directive sets out  the  circumstances  in  which  a
      family member retains a right  of  residence  following  divorce.  The
      provisions are transposed into UK law in  regulation  10  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016.

9.    Article 14 also deals with retained rights of residence.

           1.    Union citizens and their family  members  shall  have  the
                 right of residence provided for in Article 6,  as  long  as
                 they do not become an unreasonable  burden  on  the  social
                 assistance system of the host Member State.

           2.    Union citizens and their family  members  shall  have  the
                 right of residence provided for in Articles 7, 12 and 13 as
                 long as they meet the conditions set out therein.

                 In specific cases where there is a reasonable doubt  as  to
                 whether a Union citizen or his/her family members satisfies
                 the conditions set out in Articles 7,  12  and  13,  Member
                 States may verify if these conditions are  fulfilled.  This
                 verification shall not be carried out systematically.
                 .....


10.   Recitals 14 and 15 of the Directive state:

           (14)   The  supporting  documents  required  by  the   competent
                 authorities for the issuing of a  registration  certificate
                 or of a residence card should be comprehensively  specified
                 in order to avoid  divergent  administrative  practices  or
                 interpretations  constituting  an  undue  obstacle  to  the
                 exercise of the right of residence by  Union  citizens  and
                 their family members.

           (15)  Family members should be legally safeguarded in the  event
                 of the death of the Union citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of
                 marriage or termination of a registered partner- ship. With
                 due regard for  family  life  and  human  dignity,  and  in
                 certain conditions to guard against abuse, measures  should
                 therefore be taken to ensure  that  in  such  circumstances
                 family members already residing within the territory of the
                 host  Member  State  retain  their   right   of   residence
                 exclusively on a personal basis.

11.   Article 10 of the Directive deals with the documents  required  for  a
      residence card to be issued.

           1.    The right of  residence  of  family  members  of  a  Union
                 citizen who are not nationals of a Member  State  shall  be
                 evidenced by the issuing of a  document  called  'Residence
                 card of a family member of a Union citizen' no  later  than
                 six  months  from  the  date  on  which  they  submit   the
                 application. A certificate of application for the residence
                 card shall be issued immediately.

           2.    For the residence card to be issued, Member  States  shall
                 require presentation of the following documents:
                 (a)   a valid passport;
                 (b)   a document attesting to the  existence  of  a  family
                       relationship or of a registered partnership;
                 (c)   the registration certificate or, in the absence of  a
                       registration system, any other proof of residence  in
                       the host Member State of the Union citizen whom  they
                       are accompanying or joining;
                 (d)   in cases falling under points (c) and (d) of  Article
                       2(2), documentary evidence that the  conditions  laid
                       down therein are met;
                 (e)   in cases falling under Article  3(2)(a),  a  document
                       issued by the relevant authority in  the  country  of
                       origin  or  country  from  which  they  are  arriving
                       certifying that they are dependants or members of the
                       household of the  Union  citizen,  or  proof  of  the
                       existence of serious health  grounds  which  strictly
                       require the personal care of the family member by the
                       Union citizen;
                 (f)   in cases falling under Article 3(2)(b), proof of  the
                       existence of a durable relationship  with  the  Union
                       citizen.

12.   Article  25  also  sets  out  general  provisions  for  the  issue  of
      residence documents.

           1.    Possession of a registration certificate as referred to in
                 Article 8, of a document certifying permanent residence, of
                 a certificate attesting submission of an application for  a
                 family member residence card, of a residence card or  of  a
                 permanent residence card, may  under  no  circumstances  be
                 made a precondition for the exercise  of  a  right  or  the
                 completion of an administrative formality,  as  entitlement
                 to rights may be attested by any other means of proof.


           2.    All documents mentioned in paragraph  1  shall  be  issued
                 free of charge or for a charge not exceeding  that  imposed
                 on nationals for the issuing of similar documents.

The EEA Regulations 2016

13.   Regulation 18 of the EEA  Regulations  2016  sets  out  the  following
      requirements for the issue of a residence card recognising a  retained
      right of residence.

           18(2)       The Secretary of State must issue a  residence  card
                 to a person who is not an EEA national but who is a  family
                 member  who  has  retained  the  right  of   residence   on
                 application and production of-
                 (a)   a valid passport; and
                 (b)   proof that the applicant is a family member  who  has
                       retained the right of residence.


             (3)  On receipt of an application under paragraph  (1)  or  (2)
                 and the  documents  that  are  required  to  accompany  the
                 application the Secretary of State must  immediately  issue
                 the applicant with a certificate  of  application  for  the
                 residence card and the residence card  must  be  issued  no
                 later  than  six  months  after  the  date  on  which   the
                 application and documents are received.

14.   Regulation 21 is  a  new  addition,  which  sets  out  procedural  and
      evidential requirements for applications for residence documents  made
      under regulation 12 (issue of a family permit) and Part 3 of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016 (residence documentation). Although slight amendments
      were made by the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  (Amendment)
      Regulations 2018 soon after,  at  the  date  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decided the appeal on 18 June 2018, the wording was as follows:

           21(1)       An application for documentation under this Part, or
                 for an EEA family permit under regulation 12, must be made-


                 (a)   online, submitted electronically using  the  relevant
                       pages of www.gov.uk; or
                 (b)   by post or in person, using the relevant  application
                       form  specified  by  the  Secretary   of   State   on
                       www.gov.uk.


               (2)     All applications must-
                 (a)   be accompanied or joined by  the  evidence  or  proof
                       required by this Part or regulation 12, as  the  case
                       may be, as well as that required  by  paragraph  (5),
                       within the time specified by the Secretary  of  State
                       on www.gov.uk; and
                 (b)   be complete.

             (3)  An application  for  a  residence  card  or  a  derivative
                 residence card must be submitted while the applicant is  in
                 the United Kingdom.

             (4)   When  an  application  is  submitted  otherwise  than  in
                 accordance with the requirements in this regulation, it  is
                 invalid.

             (5)  Where an application for documentation under this Part  is
                 made by a person who is not an EEA national  on  the  basis
                 that the person is or was  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
                 national or an extended family member of an  EEA  national,
                 the application must be accompanied or joined  by  a  valid
                 national identity card or passport in the name of that  EEA
                 national.

             (6)  Where-
                 (a)   there are circumstances  beyond  the  control  of  an
                       applicant for documentation under this Part; and
                 (b)   as a result, the applicant is unable to  comply  with
                       the requirements to submit an application  online  or
                       using the application form specified by the Secretary
                       of State,
                 the Secretary of State may accept an application  submitted
                 by post or in  person  which  does  not  use  the  relevant
                 application form specified by the Secretary of State.

15.   Part 6 of the EEA Regulations 2016, relating to  appeals,  contains  a
      miscellaneous provision under regulation 42  relating  to  alternative
      evidence of nationality and identity.

           (1)   Subject to paragraph  (2),  where  a  provision  of  these
                 Regulations requires a person to hold or  produce  a  valid
                 national identity card issued by an EEA State  or  a  valid
                 passport, the Secretary of  State  may  accept  alternative
                 evidence of identity and nationality where  the  person  is
                 unable to obtain or produce the required  document  due  to
                 circumstances beyond the person's control.


           (2)   This regulation does not apply to regulation 11.

16.   The Explanatory Memorandum for  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  says  the
      following about the purpose of the new administrative provisions.

           Part 3 (residence documentation: regulations 17 to 22)  provides
           for the issue of residence documentation to  those  who  satisfy
           the conditions in Part  2.  A  new  regulation  21  permits  the
           Secretary  of  State  to  require  applications  for   residence
           documentation  under  these  Regulations  to  be  made  using  a
           specified application form, or pursuant to a particular process.
           Regulation 21(3) requires an applicant for a residence  card  or
           derivative residence card to make the  application  from  within
           the United Kingdom.

Case law

17.   In British Gas Trading Ltd v Lock and Anor [2016] 1 CMLR 25 the  Court
      of  Appeal  reviewed  relevant  case  law  relating   to   'conforming
      interpretation' of EU and human rights law  and  considered  the  core
      principles outlined in Marleasing S.A v LA Commercial Internacional de
      Alimentacion S.A. [1992] 1 CMLR 305, Ghaidan  v  Godin-Mendoza  [2004]
      UKHL 30, Vodafone 2 v Revenue and Customs  Commissioners  [2009]  EWCA
      Civ 446 and Swift (trading as A Swift Move) v Robertson [2014] 1  WLFR
      3438.

18.   In Vodafone 2  the  Court  of  Appeal  approved  the  summary  of  the
      principles of conforming interpretation prepared by  counsel  for  the
      HMRC.

             "37.  ...
             "In summary, the obligation on the English courts to  construe
             domestic   legislation   consistently   with   Community   law
             obligations is both broad and far-reaching. In particular: (a)
             it is not constrained by conventional  rules  of  construction
             (per Lord Oliver of Aylmerton in the  Pickstone  case,  at  p.
             126B); it  does  not  require  ambiguity  in  the  legislative
             language (per Lord Oliver in the Pickstone case,  at  p.  126B
             and Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in  Ghaidan's  case,  at  para
             32); (c) it is not an exercise  in  semantics  or  linguistics
             (per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan's case, at paras 31 and 35;  per
             Lord Steyn, at paras 48-49; per Lord Rodger of Earlsferry,  at
             paras 110-115); (d) it permits departure from the  strict  and
             literal application of the words  which  the  legislature  has
             elected to use (per Lord Oliver in  the  Litster  case,  at  p
             577A; per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan's case, at para 31); (e) it
             permits the implication of  words  necessary  to  comply  with
             Community law obligations (per Lord Templeman in the Pickstone
             case, at pp 120H-121A; per Lord Oliver in the Litster case, at
             p 577A); and (f) the precise form of the words to  be  implied
             does not matter (per Lord Keith of  Kinkel  in  the  Pickstone
             case, at p 112D; per Lord Rodger in Ghaidan's  case,  at  para
             122; per Arden LJ in the IDT Card Services case, at para 114)
             ......
             "The only constraints on the broad and far-reaching nature  of
             the interpretative obligation are that: (a) the meaning should
             'go with the grain of the legislation' and be compatible  with
             the underlying thrust of the legislation being construed': see
             per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan v. Godin-Medoza [2004] 2 AC  557,
             para 53; Dyson  LJ  in  Revenue  and  Customs  v.  EB  Central
             Services Ltd [2008]  STC  2209,  para  81.  An  interpretation
             should not be adopted which is inconsistent with a fundamental
             or cardinal feature of the legislation since this would  cross
             the boundary between interpretation  and  amendment  (see  per
             Lord Nicholls, at para 33, Lord Rodger, at  paras  110-113  in
             Ghaidan's case; per Arden LJ in R (IDT Card  Services  Ireland
             Ltd) v. Customs and Excise Comrs [2006] STC 1252, paras 82 and
             113); and (b) the exercise of  the  interpretative  obligation
             cannot require the courts to make decisions for which they are
             not equipped or give rise to important practical repercussions
             which the court is not equipped to evaluate: see  the  Ghaidan
             case, per Lord Nicholls, at para 33; per Lord Rodger, at  para
             115; per Arden LJ in the  IDT  Card  Services  case,  at  para
             113.'"

19.   In Swift the Supreme Court considered the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
      European Union decision in Schulte v Seutche Bausparkasse  Badenia  AG
      (Case C-350/03) [2003] All ER (EC)  420,  which  summarised  the  core
      interpretative principle as follows.

           "When hearing a case between individuals, the national court  is
           required, when applying the provisions of domestic  law  adopted
           for the purpose  of  transposing  obligations  laid  down  by  a
           Directive, to consider the whole body of rules of  national  law
           and to interpret them, so far as possible, in the light  of  the
           wording and purpose of the Directive  in  order  to  achieve  an
           outcome consistent with the objective pursued by the Directive."

20.   In Barnett and Others  (EEA  Regulations;  rights  and  documentation)
      [2012] UKUT 00142 the Upper Tribunal considered what evidence could be
      required under European law to support an  application  for  residence
      documentation  under  The   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006. The head note summarised the conclusions as follows:

           (1)   In applications under the Immigration  (European  Economic
                 Area) Regulations 2006, care must be taken to identify both
                 the  relevant  rights  being  asserted  and  the   relevant
                 documentary confirmation which is being sought  in  respect
                 of those rights.


           (2)   The requirement in regulation 17(1)(a) and (2)(a) for  the
                 production of a valid passport relates to the  passport  of
                 the applicant, not the EEA national.


           (3)   The "proof" that  the  Secretary  of  State  can  lawfully
                 require in applications under  regulations  17  and  18  in
                 order to entitle a non EEA national  to  a  residence  card
                 (regulation 17) or a permanent residence  card  (regulation
                 18) may,  nevertheless,  depending  on  the  circumstances,
                 entail the production of the  passport  or  other  identity
                 document of an EEA national; but it is unlawful  to  refuse
                 applications  merely  because  such  documentation  is  not
                 forthcoming.  The Secretary of State needs to show a  valid
                 reason why it is required.


           (4)   This is particularly so in  the  case  of  regulation  18,
                 given that there is likely to be relevant material relating
                 to such documentation on file from a previous,  successful,
                 application.

Decision and reasons

21.   Recital 14 of the Directive makes clear that the  competent  authority
      responsible for issuing  residence  documentation  can  put  in  place
      administrative procedures to "avoid divergent administrative practices
      or interpretations constituting an undue obstacle to the  exercise  of
      the right of residence by Union citizens and  their  family  members".
      However, as the Upper Tribunal in Barnett  observed,  the  "supporting
      documents required" cannot go beyond the requirements of the Directive
      or what is strictly necessary  to  establish  the  relevant  right  of
      residence under European Union law.

22.   Article 10 of the Directive relates to  family  members  who  are  not
      nationals of a Member State. In establishing a right of residence as a
      family member the Directive allows Member  States  to  require  (i)  a
      valid passport (to establish the identity of the  applicant);  (ii)  a
      document attesting to the existence of a family relationship or  of  a
      registered partnership; (iii)  the  registration  certificate  or  any
      other proof of residence in the host Member State of the Union citizen
      whom they are  accompanying  or  joining;  and  (iv)  any  documentary
      evidence necessary to show that the  conditions  for  residence  as  a
      'family member' or as an 'extended family member' are met.

23.   The documents outlined in Article 10 of the Directive  relate  to  the
      essential elements needed to establish  a  right  of  residence  as  a
      'family member' or an 'extended family member'.  The  requirement  for
      some evidence relating to the position of the Union citizen is central
      to an assessment of the rights of residence of  family  members  given
      that they can only be derived from the Union citizen exercising  their
      right of free  movement.  The  documentary  requirements  outlined  in
      Article 10 focus on the  rights  of  'family  members'  and  'extended
      family members' and do not refer to retained rights of residence.

 24.  Article 25 of the Directive sets  out  general  provisions  concerning
      residence documentation. It makes clear that a requirement to  hold  a
      residence card may under no circumstances be made a pre-condition  for
      the exercise of  a  right  or  the  completion  of  an  administrative
      formality because entitlement to rights may be attested by "any  other
      means of proof".

25.   The general principles outlined in the Directive make  clear  that  an
      administrative process can be put in place by a Member State  for  the
      issuing of residence documentation. A non-EEA national is required  to
      provide proof of his or her identity  with  an  application,  but  the
      documents necessary to establish a right of residence will  depend  on
      the nature of the right the applicant is seeking to establish.

26.   Regulation 18 of the EEA Regulations 2016 reflects  these  principles.
      The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a person who  is
      not an EEA national but who is a family member who  has  retained  the
      right of residence if they produce (i)  a  valid  passport;  and  (ii)
      proof that the applicant is a family member who has retained the right
      of residence. The provision relates to an application made by  a  non-
      EEA national. The plain wording suggests  that  the  "valid  passport"
      must relate to the  non-EEA  national  applicant  to  establish  their
      identity. If it meant the passport of the EEA national  it  would  say
      so. The second requirement to  show  that  the  non-EEA  national  has
      retained a right of residence can be attested by "any other  means  of
      proof", which might include a need for evidence to show that they were
      married to a person who was exercising rights  of  free  movement  but
      might not depending on the circumstances of the case.

27.    This  case  considers  the  applicability  of  regulation  21(5)  and
      regulation 42 of the EEA  Regulations  2016.  The  general  principles
      outlined above may be equally applicable to other provisions  but  are
      beyond the scope of this decision.

28.   The Explanatory Memorandum that accompanies the EEA  Regulations  2016
      asserts that the new regulation 21 permits the Secretary of  State  to
      require applications for residence documentation in  a  specific  form
      and "pursuant to a particular process". It seems that the provision is
      intended to put in  place  a  structured  process  for  administrating
      applications for residence documentation. The  Directive  makes  clear
      that this is permissible and desirable to ensure  consistent  decision
      making and that there are no undue obstacles to the exercise of rights
      by Union  citizens  and  their  family  members.  However,  provisions
      introduced for administrative convenience must not go beyond  what  is
      required to establish a right of residence.

29.    Regulation  21(4)  states  that  when  an  application  is  submitted
      otherwise than in accordance with regulation 21 it will be treated  as
      invalid. Regulation 21(5) requires a person who is not an EEA national
      to produce a valid national identity card or passport in the  name  of
      the EEA national. If a person cannot produce the  specified  evidence,
      regulation 42 provides for the submission of alternative  evidence  of
      identity or nationality where the  person  is  "unable  to  obtain  or
      produce the required document due to circumstances beyond the person's
      control".

30.   The principles outlined in Barnett are equally applicable to  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016. The provisions contained in regulations  21  and  42
      must be interpreted  to  conform  with  European  Union  law.  If  the
      provision does not conform with European Union law on the facts  of  a
      case, it must be read to conform. In some cases,  this  might  involve
      ignoring the  requirement  for  specified  evidence  altogether  if  a
      document is not in fact required to establish a right of residence.

Conclusion

31.   Neither the appellant nor the First-tier  Tribunal  were  assisted  by
      the fact that the decision  letter  did  not  refer  to  the  specific
      provisions contained in regulation 21 and 42 of  the  EEA  Regulations
      2016. The provisions were  highlighted  for  the  first  time  at  the
      hearing before the Upper Tribunal. Given that the  appeal  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal was determined without a hearing,  and  the  judge
      did not have the benefit  of  oral  submissions  from  a  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer, it is  hardly  surprising  that  she  focussed  on
      regulation 18 and did not consider the terms of regulations 21 and 42.



32.   However, even a plain reading of the wording  of  regulation  18  does
      not disclose a requirement for the appellant to produce  the  passport
      of the EEA national spouse. The appellant was only required to produce
      (i) a valid passport establishing his identity; and (ii) proof that he
      is a family member who has retained a right of residence. The  finding
      made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  [7],  that  the  appellant  was
      required to produce the passport of his EEA  national  former  spouse,
      discloses an error of law. The judge failed, through no fault  of  her
      own given the opaque nature of the decision letter,  to  consider  the
      provisions contained in regulations 21 and 42.  For  these  reasons  I
      conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
      an error of law and must be set aside.

33.   The respondent accepted that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of
      regulation 10(5) as a family  member  who  has  retained  a  right  of
      residence following a divorce. The only reason given for refusing  the
      application was the fact that  the  applicant  had  not  produced  his
      former spouse's  EEA  passport  pursuant  to  the  specified  evidence
      required by regulation 21(5) and failed to provide an  explanation  as
      to why he was unable to obtain or produce the required document due to
      circumstances beyond his control pursuant to regulation 42.

34.   The analysis set out above shows that the appellant was only  required
      to produce the documents necessary to establish a  retained  right  of
      residence following divorce. On 12 March 2014  the  respondent  issued
      the appellant with a residence card as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
      citizen who was exercising her right of free movement. At  that  stage
      the appellant would have been required to  produce  evidence  to  show
      that he was the family member of an EEA national, which was likely  to
      include his wife's passport or other form of identity and evidence  to
      show that she was exercising rights of free movement in the UK.

35.   On 16 October 2017 he applied  for  a  residence  card  recognising  a
      retained right of residence. To establish this  right,  the  appellant
      was only required to produce (i)  a  valid  passport  to  confirm  his
      identity; and (ii) proof that he is a family member who  has  retained
      the right of residence.

36.   If there was any doubt that the appellant had been married to  an  EEA
      national  as  claimed  the  respondent  could  lawfully  require   the
      production of his former wife's passport, but this was not an issue in
      this case. The respondent accepted that the appellant was  married  to
      an EEA national when he issued the previous  residence  card.  Indeed,
      the respondent accepted that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of
      regulation 10(5). As such, the  appellant  had  already  provided  the
      necessary proof  to  establish  his  right  of  residence.  A  blanket
      application of regulation 21(5), without proper analysis of what proof
      was required to establish the relevant right of residence,  cannot  be
      used as a reason for refusal if the appellant was not in fact required
      to produce his former spouse's  EEA  passport  to  show  that  he  had
      retained a right of residence. If he was not required to  produce  his
      former spouse's passport, nor could  he  be  required  to  provide  an
      explanation for his failure to produce it under regulation 42.

37.    For  these  reasons  I  conclude  that  the  decision  breaches   the
      appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect of his entry to or
      residence in the United Kingdom.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is ALLOWED on EU law grounds

Signed   [pic]   Date 08 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
