
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MS (Art 1C(5)-Mogadishu) Somalia [2018] UKUT 00196 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     M S
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    The Secretary of State is not entitled  to  cease  a  person's  refugee
    status pursuant to Article 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention  solely  on
    the basis of a change in circumstances in one part of  the  country  of
    proposed return.

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born in 1989.  He arrived in the
    UK on 21 November 2002 with his mother and six  siblings.   His  mother
    claimed  asylum,  with  him  and  his  siblings  as  dependants.    Her
    application for asylum was refused  but  she  was  granted  exceptional
    leave to remain on 19 January 2003 and leave to remain was then granted
    until 19 May 2007 to her, the appellant and his siblings.

 3. On 18 November 2011, the appellant's mother and siblings, but  not  the
    appellant, were granted asylum and indefinite leave to remain  ("ILR").
    Notwithstanding the appellant's criminal offending from  2006,  it  was
    decided not to pursue deportation proceedings against him  and  he  was
    granted discretionary leave on 14 February 2012 until 14 February 2015.
     On 8 October 2012 his discretionary leave was  curtailed  and  on  the
    same day he was granted asylum and leave  to  remain  until  8  October
    2017.

 4. On 24 September 2012, in the Crown Court at Warwick, the appellant  was
    convicted of an offence of conspiracy to defraud and on 31  March  2014
    he received a sentence of 21 months' imprisonment.  There  was  also  a
    one month's  consecutive  sentence  of  imprisonment  for  breaches  of
    previous orders and failing to surrender to custody.

 5. On 28 August 2014 and 13 November 2014 he was  served  with  notice  of
    liability to deportation and invited to submit reasons  as  to  why  he
    should not be deported.  On 1 May 2015 he was notified of the Secretary
    of State's intention to cease his refugee status.

 6. On 7 January 2016 in the Crown  Court  at  Warwick  the  appellant  was
    further convicted of assault  by  beating,  and  on  24  February  2016
    convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.  On 15 April  2016
    he was sentenced to a total of 28 months'  imprisonment.   Although  he
    completed his custodial sentence on 19 November 2016, after a period in
    immigration detention he was recalled to prison on 25 February 2017  to
    serve the remainder of his  sentence  because  of  a  failure  to  keep
    appointments and a failure  to  comply  with  requirements  as  to  his
    residence.

 7. Earlier, on 15 April 2015, the  respondent  refused  a  protection  and
    human rights claim, these being the Secretary of State's  decisions  to
    make a deportation order and to revoke the appellant's refugee  status.
    His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew ("the FtJ")  on
    16 August 2017.  She allowed the appeal in terms  of  the  respondent's
    decision to cease refugee status and consequently  concluded  that  the
    appellant was entitled  to  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention
    and/or Article 3 of the ECHR, thus concluding  that  he  could  not  be
    deported.  She allowed the appeal with evident reluctance, in the light
    of what she described as the appellant's "appalling" criminal history.

 8. Before setting out the respective parties' arguments, it  is  necessary
    to summarise the FtJ's decision.

    The decision of the FtJ

 9. The FtJ referred to  the  appellant's  extensive  history  of  criminal
    offending, starting in 2006.  I can summarise the appellant's  offences
    as including offences of dishonesty, public  order  offences,  assault,
    damaging property, and possession of drugs.  I have already referred to
    his most recent offending and incidentally, the most serious.

10. The FtJ summarised  the  appellant's  claim  as  being  that  he  fears
    persecution in Somalia as a member of a minority clan, and  would  thus
    be at real risk from the general civil unrest in the country.

11. In relation to the burden and standard of proof she said this at [23]:

         "In relation to the cessation of the Appellant's refugee status  it
         is for the Respondent to prove, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
         that there has been  a  fundamental  and  enduring  change  in  the
         country situation in Somalia to allow for the  Appellant's  refugee
         status to be revoked in the whole of the country and not just  part
         of the country.  It follows  from  this  that  issues  of  internal
         relocation are not relevant considerations".

12. The FtJ stated that otherwise, the burden of proof is on the  appellant
    and she gave an appropriate self-direction on the standard of proof.

13. The FtJ heard oral evidence from the appellant.  She noted that he  had
    a number of convictions and concluded that he had no  respect  for  the
    criminal law of the UK or any respect for authority.  However, she said
    that her first task was to consider whether or not his  refugee  status
    should be revoked.  She noted at  [30]  that  his  refugee  status  was
    granted on 8 October  2012,  following  the  conviction  on  which  the
    respondent sought  to  rely  in  her  subsequent  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order.

14. Referring to the application of s.72 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") she  noted  that  the  appellant's
    refugee status was granted on 8 October 2012 following  his  conviction
    on 24 September 2012 and said that it was difficult to  understand  how
    the respondent could rely on that conviction for the  purposes  of  the
    s.72 certification.  She pointed out that the appellant  was  convicted
    shortly before he was granted refugee status and that  it  must  follow
    therefore, that  as  at  the  date  of  grant  of  refugee  status  the
    respondent did not consider that the appellant's conviction was  for  a
    particularly serious crime or that he was a danger to the community (as
    set out in s.72).  She concluded that the s.72 certificate could not be
    maintained.

15. The FtJ referred to the sentencing judge's remarks in relation  to  the
    most recent convictions whereby it was said that the assault was  of  a
    most  serious  nature.   She  reiterated  that  the  appellant  had  an
    appalling criminal history and she said that she had no doubt  that  he
    would continue to offend in the future.  She commented that he does not
    learn by his previous  convictions  and  she  said  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that there was anything  in  what  he  says  in  his  witness
    statement that would be a protective factor to prevent him offending in
    the future.

16. At [37] she referred to the contention  that  the  appellant  had  been
    diagnosed with schizophrenia.  However, she pointed out that there  was
    no medical evidence to that effect before her.  No adjournment had been
    applied for, she said, in order for such evidence to be obtained.   She
    noted that he had been seen by a mental health unit but  there  was  no
    evidence of what the outcome  of  any  mental  health  assessment  was.
    Although he had been prescribed Risperidone at HMP Birmingham, all  the
    notes referred to were that  the  appellant  had  self-reported  having
    paranoid schizophrenia and a personality disorder.

17. With reference to a report from a Dr Chisholm, she said that  that  was
    dated 1 August 2016, over a year before the  hearing  before  her,  and
    prior to the appellant's latest incarceration.  She referred to various
    aspects of Dr Chisholm's report and noted the conclusion that "he  does
    not suffer from  a  psychotic  diagnosis".   She  noted  the  tentative
    diagnosis of personality disorder.

18. At [47] she referred to inconsistency in the  appellant's  claim  about
    his mother having returned to Somalia.  Medical notes indicated that he
    had said that his mother had gone on holiday to  Somalia  but  had  not
    returned, although the appellant claimed that he had  never  said  that
    his mother had returned to Somalia.

19. The FtJ concluded at [48] that she could not find as a  fact  that  the
    appellant no longer understands his native  language.   Her  assessment
    was that they would have used Somali in  their  household,  before  and
    after he came to the UK with his mother and siblings.

20. However, she also noted that in the appellant's mother's appeal it  was
    accepted that she is Ashraf, a minority clan, and that  she  came  from
    Kismayo, not Mogadishu.

21. In the following paragraph she concluded that it was unlikely that  the
    appellant would receive any support in Somalia from his family  in  the
    United Kingdom, finding it unlikely that  the  appellant's  mother  and
    sister are employed.  The appellant's evidence,  which  by  implication
    the FtJ accepted, was that the whole family were on benefits.

22. Next, the  FtJ  made  reference  to  the  decisions  in  AMM  &  others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445 (IAC) and MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC).  She found that the appellant was not from  Mogadishu  but
    from Kismayo, and from a minority clan, the Ashraf.  She found that  he
    has no former links with Mogadishu, having left Somalia at a young age.
     She further concluded  that  she  could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has access to funds or that any other form of clan, family or
    social support is likely to be realistic.  She said that she made  that
    assessment knowing that the  appellant  claimed  that  his  mother  had
    returned to Somalia whilst he was incarcerated.  However, she said that
    there was nothing other than  this  before  her  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant does still have family in that country.  She found  that  the
    appellant has no skills, never having formally been employed in the UK.
     Although he has some GCSEs  and  has  undertaken  some  basic  courses
    whilst incarcerated, none of those had led to  employment  in  the  UK.
    She found that they were unlikely to be of much assistance in obtaining
    employment in Mogadishu, other than in some unskilled job.

23. At [53] she said that she had to take into account that  the  appellant
    probably suffers from a mental disorder, although concluded that he was
    not at risk  of  suicide.  She  noted  that  he  does  however  receive
    medication for his mental health.  She said that the results of his not
    having that medication are not known, as there was no medical  evidence
    before her on the point.  Equally, there was no evidence to  show  that
    the medication the appellant receives cannot be  obtained  in  Somalia,
    she said.

24. She concluded at [54] that the appellant would have no alternative  but
    to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp, and  that  there
    is thus a real possibility that he would have  to  live  in  conditions
    that would fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian  standards.   In  that
    regard she referred to the respondent's  Country  Information  Guidance
    ("CIG").  She also noted that the UNHCR had also expressed concerns  as
    to the appellant living in Mogadishu and as an IDP.  Again referring to
    the CIG, she said that that confirmed that in general,  majority  clans
    or minority group members who are at risk, are unlikely to be  able  to
    access effective protection from the state.

25. At [59] she said that it was necessary for the respondent to show  that
    the change is in the whole of the country, and that the respondent  had
    given no consideration to the fact that the  appellant  does  not  come
    from Mogadishu but from Kismayo.  She said that what the respondent was
    effectively saying was that in terms of cessation, the appellant  could
    attempt internal flight to  Mogadishu.   However,  she  concluded  that
    changes in a refugee's country of origin affecting  only  part  of  the
    territory should not, in principle, lead  to  a  cessation  of  refugee
    status.  That, she said, could only come to an end  if  the  basis  for
    persecution is removed, without a pre-condition that the refugee has to
    return to specific safe parts of the country in order to be  free  from
    persecution.  Furthermore, not being able to move or establish  oneself
    freely in the country of origin would indicate that  changes  have  not
    been fundamental.  In this she referred  to  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on
    cessation at paragraph 17.

26. She thus concluded that the respondent had not shown that cessation  of
    the appellant's refugee status was appropriate and  that  he  therefore
    should continue to have protection under the Refugee Convention  and/or
    Article 3.

    The Grounds and Submissions

27. In the grounds it is argued that the FtJ was wrong at [59] to have said
    that the respondent had given no consideration to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant comes from Kismayo rather than Mogadishu.  The grounds  refer
    to a cessation letter dated 25 August 2015, specifically  at  para  13,
    which acknowledges that the appellant is from Kismayo.  In fact, I read
    that information from a cessation letter dated 1 May 2015, at para  14.
    Nevertheless, the point remains the same.

28. The grounds continue that if the appellant was  deported  he  would  be
    removed to Mogadishu and it would be for the appellant to  consider  if
    he wished to relocate.  It is argued that MOJ & Ors indicates that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return to Mogadishu.

29. It is further  argued  that  although  the  FtJ  had  relied  on  UNHCR
    Guidelines on the issue of cessation, those are not determinative.   In
    appeals, a Tribunal relies on a different threshold from considerations
    assessed by the UNHCR,  it  was  submitted.   Furthermore,  MOJ  &  Ors
    indicated  that  there  was  a  durable  and  fundamental   change   in
    conditions.  So far as his minority clan membership is  concerned,  the
    significance of that was considered in MOJ & Ors.

30. Although the FtJ had suggested that the appellant would have to live in
    an IDP camp in breach of Article 3, she had made no findings about  the
    possibility of remittances from the UK, or any of the returns  packages
    available.  Furthermore,  although  the  FtJ  had  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not be able to find employment,  other  than  unskilled
    work, that did not suggest that he would not be able to find employment
    at all and avail himself of the economic opportunities in Mogadishu.

31. The FtJ, it was argued, had failed to give clear reasons as to why  the
    appellant would be forced to live within an IDP  camp  if  deported  to
    Mogadishu.

32. In submissions before me, Mr Wilding contended that there is nothing in
    the Refugee Convention which indicates that cessation only bites  where
    the  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  no  longer  exists.   It  was
    submitted that the UNHCR has a broader 'agenda'  than  that  of  status
    determination of refugees.  It was submitted that the absurdity of that
    contention  in  relation  to  cessation  and  internal  relocation   is
    illustrated with reference to the Kurdish Regional Government in Iraq.

33. As to the facts, although the appellant has had no formal employment in
    the UK he does have some GCSEs and would be able to obtain an unskilled
    job.  The economic boom is not only available to those who could obtain
    skilled jobs.   There  are  opportunities  as  waiters,  taxi  drivers,
    kitchen porters and so forth.  There is no engagement with those issues
    by the FtJ.   All  of  that  informs  the  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant would end up in an IDP camp.  I was referred to [425] of  MOJ
    & Ors and the guidance at (xii) in that decision.

34. Mr Vokes relied on his written submissions and referred to MOJ  &  Ors,
    also in particular to (xii) of the guidance.  It was pointed  out  that
    the FtJ had noted that the  appellant's  mother  was  found  to  be  an
    Ashraf,  a  minority  clan,  from  Kismayo  and  not  from   Mogadishu.
    Furthermore, the FtJ had concluded that the appellant  suffers  from  a
    mental disorder in the light of the psychiatric  evidence  before  her.
    That was a relevant factor that she took into account in terms  of  how
    he would be able to survive in Mogadishu.  That is a matter that  needs
    to be added to the other difficulties that the appellant would have  in
    terms of lack of clan support, lack of family  support  and  the  basic
    level of his skills.  Those difficulties are exacerbated by his  mental
    disorder. At [54] the FtJ had looked at the CIG, and at [56]  in  terms
    of state protection.

35. On the issue of principle in terms of cessation of refugee status, that
    status should not be a temporary matter.  The FtJ had said at [23] that
    the onus was on the respondent to prove that the change was in relation
    to the whole of the country.  It  was  submitted  that  it  was  not  a
    question of preferring the UNHCR over the decision in  MOJ  &  Ors  but
    asserting the principle of cessation as indicated by the UNHCR.

36. In reply, Mr Wilding pointed out what could be said to  be  a  lack  of
    clarity in the diagnosis of the appellant's mental health, with the FtJ
    concluding that there was no evidence of schizophrenia.  What  the  FtJ
    had said at [53] was not therefore a fact-specific compelling situation
    in terms of his mental health that needed to be considered.  Mr Wilding
    also referred me to the decision in Hoxha & Anor v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 19, in particular at [56], in terms
    of the question of cessation.

    Assessment

37. Article 1C(5) provides that the 1951 Convention shall cease to apply to
    any person falling under the terms of Article 1(A) if:

         "He can no longer, because  the  circumstances  in  connexion  with
         which he has been recognized as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of his nationality;

         Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a  refugee  falling
         under section A(1) of this Article who is able to invoke compelling
         reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing  to  avail
         himself of the protection of the country of nationality".

38. The issue of principle at play in this appeal is in the application  of
    Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.  The FtJ concluded that issues
    of internal relocation are not relevant considerations in terms of  the
    application of Article 1C(5).

39. The FtJ relied on the UNHCR Guidelines which are  referred  to  in  the
    letter dated 17 June 2015 in response to the respondent's  proposal  to
    cease the appellant's refugee status.  In this context the UNHCR letter
    states on page 3 as follows:

         "As the application of the cessation clauses in effect operates  as
         a formal loss of refugee status, UNHCR recommends a restrictive and
         well-balanced approach to their interpretation.  This is because of
         the need to avoid unjust deprivation of the right to  international
         protection.  In practical terms, a  restrictive  approach  means  a
         strong presumption in favour of retaining  refugee  status,  and  a
         high threshold of  proof  for  the  application  of  any  cessation
         clause".

40. The letter goes on to state that:

         "... it is UNHCR's  view  that  the  availability  of  an  internal
         relocation  alternative  is   not,   in   principle,   a   relevant
         consideration when making a decision on the application of  Article
         1C(5), which relate to  fundamental  and  durable  changes  in  the
         country  of  origin.   UNHCR's  Cessation  Guidelines   state,   at
         paragraph 17, that

             'changes in the refugee's country  of  origin  affecting  only
             part of the  territory  should  not,  in  principle,  lead  to
             cessation of refugee status.  Refugee status can only come  to
             an end if the basis for persecution  is  removed  without  the
             precondition that the refugee has to return to  specific  safe
             parts of the country in order to  be  free  from  persecution.
             Also, not being able to move or to establish oneself freely in
             the country of origin would indicate that the changes have not
             been fundamental'.

         UNHCR wishes to emphasise  that  internal  relocation  alternatives
         should not be taken into account when making a decision on  whether
         to cease refugee status under Article 1C(5)".

41. The respondent's decision of 15 September 2015 states at [53] that  the
    circumstances under which the appellant was granted refugee status have
    now changed.  That is because although it was accepted that he was from
    Kismayo, he  was  granted  refugee  status  due  to  the  situation  in
    Mogadishu.  The letter goes on to state that  MOJ  &  Ors  demonstrates
    that there has been a significant and enduring change in Mogadishu.  At
    [54] the respondent's decision notes the UNHCR's views but states  that
    their submissions about internal relocation are  not  relevant  in  the
    appellant's case.  It points out again  that  he  was  granted  refugee
    status because of the situation in Mogadishu which has now changed,  as
    previously explained.

42. I do consider that the  FtJ  was  wrong  at  [59]  to  state  that  the
    respondent had given no consideration to the fact  that  the  appellant
    does not come from Mogadishu but from Kismayo.  That is plainly not the
    case.  Not only does the letter of  15  September  2015  refer  to  his
    origins in Kismayo, so also does the letter dated 1 May 2015  notifying
    the appellant of the intention to cease refugee status, at [14].   That
    however, does not seem to  me  to  be  material  to  the  principle  of
    cessation in terms of its relationship to the possibility  of  internal
    relocation.

43. I note the Asylum Policy Instruction on revocation of  refugee  status,
    Version 4.0 dated 19 January 2016.   On  page  25,  under  the  heading
    "Internal relocation" it states as follows:

         "Where it is considered that it would be reasonable  to  return  an
         individual to a specific part of a country, the fact that they have
         previously been recognised as a  refugee  must  form  part  of  the
         overall assessment. This overall assessment includes,  but  is  not
         limited to, full consideration of:

             .    the situation in the country of origin

             .    means of travel

             .     proposed  area  of  relocation  in   relation   to   the
                  individual's personal circumstances

         Even where country information and guidance suggest that relocation
         is possible, it is the ability of the individual and any dependants
         to relocate in practice which must be  assessed,  bearing  in  mind
         that the changes must be significant and non-temporary".

44. Whilst that document was not referred  to  by  either  party,  it  does
    reflect the Secretary of State's view that there  is  in  principle  no
    reason why Article 1C(5) should not  apply  where  there  is  a  viable
    internal relocation alternative available.

45. During the course of argument, the only two authorities to which I  was
    referred by the parties on this issue of principle were Hoxha,  and  AH
    (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ
    1003.  The former was a  case  in  which  the  cessation  clauses  were
    considered in the context of asylum applicants who no longer had a well-
    founded fear of persecution prior to the determination of their  asylum
    claims, which were in principle well-founded at the time that they fled
    their country of origin.  As such,  it  is  not  a  decision  which  is
    directly on point, although certain paragraphs are worth noting.  Thus,
    their Lordships said the following at [63]-[65]:

           "63.   This provision,  it  shall  be  borne  in  mind,  is  one
             calculated,  if  invoked,  to   redound   to   the   refugee's
             disadvantage, not his benefit.  Small wonder, therefore,  that
             all the emphasis in paras 112 and 135 of the Handbook is  upon
             the importance of ensuring that his recognised refugee  status
             will not be taken from him save upon a fundamental  change  of
             circumstances in his home country.  As the  Lisbon  Conference
             put it in para  27  of  their  conclusions:  '...  the  asylum
             authorities should bear the burden of proof that such  changes
             are indeed fundamental and durable'.

         64.  Many other UNHCR publications are to similar effect.  A single
             further instance will  suffice,  taken  from  the  April  1999
             Guidelines on the application of the cessation clauses:

                  '2.      The cessation clauses set out the only situations
                      in which refugee  status  properly  and  legitimately
                      granted comes to an end.  This  means  that  once  an
                      individual is determined to  be  a  refugee,  his/her
                      status is maintained until he/she  falls  within  the
                      terms of one of the cessation clauses.   This  strict
                      approach is important since refugees  should  not  be
                      subjected to constant review of their refugee status.
                       In addition, since the application of the  cessation
                      clauses in  effect  operates  as  a  formal  loss  of
                      refugee  status,  a  restrictive  and   well-balanced
                      approach should be adopted in their interpretation.'

           65.    The reason for  applying  a  'strict'  and  'restrictive'
             approach to the cessation clauses in general  and  1C  (5)  in
             particular is surely plain.  Once an  asylum  application  has
             been  formally  determined  and  refugee   status   officially
             granted, with all the benefits both under the  Convention  and
             under national law which that carries with it, the refugee has
             the assurance of a secure future in the  host  country  and  a
             legitimate expectation that he will not henceforth be stripped
             of this save for  demonstrably  good  and  sufficient  reason.
             That assurance and expectation simply does not  arise  in  the
             earlier period whilst the refugee's claim for asylum is  under
             consideration and before it is granted.  Logically, therefore,
             the approach to the grant of refugee status under 1A (2)  does
             not  precisely  mirror  the  approach   to   its   prospective
             subsequent withdrawal under 1C (5)".

46. Those paragraphs illustrate the "strict" and "restrictive" approach  to
    cessation clauses, which at [65] of  Hoxha  was  described  as  "surely
    plain".

47. The decision in AH (Algeria) is significant for another reason, that is
    in terms of the weight to be afforded to the views of the UNHCR.  It is
    only necessary to quote from [13] as follows:

         "13. It  is  clear  from  these  materials  that  the  UNHCR  is  a
             significant voice in the  interpretation  of  the  Convention.
             But it is not a lawgiver,  or  a  source  of  law.   It  is  a
             contributor of the  first  importance  to  the  protection  of
             refugees; and that fact itself must qualify the force of  what
             it has to say when a balance falls to be  struck  between  the
             interests of a putative refugee and  those  of  the  potential
             receiving State: 'exclusion clauses should not be enlarged  in
             a manner inconsistent  with  the  Refugee  Convention's  broad
             humanitarian  aims,   but   neither   should   overly   narrow
             interpretations  be  adopted  which  ignore  the   contracting
             states' need to control who enters their  territory'  (Febles,
             headnote: see further on Febles below)" [a reference to Febles
             [2014] 3 SCR 431, a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada].

48. Paragraph 339A(v) of the Rules reflects the terms of Article 1C (5) and
    provides that a person's grant of asylum will be revoked or not renewed
    if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

         "(v) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
             which he has been recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of nationality".

49. Paragraph 339A goes on to state that:

         "In considering (v) and (vi), the Secretary  of  State  shall  have
         regard to  whether  the  change  of  circumstances  is  of  such  a
         significant and non-temporary nature that  the  refugee's  fear  of
         persecution can no longer be regarded as well-founded".

50. Article 1C(5) and paragraph 339A(v) both refer to "the circumstances in
    connection with which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased
    to exist".  As quoted above, paragraph 339A states that  the  Secretary
    of State shall have regard to whether "the change of circumstances"  is
    of such a significant and non-temporary nature that the refugee's  fear
    of persecution can no longer be regarded as  well-founded.   Thus,  the
    "circumstances" in connection with which a person has  been  recognised
    as a refugee and the "change of circumstances" must be considered.

51. The Secretary of State's position as set out  in  the  decision  letter
    dated 15 September 2015 states at [53] and [54] that the  circumstances
    under which the appellant was granted refugee status have now  changed,
    because although it was accepted he was from Kismayo, "you were granted
    refugee status due to the situation in Mogadishu".  However, relying on
    MOJ & Ors, the Secretary of State says  that  "there  has  now  been  a
    significant  and  enduring  change  in   Mogadishu".    Quite   clearly
    therefore, the Secretary of State puts the situation  in  Mogadishu  at
    the heart of the decision to cease the appellant's refugee status.

52. However, in my judgement the Secretary  of  State's  approach  in  this
    respect is fundamentally flawed.  The basis of the appellant's  refugee
    claim (or more accurately the basis of his mother's claim upon which he
    was a dependant) is that he had a well-founded fear of  persecution  in
    the country of his nationality, Somalia.   That  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution arose in his home area of Kismayo.  Naturally, the issue of
    internal relocation would have been a factor that was considered at the
    time  of  the  decision  to  grant  refugee  status  to   the   family.
    Presumably, although the information has not  been  provided,  internal
    relocation to Mogadishu was not considered a viable option at the time.
     In my view it is contrary to the humanitarian principle  of  surrogate
    protection under the Refugee Convention for the Secretary of  State  to
    be able to seek to identify an area of a country where it could be said
    that an individual no longer has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution,
    and to which he could now relocate if the claim were now made.

53. The UNHCR's Cessation Guidelines make the point that not being able  to
    move or to establish oneself freely in  the  country  of  origin  would
    indicate that the changes have not been fundamental.  The Secretary  of
    State does not suggest that the appellant's claim to refugee status  in
    terms of the risk to him in his home  area  has  been  extinguished  by
    reason of fundamental and durable changes in the country as a whole.

54. Although it was suggested on behalf of the  respondent  in  submissions
    that there was no difference in principle  between  the  grant  or  the
    cessation of refugee status, because a person is only a refugee so long
    as there is no safe area of return, I do not agree.  There  is,  in  my
    judgement,  a  very  significant  philosophical  and  indeed  practical
    difference between the grant  and  the  cessation  of  refugee  status,
    illustrated by the UNHCR Cessation Guidelines, but  also  reflected  in
    the two authorities to which I have referred.

55. If the Secretary of State's position was to hold good,  it  would  mean
    that a person claiming asylum would be in a more advantageous  position
    than a person who already has  refugee  status  and  whose  status  the
    Secretary of State seeks to rescind.  Thus, if the person  whose  claim
    for asylum depends on an assessment of an internal flight option,  that
    individual would have  that  issue  assessed  on  the  basis  of  undue
    harshness and the reasonableness of internal relocation.   However,  in
    the case of a person whose refugee status is to be taken away, once  it
    is decided that there is a part of the country in which the  change  of
    circumstances is of such a significant and  non-temporary  nature  that
    the person's fear is no longer regarded as well-founded (in that area),
    that individual may be returned without the sort of examination of  the
    issues  of  undue  harshness  and  reasonableness  of  return  to  that
    particular area which would occur in considering  a  grant  of  refugee
    status. That is  so  notwithstanding  the  respondent's  Asylum  Policy
    Instruction on revocation of refugee status which I  have  set  out  at
    [42], which does not provide full coverage of  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.

56. Thus, what was recognised in Hoxha as being the need for a "strict" and
    "restrictive" approach to  cessation  clauses  would  be  significantly
    undermined.  Put another way, it  would  make  it  easier  to  cease  a
    person's refugee status than to make  a  grant  of  refugee  status;  a
    position which is contrary both to logic and principle.

57. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  FtJ  was  correct  to
    conclude that the respondent was not entitled to cease the  appellant's
    refugee status on the basis only of  the  change  in  circumstances  in
    Mogadishu since his claim was made.  That is not to  afford  the  UNHCR
    Cessation Guidelines a status of being determinative of  the  issue  in
    question, but in my view it does mean that those Guidelines are correct
    in what they say in this respect.

58. As I have already  indicated,  the  FtJ  was  wrong  to  say  that  the
    respondent gave no consideration to the fact that  the  appellant  does
    not come from Mogadishu, but that error of fact is not (in  this  case)
    an error of law.  Even if it could be said to amount  to  an  error  of
    law, it is not one that is material to the outcome.

59. Accordingly, it is not necessary for me to go on  to  consider  whether
    the FtJ erred in law in her assessment of  the  appellant's  particular
    circumstances in terms of the viability of his return to Mogadishu  and
    the risk that he would have to live in an IDP camp.  However, if I  had
    to decide the issue, I would say that there is no error of law  in  the
    FtJ's decision in this respect.  The grounds are incorrect  to  suggest
    that the FtJ made no findings about the possibility of remittances from
    the UK.  She did, at [50].

60. On the question of whether the FtJ wrongly failed to take into  account
    the possibility of financial assistance in  terms  of  return  packages
    available (presumably provided by the Home Office), I was not  referred
    to any evidence that was put before the FtJ on this issue.  The  matter
    was referred to in MOJ & Ors at [239]  and  [423].   However,  in  both
    those paragraphs the reference is to  a  grant  of  up  to  �1,500  for
    voluntary returnees.  The appellant would not be a voluntary  returnee,
    although I recognise that in AN & SS (Tamils -  Colombo  -  risk?)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063 it was said that a person could  not  argue
    destitution in circumstances where they refuse to avail  themselves  of
    such a grant simply by refusing to return voluntarily.  In any event, I
    cannot see that even if the FtJ should have  taken  into  account  that
    matter, it would have made any difference to  her  conclusions  in  the
    light of her other findings  about  the  appellant's  circumstances  on
    return.

61. Although it is true that in MOJ & Ors there was reference to a  variety
    of types of employment that individuals may be able to obtain on return
    to Mogadishu, such as building labourers, waiters and so forth, the FtJ
    expressly considered the extent to which the appellant would be able to
    support himself on return to Mogadishu.  She implicitly  accepted  that
    he might be able to find employment in some unskilled job, but she also
    took into account that he "probably" suffers from  a  mental  disorder,
    following her careful  analysis  of  the  limitations  of  the  medical
    evidence  in  that  respect.   I  cannot  see  that  the   respondent's
    contentions in relation to this aspect of the FtJ's decision amount  to
    anything other than a disagreement with her assessment  of  his  likely
    circumstances on return.

62. Mr  Wilding  confirmed  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  FtJ's
    conclusions in terms of the s.72 certificate.

63. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law
    in the FtJ's decision.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to allow the appeal therefore
    stands.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 21/03/18
