
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ozhogina and Tarasova (deception within para 320(7B) - nannies) Russia
[2011] UKUT 00197 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 October 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE BURTON
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                         Irina anatolyevna Ozhogina
                        Natalya alekseyevna tarasova

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Fransman QC, instructed by Gherson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

Where a nanny lived  in  an  employer's  home  during  a  period  where  the
employer had come to live in the United Kingdom, she:  (a)  was  not  living
under the same roof as an  employer  but  qualified  under  the  alternative
provision of 159A (ii) of "in a household the employer uses for  himself  on
a regular basis"; (b) could not comply with 159A (iii)  "intends  to  travel
to the United Kingdom in the company of his employer"; but the appeal  could
be allowed without remittal  for  reconsideration  where  the  Tribunal  was
satisfied that the respondent was bound to conclude that the  appellant  met
the terms of a policy in an IDI.
Where  the  respondent  relies  on  paragraph  320(7B)  (d)  to  refuse   an
application for entry clearance because of a breach of the UK's  immigration
laws by using 'Deception in  an  application  for  entry  clearance'  it  is
necessary to show that a false  statement  was  deliberately  made  for  the
purpose of securing an advantage in immigration terms.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This has been the hearing of an  appeal  by  Miss  Ozhogina  and  Miss
    Tarasova, who are both nannies at present in Russia and wishing to come
    to this country in order to fulfil duties in the household of a Mr  and
    Mrs Chichvarkin.  They appeal against the decision of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal, Judge Lewis, of 26th February 2010 refusing leave  to  enter.
    The facts are very thoroughly set  out  in,  if  we  may  say  so,  the
    excellent judgment of Judge Lewis, and we do not propose to repeat them
    in any detail and the material facts will appear in the course  of  our
    analysis of the three issues which have come before us for decision  on
    this appeal.

2.    The first issue relates to the entitlement of the nannies,  if  I  can
    call them that, to seek  leave  to  enter  pursuant  to  the  terms  of
    paragraph 159A of the Immigration Rules.

3.    Paragraph 159A reads as follows:


         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter  the
         United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a private household are that
         he:

          i) is aged 18-65 inclusive;

         ii) has been employed as a domestic worker for one  year  or  more
             immediately prior to application for entry clearance under the
             same roof as his employer or in a household that the  employer
             uses for himself  on  a  regular  basis  and  where  there  is
             evidence that there  is  a  connection  between  employer  and
             employee.

        iii) that he intends to travel to the United Kingdom in the company
             of his employer, his employer's spouse or civil partner or his
             employer's minor child."

      And there are then other requirements which are  either  not  relevant
    or met in this case.

4.     The  learned  judge  below  found  that  there  had  been  continuous
    employment of the nannies throughout the  material  period  up  to  and
    including July 2009, when this application for leave to enter was made.
    The circumstances, however, are somewhat unusual and that is  that  the
    employers, the Chichvarkins, who had lived  in  Moscow  and  were  also
    developing a home in the United Kingdom, entered the United Kingdom  at
    various stages in 2008 and have decided to remain  here  on  the  basis
    that  they  assert  a  fear  of  return  to  Russia.   Such  fear   has
    materialised or has been illustrated insofar as it is justified in  the
    fact that they are now locked into considerable  legal  proceedings  in
    this country.  The initial application of Mrs Chichvarkin for leave  to
    remain on the basis that she was an investor was refused but  has  been
    reopened, but in any event has been superseded  or  supplemented  by  a
    claim by Mr Chichvarkin for asylum and accompanied  by  an  extradition
    warrant issued by Russia for his return to Russia on alleged charges.

5.    This has been the background to  the  situation  in  which  these  two
    nannies who, as we have indicated, it is common ground were employed as
    such, successfully applied in 2008 and 2009 to  come  from  Russia  and
    visit the children.  It was found by the learned judge  that  on  those
    previous visits to this country they did not breach  any  condition  of
    the visit visas which were issued to them and they both returned  after
    their visits in 2008 and 2009 back to Moscow, where  they  lived  until
    April 2009 in a substantial house which was, it seems,  not  owned  but
    rented by Mr and Mrs Chichvarkin.  That house ceased to  be  rented  in
    April 2009, when it became apparent that Mr and Mrs  Chichvarkin  would
    not be returning there, and their residence in this country  continued.
    It is not clear where the nannies were living from  April  until  July,
    but they continued, as we have indicated, on the findings of the judge,
    to be employed by the Chichvarkins and on 7 July this  application  was
    made by the nannies with the support of their employers to  enter  this
    country, in order to work  as   nannies  as  domestic  workers  in  the
    private household of the Chichvarkins in England, where at least unless
    and until one or other of their applications is determined unfavourably
    to them, subject to any appeal, the Chichvarkins intend to continue  to
    remain.

6.    There are three issues, as we indicated,  for  determination  on  this
    appeal, with which we shall deal in turn. Two of  them  relate  to  the
    construction and effect of paragraph 159A  and  the  third  relates  to
    paragraph 320 subparagraphs (7A) and (7B).

The First Issue

7.    This is a  short  question.  The  learned  judge  concluded  that  the
    employment of the nannies remained continuous (see paragraphs 48 and 59
    of his judgment).  The latter paragraph set out the facts by  reference
    to the 7 July letter which accompanied, or was, their application,  and
    which the learned judge is plainly accepting for the  purposes  of  his
    judgment.

8.    The judge then continued as follows in  paragraph  60,  which  is  the
    paragraph which has been the subject of challenge before us today by Mr
    Fransman QC.

         "60.     I find that the Chichvarkins did not use their Moscow home
             from 22/23 December 2008. However  I  would  not  consider  an
             absence up to April 2009 inevitably to have caused a cessation
             in their regular use of such a home. I am prepared  to  accept
             that up to the cessation of rent payment  in  April  2008  the
             Moscow  home  was  a  'roof'  or  'household'  in  which   the
             appellants were engaged as domestic workers  such  as  to  met
             those special requirements of 159A(ii) had an application been
             made during that time.


         61.      However, it is clear  to  me  that  at  the  date  of  the
             applications neither Appellant could be said to be so employed
             for one year or more  immediately  prior  to  the  application
             under the same roof or in a household  used  regularly  by  Mr
             Chichvarkin. The appellants had not been  employed  under  any
             such 'roof' or 'household' since April 2009.  I find that  the
             ordinary meaning of the words  of  paragraph  159A(ii)  cannot
             bear a meaning such as to 'accommodate' the  circumstances  of
             the Appellants and the Chichvarkins."

9.    It seems to us that where the learned judge fell  into  error  was  in
    failing to distinguish between the expressions "under  the  same  roof"
    and "in a household". He correctly quoted the two  alternatives,  which
    appear not only in the rule itself but also in the relevant Immigration
    Directorate Instructions (IDIs) pursuant to it, paragraph 2.3, and  yet
    in the following sentence at  paragraph  61  he  failed  to  make  such
    distinction when he says the appellants had not been employed under any
    such roof or household since April 2009.  They were not  under  a  roof
    together with Mr Chichvarkin, for reasons the judge has found,  but  it
    is a quite different question as to whether they were in - not under  -
    a household qualifying for the purpose. It seems to us  that  the  word
    "roof" is a physical question, but the word "household" might be better
    described as a metaphysical question. Although not physically  under  a
    roof with Mr Chichvarkin, on the findings by the judge they remain part
    of his household albeit that Mr and Mrs Chichvarkin  and  the  children
    were in the United Kingdom and the nannies remained employed in Russia,
    waiting for the call which subsequently came.  We  are  satisfied  that
    the nannies on  the  findings  by  the  learned  judge  qualify  within
    paragraph 159A(ii), contrary to his conclusion.

The Second Issue

10.   This relates to paragraph 159A(iii), which is  a  requirement  on  the
    face of it that the nannies intend to travel to the United  Kingdom  in
    the company of their employer. On the facts of this case that is not  a
    possibility. They intend to come to the United Kingdom to work for  the
    employer, they are already employed by the employer and  have  been  in
    his household, as we have indicated and found, but they are  in  Moscow
    waiting to come here, and he and his wife and family are already in the
    United Kingdom. So there  cannot  be,  because  of  the  understandable
    reluctance - understandable as even the learned judge found it  to  be,
    and in the light of the development of further proceedings since  quite
    clearly the case - to travel to Moscow simply for the purpose  of  then
    accompanying the nannies back here,  there  is  no  question  that  the
    scenario of  intention  to  work  here  is  fulfilled  but  the  strict
    requirement that  they  must  travel  with  their  employer  cannot  be
    satisfied.  In those circumstances there was in our judgment no way  in
    which the learned judge could, as Mr Fransman QC  suggests  he  should,
    construe the clear words of the paragraph so as to remove that specific
    requirement, which is expressly  there.  It  is  not  possible  in  our
    judgment to read anything other than what it says,  travelling  in  the
    company of the employer; and to attempt to  construe  this  as  meaning
    following on subsequently to the employer  at  the  employer's  request
    seems to us to go outside any possible construction of the requirement.

10.   In our judgment there is no need for there to be such  a  construction
    and indeed the learned judge himself so concluded, because there  is  a
    discretion in the IDIs for the nannies  to  be  allowed  to  come  even
    though they are not travelling in  the  company  of  the  employer  but
    travelling independently.   The  relevant  IDI  appears  in  chapter  5
    section 12  Domestic  Workers  in  private  households,  and  reads  as
    follows:-

         "When first travelling to the UK the domestic worker is expected to
         travel with his employer, his  employer's  spouse,  his  employer's
         minor  child.  However  a  domestic  worker  may  be  admitted   if
         travelling independently provided that there is no  excessive  time
         lapse and provided satisfactory evidence e.g.  a  letter  from  the
         employer is produced explaining why he is travelling alone."

11.   The learned judge himself drew attention to the existence of this  IDI
    and in paragraph 80 of the judgment said this:

         "Whilst I accept that  the  Respondent's  decision  in  respect  of
         paragraph 159A(iii) is not in accordance with the  law  because  of
         the failure to have regard to the  policy  as  represented  in  the
         IDIs, such a failure does not render the  decision  to  refuse  the
         application under paragraph 159A not in  accordance  with  the  law
         because the refusals were properly  made  under  159A(ii)  for  the
         reasons already given.  Allowing  the  appeals  to  the  extent  of
         remitting to the Respondent for reconsideration is not appropriate.
          If I had concluded that paragraph  159A(iii)  had  been  the  only
         sustainable basis for refusal under the Rules, then, in  accordance
         with the reasoning set out above, and subject to  the  issue  under
         320(7B), I would have concluded that the appeal should  be  allowed
         to the extent of being remitted to the Respondent to reconsider  in
         accordance with the law and specifically thereby in accordance with
         the discretion in the IDIs)."

12.   That paragraph has stood in the judgment of course since  February  of
    this year and has been capable of being considered by the respondent in
    the meantime.  The position now is that we  have  already  allowed  the
    appeal in respect of paragraph  159A(ii)  and,  as  will  be  seen,  we
    propose to allow it in respect of the third issue also.  It  must  have
    been quite  apparent  to  the  respondent  that  there  would  be  that
    prospect, although of course Mr Nath has been  instructed  properly  to
    oppose  the  appeal  in  all  respects.  Mr  Nath,  however,   had   no
    instructions on what the attitude of the respondent was in the light of
    the clear terms of paragraph 80 and the at least possible result of the
    appeal in relation to the other two issues.  We  conclude  that  it  is
    preferable if  we  can,  rather  than  following  the  learned  judge's
    indication that he would have remitted to  the  respondent,  to  decide
    this issue ourselves if we are going to, as we do otherwise, allow this
    appeal. Whether we can do so depends upon whether we have  jurisdiction
    to substitute a decision of  the  respondent  by  that  which  we  have
    concluded.  Indeed the learned judge concluded  it  was  right  on  the
    basis in which it was given but wrong by  reference  to  a  failure  to
    address the discretion under the IDIs.

13.   Mr Fransman QC has drawn our attention  to  the  well  known  case  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abdi  [1996]  IAR  148  in
    which in the event it was concluded that the  decision  taker  had  not
    exercised a discretion that he should have exercised, but  despite  the
    submission by Mr Macdonald, Counsel then appearing, the Court of Appeal
    concluded (at paragraph 160) that this was not "one of the  rare  cases
    where it is appropriate  that  the  court  should  substitute  its  own
    decision for that of the decision-taker. It is not inevitable that  the
    respondents will be given entry clearance". We are clear that  we  have
    to reach the decision that the result would be inevitable if the matter
    was remitted back to the respondent for further reconsideration, before
    we can substitute our own conclusion.

14.   We are satisfied that such decision is inevitable.  There was  plainly
    no lapse of time in the circumstances found by the  Immigration  Judge,
    and  described  briefly  by  us,  and  there  is  plainly  satisfactory
    evidence, not simply by reference to the  detailed  letter  of  9  July
    2009, which formed the basis of the  application,  and  which  we  have
    already indicated was adopted in substantial part by the learned  judge
    in his findings (see, for example, paragraph 59), which  explained  why
    the nannies are to be travelling alone.   In  any  event,  we  have  so
    considered ourselves above. It is quite plain that there  is  no  basis
    upon which the respondent could concluded that the [        ] would  be
    in a position now to leave England, go back to Russia  (extradition  to
    which and/or deportation to which  they  are  resisting)  in  order  to
    accompany the nannies back to England which in those circumstances  may
    never happen.  Consequently we are satisfied that the respondent  would
    inevitably reach the decision that this was one of those cases in which
    the  strict  terms  of  paragraph  159A(iii)  could  be   excused   and
    independent travel by the nannies could be permitted.

The Third Issue

15.   The terms of paragraph 320(7A) and (7B) are as follows:


         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused"[That  is  a  provision  for  a  mandatory
         refusal]:-


         "(7A)   where  false  representations  have  been  made  or   false
             documents or information have been submitted (whether  or  not
             material  to  the  application  and  whether  or  not  to  the
             applicant's  knowledge)  or  material  facts  have  not   been
             disclosed, in relation to the application.


         (7B)     ... where the applicant has previously breached  the  UK's
             immigration laws by ...


            (d)   using Deception in  an  application  for  entry  clearance
             leave to enter or remain (whether successful or not)


            unless the applicant


            (ii) used Deception in an application for entry  clearance  more
             than ten years ago."

16.   The Immigration Judge at paragraph 118, after citing those  paragraphs
    noted the use of the upper case D in  Deception.  Mr  Fransman  QC  has
    satisfactorily  explained  that,  by  producing  paragraph  6  of   the
    Immigration Rules, which is the interpretation clause, where  Deception
    is expressly  defined  as  follows:  "'Deception'  means  making  false
    representations or submitting false documents (whether or not  material
    to the application) or failing to disclose material facts".

17.   We considered the papers without, at that stage, the  benefit  of  the
    skeleton recently delivered by Mr Fransman QC or the authority to which
    he expressly referred in that skeleton.  This authority is the case  of
    A v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ  773,  a
    case in which Rix LJ gave the lead judgment as recently as 6 July 2010,
    although we understand it has been subsequently followed in a  decision
    of this Tribunal given by the President, LD (Article 8 - best interests
    of the child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) on 15 July 2010.

18.   Without that decision of the Court  of  Appeal,  which  is  of  course
    binding on us, we would  have  approached  consideration  of  paragraph
    320(7A) differently.  Paragraph 320(7A) is not strictly in issue before
    us, as we shall explain, but forms the basis of  consideration  of  the
    paragraph which is expressly before us, namely paragraph 320(7B) and in
    particular (7B)(g).  We would have concluded,  without  such  guidance,
    that the inclusion of the words in paragraph (7A) "whether  or  not  to
    the applicant's knowledge" suggested that dishonesty  or  knowledge  of
    falsity was not required for the purpose  of  a  justified  refusal  of
    entry clearance pursuant to paragraph (7A).  By the Court  of  Appeal's
    consideration of the  equivalent  paragraph  in  the  Rules  (paragraph
    322(1A)) that dishonesty was required in order for  that  paragraph  to
    apply, then the decision which  we  propose  to  make  in  relation  to
    320(7B) is a fortiori, because we would have been minded to distinguish
    between the two paragraphs.  What we now say is subject to that caveat.



19.   Paragraph 320(7A) applies where leave to enter is sought on the  basis
    of documents which are false and that application must  be  refused  if
    the  paragraph  is  satisfied.  320(7B)   relates   to   a   subsequent
    application, such as in this case,  where  there  has  previously  been
    deception used in an application for leave to enter.  On the  facts  of
    this case the challenge to the nannies by  the  respondent,  which  was
    successful before the learned judge, was on  the  basis  that  for  the
    purpose of their visitor's visa  application  in  2008  they  had  each
    presented to the immigration authorities for the purpose  of  leave  to
    enter as a visitor  their  employment  documentation  in  Russia.  That
    employment  documentation  was   false,   in   the   sense   that   the
    documentation, produced and apparently  accepted  in  Russia,  recorded
    that they were both employed by the Chichvarkins' company, a matter  of
    itself which is expressly said not to be  a  problem  in  the  IDIs  at
    paragraph 2.3; but in this case it  was  recorded  in  such  employment
    documentation that they were employed as managers, that is managers  of
    the business.  The learned judge found at paragraph 97 of his  judgment
    as follows:

         "97.     Further I  find  that  at  no  material  time  has  either
             appellant been  occupied  as  a  manger.  Indeed,  it  is  not
             disputed  that  beyond  being  given  the  title  on   company
             documentation (and as a reflection of salary level rather than
             duties) neither appellant has ever worked in the capacity of a
             manager.


         98.      As such it is plain to me that in  stating  that  she  was
             occupied as a manager, each appellant made  a  statement  that
             was untrue. It was a positive representation as to  occupation
             that was false.


         99.      Further, I am satisfied  that  each  appellant  was  fully
             aware of what her actual occupation was, was fully aware  that
             she was not a manager, and was fully aware that in stating she
             was  a  manager  this  was  an  inaccurate  statement  of  her
             occupation. It was a deliberate untruth in the sense  that  it
             was a statement in full knowledge of its untruthfulness."

20.   The learned judge without the benefit of the reference  to  the  Court
    of Appeal  decision  in  A,  not  surprisingly  found  that  in   those
    circumstances and the other facts which  he  found  there  had  been  a
    breach of paragraph 320(7A).  The issue, however, before him was as  to
    the applicability in those circumstances, in relation  to  the  instant
    application for leave  to  remain,  of  paragraph  (7B)  which  made  a
    mandatory refusal of leave to enter dependent upon proof that there had
    been a previous breach i.e. a breach  at  the  time  of  those  earlier
    applications to enter as a visitor by using Deception.

21.   Whatever our view would have been, and as we have indicated  we  would
    have been inclined to reach the same conclusion as the learned judge in
    relation to paragraph 320(7A),  we  must  consider  his  conclusion  in
    relation to paragraph 320(7B), which we are satisfied  on  its  wording
    imposes a different test. First of all there is no such proviso  as  is
    contained in 320(7A,) whereby that paragraph  applied  whether  or  not
    false and material documents had been  submitted  "to  the  applicant's
    knowledge".  There  is  therefore  not  in  320(7B)  the  proviso  that
    deception as defined can arise whether or not the falsity,  and  indeed
    its materiality, was to the applicant's knowledge.

22.   Secondly, and to the same  effect,  by  incorporating  into  paragraph
    320(7B) by using the word Deception the definition of Deception in Rule
    6, which we have set out, there was once  again  the  omission  of  the
    caveat as to the immateriality of  the  applicant's  knowledge  of  the
    falsity.

23.   Thirdly, and in  our  judgment,  significantly,  there  is  a  drastic
    consequence to paragraph 320(7B) which  is  not  present  in  paragraph
    320(7A).  The result of a breach of paragraph  320(7A),  production  of
    false documents, is simply the refusal of the instant application.  The
    consequence of a refusal under paragraph (7B) is as set out above, that
    there is then a continued bar for a further ten years  i.e.  until  ten
    years has  elapsed  since  the  last  deception.   That  does,  in  our
    judgment, raise the bar for a construction of paragraph 320(7B) so that
    we would have on that basis distinguished between the  two  paragraphs,
    although as we indicated if paragraph 320(7A) is indeed  now  authority
    to be interpreted as the Court of Appeal have decided, then a  fortiori
    such must be the case in relation to paragraph 320(7B).

24.   The learned judge very helpfully set out his conclusions in  paragraph
    106:

         "In all of the circumstances I find that whilst I am satisfied that
         the statements as to  occupation  as  managers  were  made  by  the
         appellants knowing them to be false - and to that  extent  were  in
         breach of their duties of bona  fides  -  the  Respondent  has  not
         satisfied  me  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the   false
         statements  were  made  with  the  deliberate  intent  of  securing
         advantage in immigration terms."

      He then continued in the light of his own conclusion:

         "However, ultimately on a true construction of  320(7B)  I  do  not
         consider that the absence of such a deliberate  intent  avails  the
         appellants".

25.   In the light of our conclusion, we  have  decided  that  in  fact  the
    formulation by the learned judge, which he concluded not to avail these
    appellants, is the correct one, that for the purpose of qualifying  for
    the ten year treatment under paragraph  320(7B)  the  nannies  must  be
    shown to have made the false statements with the deliberate  intent  of
    securing advantage in immigration terms. We agree that such was not the
    case here.  Indeed as a matter of common sense  one  can  see  that  by
    submitting the false documents as they did on both occasions they  made
    it less likely rather than more likely that they would be  admitted  on
    this application to work in  a  domestic  household  on  the  basis  of
    documents which showed that they had been office managers, and if  they
    had been minded to make any alteration it would have been  not  to  use
    those false documents, so that the use of the false documents  on  this
    occasions made their entry the less likely.

26.   But all that we need to say for the purposes of this decision is  that
    we are satisfied that the appellants did not "use deception"  which  is
    the final basis upon which we distinguish paragraph (7B) from paragraph
    (7A) in the application for entry clearance.  If  "used"  simply  meant
    "supplied documents" then of course they did, but  given  what  we  are
    satisfied  about  and  that  is  the  high  level  of  requirement  for
    satisfaction for finding the applicability of paragraph  (7B),  we  are
    satisfied that the use of the deception must have  been  as  the  judge
    said, with the deliberate intent of securing advantage  in  immigration
    terms by the use of a false document known to be false,  and  like  the
    Judge, we do not conclude that that was the case.

27.   In those circumstances we allow the appeal in respect of  the  judge's
    decision on this third issue and, having found for  the  appellants  on
    all three issues upon the grounds that we have indicated, we allow  the
    appeal.

Signed                                             Date

Mr Justice Burton
(Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

