

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

TY (Overseas Adoptions - Certificates of Eligibility) Jamaica  [2018]  UKUT
00197 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 February 2018                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before
                           THE RT. HON. LORD BOYD
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                TY (a minor)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER IN SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms K. Cronin, Counsel, Garden Court Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

In cases where an adoption is not  recognised  by  the  law  of  the  United
Kingdom:

       i) The Tribunal should be aware of the underlying legal  process  in
          each part of the Kingdom by which a Certificate of Eligibility is
          issued.
      ii) The Certificate of Eligibility is the definitive outcome  of  the
          fact-finding and assessment that underlies it.
     iii) Whilst there is no exact  correlation  between  the  requirements
          that are to be met in the law of adoption and the requirements to
          be met under the Immigration Rules in order for  a  minor  to  be
          admitted for the purposes of adoption, they ought properly to  be
          seen as a unified whole where each plays its part in  determining
          whether entry clearance should be granted.
      iv) The Certificate  of  Eligibility  is  capable  of  informing  the
          decision to be made on the application for entry  clearance.   In
          particular, the Immigration and Asylum Chamber should be slow  to
          depart from the underlying circumstances  (insofar  as  they  can
          reasonably be ascertained) which are the  subject-matter  of  the
          Certificate of Eligibility.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and immigration history

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who  was  born  on  2  August
        2001. He remains a minor. His sponsor, CM, is  his  maternal  aunt.
        She is a British citizen and resident in London. She applied on the
        appellant's behalf for entry clearance to enable her nephew to join
        her in the United Kingdom. The application was refused by the entry
        clearance officer  in  Sheffield  and,  on  review,  by  the  entry
        clearance manager. Those decisions were  made  respectively  on  14
        October 2015 and 8 August  2016.  The  appellant  appealed  on  the
        ground available to him, namely, that the decision was unlawful  as
        incompatible with s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and Article 8 of
        the ECHR.

The facts

     2. The appellant's mother died in March 2010 of renal failure. A  copy
        of a death certificate was provided to the Tribunal. The  appellant
        is currently living with his grandmother in Jamaica. She is now  74
        years old. The appellant's grandmother had suffered  a  stroke  and
        was partially paralysed on the left side as well as  having  speech
        and memory impairment. The judge accepted on the  strength  of  the
        medical evidence that the appellant grandmother would be unable  to
        carry out a role as a parent to a teenage boy.


     3. The appellant's father can no longer be traced but took  no  active
        part in bringing up the appellant. He disappeared in February  2016
        and the Jamaican police suspected that they had discovered part  of
        his body but were unable to identify it positively as  the  father.
        The  sponsor's  mother  and  father   (the   appellant's   maternal
        grandparents) had been separated for more than  35  years  and  the
        sponsor financially supported (and continues to support)  both  the
        appellant's grandmother and the appellant.


     4. The appellant has four siblings in Jamaica. All of them  are  adult
        and have left home. There are two older  sisters.  The  appellant's
        two  brothers,  aged  26  and  24  respectively,  have  never  been
        considered as suitable to  look  after  the  appellant  during  his
        minority.  His two sisters have shown no willingness to do so.


     5. In 2011, shortly after the death of the appellant's mother,  Ms  CM
        commenced adoption proceedings in  Jamaica.   Jamaica  was  one  of
        several countries named in the Adoption  (Designation  of  Overseas
        Adoptions) Order 1973 ('the designated list') as  they  related  to
        adoptions made from 1  February  1973  to  2  January  2014.   Such
        adoptions were recognised in the  United  Kingdom.   On  3  January
        2014, the designated list was revoked and replaced by the  Adoption
        (Recognition  of  Overseas  Adoptions)  Order  2013  and  the  2013
        Scottish  Regulations.   Jamaica  was  omitted  from  the  list  of
        countries whose adoptions, since January 2014, were  recognised  in
        the United Kingdom.  Only the countries so  listed  were  known  as
        'overseas adoptions'.


     6. The appellant submitted a Jamaican adoption  certificate  dated  16
        December 2014 as part of her application.  By then,  this  adoption
        certificate had ceased to be recognised by the authorities  in  the
        United Kingdom.

The appeal to the FTT

     7. The appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S.
        Taylor on 12 June 2017. The determination  was  promulgated  on  27
        June 2017. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the  appellant
        could not meet the requirements of the Rules for  entry  clearance.
        Having not met them, the refusal of  entry  clearance  was  not  an
        interference with the appellant's family life sufficient to  engage
        Article 8. He rejected the appellant's appeal.

Adoption law


     8. Not all foreign adoptions  are  recognised,  that  is,  have  legal
        effect in the United Kingdom.  Sections 66 and 67 of  the  Adoption
        and Children Act 2002 and sections 39 and 40 of  the  Adoption  and
        Children (Scotland) Act 2007 define the adoptions treated in law as
        having legal effect in England, Wales and Scotland (termed  in  the
        Adoption and Children Act as 'Chapter 4 adoptions'). These  include
        certain intercountry adoptions:


        (i) An adoption effected  under  the  law  of  a  Hague  Convention
           country outside the British Islands, and certified in  pursuance
           of  Article  23(1)  of  the  Convention  (a  "Hague   Convention
           adoption").  The UK incorporated the Hague Convention of 29  May
           1993 on Protection of Children and Co-operation  in  Respect  of
           Intercountry Adoption into domestic law by the operation of  the
           Adoption  (Intercountry  Aspects)  Act  1999  Schedule   1   and
           Adoptions with a Foreign Element (Scotland) Regulations  2009/SI
           182 (Scottish SI).


        (ii) An overseas adoption (as referred to  in  paragraph  5  above)
           effected under the law of a country or territory listed  in  the
           Schedule to the Adoption  (Recognition  of  Overseas  Adoptions)
           Order 2013 from 3 January 2014 and to the Adoption  (Designation
           of Overseas Adoptions) Order 1973  for  adoptions  made  from  1
           February 1973 to 2 January 2014. These state that such adoptions
           must  not  be  a  Hague  Convention,  customary  or  common  law
           adoption.   This  change  is  the  underlying  factor  in   this
           appellant's appeal.


        (iii) An adoption recognised by the law of England  and  Wales  and
           effected under the  law  of  any  other  country.  The  inherent
           jurisdiction invoked to recognise foreign adoptions is described
           in detail by Sir James Munby President in N (A Child), Re [2016]
           EWHC 3085 (Fam). We only attempt a summary: the adoptive parents
           must have been domiciled in the foreign country at the  time  of
           the foreign adoption; the child must have been  legally  adopted
           in accordance with the requirements  of  the  foreign  law;  the
           foreign adoption must  in  substance  have  the  same  essential
           characteristics as an English adoption  and  there  must  be  no
           reason in public policy for refusing recognition.

The prohibition upon entry on those whose adoptions are  not  recognised  in
the UK


   9. Where an adoption carried out in accordance with the law  and  customs
      of a foreign country is not so recognised, there is a  prohibition  in
      bringing the child into the UK except where the Immigration Rules make
      other provision.


  10. The prohibition is found in s. 83 of the Adoption and Children Act:


           83 Restriction on bringing children in
           (1) This section  applies  where  a  person  who  is  habitually
           resident in the British Islands (the "British resident")-
           (a)  brings,  or  causes  another  to  bring,  a  child  who  is
           habitually resident outside the British Islands into the  United
           Kingdom for the purpose of adoption by the British resident, or
           (b) at any time brings, or causes another  to  bring,  into  the
           United Kingdom a child adopted by the British resident under  an
           external adoption effected within the period  of  twelve  months
           ending with that time.
           The references to adoption,  or  to  a  child  adopted,  by  the
           British resident include a reference to adoption, or to a  child
           adopted, by the British resident and another person.

    11. In Scotland the prohibition is found in s. 58 of the  Adoption  and
        Children (Scotland) Act 2007 and in Northern Ireland by NI  SI  144
        regs 3 and 4.


    12. By virtue of s.83(2) of the Adoption and Children Act where  it  is
        intended the child is  to  be  adopted  under  a  Hague  Convention
        adoption, the prohibition contained within s.  83(1)  is  expressly
        excluded.  However, the prohibition does  apply  to  all  'external
        adoptions' -  defined  as  an  adoption  other  than  a  Convention
        adoption of a child effected  under  the  law  of  any  country  or
        territory outside the British Islands, whether or not the  adoption
        is an adoption within the meaning of  ACA  Chapter  4  (that  is  a
        recognised or 'overseas adoption') or a full adoption  (within  the
        meaning of section 88(3) - that is an adoption by virtue  of  which
        the child is treated in law as not being the child  of  any  person
        other than the adopter(s).)

The exception to the prohibition

    13. The Act envisages its provisions being implemented  by  Regulations
        which may require a person intending to bring, or to cause  another
        to bring, a child into the  United  Kingdom  (a)  to  apply  to  an
        adoption agency (including a Scottish or  Northern  Irish  adoption
        agency)  in  the  prescribed  manner  for  an  assessment  of   his
        suitability to adopt the child, and (b) to give the adoption agency
        any information it may require for the purpose of the assessment.


    14. The Regulations may require prescribed conditions to be  met.   The
        principal condition with which we are concerned is the condition to
        produce a certification  from  the  Secretary  of  State  from  the
        Department for Education (DfE) or, in Scotland, from  the  Scottish
        Ministers.

    15. It is a striking feature of the scheme created by these  provisions
        that an individual who does not comply  with  the  requirements  to
        engage an adoption agency for  a  suitability  assessment  or  with
        conditions imposed under sub-s.  (5)  commits  a  criminal  offence
        punishable summarily or on indictment.

    16. It is important to note at this stage that the Home Office  in  its
        capacity to regulate the entry of non-nationals in to the UK is not
        yet involved.

The Immigration Rules

    17. The current version of paragraph 309B - which HC 667 states applies
        to all applications made on or after 24 November 2016 - is in these
        terms:


          309B. Inter-country adoptions may be subject to section 83 of  the
         Adoption and Children Act 2002 or  the  equivalent  legislation  in
         Scotland or Northern Ireland if the adopter's habitual residence is
         there.  Where  this  is  the  case,  a  letter  obtained  from  the
         Department for Education (England and Wales habitual residents)  or
         the equivalent from the relevant  central  authority  (Scotland  or
         Northern Ireland habitual residents)  confirming  the  issue  of  a
         Certificate  of  Eligibility  must  be  provided  with  any   entry
         clearance adoption application under paragraphs 310-316C.

    18. The version of 309B  applying  to  paragraphs  310  or  316A  entry
        applications prior to 24 November2016 - and thus to  the  appellant
        TY - is in these terms:


         309B. Inter-country adoptions which are not  a  de  facto  adoption
         under paragraph 309A are subject to the Adoption and  Children  Act
         2002 and the Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations 2005.  As
         such all prospective adopters must be assessed as suitable to adopt
         by a competent authority in the UK, and  obtain  a  Certificate  of
         Eligibility from the Department for  Education,  before  travelling
         abroad to identify  a  child  for  adoption.  This  Certificate  of
         Eligibility must be provided  with  all  entry  clearance  adoption
         applications under paragraphs 310-316F.


    19. The exceptions to the prohibition  are  found  in  the  Immigration
        Rules which  make  provision  for  adopted  and  adoptive  children
        entering for settlement with their settled parents or entering with
        temporary leave to await the outcome of  an  adoption  order  by  a
        British court or a partner parent's qualification  for  settlement.
        These provisions are found in the  Immigration  Rules,  paras  309A
        -316F.  The Rules make provision for the entry and stay of children
        adopted via Hague Convention and 'overseas adoptions'  as  well  as
        for those termed 'de facto'  adoptions.  De  facto  adoptions  take
        effect for immigration law purposes but  are  not  adoptions  under
        United Kingdom family law and the de facto parents  will  not  have
        parental responsibility for the children under family law on  entry
        and will need to obtain  a  family  order  to  have  such  parental
        responsibility rights and responsibilities.

    20. The Immigration Rules, Part 8, Family  Members,  contain  the  Home
        Office provisions that reflect the statutory framework set  out  in
        the Adoption and Children Act.   Paragraphs  297  to  316F  concern
        children.

    21. The more familiar provisions are found in paragraph 297  which,  in
        general, permit a person settled in the UK to seek entry  clearance
        or leave to remain to their minor, dependent child if both  parents
        are settled or being settled in the United  Kingdom  or  where  one
        parent, settled or being settled, has sole responsibility  for  the
        child.  The provisions are designed to  avoid  recourse  to  public
        funds in both forms.  However, paragraph  297  is  not  limited  to
        parents and their children but also permits a relative to apply for
        a child to join them in the UK within the terms  of  paragraph  297
        (i) (f):

           [One parent or] a relative is present and settled in the  United
           Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion  for  settlement
           and  there  are  serious  and   compelling   family   or   other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have been made to the child's care

    22. It hardly needs be said that the 'serious and compelling family  or
        other considerations' presents a high threshold for  those  parents
        or relatives who seek to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  297.
        For our purposes, we are, of course, considering the situation of a
        relative.  The purpose of making  reference  to  paragraph  297  is
        because it was through the mechanism of  this  provision  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal Judge came  to  determine  the  appeal  and  to
        dismiss it.


    23. In contrast, the provisions relating to  adoptions  which  are  not
        otherwise recognised in the United Kingdom is through the operation
        of paragraph 316A:

           Requirements for limited leave to enter the United Kingdom  with
           a view to settlement as a child for adoption
           316A. The requirements to be satisfied in the case  of  a  child
           seeking limited leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
           purpose of being adopted (which, for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
           does not include a de facto adoption) in the United Kingdom  are
           that he:
           (i) is seeking limited leave to enter to  accompany  or  join  a
           person or persons who wish to adopt him in  the  United  Kingdom
           (the  "prospective  parent(s)"),  in  one   of   the   following
           circumstances:
           ....
            (f) one prospective parent is present and settled in the United
           Kingdom or is being admitted for settlement on the same occasion
           that  the  child  is  seeking  admission,  and  has   had   sole
           responsibility for the child's upbringing; ...
           and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and
           (iii) is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and  is
           not a civil partner, and has not formed  an  independent  family
           unit; and
           (iv) can, and will, be maintained  and  accommodated  adequately
           without recourse to public  funds  in  accommodation  which  the
           prospective parent or parents own or occupy exclusively; and
           (v) will have the same rights and obligations as any other child
           of the marriage or civil partnership; and
           (vi) is being adopted due  to  the  inability  of  the  original
           parent(s) or  current  carer(s)  (or  those  looking  after  him
           immediately prior to him being  physically  transferred  to  his
           prospective parent or parents) to care for him,  and  there  has
           been a  genuine  transfer  of  parental  responsibility  to  the
           prospective parent or parents; and
           (vii) has lost or broken or intends to lose or  break  his  ties
           with his family of origin; and
           (viii) will be adopted in the United Kingdom by his  prospective
           parent or  parents  in  accordance  with  the  law  relating  to
           adoption in the United Kingdom, but the proposed adoption is not
           one of convenience arranged to facilitate his admission  to  the
           United Kingdom.


           Limited leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to
           settlement as a child for adoption
           316B. A person seeking limited leave to enter the United Kingdom
           with a view to  settlement  as  a  child  for  adoption  may  be
           admitted for a period not exceeding 24  months  provided  he  is
           able, on arrival, to produce to the Immigration Officer a  valid
           passport or other identity document and has entry clearance  for
           entry in this capacity.

The Entry Clearance Officer's decision

    24. As  will  have  become  immediately  apparent,  the  paragraph  297
        threshold ('serious and compelling family or  other  considerations
        which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable')  is  lacking  and
        there  is,   instead,   the   alternative   requirements   of   the
        appellant/sponsor establishing (a) the  inability  of  the  current
        carer to care  for  him,  (b)  the  genuine  transfer  of  parental
        responsibility  to  the  prospective  parent  or  parents  (c)  the
        breaking of ties with his family of origin and (d) the  prospective
        adoption in the United Kingdom in accordance with the law  relating
        to adoption in the United  Kingdom,  (an  adoption  of  convenience
        being excluded).


    25.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  entry  clearance  to  the
        appellant on the grounds that
   a) there was no evidence to connect the  appellant  as  the  son  of  the
      deceased DM;
   b) there was no evidence to show that  the  appellant's  grandmother  was
      unable to provide for his care;
   c) there was no evidence to show that the appellant's father consented to
      his adoption.

    26. It is apparent that each of those challenges has been  successfully
        refuted  by  the  appellant.   The  birth   certificates   of   the
        appellant's and his mother, DM, as well as that of the sponsor,  CM
        were before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  A  medical  report  was
        provided in evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   A
        letter from Jamaica's Child Development  Agency  dated  30  January
        2013 confirmed that the father consented to the  adoption  and  the
        police report dated 12 June 2017  confirmed  that  the  father  was
        missing, efforts to locate him were futile  and  the  investigation
        into his disappearance is continuing.  Ms Cronin noted that as  the
        father was not named on the appellant's birth certificate, he  does
        not have parental responsibility under  English  family  law.   His
        consent to the English adoption is not, therefore, required.


    27. The documentary  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        established the appellant countered each  of  the  Entry  Clearance
        Officer's stated reasons for refusal.

    28. CM began the adoption process in 2011 when  the  appellant  was  12
        (and, at which time, Jamaica was on the designated list made  under
        the 1973 Adoption Order); first in the UK where, after  a  detailed
        home study report and  adoption  agency  panel  decision,  the  DfE
        approved and certified her adoption proposal on 4 March 2014;  then
        in Jamaica where the appellant's father consented to  the  adoption
        on or  about  30  January  2013  and,  after  repeated  home  study
        investigations,  the  Spanish  Town  magistrate's  court  made  the
        adoption order on 16 December 2014. According to Jamaican  law,  CM
        is the appellant's parent. In English law she is not his parent  as
        the adoption  is  not  an  'overseas  adoption'  and  thus  is  not
        recognised.  This, as we have pointed out, is the  combined  effect
        of the Adoption and Children Act 2002 and the Adoption (Recognition
        of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013.

    29.  The  evidence  presented  was  that   his  grandmother  carer  was
        medically unfit and unable to continue his care; the  grandmother's
        poor health and disability  was  confirmed  by  the  Chief  Medical
        Officer at the SMN Medical centre, Dr Nesbeth who stated  that  the
        appellant's 74  year-old  grandmother  is  'a  known  diabetic  and
        hypertensive'; has had a  stroke  which  has  left  her  'partially
        paralysed'; her speech is slurred, her memory 'very poor' and  'she
        is not cognizant or coherent enough to care, monitor or supervise a
        teenage boy'.  The  doctor  stated  that  the  grandmother  herself
        requires a carer -  'that  she  can  no  longer  care  for  anyone,
        especially a teenage boy who needs guidance and supervision'.

    30. CM was the appellant's sole carer;  she  spoke  to  him  each  day;
        checked on his homework; supported him  financially  and  sent  him
        food and clothes. This is the effect of the  answers  she  gave  in
        interview, prior to the refusal, on 26 June 2015. She gave  details
        concerning her immigration history, her and the appellant's  family
        circumstances and the appellant's schooling.  She talks to him each
        day about 'his homework and things like that'; sends money (�100 or
        �200) each month for the appellant and food and clothing barrels at
        least twice a year. This evidence was not contested  by  the  Entry
        Clearance  Officer,  Entry  Clearance  Manager  or  the  Presenting
        Officer or First-tier Tribunal Judge on appeal.

    31. The appellant's siblings had shown no interest in him and had taken
        no steps to assume responsibility towards him.


The error of law

    32. The error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination was  his
        failure to apply the effect of the Adoption and Children  Act  2002
        and the process of re-adoption  in  the  United  Kingdom  which  is
        permissible pursuant  to  the  Adoptions  with  a  Foreign  Element
        Regulations 2005 and paragraph 309B of the Immigration Rules. It is
        not altogether surprising that the judge fell into this  error  and
        the purpose of this  determination  is  to  set  out  the  relevant
        provisions in order to provide  these  provisions  with  a  greater
        currency. In particular, the First-tier Tribunal judge confused the
        very distinctive roles played by paragraphs 310  and  316A  of  the
        Immigration Rules. The sponsor had been vetted and approved as  the
        applicant's adopter by the accredited adoption agency, the  British
        Association of Adoption and Fostering (BAAF),  and  the  Department
        for Education.


    33. The error was compounded by  the  unfortunate  submission  made  by
        counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that the appellant did
        not meet the requirements of paragraph 316A.  Whilst  this  renders
        the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   readily
        understandable, it does  not  render  it  lawful,  since  Counsel's
        concession cannot  obviate  the  judge's  duty  to  apply  the  law
        correctly, wittingly or unwittingly. The concession  does  not,  of
        course, bind either Ms Cronin or the Upper Tribunal.


The significance of the Regulations


    34.  A major plank of the submissions made by Ms Cronin is  the  weight
        to be attached to the  assessment  provided  by  the  approved  and
        accredited United Kingdom adoption agency which is the  cornerstone
        of the Secretary of State's Certificate of Eligibility. The  report
        itself (the BAAF Home Study report) was and remains confidential to
        the adoption proceedings.  It  was  not,  and  will  not,  be  made
        available  to  the  Tribunal.  However,  its  positive   conclusion
        resulted in the DfE's Certificate of Eligibility. More importantly,
        as the report is directed towards an assessment of the  suitability
        of the sponsor to adopt the appellant, weight has to  be  given  to
        the inference that the proposed adopter is suitable.  This will  be
        a factor in the consideration of whether adoption is in the child's
        best interests.

    35. It is for this reason that the process of checks  and  requirements
        merits consideration. We have set out the  relevant  provisions  in
        the Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations  2005/392,  as  an
        annex to this determination. It is  only  necessary  to  provide  a
        brief summary of their contents. Pursuant to reg. 4, prior  to  the
        child's entry into the  United  Kingdom,  the  prospective  adopter
        must, before visiting the child in her country  of  origin,  notify
        the adoption agency of the details of  the  child  to  be  adopted;
        visit the child; provide the adoption agency with  any  information
        and reports received from the  relevant  country  of  origin,  both
        before and after, the visit; have  discussions  with  the  adoption
        agency and must accompany the child on entering the United Kingdom.
        It is easy to see why these steps are deemed necessary.  These  are
        requirements imposed upon the prospective adopter.

    36. There are also  requirements  imposed  upon  the  adoption  agency,
        including the writing  of  the  report.  These  are  found  in  the
        Adoption Agencies Regulations 2005/389 (as amended) which are  also
        reproduced in the Appendix.  The agency must also obtain a  written
        report from a registered medical practitioner about the  health  of
        the prospective adopter, obtain written  reports  of  each  of  the
        statutory interviews with  persons  nominated  by  the  prospective
        adopter to provide personal references, contact the local authority
        for information about the prospective adopter which may be relevant
        to his suitability and,  if  the  agency  considers  it  necessary,
        obtain personal references from the  prospective  adopter's  former
        spouse, civil partner or partner.

    37. The  agency's  written  plan,  written  in  consultation  with  the
        prospective adopter, must map out the procedure for  assessing  the
        prospective adopter's suitability. The  detailed  contents  of  the
        report are set out in reg. 30. This material is  then  conveyed  to
        the adoption panel whose function is to make  a  recommendation  to
        the agency as to whether the prospective  adopter  is  suitable  to
        adopt a child. In considering  what  recommendation  to  make,  the
        adoption panel may request additional relevant information from the
        adoption  agency  and  obtain  legal  advice.  Before  making   any
        recommendation, the adoption  panel  must  invite  the  prospective
        adopter to attend a meeting of the panel. There is  scope  for  the
        prospective adopter to apply to the Secretary of State for a review
        by an independent review panel.

    38. Once this procedure has been followed, and the adoption agency  has
        received the panel's recommendation that a prospective  adopter  is
        suitable, the material is then  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  State
        including the record of the proceedings of the adoption panel,  its
        recommendation and the reasons for its  recommendation  and,  where
        there has been a review, the relevant material  generated  by  that
        review.

    39. There  are  also  provisions  within  the  regulations  imposing  a
        requirement  to  provide  counselling,  information  and   suitable
        preparation  for  the  adoption.  The  preparation   includes   the
        provision of information to the prospective adopter about  a  range
        of material considerations and skills which are  necessary  for  an
        adoptive parent.

    40.  In  Scotland,  the  Adoption  Recognition  of  Overseas  Adoptions
        (Scotland)  Regulations  2013  and  the   Adoption   and   Children
        (Scotland) Act 2007 provide  that,  if  approved  by  the  adoption
        agency, the application and supporting documents are passed to  the
        Scottish government's Intercountry Adoption (ICA) team which checks
        that the  material  complies  with  the  relevant  United  Kingdom,
        Scottish and adoptee's home country  legislation.  The  application
        will then be sent to an independent social worker  to  ensure  that
        the 'Home Study' assessment has been carried out properly. Once the
        application is deemed complete and all supporting documents are  in
        place, the ICA  team,  acting  on  behalf  of  Scottish  ministers,
        attaches a Certificate of Eligibility to the prospective adopters.

    41.  This  summary  of  the  detailed  regulations  imposed  upon   the
        prospective adopters, the accredited adoption agency, the  adoption
        panel and those involved in preparing the case for the  Certificate
        of Eligibility demonstrate the nature and scope  of  the  enquiries
        made and the decision-making process of the  adoption  agency.  The
        Certificate of Eligibility must be seen as the  definitive  outcome
        of that process which exceeds the ability of either the Home Office
        or the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal to form  its  own  judgement
        upon the matters which are the subject matter of  the  report  from
        the adoption agency and the Certificate of Eligibility.

The interface between the law of adoption and the Immigration Rules

    42. Nevertheless, paragraph 316A imposes yet further requirements which
        may not be the same considerations as the adoption  agency  or  the
        DfE is required to assess. It is, however,  very  likely  that  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules have been touched upon in the
        adoption panel's assessment. For example, sub-paragraph  (viii)  of
        paragraph 316A requires that the appellant will be adopted  in  the
        United Kingdom in accordance with the law relating to  adoption  in
        the United Kingdom which must necessarily include the work  of  the
        adoption agency and the DfE.  Further, in the  same  sub-paragraph,
        an adoption of 'convenience  arranged  to  facilitate  the  child's
        admission to the United Kingdom' is prohibited. However,  it  seems
        unlikely that the assessments made by the agency and  the  adoption
        panel will not have considered whether the adoption is genuine  and
        not one of convenience.

    43. Similarly, the requirement in paragraph 316A(vi) that the  adoption
        is due to the inability of the original parent or carer to care for
        the  child  and,  therefore,  a  genuine   transfer   of   parental
        responsibility  to  the  prospective  adopter  is  likely  to  have
        featured in the adoption agency's report  on  suitability  and  the
        Certificate of Eligibility.

'has...broken his ties...with his family of origin'

    44. We note that the requirement in paragraph 316A(vii) that the  child
        'has lost or broken or intends to lose or break his ties  with  his
        family of origin' will be most readily apparent when it is intended
        that his family of origin cease to have contact with him.  However,
        we would not construe this as requiring  a  complete  cessation  of
        contact. In a case such as this, where the grandmother is incapable
        of looking after her teenage grandson,  it  is  inconceivable  that
        this should require her to  have  no  further  contact.  Similarly,
        whilst the child's adult siblings are not participating in his  up-
        bringing, we do not regard it as necessary to  establish  that  the
        ties of kinship must be broken completely  before  entry  clearance
        will be permitted. The words of paragraph 316A(vii) must  therefore
        be read as envisaging the breaking-off of the existing arrangements
        for the child's care. The expression 'has lost or broken or intends
        to lose or break his ties with his family of origin' contemplates a
        fundamental change in the arrangements for the child's care  so  as
        to  exclude  a  situation  where  the  existing  arrangements  will
        continue in practice as before but with only a  nominal  alteration
        effected  by  the  adoption.   However,  it   must   be   construed
        purposively so as not to defeat the aim  of  the  law  relating  to
        adoption and the Immigration Rules which contemplate the  grant  of
        entry clearance for the purpose of adoption.


    45. The above is consistent with, and derived from, the decision of the
        Immigration and Asylum Tribunal in VB v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
        Ghana [2002] UKIAT 1323, a decision of its then President,  Collins
        J, paras. 13 to 15.

Our re-evaluation of the First-tier Tribunal's determination

    46.  In his determination, the First-tier Tribunal Judge commenced  his
        findings by stating in paragraph 10:

          In submissions the appellant's representatives accepted  that  the
             appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  316A.
             The appellant has not disputed that the adoption in Jamaica is
             not recognised in the UK under the  2013  Order.  The  current
             version of the Order  still  does  not  include  Jamaica,  and
             adoption orders in Jamaica  remain  unrecognised  in  the  UK.
             Similarly Jamaica is not a party to the Hague Convention which
             is a requirement of paragraph 316, through the application  of
             paragraph 316D. I find that the appellant does not  reach  the
             requirements of paragraph 316A, as he is already subject to an
             adoption order which is not recognised under  the  2013  Order
             and from a country which is not party to the Hague Convention.

    47. This paragraph displays a misunderstanding of the circumstances  in
        which a child may  be  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
        purposes of adoption. It is, of course, true that Jamaica  was  not
        and is not a party to the Hague Convention. It is  also  true  that
        the adoption affected by CM in accordance with Jamaican law is  not
        an 'overseas adoption' recognised by the United Kingdom.  The  fact
        that such an adoption has taken place, however, does not operate as
        a bar to the appellant satisfying  the  requirements  of  paragraph
        316A which was the reason advanced by the judge  for  stating  that
        the requirements of paragraph 316A were not met.


    48. It is also clear that, as the judge records in paragraph 11 of  the
        determination,   the   submissions   made   by   the    appellant's
        representative that the arrangement with the sponsor amounted to  a
        de facto adoption were also misplaced.

    49. Further, the judge appears to have misunderstood  the  significance
        the assessment made by the adoption agency. In paragraph 8  of  the
        determination, the judge records:

          The sponsor had to complete a Home Study and had to be assessed in
             the UK by a UK social worker with her  suitability  to  adopt.
             The findings of the UK social worker were  then  sent  to  the
             overseas  country  as  part  of  the  adoption   process   [in
             Jamaica]....

    50. We consider that this suggests the First-tier  Tribunal  considered
        the  accredited  UK  adoption  agency's  function  was  to  provide
        evidence in support of the Jamaican adoption. The  Judge  did  not,
        therefore,  engage  with  the  process  under  which  the  adoption
        agencies report was directed towards the UK government through  the
        medium of the DfE certifying CM as eligible to adopt the appellant.


    51. For the reasons we have stated, whilst it is understandable why the
        First-tier Tribunal Judge was confused as to the relevance  of  the
        adoption agency's report and the Certificate of  Eligibility  since
        these matters were not brought to  her  attention,  this  does  not
        operate  to  prevent  the  determination  being   legally   flawed.
        Inevitably, once the requirements of the Immigration Rules had not,
        according to the First-tier Tribunal, been met, the Article 8 claim
        was bound to fail.


The Rule 24 response


    52. It is, perhaps  regrettable  that  the  misunderstanding  has  gone
        beyond the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the  Rule  24  response,  the
        Specialist  Appeals  Team  opposed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The
        response pointed out  that  the  judge  was  guided  by  the  legal
        submissions of the appellant's  representative,  the  judge  having
        been informed that the appellant conceded his case under  paragraph
        316A. It further alleges that the Judge was bound to accept such  a
        submission and not go behind it. We reject that submission.  It  is
        of course for the Judge to apply the law and the concession made as
        to the law applicable under paragraph 316A was legally flawed. Such
        a legal flaw as this cannot be remedied by concession.

    53. The response makes a further serious error. The writer states:

          Whilst the judge's findings related to the matters under paragraph
             309B and 310 of the Immigration Rules, these were  essentially
             concerned with the same issue and that  was  the  serious  and
             compelling   family   circumstances   (namely   whether    the
             grandmother's state of health, lack of  parents  and  lack  of
             interest   from   his   siblings),   which   make    exclusion
             undesirable.... Although  under  a  different  provision,  the
             judge took into  account  all  of  the  circumstances  of  the
             appellant including the grandmother's health, the existence of
             close relatives in Jamaica, the lack of  evidence  to  suggest
             efforts were  made  with  siblings  to  take  a  role  in  the
             appellant's care and upbringing.

    54. In our judgement, the determination was fatally flawed by  applying
        the incorrect - and different - part of the Rules.  Paragraph  316A
        is not 'essentially concerned' with the same issue at  all.  It  is
        not concerned with  serious  and  compelling  family  circumstances
        making exclusion undesirable.


    55. Based on what we consider to be an unlawful approach adopted by the
        Secretary of State in the Rule 24 response, it is unsurprising that
        the respondent adopted  the  judge's  finding  that  there  was  no
        interference with family life as it  would  continue  on  the  same
        basis that it has since its inception.

What was the intended outcome?

    56. We are bound to question what the Secretary of State and the First-
        tier Tribunal considered to be the proper and suitable outcome.  It
        appears to have been contemplated that the child should remain with
        his partially paralysed grandmother whose inability to  look  after
        him was  not  challenged.  Assuming  that  it  was  not  considered
        appropriate that the appellant should become feral, the  underlying
        assumption must be that the child should live with one or other  of
        his adult siblings, none of whom had, on the evidence, taken  steps
        to assume any responsibility towards him,  two  of  whom  were  his
        elder brothers aged 26 and 24  and  two  of  whom  were  his  elder
        sisters whose circumstances  had  neither  been  examined  nor  the
        subject of any evidence. We consider that  such  a  dismal  outcome
        should at least have sounded alarm-bells.

    57. Thankfully, Mr Duffy did not take the same view as that adopted  in
        the  Rule  24  response.  He  did  not  materially  challenge   the
        submissions made by Ms Cronin. In these circumstances, we  conclude
        that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and  that
        its determination should be set  aside.  We  re-make  the  decision
        allowing the appeal of TY by our finding that the appellant met the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules. We consider that a  decision
        made by the respondent that runs counter to the  Immigration  Rules
        in the circumstances of this appeal engages Article 8  and  amounts
        to a breach of it, see for example Singh v Entry Clearance  Officer
        New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ  1075  and  Ahmadi  &  Anor,  R  (on  the
        application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]
        EWCA Civ 1721 in which the Courts have found family life  to  exist
        as between prospective adopters and adoptive children and that  the
        obligation to respect family life requires not only  that  a  State
        refrains from interfering with existing family life  but  may  also
        entails a positive obligation to permit family life to develop.

The re-making of the decision

    58. We conclude:


        i) The Tribunal should be aware of the underlying legal process  in
           each part of the Kingdom by which a Certificate  of  Eligibility
           is issued.
       ii) The Certificate of Eligibility is the definitive outcome of  the
           fact-finding and assessment that underlies it.
      iii) Whilst there is no exact correlation  between  the  requirements
           that are to be met in the law of adoption and  the  requirements
           to be met under the Immigration Rules in order for a minor to be
           admitted for the purposes of adoption, they ought properly to be
           seen as a unified whole where each plays its part in determining
           whether entry clearance should be granted.
       iv) The Certificate of  Eligibility  is  capable  of  informing  the
           decision to be made on the application for entry clearance.   In
           particular, the Immigration and Asylum Chamber should be slow to
           depart from the underlying circumstances (insofar  as  they  can
           reasonably be ascertained) which are the subject-matter  of  the
           Certificate of Eligibility.


    59. We are satisfied that all of the  requirements  of  paragraph  316A
        have been met.  There has never been an issue as to many  of  them.
        Thus, the requirements of age, dependency and the  absence  of  any
        recourse to public funds have each been met.  We are also satisfied
        that the evidence fully established CM having  sole  responsibility
        because of the grandmother's inability to provide appropriate  care
        for TY.  The process adopted by CM has been a genuine  transfer  of
        responsibility in  circumstances  where  there  has  been,  and  is
        intended that there will be, a fundamental change in the ties  with
        the appellant's family of origin,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that
        members of his family are not expected to sever  their  links  with
        him.  The legal process adopted by CM has  carefully  followed  the
        law relating to adoption in the United Kingdom.   The  adoption  is
        the result of the circumstances in which TY now  finds  himself  in
        Jamaica and is not an artificial device  to  facilitate  admission.
        Accordingly, we allow the appeal under Article 8.

    60. If much of the contents  of  this  determination  appears  to  have
        striking similarities with the  contents  of  Ms  Cronin's  written
        submissions as they  appear  in  her  note  to  the  Tribunal,  her
        skeleton  argument  and  her  grounds  of  appeal,  this   is   not
        coincidental.  We are indebted to the assistance she  has  provided
        in guiding the Tribunal through adoption law in the United Kingdom.

DECISION

 1. The Judge made an error on a point of law and we re-make  the  decision
    in the following terms:
        a. the appellant satisfies  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
           Rules;
        b. accordingly, the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                14 June 2018

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                                  Appendix


Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations 2005/392

3. Requirements applicable in respect of bringing or causing a child  to  be
brought into the United Kingdom
A person intending to bring, or to cause another to bring, a child into  the
United Kingdom in circumstances where section 83(1) of the Act applies must-

(a) apply in writing  to  an  adoption  agency  for  an  assessment  of  his
suitability to adopt a child; and
(b) give the adoption agency any information it may require for the  purpose
of the assessment.1

4.- Conditions applicable in respect of a  child  brought  into  the  United
Kingdom
(1) This regulation prescribes the conditions for the  purposes  of  section
83(5) of the Act in respect of a child brought into the  United  Kingdom  in
circumstances where section 83 applies
(2) Prior to the child's entry into  the  United  Kingdom,  the  prospective
adopter must-
(a) receive in writing, notification from the Secretary of  State  that  she
has issued a certificate confirming to the relevant foreign authority-
(i) that the person has been assessed and approved as eligible and  suitable
to be an  adoptive  parent  in  accordance  with  Part  4  of  the  Agencies
Regulations or corresponding Welsh provision; and
(ii) that if entry clearance and leave  to  enter  and  remain,  as  may  be
necessary, is granted and not revoked or curtailed, and  an  adoption  order
is made or an overseas adoption  is effected, the child will  be  authorised
to enter and reside permanently in the United Kingdom;
(b) before visiting the child in the State of origin-
(i) notify the adoption agency of the details of the child to be adopted;
(ii) provide the adoption agency with any information and  reports  received
from the relevant foreign authority; and
(iii)  [discuss  with  the  adoption  agency  the  proposed   adoption   and
information received from the relevant foreign authority;
(c) visit the child in the  State  of  origin  (and  where  the  prospective
adopters are a couple each of them); and
(d) after that visit-
(i) confirm in writing to the adoption  agency  that  he  has  done  so  and
wishes to proceed with the adoption;
(ii)  provide  the  adoption  agency  with  any   additional   reports   and
information received on or after that visit; and
(iii) notify the adoption agency of his expected  date  of  entry  into  the
United Kingdom with the child.
(3) The prospective adopter must accompany the child on entering the  United
Kingdom unless, in the case  of  a  couple,  the  adoption  agency  and  the
relevant foreign authority have agreed that it is necessary for only one  of
them to do so.
(4) Except where  an  overseas  adoption  is  or  is  to  be  effected,  the
prospective adopter must within the period of 14  days  beginning  with  the
date on which the child is brought into the United Kingdom  give  notice  to
the relevant local authority-
(a) of the child's arrival in the United Kingdom; and
(b) of his intention-
(i) to apply for an adoption order in accordance with section 44(2)  of  the
Act; or
(ii) not to give the child a home.
(5) In a case where a prospective adopter has  given  notice  in  accordance
with paragraph (4) and subsequently moves his home into the area of  another
local authority, he must within 14 days of that move confirm in  writing  to
that authority, the child's entry into the United Kingdom  and  that  notice
of his intention-
(a) to apply for an adoption order in accordance with section 44(2)  of  the
Act has been given to another local authority; or
(b) not to give the child a home, has been given.

Note 1 - Regulation 34 of the Agencies Regulations and  corresponding  Welsh
provision impose additional functions on the adoption agency in relation  to
a case where section 83 applies. (see below)
Note 2 This text is that same as  that  Adoptions  with  a  Foreign  Element
(Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010/173 (Scottish  SI)  reg  4  save  that
this provision  has  an  additional  clause  stating  that  (6)  -  In  this
regulation, "entry clearance" has the same meaning  as  in  the  Immigration
Act 1971

Adoption Agencies Regulations 2005/389 (as amended)

Duties of Adoption Agency in Respect of a Prospective Adopter
Stage 1 - the pre-assessment process
21. Registration of interest in adoption
Regulations 22 to 27 apply when a person has  notified  an  adoption  agency
that they want to adopt a child and the  agency  has  notified  that  person
that it has decided to proceed with the pre-assessment  process  in  respect
of that person.
22. Prospective adopter stage one plan
The adoption agency must prepare a written plan  in  consultation  with  the
prospective  adopter  ("the  prospective  adopter  stage  one  plan")  which
includes the following matters-
(a) information about  the  counselling,  information  and  preparation  for
adoption to be provided under regulation 24;
(b) the procedure for carrying out police checks under regulation 25;
(c) details of any training that  the  prospective  adopter  has  agreed  to
undertake;
(d) information about the role of the prospective adopter in the  stage  one
process;
(e) any applicable timescales;
(f) information about the process for making a representation  (including  a
complaint) under the 1989 Regulations; and
(g) any other information that the agency considers relevant.
23.- Prospective adopter's case record
(1) The adoption agency must  set  up  a  case  record  in  respect  of  the
prospective adopter ("the prospective adopter's case record") and  place  on
that case record-
(a) the prospective adopter stage one plan;
(b) the information and reports obtained by the agency  by  virtue  of  this
Part;
(c) the prospective adopter assessment plan;
(d)  the  prospective  adopter's  report  and  the   prospective   adopter's
observations on that report;
(e) the written record of  the  proceedings  of  the  adoption  panel  under
regulation   30A   (and   where   applicable   regulation    30B(8)),    its
recommendation, the reasons for the recommendation and any advice  given  by
the panel to the agency;
(f) the record of the agency's decision under regulation 30B(1), (6)  or  as
the case may be (9);
(g) where the prospective adopter applied to the Secretary of  State  for  a
review by an independent review panel  the  recommendation  of  that  review
panel;
(h) where applicable,  the  prospective  adopter's  review  report  and  the
prospective adopter's observations on that report;
(i) the prospective adopter matching plan; and
(j) any other documents or information  obtained  by  the  agency  which  it
considers should be included in that case record.
(2) The adoption agency may ask  the  prospective  adopter  to  provide  any
further information the agency may reasonably require.

24.- Requirement to provide counselling,  information  and  preparation  for
adoption
(1) The adoption agency must-
(a) provide a counselling service for the prospective adopter;
(b) in a section 83 case, explain to the prospective  adopter,  and  provide
written information about, the procedure  in  relation  to,  and  the  legal
implications  of,  adopting  a  child  from  the  country  from  which   the
prospective adopter wishes to adopt;
(c) in any other case, explain  to  the  prospective  adopter,  and  provide
written information about, the procedure  in  relation  to,  and  the  legal
implications of, placement for adoption and adoption;
(d) provide the prospective adopter with any information  and  any  training
materials relating to adopting a child available for use; and
(e)  make  arrangements  for  the  prospective  adopter  to   receive   such
preparation for adoption as the agency considers appropriate.
(2) In paragraph (1)(e)"preparation for adoption" includes the provision  of
information to the prospective adopter about-
(a) the age range, sex, likely needs and background of children who  may  be
placed for adoption by the adoption agency;
(b) the significance of adoption for a child and the child's family;
(c) contact between a child and the child's  parent  or  guardian  or  other
relatives where a child is authorised  to  be  placed  for  adoption  or  is
adopted;
(d) the skills which are necessary for an adoptive parent;
(e) the adoption agency's procedures in relation  to  the  assessment  of  a
prospective adopter and the placement of a child for adoption; and
(f) the procedure in relation to placement for adoption and adoption.
25.- Requirement to carry out police checks
(1) In respect of the prospective  adopter  and  any  other  member  of  the
prospective adopter's household who is aged 18 or over, the adoption  agency
must obtain an enhanced criminal record  certificate  issued  under  section
113B of the  Police  Act  1997  1  which  includes  suitability  information
relating to children (within the meaning of section 113BA(2) of that Act).
(2) An adoption agency may not consider a person suitable to adopt  a  child
if that person or any member of that person's household aged 18 or over-
(a) has been convicted of a specified offence committed at the age of 18  or
over; or
(b) has been cautioned by a constable in respect of any such offence  which,
at the time the caution was given, was admitted.
(3) In paragraph (2) "specified offence" means-
(a) an offence against a child;
(b) an offence specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3;
(c) an offence contrary to section 170 of the Customs and Excise  Management
Act 1979 in relation to goods prohibited to be imported under section 42  of
the Customs Consolidation Act 1876 (prohibitions and  restrictions  relating
to pornography) 2 where the prohibited goods included  indecent  photographs
of children under the age of 16;
(d) any other offence involving bodily injury to  a  child,  other  than  an
offence of common assault or battery,
and the expression "offence against a child" has the meaning given to it  by
section 26(1) of the Criminal Justice and Courts Services Act 2000 3  except
that it does not include an offence contrary to  section  9  of  the  Sexual
Offences Act 2003 (sexual activity with a child)  4  in  a  case  where  the
offender was under the age of 20 and the child was 13 or over  at  the  time
the offence was committed.
(4) An adoption agency may not consider a person suitable to adopt  a  child
if that person or any member of that person's household aged 18 or over-
(a) has been convicted of an offence specified in paragraph 1 of Part  2  of
Schedule 3 committed at the age of 18 or over or has  been  cautioned  by  a
constable in respect of any such offence which, at the time the caution  was
given, was admitted; or
(b) falls within paragraph 2 or 3 of Part 2 of Schedule 3,
notwithstanding that the offences specified in Part 2  of  Schedule  3  have
been repealed.
(5) Where an adoption agency becomes aware that a prospective adopter  or  a
member of the prospective adopter's household falls within paragraph (2)  or
(4), the agency must notify the prospective adopter as soon as  possible  in
writing that they cannot be considered suitable to adopt a child.
26. Other pre-assessment information
The adoption agency must-
(a) obtain the information about the prospective adopter which is  specified
in Part 1 of Schedule 4;
(b) obtain a written report from a  registered  medical  practitioner  about
the health of the prospective adopter following  a  full  examination  which
must include the matters specified in  Part  2  of  Schedule  4  unless  the
agency  has  received  advice  from  its  medical  adviser  that   such   an
examination and report is unnecessary;
(c) obtain a written report of each  of  the  interviews  with  the  persons
nominated by the prospective adopter to provide personal references for  the
prospective adopter;
(d) where the adoption agency considers  it  necessary,  obtain  a  personal
reference from the prospective adopter's former  spouse,  civil  partner  or
partner; and
(e) where it is not the  local  authority  in  whose  area  the  prospective
adopter has their home ascertain whether the local authority in  whose  area
the prospective adopter has  their  home  have  any  information  about  the
prospective  adopter  which  may  be  relevant  to  an  assessment  of   the
prospective adopter's suitability to  adopt  and  if  so  obtain  from  that
authority a written report setting out that information.
27.- Pre-assessment decision
(1) The adoption agency must, taking into account the  information  obtained
under regulations 25 and 26, decide whether-
(a) the prospective adopter may be suitable to adopt a child; or
(b) that the prospective adopter is not suitable to adopt a child.
(2) Subject to paragraph (3),  the  agency  must  make  its  decision  under
paragraph (1) within a period of two months  from  the  date  on  which  the
adoption agency notified the prospective adopter that they  had  decided  to
proceed with the pre-assessment process in accordance with regulation 21.
(3) The adoption agency may delay making the decision under paragraph (1)-
(a) where it is satisfied there  are  good  reasons  because,  for  example,
there has been a  delay  in  obtaining  information  about  the  prospective
adopter; or
(b) upon the request of the prospective adopter.
(4) Where the adoption agency decides that the prospective  adopter  may  be
suitable to adopt a child the agency must-
(a) as soon as practicable, notify in writing  the  prospective  adopter  of
its decision; and
(b) explain to the prospective adopter that they must  notify  the  adoption
agency that they wish to continue with the  assessment  process  within  six
months of the date on which the notification is given.
(5) Where the adoption agency decides that the prospective  adopter  is  not
suitable to adopt a child the agency  must  as  soon  as  practicable  after
making the decision  notify  the  prospective  adopter  in  writing  of  its
decision together with reasons for its decision.


Stage 2 - the assessment decision
28.- Stage 2 assessment
(1) Regulations 28 to 30G apply where the prospective adopter  notifies  the
adoption agency that they wish  to  continue  with  the  assessment  process
within  six  months  from  the  date  on  which  the  agency  notified   the
prospective adopter that they may be  suitable  to  adopt  under  regulation
27(4).
(2) Where the prospective adopter notifies the  adoption  agency  that  they
wish to continue with the assessment process more than six months  from  the
date on which the agency notified the prospective adopter that they  may  be
suitable to adopt  under  regulation  27(4),  the  agency  must  notify  the
prospective adopter in writing that the prospective adopter  cannot  proceed
with the assessment process.
29. Prospective adopter assessment plan
The adoption agency must prepare a written plan  in  consultation  with  the
prospective  adopter  ("the  prospective  adopter  assessment  plan")  which
includes the following matters-
(a) the procedure for assessing the  prospective  adopter's  suitability  to
adopt a child;
(b) any applicable timescales;
(c) the arrangements for the prospective adopter to receive  any  additional
counselling or preparation for adoption;
(d) details of any training that  the  prospective  adopter  has  agreed  to
undertake;
(e) information about the role of the prospective adopter in the  assessment
process;
(f)  information  about  the  process  for  submitting  representations   or
applying to the Secretary of State for a review under regulation  30B(5)(c);
and
(g) any other matters which the agency considers relevant.
30.- Prospective adopter's report
(1) The adoption agency must obtain the information  about  the  prospective
adopter which is specified in Part 3 of Schedule 4.
(2) The adoption agency must prepare  a  written  report  ("the  prospective
adopter's report") which includes-
(a) the information  about  the  prospective  adopter  and  the  prospective
adopter's family which is specified in Parts 1 and 3 of Schedule 4;
(b) a summary, written by the agency's medical  adviser,  of  the  state  of
health of the prospective adopter;
(c) any relevant information obtained by the agency under regulation 26(e);
(d)  any  observations  of  the  agency  on  the  matters  referred  to   in
regulations 24 and 25;
(e) the agency's assessment of  the  prospective  adopter's  suitability  to
adopt; and
(f) any other information which the agency considers relevant.
(3) In a section  83  case,  the  prospective  adopter's  report  must  also
include-
(a) the name of the country from which the  prospective  adopter  wishes  to
adopt a child ("country of origin");
(b)  confirmation  that  the  prospective  adopter  meets  the   eligibility
requirements to adopt from the country of origin;
(c)  any  additional  information  obtained  as   a   consequence   of   the
requirements of the country of origin; and
(d) the agency's assessment of  the  prospective  adopter's  suitability  to
adopt a child who is habitually resident outside the British Islands.
(4) Where the adoption agency receives information under  paragraph  (1)  or
other information in relation to the assessment of the  prospective  adopter
and is of the opinion  that  the  prospective  adopter  is  unlikely  to  be
considered suitable to  adopt  a  child,  it  may  prepare  the  prospective
adopter's report under paragraph (2) notwithstanding  that  the  agency  may
not have received all the information about the  prospective  adopter  which
may be required by this regulation.
(5) The adoption agency must-
(a)  notify  the  prospective  adopter  that   the   prospective   adopter's
application is to be referred to the adoption panel;
(b) give the  prospective  adopter  a  copy  of  the  prospective  adopter's
report;
(c) invite the prospective adopter to send any observations  in  writing  to
the agency within 5 working days, beginning  with  the  date  on  which  the
notification is sent; and
(d) explain to the prospective adopter that  the  adoption  agency  may,  in
exceptional circumstances, extend the timescale  referred  to  in  paragraph
(c) above.
(6) At the end of the 5 working days referred to in  paragraph  (5)(c)  (or,
where that timescale  is  extended  by  the  adoption  agency,  as  soon  as
possible after the prospective  adopter's  observations  are  received)  the
adoption agency must send-
(a)  the  prospective  adopter's  report  and  the   prospective   adopter's
observations;
(b) the written reports and references referred to in  regulation  26(b)  to
(e) but in the case  of  reports  obtained  in  accordance  with  regulation
26(b), only if the agency's medical adviser advises it to do so; and
(c) any other relevant information obtained by the agency,
to the adoption panel.
(7) The adoption agency must obtain, so far as  is  reasonably  practicable,
any other relevant information which may be required by the  adoption  panel
and send that information to the panel.



30A.- Function of the adoption panel
(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the adoption panel must consider  the
case of the prospective adopter referred to it by the  adoption  agency  and
make a recommendation to the agency as to whether  the  prospective  adopter
is suitable to adopt a child.
(2) In considering what recommendation to make the adoption panel-
(a) must consider and take into account  all  the  information  and  reports
passed to it in accordance with regulation 30;
(b)  may  request  the  adoption  agency  to  obtain  any   other   relevant
information which the panel considers necessary; and
(c) may obtain legal advice as it considers necessary  in  relation  to  the
case.
(3) In relation to the case of a prospective adopter in respect  of  whom  a
report has been prepared in accordance with regulation 30(4),  the  adoption
panel must either-
(a) request the adoption agency to prepare a further  prospective  adopter's
report, covering all the matters set out in regulation 30(2); or
(b) recommend that the prospective  adopter  is  not  suitable  to  adopt  a
child.
(4) Where the adoption panel makes a recommendation to the  adoption  agency
that the prospective adopter is suitable to adopt a  child,  the  panel  may
consider and give advice to the agency about  the  number  of  children  the
prospective adopter may be suitable to  adopt,  their  age  range,  sex  and
likely needs.
(5) Before making any recommendation, the adoption  panel  must  invite  the
prospective adopter to attend a meeting of the panel.
30B.- Adoption agency decision and notification
(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the adoption agency must  decide  whether  the
prospective adopter is suitable to adopt a child within four months  of  the
date on which the agency received  the  prospective  adopter's  notification
that they wished to proceed with the assessment process.
(2) The adoption agency may delay making the decision under paragraph (1)-
(a) in a case where the adoption  agency  considers  there  are  exceptional
circumstances which mean it cannot make the decision within that time, or
(b) upon the request of the prospective adopter.
(3) No member of the adoption panel may take part in any  decision  made  by
the adoption agency under paragraph (1).
(4) Where the adoption agency decides to approve the prospective adopter  as
suitable to adopt a  child,  it  must  notify  the  prospective  adopter  in
writing of its decision.
(5) Where the adoption agency considers that the prospective adopter is  not
suitable to adopt a child, it must-
(a) notify the prospective adopter  in  writing  that  it  proposes  not  to
approve the prospective adopter as suitable to adopt  a  child  ("qualifying
determination");
(b) send with that notification its reasons together  with  a  copy  of  the
recommendation of the adoption panel if that  recommendation  is  different;
and
(c) advise the prospective adopter that within  40  working  days  beginning
with the date on which the notification was  sent  the  prospective  adopter
may-
(i) submit any representations the prospective adopter  wishes  to  make  to
the agency; or
(ii) apply to the Secretary of State for a review by an  independent  review
panel of the qualifying determination.
(6) If, within the period of  40  working  days  referred  to  in  paragraph
(5)(c), the prospective adopter has not made any representations or  applied
to the Secretary of State for a review by an independent review  panel,  the
adoption  agency  must  proceed  to  make  its  decision  and   notify   the
prospective adopter in writing of its decision  together  with  reasons  for
that decision.
(7) If, within the period of  40  working  days  referred  to  in  paragraph
(5)(c), the  adoption  agency  receives  further  representations  from  the
prospective adopter, it may  refer  the  case  together  with  all  relevant
information to the adoption panel for further consideration.
(8) The  adoption  panel  must  consider  any  case  referred  to  it  under
paragraph (7) and make a fresh recommendation to the adoption agency  as  to
whether the prospective adopter is suitable to adopt a child.
(9) The adoption agency must make a decision on the case but-
(a) if the case has been referred to  the  adoption  panel  under  paragraph
(7), the agency must make the decision only after taking  into  account  the
recommendations of the adoption panel made  under  both  paragraph  (8)  and
regulation 30A; or
(b) if the prospective adopter has applied to the Secretary of State  for  a
review by an independent review panel of the qualifying  determination,  the
agency  must  make  the  decision  only  after  taking  into   account   the
recommendation of the independent review panel  and  the  recommendation  of
the adoption panel made under regulation 30A.
(10) As soon as possible after making its decision under paragraph (9),  the
adoption agency must notify  the  prospective  adopter  in  writing  of  its
decision stating its reasons for that decision if they do not  consider  the
prospective adopter suitable to adopt a child, and of the  adoption  panel's
recommendation under paragraph (8), if this is different from  the  agency's
decision.
(11) In a case where an independent review panel has made a  recommendation,
the adoption agency must send to the  Secretary  of  State  a  copy  of  the
notification referred to in paragraph (10).

