

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       Zubair (EEA regs: self-employed persons) [2013] UKUT 00196(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Phoenix House, Bradford             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 March 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               SAMEENA ZUBAIR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmott
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

   1) The provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
      2006  concerning,  respectively,  self-employed  persons  and  workers
      ultimately derive from different previous  Directives  and  cannot  be
      elided, so as, for example, to create a  concept  of  "self-employment
      seeking".


   2) Accordingly, a person cannot combine a period of self-employment  with
      a period of seeking employment, so as to achieve a requisite period of
      residence under the Regulations.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.    The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Birkby dated 12
      October 2012. The judge dismissed her appeal from a  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State refusing her a permanent residence card  under  the
      provisions of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as  amended  (the
      Regulations).


   2.    The material facts as found  by  the  judge  are  as  follows.  The
      appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1968.  She  is  married  to
      Mohammed Zubair a German national. The appellant and her husband  have
      three children all born in Germany in 1997, 1999 and 2005.

   3.    Mohammed Zubair ran a successful business in Germany. In July  2006
      he established a company  called  ZZ  Sports  fashion  in  the  United
      Kingdom. In February 2007 the appellant was issued  with  a  residence
      card as the family member of an  EEA  national  who  was  a  qualified
      person by reason of self-employment. Unfortunately, the  business  did
      not prosper and Mr Zubair closed it in November 2007. Between November
      2007 and May 2008 the appellant and her husband appeared to be  living
      off the assets of the wound-down business. In  May  2008  the  husband
      submitted an application  for  jobseekers  allowance,  and  there  was
      evidence of his actively seeking work in the sports  garment  industry
      throughout the period thereafter until 28 January 2011 when he  became
      unwell and unable  to  work.   This  was  first  considered  to  be  a
      temporary  incapacity  but  on  7  July  2011  he  was  diagnosed   as
      permanently incapacitated and suffering from Parkinson's disease. This
      remains the position since. The appellant cares for him daily and  was
      unable to attend the First-tier hearing by reason of such care.

   4.    In February 2012 the appellant applied for permanent  residence  on
      the basis that she had completed five years residence as the spouse of
      an EEA national. This application was refused  in  August  2012.   The
      Secretary of State explained that for a  spouse  to  be  eligible  for
      permanent residence the qualified person must have resided five  years
      as a worker, a self-employed person, a  self-sufficient  person  or  a
      jobseeker. Although he had been a work-seeker from May  2008  to  July
      2011, he had never found employment and must  have  been  employed  or
      self-employed for  a  minimum  of  twelve  months  prior  to  becoming
      unemployed.

   5.    The judge found the facts set out in paragraph 3 above. He was  not
      satisfied that evidence had been provided to show that Mr Zubair was a
      self-sufficient person within the meaning of  the  Regulations  either
      before 2006 or from November 2007.

   6.   On  the  basis  of  these  findings  he  dismissed  the  appeal.  He
      concluded:-
        i.  The  appellant's  husband  was  never  employed  and  so  never
           qualified as a worker within the meaning of regulation 6(2).
       ii. In any event, Mr Zubair could not be regarded as a jobseeker  as
           he did not enter the United Kingdom for that purpose as required
           by regulation 6(4).
      iii. Finally, Mr. Zubair could not rely on his  permanent  incapacity
           because his self-employment has not come to an end as  a  result
           of this incapacity as required by regulations 5  (3)(a)  and   6
           (1) (c).

   7. The judge  further  considered  a  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR  but
      concluded that there was no reason why the appellant could not  return
      to Germany with her husband and her children.


   8. Grounds of appeal were lodged contending that:

        i. There was fresh evidence to show  that  the  appellant  and  her
           husband had been  self-sufficient  prior  to  his  applying  for
           jobseeker's allowance.
       ii. The impact of the removal of the children after some  six  years
           residence in the United Kingdom had not been properly assessed.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shaerf on the basis  of  the
      second of these grounds.


  10.  Regulations 4, 5 and  6  of the Regulations as amended in 2012 are in
      the following terms:-


        Worker",  "self-employed  person",  "self-sufficient  person"   and
        "student"

        This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
        4.-(1) In these Regulations -

        (a)"worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article 45 of  the
        Treaty on the Functioning of the  European Union;

        (b)"self-employed person" means a person who establishes himself in
        order to pursue activity as a self-employed  person  in  accordance
        with Article 49 of the Treaty on the Functioning  of  the  European
        Union;

        (c) "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-

        (i ) sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on  the  social
        assistance system of  the  United  Kingdom  during  his  period  of
        residence; and

        (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom;

        (d)"student" means a person who-

        (i) is enrolled for the principal purpose  of following a course of
        study (including  vocational  training)  at  a  private  or  public
        establishment which is -

          (aa) financed from public funds or

         (bb)  otherwise  recognized  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  an
         establishment  which  has  been  accredited   for  the  purpose  of
         providing  such course or training within the law or administrative
         practice   of  the  part  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  which   the
         establishment is located;

        (ii) has comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  in  the  United
        Kingdom; and

        (iii) assures the Secretary of State, by means of a declaration, or
        by such equivalent means as the person  may  choose,  that  he  has
        sufficient  resources  not  to  become  a  burden  on  the   social
        assistance system of  the  United  Kingdom  during  his  period  of
        residence.

        (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where family members  of
        the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom and  their  right
        to reside is dependent upon their  being  family  members  of  that
        person-

        (a) the requirement for that person to  have  sufficient  resources
        not to become a burden on  the  social  assistance  system  of  the
        United Kingdom  during  his  period  of  residence  shall  only  be
        satisfied if his resources and those  of  the  family  members  are
        sufficient to avoid him and the  family  members  becoming  such  a
        burden;

        (b) the requirement for that person to have comprehensive  sickness
        insurance cover in the United Kingdom shall only be satisfied if he
        and his family members have such cover.

        (3) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(d), where family members  of
        the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom and  their  right
        to reside is dependent upon their  being  family  members  of  that
        person, the requirement for that person to assure the Secretary  of
        State that he has sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on
        the social assistance system  of  the  United  Kingdom  during  his
        period of residence shall only  be  satisfied  if  he  assures  the
        Secretary of State that his  resources  and  those  of  the  family
        members are sufficient to avoid him and the family members becoming
        such a burden.

        (4) For the purposes of paragraphs (1)(c) and (d)  and  paragraphs
        (2) and (3), the resources  of  the  person  concerned  and,  where
        applicable, any family members, are to be regarded as sufficient if

        (a)   they exceed the maximum level of  resources  which  a  United
        Kingdom national and his family members may possess  if  he  is  to
        become eligible for social  assistance  under  the  United  Kingdom
        benefit system or

        (b) paragraph (a) does not  apply  but  taking  into  account   the
        personal situation of the person concerned and,  where  applicable,
        any family members, it appears to  the  decision  maker   that  the
        resources of the person or persons concerned  should be regarded as
        sufficient.

        (5)  For the purposes of  regulation 15A  (2)  references  in  this
        regulation to  "family  members"  includes  a  "primary  carer"  as
        defined in regulation 15A7.



        Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"

        This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
        5.-(1) In these Regulations,-

        "worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"  means  an
        EEA national who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph  (2),  (3),
        (4) or (5).

        (2) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if he-

        (a)terminates his activity as a worker or self-employed person and-



        (i)has reached the age at which he is entitled to a  state  pension
        on the date on which he terminates his activity; or

        (ii) in the  case  of  a  worker,  ceases  working  to  take  early
        retirement;

        (b )pursued his activity as a worker or self-employed person in the
        United Kingdom for at least twelve months prior to the termination;
        and

        (c) resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than  three
        years prior to the termination.

        (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

        (a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker or
        self-employed person as a result of a permanent incapacity to work;
        and

        (b) either-

        (i)he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than  two
        years prior to the termination; or

        (ii) the incapacity is the result of an  accident  at  work  or  an
        occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable in full
        or in part by an institution in the United Kingdom.

        (4) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

        (a)he is active as a worker or self-employed person in an EEA State
        but retains his place of residence in the United Kingdom, to  which
        he returns as a rule at least once a week; and

        (b) prior to becoming so active in that  EEA  State,  he  had  been
        continuously resident and continuously active as a worker or  self-
        employed person in the United Kingdom for at least three years.

        (5) A person who satisfies the condition in paragraph  (4)(a)  but
        not the condition in paragraph (4)(b) shall, for  the  purposes  of
        paragraphs (2) and (3), be treated as being active and resident  in
        the United Kingdom during any period in which he is working or self-
        employed in the EEA State.

        (6) The conditions in paragraphs (2)  and  (3)  as  to  length  of
        residence and activity as a worker or  self-employed  person  shall
        not apply in relation to a person whose spouse or civil partner  is
        a United Kingdom national.

        (7) For the purposes of this regulation-

        (a) periods of inactivity for  reasons  not  of  the  person's  own
        making;

        (b) periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and

        (c) in the case of a worker, periods  of  involuntary  unemployment
        duly recorded by the relevant employment office,

        shall be treated as periods  of  activity  as  a  worker  or  self-
        employed person, as the case may be.



        "Qualified person"

        This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
        6.-(1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person who
        is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

        (a) a jobseeker;

        (b) a worker;

        (c) a self-employed person;

        (d) a self-sufficient person; or

        (e) a student.

        (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated
        as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

        (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or
        accident;

        (b) he is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment  after  having
        been  employed  in  the  United  Kingdom,  provided  that  he   has
        registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office and-

        (i)  he  was  employed  for  one  year  or  more  before   becoming
        unemployed;

        (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than six months; or

        (iii) he can provide evidence that he is seeking employment in  the
        United Kingdom and has a genuine chance of being engaged;

        (c) he is involuntarily unemployed and has embarked  on  vocational
        training; or

        (d) he has voluntarily ceased working and  embarked  on  vocational
        training that is related to his previous employment.

        (3) A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not cease to
        be treated as a self-employed person for the purpose  of  paragraph
        (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to pursue his activity as a self-
        employed person as the result of an illness or accident.

        (4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means a person
        who enters the United Kingdom in order to seek employment  and  can
        provide evidence that he is seeking employment and  has  a  genuine
        chance of being engaged.




  11.  At the hearing Mr Hussain submitted that the appellant's  entitlement
      to  permanent  residence  depended  on  whether  Mr  Zubair  could  be
      considered to be self-sufficient.  We  pointed  out  that  that  self-
      sufficiency could not assist as:-

        i. There was no evidence that the family had  health  insurance  as
           required by regulation 4(1)( c).


       ii. There was no evidence that Mr Zubair had  completed  five  years
           residence as a  self-sufficient  person  prior  to  his  seeking
           jobseekers allowance in 2008 or illness  in  2011  as  would  be
           required by regulation 15(1)(b).[1]

      iii. There was no provision  in  the  Regulations  or  the  Citizens'
           Directive 2004/38/EC for a person who had  been  self-sufficient
           for a period of  less  than  five  years  to  acquire  permanent
           residence by reason of permanent incapacity for work.

  12.  We did indicate that, although there  was  no  reason  to  doubt  the
      judge's conclusions as to employment set out in paragraph 6(i)  above,
      an arguable issue arose as to the relationship between self-employment
      and permanent incapacity and therefore a question as  to  whether  the
      judge's conclusions at paragraph 6(iii) above were correct.

  13. Mr Hussain therefore applied to amend his grounds to raise this issue.
      Mrs Pettersen did not object to the amendment but we gave her time  to
      make  written  representations  in  response,  having  regard  to  the
      previous lack of notice that this issue would  be  ventilated  at  the
      appeal. In due course, she submitted the IDI on permanent residence to
      which we have had regard.

  14.  Having considered the matter  further,  we  conclude  the  judge  was
      correct in his reasoning and no error of  law  accordingly  arises  on
      this issue. We summarise our reasons as follows:-


        i. Regulation 5(3) requires a person to terminate his activity as a
           worker  or  self-employed  person  as  a  result  of   permanent
           incapacity to work and has either resided in the United  Kingdom
           continuously for more than two years prior to the termination or
           has suffered an accident at work or  occupational  disease  that
           precludes such a period of residence.


       ii. Mr Zubair has resided in the United Kingdom for  more  than  two
           years prior to his permanent incapacity to work but he  has  not
           resided either as a worker or as a self-employed person for more
           than two  years  before  that  incapacity.  His  self-employment
           lasted 16 rather than 24 months and although he has remained  as
           a work seeker for 38 months prior to  his  permanent  incapacity
           such residence never counted as residence  as  a  worker  as  he
           never found work.


      iii. His illness was not an accident at work  or  industrial  disease
           obviating the requirement for two years lawful residence  within
           the meaning of EU law before he acquired permanent residence.


       iv. We see no reason why a person who has entered the United Kingdom
           in another capacity cannot subsequently become  a  work  seeker,
           and note that the respondent treated him as such.  The words  of
           regulation 6 (4) 'enters the United Kingdom  in  order  to  seek
           employment' should be read to include those who  having  entered
           can provide evidence that he is seeking employment.  We  do  not
           think the judge was correct in  his  conclusions  summarised  at
           paragraph 6 (iii) above. However, such  an  interpretation  does
           not avail  Mr Zubair  because although he  was  a  genuine  work
           seeker,  he never obtained employment and thus never fell to  be
           considered as a worker within the meaning of regulation 6 (2)(b)
           which  properly  reflects  Article  7  (3)  of   the   Citizens'
           Directive.

        v. The judge was correct to note that  Mr Zubair could not  benefit
           from regulation 6 (3) because it was not illness that caused him
           to be unable to pursue his activity as  a  self-employed  person
           but the closing of his business some 42 months before  he  first
           became ill.  Similarly he did not terminate his  activity  as  a
           worker  or  self-employed  person  as  a  result  of   permanent
           incapacity to work within the meaning of  regulation  5  (3)(a),
           faithfully reflecting  Article 17 of  the  Citizens'  Directive.
           What his illness terminated was his activity as a work-seeker.

       vi.  We have considered whether regulation 5(3)(a)  should  be  read
           purposefully to treat activity as a self-employed person  or   a
           worker the same,  as Article 17 (1)(b) appears  to  do,  but  on
           reflection conclude that this would not be appropriate. Preamble
           19 to the Directive explains that these provisions were designed
           to continue rights that had been separately provided to  workers
           and self-employed  persons  by  different  previous  Directives.
           Council Directive 75/34/EC dealt with self-employed persons  and
           there is nothing in the terms of that  Directive  that  suggests
           that periods of self-employment could be combined  with  periods
           of work seeking to achieve the requisite  period  of  residence.
           There is no concept of 'self-employment seeking'.

      vii. Contrary to the indication we raised during the hearing, it does
           not, on reflection, appear to be  the  case  that  the  critical
           issue is whether the self- employment was immediately  prior  to
           the illness, but  whether  illness  prevented  continued  lawful
           residence either as a worker or self-employed person.


  15. We turn to the Article 8 question on which permission  to  appeal  has
      been  granted.   We  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  never
      considered this question herself and  no  removal  decision  had  been
      taken in respect of the appellant, her husband or the three  children.
      In the light of their circumstances it may be that  no  such  decision
      will ever be taken. The appellant is the only non-EEA national in  the
      family but her case should not be considered in isolation.


  16. The children are now aged 16, 14 and 8. They are all in  education  in
      the United Kingdom. Although the youngest was born in Germany in  2005
      there is clear evidence of visits to the United  Kingdom  before  that
      time. Even taking 2005 as the date since the whole  family  unit  have
      been here permanently, this was a period of some seven years prior  to
      the decision, and consisted of the formative years of  the  first  two
      children and nearly all the life of the third child. Matters have  now
      moved on.


  17.  We  conclude  that  the  judge  did  indeed  fail  to  give  adequate
      consideration to the interests of  the  children  in  determining  the
      Article 8 aspect of the claim and that this is  a  material  error  of
      law.

  18. Rather than re-making this aspect of the decision  for  ourselves,  we
      will set aside the judge's decision and treat the representations made
      in this appeal as representations made to the Secretary of State  that
      should be considered and determined by her first. We would observe the
      following:

        i. The appellant should not  be  separated  from  her  husband  and
           children, if the Secretary of State is content that they  remain
           here at least discretionary leave to remain should be granted to
           the appellant.


       ii. It may be that the children have their own rights under  EU  law
           to remain for the purpose of education and if  so  their  mother
           ought to be given a residence card or leave to  remain  to  give
           effect to the children's rights.

      iii. If neither Mr Zubair nor any of the children have any further EU
           rights of residence then they could be made  the  subject  of  a
           decision to remove them as  EEA  nationals  who  are  no  longer
           qualified persons.

       iv. Before such a decision could be taken EU law  would  require  an
           assessment of  their  degree  of  integration  into  the  United
           Kingdom and an article 8 assessment of the impact on removal  on
           the children having regard to their prior legal residence.

        v. It would be open to the Secretary of State to take into  account
           that Mr Zubair would have qualified for permanent  residence  if
           he had been employed by his  company  for  at  least  12  months
           before closing the business and becoming a work seeker and  then
           falling ill.

       vi. If a decision to remove every member of  the  family  is  to  be
           taken, it should be taken  promptly  and  generate  a  right  of
           appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  where   the
           position of the whole family can  be  examined.   Every  passing
           year makes it less likely that  the  children  can  be  lawfully
           removed.

      vii. If on the other hand, it is decided that the  family  should  be
           permitted to  reside  here  indefinitely  appropriate  leave  or
           authority should be granted to  them  to  do  so.  A  period  of
           ambiguity not subject to a right of appeal is not desirable  and
           may not be lawful.


  19. The appeal against the Secretary of State's decision with  respect  to
      the refusal of a permanent residence card is dismissed.


  20.  The appeal against the decision of Judge Birkby on Article 8  grounds
      is allowed to the extent that the judge's decision is set aside.  This
      aspect of the appeal remains outstanding for a lawful decision  to  be
      made by the Secretary of State in the light  of  the  observations  in
      this determination.

  21. No other order is made save that the Secretary of State should respond
      to the representations made in the course of this appeal and  anything
      else the appellant or her family seeks to place before the  respondent
      and  either  grant  a  period  of  discretionary  leave  or  make   an
      immigration or EEA decision in respect of the appellant and her family
      that will give rise to a right of appeal where the matter will need to
      be considered afresh.



                               Signed




                                 Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal


                               10 April 2012
-----------------------
[1] 15.- Permanent right of residence
   (1) The following persons shall acquire  the  right  to  reside  in  the
   United Kingdom permanently-
      (b) a family member of an EEA national  who  is  not  himself  an  EEA
      national but who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
      national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
      of five years;

