
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Bhavsar (late application for PTA: procedure) [2019] UKUT 00196 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2019                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                               chetan bhavsar
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G O'Ceallaigh, instructed by Eagles Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) There  is  nothing  in  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  that  prevents  the  First-tier
Tribunal from refusing to admit an application for permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal, where the application is made outside the relevant  time
limit and the First-tier Tribunal does not extend time.

(2) The appropriate course, in the case of such an application, is  for  the
First-tier Tribunal  to  refuse  to  admit  it.  This  will  mean  that  any
subsequent application to the Upper Tribunal in the case for  permission  to
appeal to that Tribunal will be  subject  to  rule  21(7)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, whereby the Upper Tribunal must  only
admit the application made to it (whether or not  that  application  was  in
time) if the Upper Tribunal considers it is in the interests of justice  for
it to do so.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. INTRODUCTION

 1. The appellant, born in 1988, is a citizen of India.  He  first  entered
    the United Kingdom in September 2011, with entry clearance as a student
    until 8 June 2013.  The appellant came  here  to  pursue  a  course  in
    Tourism Management at the University of West London, which he completed
    in 2013.  In that year, he  obtained  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student until September 2016.  The  appellant's  purpose  in  obtaining
    this  further  leave  was  to  study  under  the  auspices  of  Glyndwr
    University, which at the time had an agreement with the  London  School
    of Business  and  Finance  (LSBF)  to  deliver  tuition  for  Chartered
    Institute of Management Accountants courses.

 2. The appellant's statement of 9  October  2017  describes  a  number  of
    important  problems  he   encountered   regarding   his   course   with
    Glyndwr/LSBF, as well as complaints about the activities of  his  agent
    who pressured the appellant into parting with  a  considerable  sum  of
    money in respect of the course.

 3. In January 2014,  the  appellant  received  confirmation  from  Glyndwr
    University of its decision to withdraw him as a student, by  reason  of
    his alleged poor attendance at classes.

 4. On 9 September 2014, Glyndwr  University  wrote  to  the  appellant  to
    inform him that he had been withdrawn for the  additional  reason  that
    the University had been informed by the UKVI  that  the  appellant  had
    obtained an invalid ETS TOEIC test certificate.

 5. On 12 November 2014, the appellant made a human rights  application  to
    the respondent, on the basis of his private  and  family  life  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   Despite  the  voluminous  nature  of  the  materials
    assembled by the appellant in connection with the  appeal  proceedings,
    our attention has not been drawn to a copy of this application.  As far
    as  can  be  seen,  however,  the  application  did  not  rest  on  the
    appellant's contention that his human rights  demanded  the  respondent
    should grant him a limited period of leave to pursue  further  studies.
    Certainly, the respondent's decision of 23 May 2016, refusing the human
    rights claim, makes no mention of this.  Under  the  heading  "Decision
    Under  Exceptional  Circumstances"  the  only  aspect  raised  by   the
    appellant is said to be that he has "family and friends in the UK".



B. APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 6. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's  refusal  decision  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge G Clarke at Hatton Cross on  11  May
    2018.  The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.  In  doing  so,  the
    judge carefully considered the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  had
    cheated in his TOEIC test, by using a proxy to take the test  for  him.
    The judge found that, in the particular circumstances of the appellant,
    he had had nothing to gain by taking the test because  he  had  already
    been accepted onto the  CIMA  course  on  the  strength  of  his  IELTS
    Certificate, rather than the TOEIC.

 7. That being so, the judge found that the appellant met  the  suitability
    requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.  In order
    to meet the remaining requirements of paragraph  276ADE,  however,  the
    appellant had to show that there were very significant obstacles to his
    reintegration in India.  The judge found that the appellant  had  lived
    the vast majority of his life in India, where he had  been  raised  and
    educated.  He was familiar with its culture and way of  life.   He  had
    also shown resolve, resilience and resourcefulness in coming from India
    to an unfamiliar country such as the United Kingdom.   Those  qualities
    and  characteristics  would,  according  to  the  judge,  benefit   the
    appellant, were he to return to India.

 8.  Having  therefore  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules,  by  reference  to  his  private
    life, the judge turned to consideration of the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights, outside those rules.

 9. Understandably, the judge considered that the relevant question in  the
    present case was the fifth of those posed by Lord Bingham in  Razgar  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27;  namely,
    whether  the  interference  with  the  appellant's  private  life,   by
    requiring him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  was  proportionate  to
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

10. In determining that issue, the Judge had regard, as he was required  to
    do,  to  the  relevant  factors  contained  in  section  117B  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge  decided  that
    little weight should be attached to the appellant's private life, which
    had been built up in the United Kingdom whilst his  immigration  status
    had been "precarious".  We note in passing that, for these purposes, it
    has now been authoritatively decided that a person  with  only  limited
    leave to remain occupies a precarious position in  the  United  Kingdom
    (Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58).

11. At paragraph 62, the judge considered that the appellant had overstayed
    and therefore shown a disregard for the immigration laws of the  United
    Kingdom.  It is, however, common ground that the appellant  has  at  no
    material time been an overstayer.  His extant  leave  was  extended  by
    reason of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

12. The judge's conclusions were as follows: -

         "65. I rely on all my earlier  findings  in  respect  of  Paragraph
             276ADE(1) which I do not need to repeat here.  I also rely  on
             the fact that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2011
             with leave as a student and therefore he  ought  not  to  have
             harboured any expectation of being permitted to  stay  in  the
             United Kingdom on a permanent basis.

         66.  I accept that the Appellant has  family  here  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  His evidence is that he has an aunt  and  uncle  who
             support him financially and a sister as well  as  cousins.   I
             find it extremely unusual that none of his family submitted  a
             Witness Statement in support of his  appeal  or  attended  the
             hearing.  In any event, the Appellant will be able to maintain
             his relationships and  friendships  through  modern  means  of
             communication such as phone and Skype  and  various  forms  of
             social media.  There is  nothing  in  the  Appellant's  family
             dynamics or friendships that would  tip  the  balance  in  his
             favour when weighing the proportionality of his removal.

         67.  The submission was made that the  Appellant's  life  has  been
             ruined by taking the TOEIC test and if he had never  taken  it
             he would not be in the situation in which he finds himself.

         68.  On the specific facts of  this  case,  there  is  no  credible
             evidence that the Appellant's removal  is  a  disproportionate
             interference with his family life.

         69.  I find that the public interest is strong.  There  is  nothing
             in the specific facts of this case  that  would  outweigh  the
             public interest.

         70.  Accordingly, the appeal is refused."



C. PROCEDURAL ISSUES

13. We turn now to the procedural issues raised by this case.  As  will  be
    seen, they raise matters of considerable general significance.

(a) The application to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was  sent  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors under cover of a notice (Form IA60) dated 20 June 2018.  The
    notice contained the following information:-

         "Either party may apply to the First-tier Tribunal  for  permission
         to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on a point of law arising from  the
         First-tier Tribunal's decision.

         Any application must  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  relevant
         Procedure Rules and must be provided to the Tribunal so that it  is
         received no later than 14 days after the date on  which  the  party
         making the application was provided with written  reasons  for  the
         decision ..."

15. It is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  received  the
    decision and notice on 22 June 2018.

16. On 5 July 2018, at 18:18 hours, the First-tier  Tribunal  received,  by
    fax, the appellant's application for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On  20  September  2018,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused
    permission to appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge who considered the
    application said the following:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission out of time to appeal against a
             decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   G   Clarke)
             promulgated  on  20  June  2018  whereby  it   dismissed   the
             Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to refuse him leave to remain on the basis of his private  and
             family life.   The  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  were
             received by fax on 5 July, 2018 at 18:18 which  is  after  the
             close of business when they should have  been  received  on  4
             July, 2018 in terms  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Amendment)
             Rules 2018.  The application is refused.

         2.   In terms of R (on  the  application  of  Onowu)  v  First-tier
             Tribunal (IAC) (extension of time for  appealing:  principles)
             IJR [2016] UKUT 00185 (IAC) I find there is no  merit  in  the
             grounds in any event.  The grounds do not set  out  where  the
             Judge  has  arguably  erred  in  law.   They  are   simply   a
             disagreement with the decision.   It  is  submitted  that  any
             public interest in  removal  is  outweighed  by  the  specific
             circumstances of the Appellant established as per the 5  stage
             Razghar [sic] test.  The Judge has considered the evidence and
             made appropriate findings which  were  open  to  him  to  make
             having also had the benefit of oral evidence on the day of the
             hearing.  It was open for the Judge to consider what weight he
             felt it appropriate to place on the evidence before him in the
             proportionality  exercise.   The  Judge  has  given   adequate
             reasons for his decision with reference to section 117B of the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         4. [sic] The grounds disclose no arguable error of law."



(b) The application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal


17. The appellant purported to apply to the Upper Tribunal for  permission,
    pursuant to rule 21 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  On 29 November 2018, Swift J, sitting as a judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, granted permission to appeal  "subject  to  determination  of
    whether the Upper Tribunal has the jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal".
    Swift J explained his conditional grant of permission as follows in the
    reasons for decision:-

         "1.  In this case the First-tier Tribunal refused  the  application
             for permission to appeal on the ground  that  the  application
             was made too late (see Tribunal Rules of Procedure 2014,  rule
             33(2)).

         2.   The application for permission to appeal  made  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal did not include any statement of the reasons why  the
             application to the First-tier Tribunal was not made within the
             time permitted (see Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
             2008,  rule  21(7)(a)).   Any  failure  to  comply  with  rule
             21(7)(a) arguably  goes  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal to hear the appeal.

         3.    Whether  rule  21(7)(a)  applies,  and  if  so  whether   the
             Appellant's failure to comply with it goes to this  Tribunal's
             jurisdiction to entertain the appeal should be  determined  as
             preliminary  issues.   Given  the  discrete  nature   of   the
             substantive  issue  raised  by  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  the
             preliminary  issues  can  be  listed  for  hearing  with   the
             substantive appeal to follow in the event that  the  Appellant
             succeeds on the preliminary issues."

(c) The First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules

18. It is necessary at this point to refer to  various  provisions  of  the
    Procedure Rules, both past and current.

The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

19. On the establishment of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal in February 2010, the Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 were amended, so as  to
    become the Procedure Rules of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Rule 24 (Application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal), insofar as relevant, provided as follows:-

         "24.-(1) A party seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
                  must make  a  written  application  to  the  Tribunal  for
                  permission to appeal.

            (2)   ...  An application under paragraph (1) must be  sent  or
                  delivered to the Tribunal so that it is received no  later
                  than 5 days after the date on which the party  making  the
                  application is deemed to have  been  served  with  written
                  reasons for the decision.

            ...

            (4)   If a person makes  an  application  under  paragraph  (1)
                  later than the time required by paragraph (2) -

                  (a)  the Tribunal may extend the  time  for  appealing  if
                      satisfied that by reason of special circumstances  it
                      would be unjust not to do so; and

                  (b)  unless the Tribunal extends time under  sub-paragraph
                      (a), the Tribunal must not admit the application.

         ..."







The  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
Chamber) Rules 2014

20. On 20 October 2014, the  2005  Rules  were  replaced  by  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 ("the 2014 Rules").  Rule 2 sets  out  the  overriding  objective,
    which is to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly  and  justly.
    Rule 2(3)(b) requires the First-tier Tribunal "to give  effect  to  the
    overriding objective when it interprets any rule ..." .

21. Rule 4(1) states that, subject to  the  provisions  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and any other enactment,  the  Tribunal
    may regulate its own procedure.

22. Rule 6 (Failure to  comply  with  rules,  etc),  so  far  as  relevant,
    provides as follows:-

         "6. - (1)     An irregularity resulting from a  failure  to  comply
                  with any requirement in  these  Rules,  ...  does  not  of
                  itself render void the proceedings or any  step  taken  in
                  the proceedings.

             (2)  If a party has failed to comply  with  a  requirement  in
                  these Rules,... the Tribunal may take such  action  as  it
                  considers just, which may include-

                  (a)  waiving the requirement;

                  (b)  requiring the failure to be remedied; or

                  (c)  ..."

23. Rule 33 (Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal) so
    far as relevant, reads:-

         "33. - (1)    A party seeking permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
                  Tribunal must make a written application to  the  Tribunal
                  for permission to appeal.

              (2) ... an application under paragraph (1) must  be  sent  to
                  the Tribunal so that it is received no later than 14  days
                  after the date on which the party making  the  application
                  was sent the written reasons for the decision.

              ...

              (6) If a person makes an application under paragraph (1) when
                  the Tribunal has not given a written statement of  reasons
                  for its decision-

                  (a)  the Tribunal must, if no application  for  a  written
                      statement  of  reasons  has  been  made,  treat   the
                      application for permission as  such  an  application;
                      and

                  (b)  may-

                      (i)  direct under rule 36 that the application is not
                           to be treated as an application for permission to
                           appeal; or

                      (ii) determine  the  application  for  permission  to
                           appeal.

             (7)  If an application for a written statement of reasons  has
                  been, or is, refused because the application was  received
                  out of time, the Tribunal must only admit the  application
                  for permission if the Tribunal considers that it is in the
                  interests  of  justice  to  do  so."   (Our  emphases   in
                  paragraph (2))

24. Again, so far as relevant, rule  34  (Tribunal's  consideration  of  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal) reads:-

         "34. - (1)    On receiving an application for permission to  appeal
                  the Tribunal must first consider  whether  to  review  the
                  decision in accordance with Rule 35.

             (2)  If the Tribunal decides not to review  the  decision,  or
                  reviews the decision and decides  to  take  no  action  in
                  relation to the decision, or part of it, the Tribunal must
                  consider whether to give permission to appeal in  relation
                  to the decision or that part of it.

             (3)  The Tribunal must send a record of its  decision  to  the
                  parties as soon as practicable.

             (4)  If the Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it must send
                  with the record of its decision-

                  (a)  a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and

                  (b)  notification of the right to make an  application  to
                      the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  and  the
                      time within which, and  the  manner  in  which,  such
                      application must be made.

             ..."

25. The reason why we have emphasised in bold certain words in  rule  33(2)
    above is that those words were substituted by SI 2018/511  with  effect
    from 14 May 2018.  Up to that date, rule 33(2) of the 2014  Rules  read
    as follows:-

         "(2) ... an application under paragraph (1) must be provided to the
             Tribunal so that it is received no later than  14  days  after
             the date  on  which  the  party  making  the  application  was
             provided with written reasons for the decision."

26. According to the Explanatory Note to SI 2018/511,  the  replacement  of
    references to "provided" with references to "sent" was done  "in  order
    to clarify that the time period for an application to be  sent  to  the
    Tribunal is calculated by reference to the date on  which  the  written
    reasons for the decision are sent to the party making the application".



(d) Was the application in time?

27. As we have seen, the First-tier Tribunal's decision in the  appellant's
    appeal was sent to his solicitors on 20 June 2018, after the amendments
    made by SI 2018/511 had taken effect.  Accordingly, the date  by  which
    the First-tier Tribunal needed to receive his application  was  3  July
    2018 (not 4 July 2018, as the judge who refused permission  appears  to
    have thought).

28. As we have also seen, however, the notice IA60 sent with the First-tier
    Tribunal's appeal decision, still referred to the  provisions  of  rule
    33, as they had existed up to 14 May 2018.  Despite the implication  in
    the Explanatory Note to SI 2018/511 that the substitution of "sent" for
    "provided" had been made merely in order "to clarify" the position,  it
    is, in our view, clear that a substantive change had in fact been made.
     As a matter of ordinary  language,  a  person  is  "provided"  with  a
    physical thing when he or she receives or takes possession of  it.   In
    the present case, that was  on  22  June  2018,  when  the  appellant's
    solicitors received the First-tier Tribunal's decision, along with form
    IA60.  The fourteen-day time limit, accordingly, would have expired  on
    5 July 2018, but for the amendment to rule 33 made by SI 2018/511.

29. As we have seen, the appellant's application was received by the First-
    tier  Tribunal  on  5  July  2018.   Although  the  judge  who  refused
    permission considered  it  significant  that  the  fax  containing  the
    application had arrived after business hours, there is nothing  in  the
    2014 Rules to say that, in such circumstances, the application was  not
    deemed to be received until the next business  day.   Accordingly,  but
    for the rule change, the appellant's application  would  have  been  in
    time.



(e) The jurisdictional issue: rule  21  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

30. We turn to the issue raised by Swift J  in  his  conditional  grant  of
    permission to appeal. This concerns rule 21 (Application to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for permission to appeal) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008  ("the  2008  Rules"),  which  (again  so  far  as
    relevant) states:-

         "21. (1) ...

             (2)  A person may apply to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission
                  to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of
                  another tribunal only if-

                  (a)  they have  made  an  application  for  permission  to
                      appeal  to  the  tribunal  which  made  the  decision
                      challenged; and

                  (b)  that application has been refused  or  has  not  been
                      admitted or has been granted only on limited grounds.

             (3)  An application for permission to appeal must be  made  in
                  writing and received by the Upper Tribunal no later than-

             ...

                  (aa) ... in an asylum case or an  immigration  case  where
                      the appellant is in the United Kingdom  at  the  time
                      that the application is made -

                      (i)  14 days after the date on which  notice  of  the
                           first First-tier Tribunal's refusal of permission
                           was sent to the appellant; or

                      ...

             (7)  If the  appellant  makes  an  application  to  the  Upper
                  Tribunal for permission to appeal against the decision  of
                  another tribunal, and that other tribunal refused to admit
                  the  appellant's  application  for  permission  to  appeal
                  because the application for permission or  for  a  written
                  statement of reasons was not made in time -

                  (a)  the application to the Upper Tribunal for  permission
                      to appeal must include the reason why the application
                      to the other tribunal for permission to appeal or for
                      a written statement of reasons, as the case  may  be,
                      was not made in time; and

                  (b)  the Upper Tribunal must only admit the application if
                      the Upper  Tribunal  considers  that  it  is  in  the
                      interests of justice for it to do so.

             ..."

31. The jurisdictional issue is predicated  on  the  assumption  that  rule
    21(7) of the 2008 Rules applies in  the  appellant's  case.   In  fact,
    however, the judge who refused permission in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not refuse to admit the application because it was out of time.  On
    the contrary, her decision was "Permission to appeal is refused".

32. On the face of the  Rules,  the  judge's  decision  to  refuse  can  be
    regarded as understandable.  A comparison of rule 24 of the 2005  Rules
    and rule 33 of the 2014  Rules  reveals  that  there  is  no  longer  a
    provision that requires the First-tier Tribunal to refuse  to  admit  a
    late application, where the Tribunal  declines  to  extend  time.   The
    effect of rule 33(7) of the 2014 Rules is that the First-tier  Tribunal
    is expressly required to refuse to admit an application for  permission
    to appeal, only in the circumstances where  the  written  statement  of
    reasons (as opposed to the application itself) has been refused because
    the application for reasons was received out of time.

33. Given that the judge did not  refuse  to  admit  the  application  but,
    rather, refused to grant permission, we therefore find that rule  21(7)
    of the 2008 Rules has no purchase.

34.  However, even in a case to which rule 21(7)  does  apply,  we  do  not
    consider that a failure to comply with  the  requirement  of  paragraph
    (7)(a) causes the Upper Tribunal to  lose  jurisdiction.   So  much  is
    plain from rule 7(1), which provides that a failure to  comply  with  a
    requirement of the Rules does not of itself render void the proceedings
    or any step taken in them.


35. In any event, it would be  remarkable  if  a  failure  to  comply  with
    paragraph (7)(a) were to have that effect, since it  would  mean  that,
    even where the Upper Tribunal considered it to be "in the interests  of
    justice" to admit the application made to it,  the  Tribunal  would  be
    without the power to do so.  One can envisage a scenario in which there
    may be a good case for  giving  relief,  both  in  respect  of  a  late
    application to the First-tier Tribunal and also in respect of a failure
    to comply with rule 21(7)(a).


36. The more difficult question is whether the judge should have refused to
    grant permission or, instead, have refused to  admit  the  application,
    with the result that rule 21(7)  would  undoubtedly  have  applied.  We
    therefore turn to this issue.





(f) The First-tier Tribunal's response to a late application for  permission
to appeal


37. Before us, Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  in  all  cases  in  which  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refuses
    permission to appeal, where the application made to it is late and time
    is not extended, rule 21(7) should be  read  as  if  the  reference  to
    refusing to admit the appellant's application included a  reference  to
    refusing permission to appeal.  Were that  not  the  case,  Mr  Wilding
    said, then, in reaching its decision on an application  for  permission
    to the Upper Tribunal which may be in time, the  Upper  Tribunal  could
    not pay any regard to the fact that the application to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was out of time.  This would be particularly problematic in  a
    case where the application to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  months  or
    even years late.


38. Although not drawn to our attention, the  judgments  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in KM (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 437 are of relevance.  In that case, an Upper  Tribunal
    judge, faced with an application for permission to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal against a decision of that Tribunal,  refused  to  admit  the
    application, on the ground that it was made out  of  time.   The  judge
    had, however, overlooked rule 44(6) of the 2008  Rules,  which  governs
    the position:-


         "(6) If the  person  seeking  permission  to  appeal  provides  the
             application to the Upper Tribunal later than the time required
             by paragraph (3), (3A), (3D) or (4) or by an extension of time
             under rule 5(3)(a) (Power to extend time) -


             (a)  the application must include a request for  an  extension
                  of time  and  the  reason  why  the  application  was  not
                  provided in time; and


             (b)   unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  extends   time   for   the
                  application under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend time)  the
                  Upper Tribunal must refuse the application."


39. At paragraph 16 of  the  judgments  in  KM,  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals (Sir Ernest Ryder) held that the judge's refusal to admit the
    application "must be read as an order refusing permission as  that  was
    what the UT Rules required her to do".


40. The question for the court then became how to approach the lateness  of
    the application to the Upper Tribunal, given that the  application  for
    permission made to the court itself had been made within the time limit
    set by Practice Direction 52D for  statutory  appeals  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The Senior President addressed this question as follows:-

         "26. The leading case on the question is  Ozdemir  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 167.   It  is  a
             permission decision of a two judge court which gave  leave  at
             the time to cite it as authority.  Although the tribunal rules
             were different in 2003 and Ozdemir  involved  the  predecessor
             tribunal to  the  existing  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunals,
             namely the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, a point  of  principle
             was identified which has subsequently been  followed  by  this
             court.

         27.  In Ozdemir, the appellant had been unsuccessful  in  the  IAT.
             She applied to the IAT for permission to appeal to  the  Court
             of Appeal but her application was a month out  of  time.   The
             then existing tribunal rules contained no provision to  extend
             time.  The IAT determined that it lacked jurisdiction to  hear
             the permission application,  and  that  accordingly  it  could
             neither grant nor refuse it. The question was whether  or  not
             this excluded the Court of Appeal's jurisdiction to  hear  the
             appeal given that under paragraph 23  of  schedule  4  of  the
             Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  the  Court  of   Appeal's
             jurisdiction  only  arose  once  the  IAT  had   "refused"   a
             permission to appeal application.

         28.  The Secretary of State  argued  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
             jurisdiction had not been triggered, and that the  appellant's
             only mechanism for challenging the IAT's  determination  would
             be by  judicial  review.   Mance  LJ  found  this  proposition
             "unattractive" on the basis that recourse to  judicial  review
             would  weaken  finality  and  cause  extra  delay.   Mance  LJ
             reasoned that paragraph 4(1)(b) of schedule 4 of the 1999  Act
             provided a power in the Lord Chancellor to make rules enabling
             a tribunal to dismiss an appeal for  procedural  reasons.   He
             saw  this  as  evidencing  a  Parliamentary   intention   that
             procedural failures would lead to refusal.

         29.  Mance LJ concluded that the IAT's determination should be read
             as a refusal and that the IAT's way of expressing this refusal
             should be read as a reflection of the fact that  the  IAT  was
             refusing the application for procedural reasons.  He then went
             on to consider the question relevant to these proceedings that
             is, how the Court of Appeal should approach  the  question  of
             extension of time?

         30.  The question was answered by Mance  LJ  at  [37]  to  [42]  as
             follows:

             a.   If the PD to CPR 52 which sets out the special provisions
                  relating to appeals from the IAT is construed in a similar
                  way to the right of appeal provisions in schedule 4 of the
                  1999 Act, an applicant could always be  in  time  to  seek
                  permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal however out of
                  time the applicant  had  been  in  seeking  permission  to
                  appeal from the tribunal;

             b.   That cannot be right. The concept of refusal in  the  CPR
                  PD is not necessarily the same as in the 1999 Act.     The
                  PD refers to the tribunal rules which provide for two ways
                  in which an application for permission to  appeal  may  be
                  refused: either on the merits or on the basis of  lack  of
                  jurisdiction. The PD relates to the former not the latter;

             c.   If the special provision of the PD does  not  apply,  the
                  general rules relating to appeals remain which provide for
                  a fixed time within which an application for permission to
                  appeal must be made from the substantive decision.    That
                  time period runs not from the AIT's decision on permission
                  to appeal but from the substantive AIT decision and unless
                  extended it  follows  that  the  period  within  which  an
                  appellant  must  apply  for   permission   to   appeal   a
                  substantive decision to the  court  of  appeal  will  have
                  expired.

             31.  I will consider the point of principle  that  arises  and
                  the examples that this court has followed the same in  due
                  course.  It is first important to note that since  Ozdemir
                  the FtT and the UT have been created.  A right  of  appeal
                  to this court from the UT is provided for in section 13 of
                  the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.   For
                  present purposes, all that needs to be  said  is  that  by
                  section 13(4) permission to appeal may be given by the  UT
                  or this court on an application by a party and by  section
                  13(5) an application to this court may  only  be  made  if
                  permission has been refused by the UT. Accordingly,  prior
                  refusal by the UT is still the trigger  for  this  court's
                  consideration of a permission application.

             32.  As I have already remarked,  the  UT  now  has  power  to
                  extend time to consider  a  permission  application  (rule
                  5(3)(a) of the UT Rules) but if no application is made  to
                  extend time or the UT declines to exercise that power, the
                  UT must refuse the application (rule 44(6)(b)  of  the  UT
                  Rules). The procedural position is  therefore  that  which
                  Mance  LJ  was  seeking  to  address  i.e.  there  is   no
                  jurisdiction  in  the  UT  to  do  other  than  refuse   a
                  permission application which is out of time and for  which
                  an extension of time has not been granted.

             33.  The procedural provisions  identified  by  Mance  LJ  are
                  repeated in the modern rules and practice directions  with
                  modifications that are not relevant to this  appeal  other
                  than the fact that  the  time  limits  have  changed.  The
                  special provision for appeals from the UT to this court is
                  to  be  found  in  CPR  PD52D  at  paragraph  3.3.    That
                  replicates paragraph 21.7 of CPR 52PD-087  save  that  the
                  time period is now 28 days rather than 14  days  from  the
                  date on which the UT decision on permission is sent to the
                  appellant.  The  general  rule  is  21   days   from   the
                  substantive decision by reason of CPR 52 rule  12.2  which
                  replicates the former CPR 52 rule 4(2)(b)  save  that  the
                  time limit used to be 14 days.

             34.  The point of principle which Mance LJ identified is  that
                  this court should enforce the time limits provided for  in
                  the  tribunal   rules   to   prevent   them   from   being
                  substantially  undermined.   To  permit  otherwise   would
                  enable a party to wait months or even years before  making
                  a decision to appeal an adverse immigration  determination
                  while continuing to take advantage of the delay that would
                  be the consequence.  This court  should  rigorously  apply
                  the tribunal rules so that permission to appeal  will  not
                  be granted if an appellant has not made application for an
                  extension of time to  appeal  a  determination  where  the
                  application is otherwise out of time."

41. The Senior President concluded as follows:-

         "40. I am persuaded that the principle in Ozdemir should be applied
             to the application in this case for two  reasons:  a)  it  has
             been treated as binding by this court since it was decided and
             there is neither material difference in the rules and practice
             directions to distinguish it nor any argument put before  this
             court to regard it as per incuriam, and b)  the  legal  policy
             underscoring the decision remains sound, namely that  tribunal
             rules are to be complied with unless application is  made  for
             good reason and this court should enforce that principle.

         41.  If the principle in Ozdemir is applied,  the  application  for
             permission to appeal in this case  must  be  refused  for  the
             additional reason that no application has been  made  to  this
             court to extend time  and  it  necessarily  follows  that  the
             absence of any reason to explain the delay  that  occurred  is
             fatal.  If my Lord  agrees,  I  would  refuse  permission  and
             dismiss the appeal.  I would give  permission  to  report  and
             rely upon this judgment."

42. In his concurring  judgment,  Underhill  LJ,  having  agreed  with  the
    approach to be adopted to the categorisation of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    permission decision, continued:-

         "44. The next question is what is the relevance to the  application
             for permission in this  Court  of  the  fact  that  the  prior
             application to the Upper Tribunal was made out of time.  I  at
             first thought that that prior  delay  had  to  be  treated  as
             irrelevant because para. 3.3 of the Practice Direction to rule
             52 provides that time for applying for permission to appeal to
             this Court from the UT runs from the date of  notification  of
             "the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  on  permission  to  appeal".
             However, that produces the very unsatisfactory result that the
             prior delay is wiped from the slate as long as the application
             to this Court is in time.  As the Senior President points out,
             in Ozdemir  the  Court  was  prepared  to  adopt  a  purposive
             construction of the rules/practice direction governing appeals
             from the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  which  were  broadly
             similar in structure, in order to avoid that result.  The then
             practice direction provided for time to run from the  date  of
             notification "of the Tribunal's decision  to  give  or  refuse
             permission to appeal under [the then rules]".  Mance  LJ  held
             at para. 40 of his judgment that the reference to  a  decision
             "to give or refuse permission" was only to  decisions  on  the
             substantive merits rather than  to  decisions  based  on  non-
             compliance with time limits, so that the special rule did  not
             apply.  In my view it  is  no  more  difficult  to  apply  the
             equivalent purposive construction to the phrase in the current
             practice direction, namely "the Upper Tribunal's  decision  on
             permission to appeal".  It is indeed inherently unlikely  that
             those responsible for the  wording  of  the  current  Practice
             Direction intended to produce the very result which this Court
             in Ozdemir (and indeed the subsequent decisions identified  by
             the Senior President in which it has been  followed)  regarded
             as unacceptable. The result produced by  applying  an  Ozdemir
             approach  to  the  current  rules/practice  direction  can  be
             summarised as follows:
             (1)  The special time limit for appeals from the UT  in  para.
                  3.3 of the Practice Direction does not apply where the  UT
                  has refused permission on the basis of non-compliance with
                  time-limits rather than on the merits.
             (2)  Instead the ordinary time limit in (now)  CPR  52.12  (2)
                  applies.
             (3)  Since ex hypothesi the application to the UT was  out  of
                  time the application to the CA will be even more  so,  but
                  the CA can grant an extension under CPR 52.15 if satisfied
                  that  the  missing  of  the  original  deadline  (and  any
                  subsequent delay)  was  justifiable.   This  will  involve
                  considering the same matters as the UT will have done,  if
                  it refused an extension; but it is not, as such, an appeal
                  from the UT's decision.
         45.  That being so, it is necessary to ask whether  the  Applicant
             has shown a good reason for his delay in applying to the Upper
             Tribunal for permission to appeal to this Court.  We  are  not
             reviewing the decision of  Judge  Kekic  about  the  delay  in
             applying to the UT but are making our own decision.   However,
             we ought to give considerable weight to what she decided,  and
             why, for the reasons given by the Senior President at para. 24
             of his judgment.

         46. I have not found the question whether there  was  good  reason
             for the delay entirely straightforward.  It is clear from  the
             contemporary correspondence, of which  I  need  not  give  the
             details,  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  were   genuinely
             unaware that the UT had made a decision and were pressing UKBA
             for  a  decision,  receiving  some  confused  and   misleading
             replies.  This is not, therefore, a case where the time  limit
             was missed as a result of insouciance.   On  the  other  hand,
             there is obvious force in Judge Kekic's point that it is  hard
             to accept that both the notice of the hearing and  the  notice
             of decision had  failed  to  be  delivered  not  only  to  the
             solicitors  but  also  to  the  appellant.   The  more  likely
             explanation is that  they  were  lost  or  overlooked  by  the
             solicitors and the appellant personally,  in  which  case  the
             delay is their fault.  As I say, it is right to attach  weight
             to the conclusion of Judge Kekic to that effect,  even  if  it
             was rather more succinctly expressed than I would have  liked.
             In the end, however, the point  is  not  crucial  because  the
             appeal to the UT was bound to fail  on  the  merits,  for  the
             reasons I give below.

         47. It seems to me that even if the application  was  in  time  it
             could not satisfy the second appeals test.  Even if there  was
             an error of law by the FtT or the UT, it raises no question of
             principle or practice; nor is there any other reason  why  the
             appeal should be  allowed  to  proceed.   The  fact  that  the
             appellant was not represented at  the  UT  cannot  be  such  a
             reason since the right route to remedy any  injustice  arising
             out of non-service of the notice of hearing was to apply under
             rule 43.  Nor am I satisfied that there was an error of law in
             the substantive reasoning, for  the  reasons  quoted  from  my
             original  refusal  at  para.  11  of  the  Senior  President's
             judgment and amplified by him at paras. 19-22."

43. We do not consider that the judgments in KM  (Bangladesh)  provide  any
    support for Mr Wilding's submission that any refusal of  permission  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on "lateness" grounds should be  treated  as  a
    refusal to admit the application, thereby triggering the  operation  of
    rule 21(7) of the 2008 Rules.  In KM (Bangladesh), the  Upper  Tribunal
    was expressly required by the 2008 Rules to refuse a  late  application
    made to it, unless time was extended.  It was  therefore  but  a  small
    step for the court to categorise what the Upper Tribunal judge  did  as
    amounting to such a refusal.  By contrast, there is nothing in the 2008
    Rules that requires the Upper Tribunal to  categorise  the  refusal  of
    permission by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  a  refusal  to  admit  an
    application.

44. That being so, it would be wrong for the Upper Tribunal to take it upon
    itself to categorise a refusal by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  grant
    permission in response to a late  application  as  a  refusal  by  that
    Tribunal to admit the application, merely in order to invoke rule 21(7)
    of the 2008 Rules. Such a course would only increase the likelihood  of
    applicants failing to comply with rule 21(7)(a), since they would  have
    to know that a decision of the First-tier Tribunal which, on its  face,
    said that permission to appeal is refused must, in fact, be read  as  a
    decision to refuse to admit the application.

45. Although we are unable to accept Mr Wilding's proposed way  of  dealing
    with the problem, KM (Bangladesh) supports his  underlying  submission,
    since it emphasises the extreme undesirability  of  allowing  delay  in
    applying for permission to the court or tribunal  below  to  be  "wiped
    from the slate as long as the application to [the appellate body] is in
    time", to use the  words  of  Underhill  LJ  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    judgments.

46. For the reasons we have just given, the solution does not lie in an  ex
    post facto recategorization by the  Upper  Tribunal  of  a  refusal  of
    permission as a refusal  to  admit.   Instead,  the  solution  lies  in
    realising that the 2014 Rules in  fact  do  not  prevent  a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge from refusing to admit a late application for permission
    to appeal.

47. Despite the disappearance of rule 24(4) of the  2005  Rules,  there  is
    nothing in the 2014 Rules  that  compels  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    refuse to grant permission to appeal, where it is  faced  with  a  late
    application and decides not to extend time. There is nothing equivalent
    to rule 44(6)(b) of the 2008 Rules.

48. The concept of refusing to admit an application made  out  of  time  is
    firmly embedded in the procedure rules of the Chambers  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, as well as in the 2008 Rules of the Upper  Tribunal.  In
    some First-tier Tribunal  Chambers,  such  as  the  General  Regulatory
    Chamber, one finds provisions akin to rule 24(4) of the 2005 Rules (GRC
    rule 42(4)).

49.  The  ability  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  refuse  to  admit  an
    application is directly recognised in rule 21(2) of the 2008  Rules  as
    providing one of the avenues whereby an applicant may  seek  permission
    to appeal from the Upper Tribunal:

        "(2) A person may apply to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
        appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of another  tribunal
        only if-

          a) they have made an application for permission to appeal  to  the
             tribunal which made the decision challenged; and

          b) that application has been refused or has not been  admitted  or
             has been granted only on limited grounds."

50. In rule 21(7), the opening words make  it  plain  that  the  Tribunal's
    ability to refuse to admit an application is  wide-ranging.  The  words
    "because the application for permission or for a written  statement  of
    reasons was not made in time" would be unnecessary  if  they  described
    the only situation in which that ability may arise.

51. Against this background, the decision of the drafter of the 2014  Rules
    not to reproduce rule 24(4) of the 2005  Rules,  far  from  creating  a
    restriction on the ability of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the
    First-tier Tribunal to refuse to admit an application on  the  specific
    grounds of lateness, appears to  be  a  recognition  of  the  Chamber's
    inherent power to act in this manner, where it declines to extend  time
    and  give what is known as relief from sanctions. In the light  of  the
    existence of rule 21(7) of the 2008 Rules and the undesirability of its
    being  rendered  otiose  in  this  large  category  of  cases,  it   is
    inconceivable that the drafter of the 2014  Rules  intended  to  impose
    such a restriction,  in  the  absence  of  a  clear  provision  to  the
    contrary.

52. One looks in  vain  in  the  2014  Rules  for  such  a  provision.  The
    requirement in rule 33(7) of those Rules not to  admit  an  application
    for permission, where an application for a written statement of reasons
    had been refused on lateness grounds, cannot be read as  a  legislative
    pronouncement that it is only in such a scenario that the Tribunal  may
    refuse to admit an application. Particularly in the light  of  what  we
    have just said, such an interpretation would be inconsistent  with  the
    overriding objective and falls to be rejected, pursuant to the canon of
    construction contained in rule 2(3)(b).

53.  There is, then, nothing in any enactment that fetters the power of the
    First-tier Tribunal under rule 4(1) to regulate its  own  procedure  in
    this area.  We therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal has power to
    refuse to admit an application made to it for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, where the application is made late and  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decides not to exercise its  discretion  to  extend  time
    under rule 4 or waive the requirement under rule 6.

54. Whilst it is true that rule 34(3) and (4) of the 2014  Rules  at  first
    sight appear not to apply to decisions to refuse to admit, that  cannot
    be right because, otherwise, a refusal to admit pursuant to rule  33(7)
    would not need to be communicated, along with information as to how  to
    make an application to the Upper Tribunal.  Accordingly, rule 34(3) and
    (4) must be read as applying, not only to refusals of  permission,  but
    also to every case in which the First-tier Tribunal refuses to admit an
    application  for  permission,  whether  by  reason  of  rule  33(7)  or
    otherwise.

55. Henceforth, a judge of the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
    Chamber) should state in terms,  as  his  or  her  decision,  that  the
    application for  permission  to  appeal  is  not  admitted,  where  the
    application is made out of time and the  judge  decides  not  to  grant
    relief from sanctions.  The judge's reasons for coming to this decision
    should be expressed in the "Reasons for Decision" part of the  relevant
    document.  The First-tier Tribunal's administration should then  ensure
    that rule 34(4)(b) is complied with in such a case.

56. If an applicant whose application has not  been  admitted  on  lateness
    grounds by the  First-tier  Tribunal  then  makes  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, rule 21(7) will  apply,  as
    intended, with the  result  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  may  admit  the
    application made to it (whether or not that application  is  in  time),
    only if the Upper Tribunal considers that it is  in  the  interests  of
    justice for it to do so.  In short, the slate is not wiped clean.

D. DECIDING THE APPEAL

57. We return to the facts of the appellant's appeal.  As  we  have  found,
    because the  judge's  decision  was,  in  terms,  to  refuse  to  grant
    permission, and cannot be read as a refusal to admit, rule  21(7)  does
    not apply. The grant of permission falls to be treated as unconditional
    in  nature.   We  accordingly  turn  to  the  substantive  grounds   of
    challenge.

58. Ground 1 contends that the First-tier Tribunal judge who dismissed  the
    appeal erred in law because  of  the  incorrect  presumption  that  the
    appellant was an overstayer.  Ground  2  asserts  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant should be granted  a  short  period  of  leave  in  order  to
    continue his studies.

59. We shall deal with ground 2 first, since it raises the wider  issue  of
    how any hypothetical  judge,  faced  with  the  human  rights  case  as
    advanced by the appellant, could legitimately respond to it.

60. It is manifest from the appellant's statement, in particular paragraphs
    135 to 141, that the appellant no longer had  the  financial  means  to
    study in the United Kingdom, as a result of parting with his  money  to
    Glyndwr University, which they are refusing  to  return  to  him.   The
    appellant does not point to any source of funds, which might enable him
    either to "complete" his existing studies or study for  something  else
    in the United Kingdom.  Indeed, it does not  appear  from  the  judge's
    decision that this was how the  case  for  the  appellant  was  put  by
    counsel who appeared at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

61. Before us, Mr O'Ceallaigh (who did not appear  below)  sought  to  draw
    support from the judgments of the Court of Appeal in Ahsan &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2009.
    There, the court was required to consider  a  number  of  appeals  from
    judicial review decisions of the Upper Tribunal, refusing permission to
    bring judicial review proceedings to challenge removal decisions  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, made  on  the  basis
    that the applicants had used  deception  in  obtaining  extensions  for
    leave to remain by using proxies for the spoken  part  of  their  TOEIC
    tests.  One of the issues considered by the Court of Appeal was whether
    the appellants had a suitable alternative remedy to judicial review, in
    the form of a human rights appeal. Underhill LJ said:

         "103.    Thus,  to  summarise,  Ms  Giovannetti's  case  should  be
             analysed as being that:

         (a)  as long as the old regime remained in effect,  the  Appellants
             could have triggered a right to an in-country  appeal  against
             the section 10 decision simply by making a human rights  claim
             - relying on the Nirula work-around if  the  claim  post-dated
             the notice; and

         (b)  once the new regime came  into  effect,  they  could  and  can
             acquire a right to an in-country  appeal  by  making  a  human
             rights claim challenging the decision to remove them  and,  if
             and when it is refused, appealing against that refusal.

         Although the position under the  new  regime  is  for  that  reason
         relevant to the issues before us, despite the initial decisions  in
         the  Appellants'  case  being  made  under  the  old   regime,   Ms
         Giovannetti discouraged us from considering the position as regards
         a case where the initial decision was made after  the  coming  into
         effect of the 2014 Act, since no such case is before us.  I  accept
         that we should not do so  (save  to  the  extent  necessary  in  Mr
         Ahsan's case).

         ...

         115. I start from the  position  that,  other  things  being  equal
             (though that is an important qualification in this  case),  it
             is better for the issue whether a person has cheated in  their
             TOEIC test to be determined in an appeal  to  the  FTT  rather
             than by way of judicial review proceedings in the UT.  The FTT
             is,  generally,   the   more   appropriate   forum   for   the
             determination of disputed issues of primary  fact,  and  as  a
             matter of the best use of judicial resources the UT ought  not
             to be burdened with cases that could properly be determined in
             the FTT.  That approach is  reinforced  by  the  consideration
             that Parliament  specifically  provided  for  appeals  against
             section 10 decisions to be heard in the  FTT,  albeit  out-of-
             country.  (The FTT is also, though this is perhaps  a  neutral
             point, a jurisdiction where costs are not normally awarded.)

         116. Of course, as already established, the direct route to the FTT
             by way of an old-style appeal against the section 10  decision
             itself would not provide an effective remedy in  these  cases,
             because it is  out-of-country.   The  question  before  us  is
             whether a different route to the FTT (in-country), via a human
             rights appeal, constitutes an  appropriate  available  remedy.
             In my judgment, it may do, if but only if all of the following
             conditions are satisfied:

             (A)  It must be clear that on such  an  appeal  the  FTT  will
                  determine whether the appellant used deception as  alleged
                  in the section 10 notice.

             (B)  It must be clear that if  the  finding  of  deception  is
                  overturned the appellant will, as a matter  of  substance,
                  be in no worse position than if the  section  10  decision
                  had been quashed in judicial review proceedings.

             (C)  The position at the date of the permission decision  must
                  be either that a human rights claim has been refused  (but
                  not certified), so that the applicant is in a position  to
                  mount an  immediate  human  rights  appeal,  or  that  the
                  applicant has failed to accept an offer from the Secretary
                  of State to decide a human rights claim promptly so that a
                  human rights appeal would become available.

             If those conditions are satisfied, the UT  would  in  my  view
             normally  be  entitled  to  refuse  permission  to  apply  for
             judicial review - though  it  is  impossible  to  predict  the
             idiosyncrasies of  particular  cases,  and  I  should  not  be
             regarded as laying down a hard-and-fast rule.   I  should  say
             something more about each of the conditions.

         117. As for (A), if in a case of this kind permission were given to
             apply for judicial review of  the  section  10  decision,  the
             applicant would obtain a judicial determination of whether  he
             or she did or did not cheat in their TOEIC test, since that is
             a matter of precedent fact on  which  the  lawfulness  of  the
             decision depends.  I regard the right to such a  determination
             as a matter of real value because  of  the  potentially  grave
             other consequences of an official finding of  that  character,
             as identified at paras. 20-21 above, even where  (untypically)
             it is not, or no longer,  central  to  any  removal  decision.
             However, an appellant would prima facie  also  obtain  such  a
             determination in a human rights appeal.  The tribunal would of
             course have to decide the deception issue  for  itself  rather
             than  simply  review  the  Secretary  of  State's  finding  on
             rationality grounds, and the appeal would to that extent be an
             appropriate alternative.  But if there is any  risk  that  the
             appeal will be determined on a basis which  does  not  require
             such a determination, e.g. for the  reasons  suggested  by  Mr
             Biggs at para. 113 above, that will not be the case.

         118. I should say, for the avoidance of doubt, that  the  reasoning
             in the previous paragraph does not mean  that  in  every  case
             where a finding of deception  is  made  the  subject  of  that
             finding is entitled to a judicial determination of  the  truth
             of the allegation.  Whether it does  so  will  depend  on  the
             legal context in which the question arises, including  whether
             it is material to a human rights claim.  That there are  cases
             where only a rationality review is available is illustrated by
             Giri (see para. 43 above).  Ms Giovannetti was  asked  by  the
             Court whether an appellant was entitled to pursue a  challenge
             to a deception finding in its own right, irrespective  of  its
             impact on  the  question  of  leave  to  remain  or  potential
             removal.  She said that in principle they would  be,  but  she
             submitted, relying on Giri, that such a challenge  could  only
             be on Wednesbury grounds.



         119. I turn to condition (B).  Mr Biggs must be  right  that  where
             the FTT on a human rights appeal finds that the appellant  did
             not cheat, that will not formally lead to the reversal of  the
             section 10 decision: that is a different  and  prior  decision
             which will not as such be  the  subject  of  the  appeal.   In
             contrast, a successful judicial review challenge would lead to
             the section 10 decision being quashed.  But I would not regard
             that difference as necessarily conclusive.  This  is  an  area
             where we should be concerned with substance rather than  form.
             I would regard the crucial question as being whether the  fact
             that the section 10 decision remained formally in place  -  so
             that leave to remain was  still  formally  "invalidated"  (see
             section 10 (8)) - would leave an  appellant  worse  off  as  a
             matter of substance than if the  decision  had  been  quashed.
             Unfortunately  this  aspect  was  not  explored  in  the  oral
             submissions as fully as it might have  been,  no  doubt  as  a
             result of the late emergence of the human rights claim  issue;
             and the guidance I can give must be rather tentative.


         120. The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if  on  a
             human rights appeal  an  appellant  were  found  not  to  have
             cheated, which inevitably means that the section  10  decision
             had been wrong, the Secretary of State  would  be  obliged  to
             deal with him or her thereafter so far as possible as if  that
             error had not been made, i.e. as if their leave to remain  had
             not been invalidated.  In a straightforward case, for example,
             she could and should make a fresh grant  of  leave  to  remain
             equivalent to that which  had  been  invalidated.   She  could
             also, and  other  things  being  equal  should,  exercise  any
             relevant future discretion, if necessary "outside the  Rules",
             on the basis that the appellant  had  in  fact  had  leave  to
             remain in the relevant period  notwithstanding  that  formally
             that leave  remained  invalidated.   (I  accept  that  how  to
             exercise such a discretion would not always be easy, since  it
             is not always possible to reconstruct the world  as  it  would
             have been; but that problem would arise even if  the  decision
             were quashed on judicial review.)  If it were  clear  that  in
             those  ways  the  successful  appellant  could   be   put   in
             substantially the same position as if the section 10  decision
             had been quashed, I can see no reason in  principle  why  that
             should not be taken into account in deciding whether  a  human
             rights appeal  would  constitute  an  appropriate  alternative
             remedy.  To pick up a particular point relied on by Mr  Biggs,
             I do not regard the fact that  a  person  commits  a  criminal
             offence by remaining in the UK from (apparently) the moment of
             service of a section 10 notice as constituting  a  substantial
             detriment such that he is absolutely entitled to seek to  have
             the notice quashed, at least in circumstances where there  has
             been  no  prosecution.   (It  is  also  irrelevant  that   the
             appellant may have suffered collateral consequences  from  the
             section 10 decision on the basis that his  or  her  leave  has
             been invalidated, such as losing their  job;  past  damage  of
             that  kind  cannot  alas  be  remedied  by  either   kind   of
             proceeding.)

         121. So far so good, but the law in this area is  very  complicated
             and I am not confident that all its ramifications  were  fully
             explored before us.  I do  not  feel  in  a  position  to  say
             definitively that the Secretary of State will always  be  able
             to exercise her discretion, in the aftermath of  a  successful
             human rights appeal, so as to  achieve  the  same  substantive
             result as the formal quashing  of  the  section  10  decision.
             There may,  for  example,  be  legislation  (i.e.  primary  or
             secondary legislation rather  than  simply  the  Rules)  which
             would result in the appellant having to be differently treated
             depending on whether he or she had leave to  remain  during  a
             particular period. If there were any real doubt about  whether
             in a given case a successful human rights appeal would  be  as
             effective as the formal quashing of the  section  10  decision
             the applicant should have the benefit of  that  doubt  and  be
             permitted to pursue judicial review proceedings.

         122. As for condition (C),  I  believe  Mr  Knafler  was  right  to
             concede that if at the permission stage a human  rights  claim
             has already been made and refused, so that the claimant  could
             appeal forthwith, then the UT  would  be  entitled  to  refuse
             permission on the basis that an appropriate alternative remedy
             was available (assuming that  the  other  two  conditions  are
             satisfied).  That would lead to  the  crucial  question  being
             determined in what  I  believe  to  be  the  most  appropriate
             forum."

62. We do not consider that Mr O'Ceallaigh's reliance  upon  Ahsan  assists
    the present appellant.  There is no section 10 decision in his case.

63.  Furthermore, there is only a hazy relationship, at best,  between  the
    curtailment decision in August 2015 and the respondent's refusal of the
    human rights claim that was made in November 2014. As we  have  already
    noted, the appellant had been withdrawn from his course of  studies  by
    Glyndwr University well before  the  University  was  informed  by  the
    respondent about the issue  regarding  the  appellant's  taking  of  an
    English language test.  The appellant had not achieved  a  satisfactory
    level of attendance on the course. The  appellant's  witness  statement
    acknowledges problems with his attendance, owing  to  issues  with  his
    accommodation and a course of dental treatment.

64. In these circumstances, it is not possible to invoke Ahsan as authority
    for the proposition that, even if the case  had  been  argued  on  this
    basis, the First-tier Tribunal judge  should  have  allowed  the  human
    rights appeal to enable the  respondent  to  give  a  period  of  leave
    commensurate with the period of just over  one  year  that  would  have
    taken the appellant to 26 September 2016  (his  leave  being  curtailed
    with effect from 11 September 2015).  Allowing the appeal on that basis
    would not affect the decision of Glyndwr  University  to  withdraw  the
    appellant from the course because of his problematic attendance.   Nor,
    of course, would it  put  the  appellant  in  the  position  of  having
    sufficient funds to resume his studies.  In  any  event,  as  ground  1
    points out, on the  facts  of  this  case  the  appellant's  leave  was
    statutorily extended by section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971,  albeit
    that section 3C leave has somewhat different characteristics than leave
    which is actually granted by the respondent.

65. For these reasons, even if the appellant's human rights appeal had been
    advanced before the First-tier Tribunal judge on the basis  now  sought
    to be relied upon, it would have been doomed to fail.  The  appellant's
    case, as now advanced, is very far from the sort of case the  Court  of
    Appeal envisaged, when it spoke of attempting to put a  person  in  the
    same position as if the decisions to curtail and remove  had  not  been
    taken. On the contrary, the suggestion that the appellant ought  to  be
    granted a short period of further leave in essence boils  down  to  the
    proposition that because his later studies in the United  Kingdom  have
    not gone as he might have hoped, owing in part to the fault of  others,
    the appellant should be compensated by the grant of a period of  leave.
    His appeal, however, is a human rights appeal and human rights are  not
    to be dispensed in such a manner.

66. Our conclusion on ground 2 therefore means that the First-tier Tribunal
    judge's error in respect of the issue  of  overstaying  could  make  no
    material difference to the appellant's appeal.  The  appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom as an adult,  in  order  to  study  at  West  London
    University.   He  did  so  and  obtained  a  qualification  from   that
    institution.  Thereafter, his dealings with a person who may have  been
    an unscrupulous and greedy agent led him to part  with  a  considerable
    sum of money, so as to embark on another course of studies,  which  had
    become problematic, even before the English language test issue  arose.
    The appellant has no clearly articulated plans for how he  would  spend
    his time in the United Kingdom, were he to be  granted  further  leave,
    although his statement refers to a desire to  work  here,  so  that  he
    might provide financially for his parents in India.  His  relationships
    with friends and relatives in the United Kingdom were,  rightly,  given
    little weight by the First-tier Tribunal judge, having regard  to  Part
    VA of the 2002 Act.  The appellant would  be  able  to  reintegrate  in
    society in India, where he has parental relatives.

67. In all the circumstances, therefore, the judge's error,  identified  in
    ground 1, was of no significance.  We decline  to  exercise  our  power
    under section 12 of the 2007 Act to set aside his decision.




E. DECISION

68. The appeal is dismissed.



                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber
