
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

CS and Others (Proof of Foreign Law) India [2017] UKUT 00199 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 04 April 2017                             |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


                                   Between

                           CS (India) and 4 others
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent





                                ANONYMITY

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

Appellants:   In person, unrepresented
Respondent:   Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The content of any material foreign law  is  a  question  of  fact  normally
determined on the basis of expert evidence.


                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. We hereby undertake the exercise of remaking the decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT"),  this  appeal  having  travelled  via   a
    relatively elaborate route through the United Kingdom legal system.

The Appellants

 2. Some basic understanding of the  family  unit  comprised  by  the  five
    Appellants is essential:

      a) The first Appellant, the father, is a national of  India,  a  civil
         engineer by profession, now aged 42 years.

      b) The second Appellant, the mother, is a national of Pakistan,  a  BA
         graduate, now aged 39 years.

      c) There are three children of the family,  all  born  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  They are aged 8, 4, and 2 years respectively.

 3. The parents met for the first time  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  were
    married in this jurisdiction.  The father of the  family  was  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom during some seven years, from  September
    2003 to April 2010.  The mother  was  lawfully  resident  here  between
    September 2006 and December 2009.  They  were  married  on  09  October
    2008.

 4. At this juncture it is of some  significance  to  note  the  following,
    which is not contentious:

      a) Both the father and the oldest child of the family are nationals of
         India.

      b) The mother is a national of Pakistan.

      c) The second and third children do not  have  nationality  of  either
         India or Pakistan.

      d) None of the children is a British national.



The First Legal Challenge

 5. The first element of the  elaborate  litigation  jigsaw  in  which  the
    Appellants have become involved crystallised in  July  2013  when  they
    brought an application for judicial review challenging the decision  of
    the Respondent, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ("the
    Secretary of State"), refusing their leave to remain application  based
    on their Article 8 ECHR rights.  Their judicial review challenge had  a
    favourable outcome, giving rise to a consent order dated 11 April  2014
    whereby the Secretary of State undertook  to  reconsider  the  decision
    challenged.

The Impugned Decision

 6. The challenge noted above generated the  impugned  decision,  which  is
    dated 01 July 2014.  By this decision the refusal of leave to remain in
    respect of all five Appellants was maintained.   The  Appellants  were,
    simultaneously, formally notified of  their  vulnerability  to  removal
    from the United Kingdom.

 7. It is necessary at this point to highlight the following, which is  not
    contentious and is linked to [4] above:

      a) The Secretary of State is proposing to remove the father and oldest
         daughter to India.

      b) The Secretary of State is proposing to remove the  mother  and  the
         other two children to Pakistan. In passing, while the Secretary  of
         States written decision intimated an intention to remove the second
         child to India with her father, this was expressly modified  by  Mr
         Singh (representing the Secretary of State)  on  enquiry  from  the
         bench at the hearing.

    It follows that if the  Secretary  of  State's  removal  decisions  are
    lawful the family will be fragmented, subject  to  our  assessment  and
    determination of certain nationality issues below.

FtT Decision

 8. The FtT dismissed the appeals, which  were  pursued  exclusively  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  It is appropriate to highlight the  following  passage
    in the Tribunal's decision, at [27]:

         "Accordingly for the purposes of the application and the  appeal  I
         proceed on the basis that all four Appellants ought to  be  treated
         as Indian nationals or as people who can be removed to India."

    As appears from what we have stated above, in tandem with what follows,
    this was a misconception.

Upper Tribunal Error of Law Decision

 9. The Upper Tribunal ("UT") concluded that there  was  no  error  of  law
    afflicting  the  decision  of  the  FtT  and   dismissed   the   appeal
    accordingly.  Unlike the FtT, the UT was alert to the family separation
    issue noted in [7] above.  However, its decision did not really  engage
    with the single facet of separation which was then acknowledged, namely
    that the mother would have to be removed  to  Pakistan.   Nor  did  the
    decision grapple with the proposed removal destination  of  the  second
    and third children.

Decision of the Court of Appeal

10. On further appeal the Secretary of State ultimately conceded  that  the
    decision of the UT was unsustainable in law.  The Statement of  Reasons
    accompanying the order of the  Court  of  Appeal  dated  02  June  2016
    records, in material part:

         "... The decision of the Upper Tribunal is  flawed  to  the  extent
         that it did not fully consider the question of the immigration  law
         of India."

    The  court  ordered  that  the  appeal  be  remitted  to  a   different
    constitution of the UT, with no findings of fact preserved.

Our Decision

11. The  framework  of  the  exercise  which  we  now  undertake  has  been
    established by the decision making and litigation history which we have
    rehearsed.  We highlight in particular [4] and [7] above.  While two of
    the hallmarks of this appeal are the  voluminous  documentary  evidence
    and the lengthy submissions of the two sides, we have disentangled from
    the bulk a single and  fundamental  question:  will  it  be  reasonably
    possible for the long established family life of these five  Appellants
    to be maintained, or re-established, in the wake of the removal  action
    which the Secretary of State is proposing to take?  The answer to  this
    question, in turn, provides the key to our  resolution  of  the  issues
    arising under Article 8 ECHR and section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 (the "2009 Act").

12.  The answer to the central  question  formulated  above  turns  not  on
    United Kingdom  law.   It  is,  rather,  dependent  upon  the  material
    provisions of the domestic laws of a foreign state, namely  India:  see
    [16] infra.

13. It is unfortunate for the Appellants that at  this  advanced  stage  of
    their journey through the English legal  system  they  no  longer  have
    legal representation.  They explained to us that they could  no  longer
    afford it.  It is clear from the various materials assembled that  they
    were   well   served   by   their   former    legal    representatives.
    Notwithstanding  this  handicap  the  mother   and   father   acquitted
    themselves admirably, in both the compilation of  documentary  evidence
    and the crystallisation of certain issues at the hearing.

14. Given the elongated history noted above it was a matter of some  little
    surprise that the Secretary of State's  representative  still  did  not
    have  full  and  conclusive  answers  to  certain  important  questions
    relating to the domestic laws of India and Pakistan.   Mr  Singh,  very
    candidly, was driven to withdraw part  of  his  written  submission  in
    consequence.  We received no expert evidence on the laws of  either  of
    the foreign states concerned.  Ultimately, both sides found  themselves
    formulating arguments in relation  to  the  meaning  of  the  available
    evidence of the two legal systems under scrutiny which we shall address
    below.

15. We preface our evaluation of  the  evidence  with  the  following.   As
    noted, it is common case that the Secretary of  State's  removal  plans
    will fragment this family.  It will result in  the  father  and  eldest
    daughter being removed to India, while the mother  and  the  other  two
    children are removed to Pakistan.  The Appellants' case  is  that  this
    will  infringe  their  rights,  individually  and  collectively,  under
    Article 8 ECHR and, further, will be in contravention of section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  (the  "2009  Act").
    The central focus of this case has become whether, in the  post-removal
    scenario outlined above, the mother and the two younger  children  will
    be able to reunite with the father and oldest  child  in  India.   This
    question, in turn, has resulted in attention being  focused  on  Indian
    immigration laws.

16. It is long settled that in United Kingdom  legal  proceedings,  foreign
    law is capable of being proved by the evidence of a  person  possessing
    demonstrated expert credentials.  This, in our experience, is the  norm
    in a broad range of  litigation  fields.   It  is  illustrated  in  the
    recently reported decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  R  (Hassan  and
    Karada) (Returns to Malta - Dublin Regulation) IJR  [2016]  UKUT  00452
    (IAC).  Evidence presented in this way need  not  necessarily  be  viva
    voce.  Rather, an  expert's  report,  satisfactory  in  both  form  and
    content, can be acceptable. The burden of  proof  rests  on  the  party
    relying upon the relevant foreign law.  Any question of foreign law  is
    one of fact. Judicial notice of foreign law is rarely appropriate.  The
    general principles are rehearsed in Halsbury's Laws of England  (2015),
    Volume 12 (2015) at [746].

17. The Tribunal has received no expert evidence of the immigration laws of
    India.  There is not, however, an outright dearth of evidence  of  such
    laws.   Two  separate  pieces  of  documentary  evidence  fall  to   be
    considered.

18. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Singh brought to our attention a
    document which, on its face, was generated by an unidentified  unit  of
    the Home Office entitled "Response to  Country  of  Origin  Information
    (COI) Request", dated 06  October  2016.   We  shall  assume  that  the
    request was made by the Home Office Presenting Officer's Unit  for  the
    purpose of this appeal, in the wake of the Court of Appeal Order.  This
    document rehearses the questions posed.  These included  the  following
    key question:

         "In particular, can a Pakistani male married to  an  Indian  female
         with children obtain a spousal visa?"

    Regrettably,  but  unassailably,  this   question   was   fundamentally
    misconceived: see [4] above.  For this reason alone we must treat  with
    caution and scrutinise with particular care the text which follows.




19. The "Response" identifies as its  source  a  document  which  we  shall
    consider in [20] - [21] below.  Within this section it is  stated  that
    Pakistani women married to Indian nationals "... would initially travel
    to India on a short term entry visa or  tourist  visa".   As  we  shall
    explain,  we  find  nothing  in  the  second  document  supporting   or
    confirming this assertion.  The remainder of the document is  correctly
    described as vague and non-specific,  exemplified  by  unparticularised
    phrases such as "Visa restrictions" and "Indian  visas".   Furthermore,
    we note that the document contains a species of disclaimer:

         "The Indian High Commission in London may have to be approached for
         clarification on the above".

    There is no  evidence  that  this  step  was  taken.   Finally,  it  is
    abundantly clear that the author of the Home Office document  professes
    no expertise in Indian immigration laws.

20. The document, to  which  the  unidentified  Home  Office  official  was
    referring, on its face, emanates  from  the  Indian  Ministry  of  Home
    Affairs.  It is endorsed with the words "Updated as on  16th  September
    2014".   It appears to be an instrument of guidance to State Government
    Officials and others processing visa  applications.   The  document  is
    unsigned and its author undisclosed.  There is no indication  that  the
    author professes any degree of expertise in  Indian  immigration  laws.
    Furthermore, the document does not reproduce any of the relevant  laws.
    Rather, it takes the form of an analysis, or summary,  of  unidentified
    source material.

21. The aforementioned  document,  giving  its  words  their  ordinary  and
    natural meaning, invites the following analysis:

    (i)  The section (paragraph 2)  relating  to  temporary  extensions  of
         visas does not support the Home Office assertion (supra)  that  the
         mother of this family could "... travel to India on  a  short  term
         entry visa or  tourist  visa".   Furthermore,  both  documents  are
         silent as regards the two younger children.

    (ii) The first section dealing with tourist visas (paragraph 7)  is  of
         no application to this family as it  is  concerned  with  "re-entry
         permission".

    (iii)    The remaining "tourist visa" sections (paragraphs 8 and 9) are
         plainly of no application to this family.

    (iv) The first of two sections relating to "Long Term  Visa  (Pakistani
         nationals)" (paragraph 47) is inapplicable as it is concerned  with
         the "extension" of long term visas.  We give the  word  "extension"
         its ordinary and natural meaning.  We do not overlook that  in  the
         outworkings of this discrete category the language used is "grant".
           However,  this  inconsistency  simply  highlights  one   of   the
         significant  difficulties  posed  by  this  documentary   evidence.
         Furthermore, the sub-category of "PAK (sic) women married to Indian
         nationals and staying in India" would not apply to  the  mother  of
         the family as she will  be  "staying  in"  Pakistan  following  the
         implementation of the Secretary of State's removal directions.

    (v)  The second discrete section entitled  "Long  Term  Visa  (Pakistan
         nationals)" (paragraph 48) is  clearly  of  no  application  as  it
         relates to Pakistan nationals "staying in" India  on  a  long  term
         visa and is designed to permit  employment  and  the  admission  of
         their children to education.

22. We pose again the main question:  what  is  likely  to  become  of  the
    Appellants in the event of the Secretary of State  removing  them  from
    the United Kingdom in the manner proposed?  The Secretary of State,  on
    whom no legal burden of proof rests, has sought to persuade us that the
    effect of Indian immigration laws is that  the  family  will,  at  some
    unspecified date, be reunited on Indian soil.  In  our  estimation  the
    evidence which has been adduced in support  of  this  contention  falls
    manifestly short of demonstrating that Indian law is  to  this  effect.
    As our analysis above demonstrates, this evidence suffers from a series
    of flaws and raises more questions than it answers.  It leaves us quite
    unable to conclude with any reasonable degree of confidence that family
    reunification will, ultimately, be achieved.

23. It follows that the  cornerstone  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  case
    crumbles and collapses.  The main pillar upon which  the  Secretary  of
    State has sought to justify the impugned  removal  decisions  has  been
    shown to be  devoid  of  foundation.   The  expectation  on  which  the
    Secretary of State's decision was based is misconceived.

24.  We apply the above analysis and conclusions to the legal framework  in
    the following way. These are pure Article 8 ECHR claims. None  of  them
    satisfies the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  Thus  Article  8
    must be viewed through a broader lens in this case. In conducting  this
    exercise,  some  of  the  criteria  identified  in  the  Rules  provide
    guidance:

      i) The first two Appellants are in a genuine marital relationship.

     ii) They have genuine and subsisting parental relationships with  their
         children.

    iii) All three children of the family have lived their entire  lives  in
         the United Kingdom.




     iv) It would not be reasonable to expect any of the children  to  leave
         the United Kingdom given the fragmentation of the family unit which
         this will entail and  the  highly  uncertain  prospects  of  family
         reunification.



      v) There are  obvious  obstacles  to  family  reunification.  We  have
         identified no evidence that these are surmountable.




25. Alert to our obligation to give effect to the applicable provisions  at
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  "2002
    Act"), we do so in the following way:

    (i)  We begin by acknowledging the  public  interest  underpinning  the
         maintenance of effective immigration controls: section 117B(1).

    (ii) The Appellants demonstrated to us  that  they  have  an  excellent
         command of the English language: section 117B(2); furthermore, this
         has never been a contentious issue.

    (iii)    There is no evidence that the Appellants are  not  financially
         independent and this  too  has  never  been  a  contentious  issue:
         section 117B(3).

    (iv) The "little weight" provisions of  section  117B(4)  and  (5)  are
         acknowledged and, succinctly,  operate  to  the  detriment  of  the
         Appellants in the overall proportionality balancing exercise.

    (v)  As regards section 117B(6), the oldest child of the  family  is  a
         "qualifying child" by virtue of having lived in the United  Kingdom
         for a continuous period exceeding seven  years.   For  the  reasons
         given above it would, plainly, not be  reasonable  to  expose  this
         child to all of the imponderables and  adverse  consequences  above
         which her enforced removal from the United Kingdom would entail.

26. Finally, we turn our attention to section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The best
    interests of the third, fourth and fifth Appellants rank as  a  primary
    consideration.  Having regard to our analysis  and  conclusions  above,
    the assessment that their best interests will not be  promoted  by  the
    enforced removal of all five Appellants from  the  United  Kingdom  and
    ensuing family separation follows inexorably.  There is an inextricable
    link between the best interests of these children and the  perpetuation
    of the family unit.  We have  found  that  the  implementation  of  the
    Secretary of State's removal decisions will give rise to  fragmentation
    of the family unit with no identifiable prospect  of  re-establishment,
    or family reunification.

27. It follows inexorably from all of the above that this appeal  succeeds.
    We remake the decision of the FtT accordingly.



Notice of Decision

These appeals are allowed under Article 8 ECHR and Section 55  of  the  2009
Act.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                         Date: 19 April 2017
