
[pic]
UPPER TRIBUNAL
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Rashid)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00190 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                                                 Field House
                                                     Heard: 18 February 2015

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                      THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF
                           MD MAMUNUR RASHID)         Applicant


                                     and

         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   Respondent

Representation:
For the Applicant:     Ms S Kansal, of Counsel, instructed by Universal
                    Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lewis, of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT
                         delivered on: 2 April 2015


Judge Gill:


     Introduction and background facts:


 1. The applicant  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh.  He  has  been  granted
    permission to apply for judicial review of a decision of the respondent
    of 20 September 2013 rejecting an application he made on 8 August  2013
    for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.  The  respondent
    refused the application  on  the  ground  that  the  applicant  had  an
    outstanding appeal against an earlier decision of 14 January  2013  and
    he was therefore restricted from making a fresh application  for  leave
    whilst his appeal was  outstanding  in  accordance  with  s.3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 (the "1971 Act").

 2. The claim was lodged out of time. As this is a  matter  which  goes  to
    jurisdiction, I shall deal with it at the outset (as it  had  not  been
    dealt with previously). I apply the guidance  given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in R (Dinjan Hysaj) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1633 which explained that there are three stages  in  a
    court's consideration of the question whether time should be  extended.
    The claim was lodged on 23 December 2013, less than a  week  after  the
    "long-stop" period of 3 months. The reason given in the claim form  for
    the delay was that the letter of 20 September 2013 was received  on  25
    September 2014. Having regard to  the  fact  that  the  delay  was  not
    substantial  and  the  explanation,  I  have  decided  to  exercise  my
    discretion and extend time. The application is therefore admitted.

 3. The respondent's letter dated 20 September 2013 reads:

              "I write regarding the completed application form your  client
             submitted for consideration to the Home  Office  on  08  August
             2013 for leave to remain on the basis of  a  Tier  4  (General)
             Student visa.

              Your client already has  an  outstanding  appeal  against  the
             Secretary  of  State's  decision  to   refuse   your   client's
             application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.
             Your client is  restricted  from  making  a  fresh  application
             whilst your client's appeal is outstanding in  accordance  with
             Section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971  (as  substituted  by
             Section 118 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  asylum  Act
             2002).

              Your client may apply to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
             to have your client's application for leave to remain as a Tier
             4 (General) Student to  be  treated  as  a  variation  of  your
             client's  grounds  of  appeal.  To  this  end,  your   client's
             documents have been retained on the Home Office  file  as  they
             may be considered as part of your client's existing appeal."

 4. The applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 May  2010  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 30 April 2012. On 9
    March 2012, his Tier 4 leave was extended until  30  May  2013.  On  23
    October 2012, his sponsor college informed the Secretary of State  that
    he had failed to enrol on his course of study.  The  following  is  the
    subsequent chronology:

         14 Nov 2012        The  applicant  applied  in-time  for  leave  to
                      remain as a Tier 2 (General) migrant.

         9 Jan 2013        The applicant's leave to remain was curtailed  to
                      expire on the same day as he was no  longer  studying
                      at the approved sponsor for which the leave had  been
                      granted.

         14 Jan 2013       The respondent refused  the  applicant's  Tier  2
                      application with a right  of  appeal.  The  applicant
                      appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").

         3 May 2013        The FtT  dismissed  his  appeal  (appeal  number:
                      IA/03700/2013). The applicant was granted  permission
                      to appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("UT").

         29 July 2013      The UT  dismissed  the  applicant's  appeal.  The
                      determination of the UT was sent by post.

         8 Aug 2013        The applicant  made  a  "fresh  application"  for
                      leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  student.  This
                      is  the  application  that  is  the  subject  of  the
                      respondent's letter  dated  20  September  2013.  The
                      application was sent to the respondent.  It  was  not
                      sent to the UT but  it  was  included  in  the  claim
                      bundle for these judicial review proceedings.

         14 Aug 2013       Last date on which the applicant could have  made
                      an in-time application to the UT  for  permission  to
                      appeal to the Court of Appeal.  No  such  application
                      was  made.  This  is  therefore  the  date  that  the
                      applicant exhausted his appeal rights.

 5. The Upper Tribunal Judge (UTJ) who  granted  permission  considered  it
    arguable that the respondent erred in law in stating that the applicant
    was restricted from making a fresh application by virtue of  s.3C.  The
    UTJ considered it arguable that the applicant's s.3C leave  expired  on
    29 July 2013 and that the application of 8 August 2013 was made  within
    the period of 28 days provided for in para 245ZX(m) of the Statement of
    Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the "IRs").

     The relevant provisions

 6. The version of s. 3C of the 1971 Act which is relevant in this claim is
    the version that was in force from 31 August 2006 to 19  October  2014.
    This provided as follows:


        "3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision


        (1)  This section applies if-


         (a) a person who has limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
               United  Kingdom  applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State   for
               variation of the leave,


         (b) the  application  for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
        expires, and


         (c) the leave expires without the application for variation having
        been decided.


        (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during  any
        period when-


          (a)  the  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided   nor
        withdrawn,


         (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum  and
               Immigration Act 2002 could be brought,  while  the  appellant
               is  in  the  United  Kingdom  against  the  decision  on  the
               application for variation (ignoring  any  possibility  of  an
               appeal out of time with permission), or


         (c) an appeal under that section against  that  decision,  brought
               while the appellant is in  the  United  Kingdom,  is  pending
               (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act).


        (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if  the
             applicant leaves the United Kingdom.


        (4)  A person may not make an  application  for  variation  of  his
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that leave
             is extended by virtue of this section.


        (5)  But subsection (4) does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).


        (6)  The Secretary of State may make regulations  determining  when
             an application is decided for the purposes  of  this  section;
             and the regulations-


         (a) may make provision by reference to receipt of a notice,
         (b) may provide for a notice to be treated as having been received
                 in specified circumstances,
         (c)  may  make  different  provision  for  different  purposes  or
        circumstances,
         (d) shall be made by statutory instrument, and
         (e) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution  of
                 either House of Parliament."

         (my emphasis)

 7. The relevant version of  s.104  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") is the version that was in force  from
    15 February 2010 until 19 October 2014. This provided as follows:


        "104 Pending appeal


        (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period-


         (a) beginning when it is instituted, and


         (b)  ending when it is finally determined, withdrawn  or  abandoned
                 (or when it lapses under section 99).


          (2) An appeal under section 82(1) is not  finally  determined  for
            the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-


         (a)  an application for permission to appeal under section 11 or 13
                 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 could  be
                 made or is awaiting determination,


         (b)  permission to appeal under either of those sections  has  been
                 granted and the appeal is awaiting determination, or


         (c)  an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or 14 of that Act
                 and is awaiting determination.
        (4)  ...


        (4A) ...


        (4B) ...


        (4C) ...


        (5)  ..."

 8. The applicant's skeleton argument refers to s.103 of the 2002 Act.  The
    version of s.103 that was in force from 1 April 2003 is set out  below.
    S.103 was repealed with effect from 4 April 2005  (the  date  when  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal was abolished) subject to  transitional
    provisions which are not relevant in this case:


        "103 Appeal from Tribunal


          (1) Where the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  determines  an  appeal
            under section 101 a party to the appeal  may  bring  a  further
            appeal on a point of law-


         (a)  where the original decision of the  adjudicator  was  made  in
               Scotland, to the Court of Session, or
         (b) in any other case, to the Court of Appeal."

     The Grounds:

 9. Eight grounds have  been  advanced.  Ground  1  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:

    i)   S.104(2) of the 2002 Act only applies to s.104(1)(b). It does  not
        purport to apply to s.3C(2)(c), i.e. it  does  not  apply  to  s.3C
        leave.

    ii)  Accordingly, a proper  construction  of  the  words  "when  it  is
        finally determined" in s.104(2) of is that an  appeal  is  "finally
        determined" when the determination is promulgated.

10. Ground 2 contends that the respondent has a discretion to consider  the
    merits of any application by an individual who  has  lost  his  or  her
    appeal before the UT for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal.
    If it would be hopeless for such an individual to pursue an  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal, then the respondent should exercise her discretion
    so that any application for leave made by such  an  individual  to  the
    respondent during the period when  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal could be made  should  be  treated  as  a
    variation of the  original  application.  Ground  2  is  based  on  the
    following arguments:

     i)  At para 14.i of the skeleton argument (as explained at the  hearing
        by Ms Kansal), it is argued that the words "could be" in the phrase
        "could be made"  in  s.104(2)(d)[1]  of  the  2002  Act  should  be
        construed as conferring a discretion on the respondent to  consider
        the merits  of  any  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  against  a
        determination of the UT dismissing an individual's appeal  and  the
        possibility of the individual meeting the  second  appeal  criteria
        for the grant of permission.

    ii)  It is contended that the proposition that  the  phrase  "could  be
        made" confers such a  discretion  on  the  respondent  is  "further
        compounded" by the use of the phrase "may bring a further appeal on
        a point of law" in s.103B(1) of the 2002 Act. It is contended  that
        the  phrase "may bring a further appeal  on  a  point  of  law"  in
        s.103B(1) denotes that the respondent has a  discretion  to  decide
        whether the case is one in which  permission  to  appeal  could  be
        sought.

    iii) A purposive construction should be given to the  words  "could  be
        made" so that, if the claimant  wishes  to  bring  an  appeal,  his
        appeal is treated as not "finally determined" but, if he  takes  "a
        measured decision not to appeal further"  and  chooses  instead  to
        vary his application or to submit a fresh application,  his  appeal
        is treated as "finally determined".

    iv)  It is contended that this purposive construction is  necessary  in
        order  to  safeguard  and  protect  immigrants  and  that  such   a
        construction is  also  consistent  with  the  common  law  duty  of
        fairness. In this respect, reliance is placed on the  determination
        of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -  common  law
        fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC)  and  para  7  of  the
        judgment of Sullivan J in Forrester, the full name and citation  of
        which was not provided in the skeleton argument but which I know to
        be R (Forrester) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2008] EWHC 2307 (Admin).

     v)  The discretion conferred on the respondent by the phrase "could  be
        made" should be exercised by the respondent as follows:  If  it  is
        unlikely that the claimant will be granted permission to appeal  to
        the Court of Appeal, the respondent should exercise her  discretion
        and treat a variation application  as  validly  having  varied  the
        original application for leave.

         The implication therefore is that, if the respondent does  exercise
        her discretion in this way, the original  application,  as  varied,
        remains outstanding and awaits a decision, so that any  s.3C  leave
        continues until a decision on the application as  varied  has  been
        made and any appeal lodged against  any  adverse  decision  on  the
        varied application is "finally determined".

     vi) It is argued that, in the  instant  case,  if  the  respondent  had
        considered her discretion, it is likely that she would have  formed
        the view that any further appeal  would  have  been  hopeless.  The
        implication (following on from the arguments summarised  above)  is
        that the respondent should therefore have treated  the  application
        of 8 August 2013 as a variation of the applicant's  application  of
        14 November 2012 and that this application  (as  varied)  therefore
        awaits a further decision.

11. Ground 3 is that the decision is in breach of  the  applicant's  rights
    under Article 8. He is a genuine student who  has  made  good  academic
    progress in his studies.

12. Ground 4 is that the  applicant  was  entitled  to  vary  his  original
    application, even after the respondent  had  made  a  decision  on  the
    original application. This is because s.3C permits one variation. It is
    contended that the principle that s.3C permits one variation even after
    the respondent has decided the original application is the ratio of the
    judgment of HHJ Thornton QC, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge, in R
    (Chowdhury) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 59
    (Admin), at paras 25 and 26. If the applicant's application of 8 August
    2013 had been made three days later, it would  have  been  granted.  It
    should therefore now be granted.

13. Ground 5 is set out in a  document  entitled:  "Additional  Grounds  on
    behalf of the claimant" prepared by  Ms  Kansal  by  which  she  sought
    permission to advance the argument that an application for variation of
    leave is a continuing application, commencing from the date on which it
    is first lodged and remaining open until it  is  decided,  in  reliance
    upon the determination of the UT in Khatel and others (s85A; effect  of
    continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) to the effect  that  an
    application can be a continuing application right up until the date  it
    is decided. The "Additional Grounds on behalf of the claimant" develops
    ground 5 as follows (and I quote):

              "3. From this case[2] therefore the following emerges:

              a.  That applications for variation of  leave  are  continuing
                 applications, commencing from when they  are  first  lodged
                 and remaining open until they are decided.
                  b.   The application is to be decided as at  the  date  of
    the decision.

              4.  Applying these points to the case in  hand  the  following
    emerges:

              a.  That notwithstanding the  arguments  for  the  R,  if  the
                 application had been decided within the 12 day period  from
                 the UT dismissing the C's appeal, the  R  would  have  been
                 able to put forward the current arguments.
              b.  That the situation as at the  date  of  the  decision  was
                 that the application was continuing and therefore the words
                 'make an application' in section 3(c)(4) of  the  1971  Act
                 are not applicable. As the C did not technically 'make' the
                 application at the date of the decision.
              c.  That  therefore  the  C's  section  3c  leave  expired  on
                 11.8.13 (being after 12 days after the determination of the
                 UT was served on 29.7.13). So from 12.8.13 the  application
                 was being made effectively not during the period of section
                 3c leave.
              d.  That the R has made a mistake of fact in that there is  an
                 appeal outstanding, as the C did not apply  for  permission
                 to appeal to the Court of Appeal within the  12  days.  But
                 for this mistake of fact, the R would have  considered  the
                 application as though it was a variation of the  first  and
                 was continuing as up to the date of the decision."

14. Ground 6 (set out at para 5 of the "Additional Grounds on behalf of the
    claimant") runs as follows:

    i)   The application of 14 November 2012 was varied.  This  is  because
        the respondent accepted that to be the case in the letter dated  20
        September 2013. This (in turn) is because the  respondent  had  not
        stated that the application of 14 November 2012 had been decided or
        treated as invalid. Instead, the letter stated that the application
        "has been retained on the HO file as they may be considered as part
        of your client's existing appeal".

    ii)  It is therefore argued that the respondent had a duty to  consider
        the application as part of her residual discretion.

15. Ground 7, advanced only at the hearing, runs as follows:

    i)   Although the applicant's application for leave to remain  dated  8
        August 2013 was served on the respondent and not the  UT  when  the
        application was made on 8 August  2013,  it  was  included  in  the
        applicant's bundle for the instant judicial review proceedings  and
        therefore it was served on the UT.

    ii)  Accordingly, the application of 8 August 2013 could  be  construed
        as an application by the applicant to  the  UT  for  permission  to
        appeal to the Court of Appeal against the dismissal of  his  appeal
        by the UT of his appeal in IA/03700/2013.

    iii) Indeed, the UT should  have  treated  it  as  an  application  for
        permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal against  the  dismissal
        by the UT of the applicant's previous appeal. This is because  rule
        44 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (the  "UT
        Rules") is to the effect that there is no particular form in  which
        an application for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  is
        to be made.

     At the hearing, Ms Kansal acknowledged that, if the  application  of  8
    August 2013 was to be construed as an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal, the application for permission to appeal
    to the Court of Appeal was out of time because it was only lodged  with
    the UT with the claim that was lodged on 23 December 2013. However, she
    submitted that the  applicant  could  still  make  an  application  for
    extension of time.

16. Ground 8, also advanced for the first time  at  the  hearing,  runs  as
    follows:

    i)   The judgment in Chowdhury is authority for  the  proposition  that
        "anything which comes in" after  a  decision  has  been  made  will
        amount to a variation of the grounds of appeal to  the  FtT/UT  (as
        the case may be).

    ii)  Alternatively, the respondent accepted  in  the  letter  dated  20
        September 2013 that the applicant could apply to the  UT  to  amend
        his grounds of appeal in his appeal (IA/03700/2013). The respondent
        accepted in the letter dated 20 September 2013 that  the  applicant
        had an outstanding appeal as at 20  September  2013.   Accordingly,
        the respondent accepted that the applicant could apply  to  the  UT
        for variation of his grounds of appeal,  notwithstanding  that  the
        application of 8 August 2013 post-dated  the  promulgation  of  the
        UT's determination.

    iii) Accordingly, the applicant's s.3C leave continued until the UT has
        decided  his  application  to  vary  his  grounds  of   appeal   in
        IA/03700/2013.

    Ms Kansal did not address me on the question whether the UT was functus
    officio once it had dismissed the appellant's appeal in IA/03700/2013.

17. I reject Ms Kansal's submission that all of her  grounds  were  in  her
    skeleton argument. Grounds 4 to 8 were not in the original grounds that
    were considered by the UT when permission was granted. Of  these,  only
    ground  4  was  raised  in  the  skeleton  argument.  Accordingly,   an
    application for permission to amend the grounds to include grounds 4 to
    8 should have been made. The only application for permission  to  amend
    the grounds concerned grounds 5 and 6.

18. In relation to ground 5, I asked Ms Kansal at the commencement  of  the
    hearing whether she was aware that, in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v Raju & others [2013] EWCA Civ  754  (a  copy  of  which  I
    provided to her), the Court of Appeal overturned the UT's determination
    in Khatel and others. Although she confirmed that she did not rely upon
    ground 5 (having apologised for not mentioning Raju in the  "Additional
    Grounds on behalf of the claimant"), she  nevertheless  submitted  that
    para 23 of the judgment in Raju left open the  possibility  of  arguing
    that an application is continuing albeit not on the basis of  the  UT's
    determination in Khatel.

19. As to the relief sought, section 6 of the claim form and para 32 of the
    original grounds refer to the following:

         i)   an order quashing the decision.

         ii)  a mandatory order requiring the respondent to  reconsider  the
             decision in the light of all the circumstances.

         iii) a declaration that the respondent acted unfairly.

         iv)  costs.

         v)   further or other relief.

20. However, Ms Kansal informed me at the hearing that the applicant  seeks
    variation of the application made to the respondent on 14 November 2012
    or variation of the grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  in  appeal  number
    IA/03700/2013.

     Assessment

21. The leading  authority  on  the  proper  construction  of  s.3C  is  JH
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
    78. The version of s.3C  considered  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JH
    (Zimbabwe) was the version in force from 2 April 2003 until  30  August
    2006. This version was the same as the version set out  at  my  para  5
    above, except as follows:

    i)   s.3C(2)(b) and (c) in force from 2 April 2003 until 30 August 2006
        did not have the words shown in bold in  my  para  5  above.  These
        words were added by s.11(2) and (3) of the Immigration, Asylum  and
        Nationality Act 2006 with effect from 31 August  2006,  subject  to
        certain transitional provisions specified in IS 2006/2226 art. 4(3)
        which are not relevant in this claim; and

    ii)  s.3C(6) in force from 2 April 2003 until 30 August  2006  read  as
        follows:


             "(6) In this section  a  reference  to  an  application  being
                 decided is a reference to  notice  of  the  decision  being
                 given in accordance with regulations under section  105  of
                 that Act (notice of immigration decision)."

22. These differences are not material in  this  claim  for  the  following
    reasons: In relation to s.3C(2)(b) and  (c),  the  respondent  has  not
    suggested that the applicant left the United Kingdom  at  any  material
    time. In relation to s.3C(6),  Ms  Kansal  did  not  suggest  that  the
    applicant's application of 14 November 2012 had not been decided within
    the meaning of s.3C(6). Ground 5  which  argued  that  the  applicant's
    application  was  a  continuing  application  relied  upon   the   UT's
    determination in Khatel. Ms Kansal did not suggest that the application
    had not been "decided" pursuant to the regulations made under s.3C(6).

23. Accordingly, the judgment in JH (Zimbabwe) is directly applicable.  The
    leading judgement in JH (Zimbabwe) was given by Richards LJ who said as
    follows, at paras 35 and 36:


        "35. The key  to  the  matter  is  an  understanding  of  how  s.3C
             operates. I have set the section out  at  para  10  above.  The
             section  applies,  by  subs.(1),  where  an   application   for
             variation of an  existing  leave  is  made  before  that  leave
             expires (and provided that there has been no decision  on  that
             application before the leave expires). In that event there  is,
             by subs.(2), a statutory extension of the original leave  until
             (a) the application is decided or withdrawn,  or  (b),  if  the
             application has been decided and there is  a  right  of  appeal
             against that decision, the time for appealing has  expired,  or
             (c), if an appeal has been brought, that appeal is  pending:  I
             paraphrase the statutory language, but that seems to me  to  be
             the effect of it. During the period of the statutory  extension
             of the original leave, by subs.(4) no further  application  for
             variation of that leave can be made. Thus, there  can  be  only
             one application for variation of the original leave, and  there
             can be only one decision (and, where applicable,  one  appeal).
             The possibility of a series of further applications leading  to
             an indefinite extension of  the  original  leave  is  excluded.
             However, by subs.(5) it is possible to vary the  one  permitted
             application. If it is varied, any  decision  (and  any  further
             appeal) will relate to the application as varied.  But  once  a
             decision has been made, no  variation  to  the  application  is
             possible since there is nothing left to vary.


          1. Once the operation of s.3C is understood, the  concern  of  the
             tribunal in  DA Ghana [[2007] UKAIT 00043] about nullifying the
             prohibition in subs.(4) if a second application is treated as a
             variation of the first can be seen to lose its force. A  second
             application can be treated as a variation of the first only  up
             to the point when the Secretary of States makes a  decision  on
             the application. There is  nothing  surprising  about  subs.(4)
             having only a limited impact during that period, given that  it
             is qualified by subs.(5) which expressly permits a variation of
             the  first  application.  Thereafter,  however,   subs.(4)   is
             effective  to  prevent  any  further  application  which  might
             otherwise have been made right up to the time when an appeal in
             relation to the first was no longer pending, and to  prevent  a
             succession of such applications. Far from being  nullified,  it
             retains an important function in avoiding abuse of the system."

         (my emphasis)

24. I consider that the reasoning in paras 35 and 36 is plain. It  requires
    no  explanation.  At  paras  36-40,  Richards  LJ  said  that  a  later
    application is capable of being treated as a  variation  of  the  first
    application even if it is for a different purpose and  on  a  different
    form. It is clear from paras 43-46, that the question whether a  second
    "application" is an application as such or a variation  of  an  earlier
    application is a question of  fact,  notwithstanding  that  the  second
    "application" is not expressly put forward as a variation of the first.
    What is plain beyond any doubt is that once  the Secretary of State has
    decided the original application,  it  cannot  be  varied  by  a  later
    application because there is nothing left to vary once a  decision  has
    been made.

25. A purported "application" for leave or variation of leave, made after a
    decision has been made on an earlier application, may operate (if it is
    made during the period of an appeal) as an amendment of the grounds  of
    appeal, if that is permitted by the FtT or the UT (as the case may be).
    In AS (Afghanistan) and NV (Sri Lanka)  v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, there were  two  claimants.  Both
    had made applications for  leave  after  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    refused their original applications and they had appealed. It is  clear
    from paras 49  and  50  of  the  judgment  that  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered that the claimants were not permitted to  make  applications
    for variation of their leave because of s.3C(4) of the 1971 Act and the
    judgment in JH (Zimbabwe). The Court of Appeal upheld the decisions  of
    the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal   refusing   to   accept   such
    applications as amendments of the grounds of appeal in the two appeals.
    The reasoning  of the Court of Appeal, which is explained at  paras  49
    and 50, is not relevant in the instant case.

26. JH (Zimbabwe) was followed by the UT in Qureshi (Tier  4  -  effect  of
    variation - App C) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00412 (IAC). The  UT  made  the
    point that there is no restriction on the number of occasions on  which
    applications for variation of the  original  application  can  be  made
    provided notice  of  variation  is  given  prior  to  the  respondent's
    decision  as  thereafter  there  would  be  no   application   pending.
    Accordingly, Ms Kansal is incorrect to say that there can only  be  one
    variation of the original application. The only restriction is that the
    application to vary the original application  must  be  made  before  a
    decision has been made.

27. Ms Kansal said that she was aware of JH (Zimbabwe). She submitted  that
    JH (Zimbabwe) was  considered  in  Chowdhury  and  that  Chowdhury  was
    authority for the propositions relied upon in relation to grounds 4 and
    8.

28. In my view, Ms Kansal has completely misunderstood Chowdhury. Whilst  I
    agree that Chowdhury does apply JH (Zimbabwe), it is not authority  for
    any of the propositions she advanced,  for  the  reasons  given  below.
    Second, Chowdhury was a permission decision.  In  addition,  it  was  a
    decision of the  Administrative  Court  whereas  JH  (Zimbabwe)  was  a
    decision of the Court of Appeal. Thus, even if Ms Kansal is correct  in
    her understanding of Chowdhury (which is not the case), I am  bound  by
    JH (Zimbabwe).

29. In Chowdhury, the  claimant  had  applied  in  June  2011,  during  the
    currency of his leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  student,  for
    leave as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.  His  application  was
    refused on 15 July 2011. He appealed to the FtT. The FtT dismissed  his
    appeal on 9 September 2011. He was granted permission to appeal to  the
    UT. His appeal was heard before the UT  on  3  February  2012.  The  UT
    reserved its decision. On 28 March 2012, the claimant obtained  his  BA
    graduate qualification. On 5  April  2012,  the  claimant  applied  for
    leave, relying upon his BA graduate qualification. On 6 April 2012, the
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) category was withdrawn. On 24 May 2012, the UT
    dismissed the claimant's appeal. On 29 September 2012, the Secretary of
    State decided that the claimant's application of 5 April 2012 was  void
    as it was prohibited by s.3C(4) of the  1971  Act  because  it  was  an
    application for variation of an existing leave to remain made whilst an
    appeal was pending.

30. Before the Deputy Judge, the claimant argued that the application of  5
    April 2012 was not a fresh application to vary his leave to remain  but
    was instead a variation of the original application dated 21 June 2011.
    He contended that the effect of his service of that  variation  on  the
    Secretary of State was "to return the application" in its  varied  form
    to be determined by the Secretary of State with the  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State, the FtT and the UT having no continuing effect  and
    that his varied application was therefore yet  to  be  decided  by  the
    Secretary of State (para 10 of Chowdhury).

31. At paras 23-24, the Deputy Judge decided  that  the  application  of  5
    April 2012 was not a fresh application  for  leave  to  remain  but  an
    attempt to vary the application of June 2011.  The  Deputy  Judge  then
    went on to say as follows, at paras 25-28:


        "(4) Should the document have been submitted to the SSHD or to  the
             Upper Tribunal?


        25   Section 3C(5) provides that section 3C(4) "does not prevent an
             application for variation of the application for  variation  of
             leave". Thus,  what  is  permitted  does  not  have  to  be  an
             application  to  vary,  a  unilateral  act   of   varying   the
             application is permitted. However, there is  no  definition  of
             what constitutes an effective variation of the application.  In
             particular, once the SSHD has made a decision, can the original
             application be varied whilst an appeal against that decision is
             pending and, if  it  can,  should  the  variation  document  be
             notified to the appeal tribunal that is to hear the  appeal  or
             to the SSHD that has already disposed of it?


        26   It would be surprising if the application could not be  varied
             following a decision of the SSHD  even  though  an  applicant's
             leave to remain continues to be extended since, if that was the
             case, the applicant would have  lost  the  right  to  vary  the
             application pending the hearing of the appeal but would  regain
             it if the appeal  was  successful.  Moreover,  the  wording  of
             subsection  (5)  that  states  that  the   variation   of   the
             application is not prevented by the extension  of  leave  under
             subsection (2) suggests that whenever leave is  extended  under
             subsection (2) , a variation of  the  original  application  is
             permitted. However, if that variation takes place in the period
             after an SSHD decision has been issued but  before  the  appeal
             against that decision has been determined,  the  terms  of  the
             variation may only be considered and applied by the FtT, or  in
             a second appeal  by  the  UT,  if  such  is  permitted  by  the
             appropriate  tribunal,  if  necessary  following  a  successful
             application  for  permission  to  amend  or  to  rely  on   the
             variation.


        27   However, that conclusion does not identify what constitutes  a
             variation. Supposing the variation had been written  out  in  a
             document which was clearly one prepared by  the  applicant  but
             from oversight the document  was  never  issued  or  posted  to
             anyone and remained in a drawer in the applicant's desk and  no
             mention was made of the variation until  it  was  too  late  to
             affect the decision. It would be strange if,  nonetheless,  the
             original  application  had  been  varied  by  that  unpublished
             document. In this case, the SSHD had,  in  issuing  a  decision
             rejecting and dismissing Mr Chowdhury's application,  concluded
             its  involvement  in  that  application  and  had  no   further
             entitlement to change, alter or withdraw  the  decision  albeit
             that it could consider a further application which  applied  to
             vary the decision just taken. It follows that, for the document
             to be treated as a variation of the original  application,  its
             contents must be made  known  to  the  decision-maker  directly
             affected by the variation. Mr Chowdhury informed  the  UKBA  in
             his  letter  dated  8  October  2012  that  "I  made  a   fresh
             application to the UKBA on 5 April 2012 and since  that  day  I
             received nothing in regards to  the  application."  That  shows
             that he intended the document to be acted upon by the UKBA  and
             that its contents were not a  variation  for  the  purposes  of
             section 3C since the only body then able to give effect to  the
             variation, namely the Upper Tribunal, neither saw the  document
             nor was intended to see the document.


        28   I conclude that the document dated 5 April 2012 did  not  vary
             the original application."

32. Ms Kansal relied upon the final sentence of para 25 and  the  whole  of
    para 26. She submitted that the final sentence of para  26  shows  that
    the UT in Chowdhury had power to consider the claimant's application of
    5 April 2012 as a variation of the original application of June 2011.

33. In my view, this submission is misconceived.  JH  (Zimbabwe)  makes  it
    clear that, once a decision has been made on an application, it  cannot
    be  varied  and  it  is  therefore  not  possible  for  any  subsequent
    application to amount to  a  variation  of  the  application  that  has
    already been decided.  The  Deputy Judge in Chowdhury was aware of  the
    judgment in JH (Zimbabwe). He referred to it at para 20 and quoted from
    it at para 21. Ms Kansal relied, in particular, upon the final sentence
    of para 25 taken together with the first  two  sentences  of  para  26.
    However, it is clear from the final sentence of para 26 that the Deputy
    Judge considered that any purported variation made after a decision has
    been made by the Secretary of State but  before  the  appeal  has  been
    determined may only be considered and applied by the FtT or the UT,  as
    the case may be; in other words, as  a  variation  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal. This is reinforced by the final sentence of para 27 from  which
    it is clear that the Deputy Judge considered that the  only  body  that
    could give effect to such a variation  was  the  UT,  as  the  FtT  had
    determined the appeal. Accordingly, Chowdhury  is  entirely  consistent
    with JH (Zimbabwe), although I should again stress that, even if it had
    not been consistent, I would have been bound to apply JH (Zimbabwe).  I
    reject the submission that Chowdhury is authority for  the  proposition
    that s.3C permits one variation of an application for leave  to  remain
    even if the (purported  or  attempted)  variation  is  made  after  the
    Secretary of State has decided the original application. If  Ms  Kansal
    is right, she did not explain why the Deputy Judge concluded,  at  para
    28, that the document dated 5 April 2012  did  not  vary  the  original
    application.

34. This is a complete answer to ground 4.

35. It is also a complete  answer  to  ground  5,  which  relies  upon  the
    determination of the UT in Khatel concerning  continuing  applications.
    Furthermore, and as I have already said, the Court of Appeal overturned
    Khatel in Raju. In addition, I would point out  that  even  the  UT  in
    Khatel did  not  suggest  that  an  application  can  be  a  continuing
    application  after  the  decision  on  it  has  been  made,  which   is
    effectively what Ms Kansal sought to suggest in relying upon Khatel. It
    is impossible to see how that  proposition  could  properly  have  been
    advanced, even leaving aside the judgment in  Raju.  Finally,  I  would
    point out that, in my view, paras 4.a-b of the "Additional  Grounds  on
    behalf  of  the  claimant"   quoted   at   my   para   13   above   are
    incomprehensible.

36. Ground 1 asserts that s.104 of the 2002 Act only applies to s.104(1)(b)
    and therefore does not apply to s.3C leave. This ground is based  on  a
    selective reading of the relevant legislation. Section 104 is  relevant
    in the context of s.3C because it is referred to in  s.3C(2)(c),  which
    provides (inter alia) that leave is extended by virtue of  s.3C  during
    any period when an appeal is pending within the meaning of s.104 of the
    2002 Act.  S.104(1) then provides that an appeal is pending during  the
    period beginning when it is instituted and ending when it  is  "finally
    determined, withdrawn or abandoned (or when  it  lapses  under  section
    99)". In other words, s.104(1) explains the beginning of the period  as
    well as the end of the period. It is therefore not open to Ms Kansal to
    simply disregard what s.104 has to say about how the end of the  period
    is to be ascertained and substitute the date  of  promulgation  of  the
    UT's determination as marking the end of the period of the  applicant's
    s.3C leave.

37. Accordingly, and applying s.3C(2) of the 1971 Act and S.104(1) and (2),
    the applicant's appeal was finally determined by the UT  on  14  August
    2013 because this was the last day on  which  he  could  have  made  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  His  s.3C
    leave therefore ended on 14 August 2013.

38. Leaving grounds 2 and 3 aside for the moment, I shall  deal  next  with
    ground 6, which is hopeless. I  have  quoted  the  respondent's  letter
    dated 20 September 2013 at para 3 above. There is simply nothing in the
    letter which suggests that the respondent accepted that the application
    of 8 August 2013 was  a  valid  variation  of  the  application  of  14
    November 2012. The  phrase:  "your  client's  documentation  have  been
    retained on the Home office file as they may be considered as  part  of
    your client's existing appeal" cannot, on any reasonable reading of the
    respondent's letter, be seen as an acceptance by  the  respondent  that
    the application  of  8  August  2013  was  a  valid  variation  of  the
    application of 14 November 2012.

39. Ground 7 is likewise hopeless, for the following reasons:

    i)   In effect, Ms Kansal contends that the mere  act  of  including  a
        copy of the application of 8 August 2013 in the applicant's  bundle
        in support of his claim for judicial review of a different decision
        (i.e. the decision of 20 September 2013) is sufficient to  fix  the
        UT with notice of an application for permission to  appeal  to  the
        Court of Appeal against its determination  in  a  statutory  appeal
        which concerned an entirely different decision. The application  of
        8 August 2013 was an application to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
        leave to remain. It was not  even  termed  as  an  application  for
        permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. The application  of  8
        August 2013 did not even concern a decision; yet Ms Kansal suggests
        that the UT should have regarded it as a challenge to its  decision
        in a statutory appeal which concerned a different  decision.  There
        is simply no reasonable basis for these submissions,  even  leaving
        aside the procedural and legislative hurdles in the way,  which  Ms
        Kansal did not engage with and to which I shall now turn.

    ii)  Ground 7 ignores rule 44(6) of the UT  Rules  which  provides,  in
        effect, that any application for permission to appeal to the  Court
        of Appeal which  is  made  late  must  include  a  request  for  an
        extension of time and give the reason why the application  was  not
        made in time. It also ignores rule 44(7) which provides, in effect,
        that an application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
        must identity the decision of the  UT  to  which  it  relates,  the
        alleged error or errors of law in the decision and state the result
        that the applicant is seeking. The  applicant's  application  of  8
        August  2013  did  not  comply  with  any   of   these   procedural
        requirements. In particular, it was not explained (and had not been
        explained by the end of the hearing before me)  precisely  how  the
        application of 8 August 2013 arguably disclosed any point of law in
        the UT's determination that had already been promulgated and  which
        concerned a different decision made by the Secretary of State.

    iii) Finally, ground 7  completely  ignores  the  words  "ignoring  any
        possibility of an appeal out of time with permission"  in  brackets
        in s.3C(2)(b).

40. Ground 8 is also hopeless, for the following reasons:

    i)   Chowdhury is not authority  for  the  proposition  that  "anything
        which comes in" after a decision has been made  will  amount  to  a
        variation of the grounds of appeal to the FtT  /  UT.  Ms  Kansal's
        suggestion that it is authority  for  this  proposition  is  simply
        misconceived and based on a  misunderstanding.

    ii)  The submission that the respondent's  letter  dated  20  September
        2013 accepted that the applicant could apply to the UT to amend his
        grounds of appeal  in  his  appeal  (IA/03700/2013)  and  that  the
        applicant had an outstanding appeal as at 20 September  2013  fails
        to appreciate that the issue of whether there  was  an  outstanding
        appeal before the UT did depend on anything the respondent said  in
        her letter of 20 September 2013. Further, it  fails  to  appreciate
        the fact that the UT is independent of the parties,  including  the
        respondent.

    iii) The submission fails to appreciate the fact that once the  UT  had
        dismissed the  applicant's  appeal  in  IA/03700/2013  against  the
        decision of 14 January 2013, it was  functus  officio.  It  had  no
        jurisdiction to even entertain an application for variation of  the
        grounds of appeal.

41. In relation to ground 2, Ms Kansal accepted that, if I was against  her
    on the interpretation of s.3C, then she could not succeed in  impugning
    the lawfulness of s.3C on the ground of fairness, which  is  raised  as
    part of ground 2 (see para 10.iv) above). In any event, and as  I  said
    at the hearing, any such challenge should have been brought elsewhere.

42. Ground 2 also contends that the phrase "may bring a further appeal on a
    point of law" in s.103B(1) of the 2002 Act confers a discretion on  the
    Secretary of State whether to treat  an  application  for  leave  as  a
    variation of an earlier application  based  on  her  assessment  as  to
    whether any application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, if brought by the applicant concerned, could  meet  the  second
    appeal criteria. However, as I said at the hearing and as stated at  my
    para 7 above, s.103 was repealed with  effect  from  4  April  2005  to
    coincide with the abolition of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Ms
    Kansal did not address me on the relevant provision in  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "TCEA 2007") that replaced s.103.

43. The remainder of ground 2 is devoid of merit, as  Ms  Kansal  seeks  to
    interpret the phrase "could be made" in  a  way  which  would  make  it
    impossible to apply the section in practice and which, in any event, is
    illogical. I simply cannot see how  the  phrase  "could  be  made"  can
    reasonably be construed as conferring a discretion on the respondent to
    consider the merits of an application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal that an individual could make but which he/she might or
    might not make, the strength of which may well vary  depending  on  who
    he/she instructs.

44. Ground 3, which relies upon the applicant's rights under Article 8,  is
    simply untenable, having regard to para  57  of  the  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 72.

45. I therefore refuse permission to amend the grounds to include grounds 5
    and 6. No application was made for permission to amend the  grounds  in
    order to include grounds 4, 7 and 8 but if such an application had been
    made, I would have refused it, for the reasons given above.

46. Applying s.3C(5) of the 1971 Act as interpreted by the Court of  Appeal
    in JH (Zimbabwe), the applicant's application of 8  August  2013  could
    not amount to a variation of his application for leave to remain  dated
    14 November 2012 because  the  application  of  14  November  2012  had
    already been decided. Applying s.3C(2)(b) of the 1971 Act together with
    s.104(1) and s.104(2)(a) of the 2002 Act, the  applicant's  s.3C  leave
    ended on 14 August 2013 because this was the  last  date  on  which  he
    could have made an in-time application for permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal. This means that the applicant's application for  leave
    to remain dated 8 August 2013 was made at  a  time  when  he  had  s.3C
    leave. Accordingly, the respondent's letter  dated  20  September  2013
    rejecting the applicant's application of 8 August 2013 as  one  he  was
    precluded from making under s.3C was not unlawful.

47. For all of the reasons given above, the applicant's  challenge  to  the
    decision of the respondent of 20 September 2013 on the basis of grounds
    1, 2 and 3 is dismissed.

     Decision

     The claim is dismissed.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 2 April 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

-----------------------
[1] This must be a reference to s.104(2)(a), since there is no s.104(2)(d)
and the phrase "could be made" is only to be found in s.104(2)(a).
[2] This is a reference to the UT's determination in Khatel and others

