
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Cokaj (anonymity orders: jurisdiction and ambit) [2021] UKUT 00202 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House by Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2020                  |On 31 December 2020                  |
|                                     |[Addendum inserted 19 July 2021]     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                          NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                                SELAMI COKAJ
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                            Interested Party


Representation:

For the applicant:     Mr J Bunting, Counsel, instructed by NGN Legal

For the respondent:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by Bond Adam LLP Solicitors

For the interested party:  Mr M Gullick, Counsel, instructed by Government
                      Legal Department




     1. A court  or  tribunal  retains  jurisdiction  to  deal  with  'open
        justice' aspects arising from a case, after that case has concluded
        before it.

     2. A higher court or tribunal may impose an anonymity order  that  has
        effect in respect of the entirety of the proceedings under  section
        82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002;  and,
        conversely, may discharge such an order, whether  expressly  or  by
        necessary implication.


            DECISION ON APPLICATION TO DISCHARGE ANONYMITY ORDER



A.  INTRODUCTION

 1. On 23 April 2020, the Upper Tribunal promulgated its  decision  in  the
    case of SC v Secretary of State for the Home Department.  The  decision
    involved the re-making of the Article 8  ECHR  aspect  of  SC's  appeal
    against the refusal by the Secretary of  State  of  SC's  human  rights
    claim.  On 9 May 2019, the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt)
    had set aside the part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that
    related to Article 8.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt had, however, found no error of  law  in  the
    part of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that  related  to  SC's
    protection claim, which was based upon  an  alleged  fear  of  harm  on
    return to Albania as a result of a blood feud.  The blood feud was said
    to have been occasioned by the killing by SC of a man in Albania.

 3. In the 9 May decision,  the Upper  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order
    under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
    The order stated that SC was granted anonymity and that  no  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of their family.  The direction applied both to SC  and  to  the
    Secretary of State.  Failure to comply with it could lead  to  contempt
    of court proceedings.

 4. Rule  14(1)  provides  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  may  make  an  order
    prohibiting the disclosure or publication of (a) specified documents or
    information relating to the proceedings or (b)  any  matter  likely  to
    lead members of the public  to  identify  any  person  whom  the  Upper
    Tribunal considers should not be identified.

 5. On 19 June 2019, the case came before the Upper Tribunal for  re-making
    on the Article 8 issue.  The Tribunal, however, adjourned  the  matter,
    following submissions by leading Counsel for SC that it  was  necessary
    for the Tribunal to consider the safety of the murder conviction, which
    had been imposed upon SC as a result of the killing. An anonymity order
    was also made by the Tribunal on that occasion.

 6. With the promulgation of the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  of  23  April
    2020,  the Upper Tribunal's appellate  function  had  been  discharged.
    The Upper Tribunal's  decision  of  23  April  2020  also  contains  an
    anonymity order.

 7.  SC applied for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  He did so
    only in respect of the Article 8 decision of 23 April, not  in  respect
    of the refusal by the Upper Tribunal to set  aside  such  part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision as concerned the protection claim.

 8. SC has renewed his application for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal.  His grounds relate to the refusal of the  Tribunal  to  accept
    the late production of a document; and to the  conclusions  reached  in
    respect of the effect of SC's removal on his children.



B.  THE PARTIES' POSITIONS IN OUTLINE

 9. The application of News Group Newspapers Ltd ("NGN") dated  25  October
    2020 invites the Upper  Tribunal  to  discharge  the  order  giving  SC
    anonymity, on the basis that it represents a serious interference  with
    the principle of open justice and with the media's right of freedom  of
    expression.  As developed by Mr Bunting in written and  oral  argument,
    NGN's position can be summarised as follows.  The identity of SC is, it
    is said, already firmly in the public domain, since he was  subject  to
    extensive press coverage in 2007, which named him, and  identified  his
    business and the town in which he lived.  The press  coverage  included
    photographs of SC, captioning his name, as well as photographs  of  his
    business and his residence.  There was also a description of SC's abuse
    of the United Kingdom's immigration laws, including returning illegally
    to the United Kingdom after  he  had  been  extradited  to  Albania  in
    connection with his conviction for the murder of  the  person  to  whom
    reference has been made (as well as another conviction, which  was  set
    aside subsequently in Albania).  Mr Bunting submits that, had the Upper
    Tribunal known about this press reporting,  it  is  unlikely  that  the
    anonymity order would have been made. Mr Bunting also submits  that  it
    is possible to discover the identity of SC by reading the  judgment  of
    the Divisional Court, which dismissed his appeal against extradition.

10. So far as protection issues are  concerned,  Mr  Bunting  submits  that
    these have fallen away, as a reason for anonymity, in the light of  the
    fact that SC has not sought permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
    against the Upper Tribunal's decision not to set aside  the  protection
    claim aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

11. As for any adverse effect  upon  the  children  of  SC,  which  may  be
    occasioned by the lifting of the order, Mr  Bunting  submits  that  the
    balance  of  competing  rights  as  between  Article  10  (Freedom   of
    expression) and Article 8 (Right to  respect  for  private  and  family
    life) of the ECHR falls to be struck firmly in favour  of  Article  10.
    There is no reliable evidence that naming SC would have a significantly
    detrimental impact upon his minor children, particularly  in  light  of
    the fact that SC's identity is in the public domain.  The Tribunal  can
    expect news organisations to follow  the  Editors'  Code  of  Practice,
    whereby family members of an individual are not to be identified except
    in circumstances where they  are  "genuinely  relevant"  to  the  story
    (Clause 9 of the Code).

12. For SC, Mr Malik submits  that,  although  SC's  underlying  appeal  is
    "pending"  for  the  purposes  of  section  104  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the appeal is not presently before the
    Upper  Tribunal.   The  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    comprises a carefully constructed scheme to  segregate  proceedings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal and the  Court  of  Appeal.
    It is tolerably clear, says Mr Malik, that  Parliament's  intention  is
    that all matters which are incidental to the appeal proceedings  should
    be dealt with by the specific tribunal or court that  is  dealing  with
    the appeal at the given time.  It would  be  contrary  to  the  general
    statutory scheme for the First-tier Tribunal to intervene in respect of
    an anonymity order, when the appeal was before the Upper Tribunal.   In
    the same way, it is for the Court of Appeal exclusively  to  deal  with
    the matter, once it reaches that court.  It would, therefore,  be  open
    to NGN to apply to the Court  of  Appeal  to  discharge  the  anonymity
    granted to SC.  The  Court  of  Appeal  is,  in  any  event,  the  most
    convenient forum to consider the issue of anonymity.

13. In any event, Mr Malik says, the anonymity order should  be  preserved.
    The Upper Tribunal's Guidance Note 2013 No. 1:  Anonymity Orders states
    at paragraph 18 that the  identities  of  children,  whether  they  are
    appellants or not, will not normally be disclosed; and that  where  the
    identity of a child is not to be revealed, the name and  address  of  a
    parent other than the appellant may also need to be withheld, so as  to
    preserve the anonymity of the child.

14. Witness statements filed by SC in respect of  the  present  application
    explain how the previous adverse publicity has affected the family  and
    the welfare of the children.  Furthermore, in June 2020, a firearm  was
    discharged in the street, apparently targeting SC's residence.

15. In addition, Mr Malik raises a new argument in  support  of  anonymity.
    Unlike the position before the Upper Tribunal, SC's present  stance  is
    that, if he loses his appeal, he will return to Albania with  his  wife
    and minor children.  The publicity which would  result  in  the  United
    Kingdom from lifting the anonymity order would place SC and his  family
    at risk from kidnappers.

16. For the Secretary of State, Mr Gullick adopts  a  neutral  stance.   Mr
    Gullick draws attention to the judgment of Lord Neuberger  MR  in  Pink
    Floyd Music Ltd v EMI Records Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 1429, which discusses
    the relationship, in cases of  anonymity  etc,  between  the  Court  of
    Appeal and a lower  court.   Mr  Gullick  submits  that  if  the  Upper
    Tribunal considers the application by NGN has merit (or that it is  not
    clearly unmeritorious), then the Tribunal  may  wish  either  to  defer
    consideration  of  the  application  until  the  Court  of  Appeal  has
    considered the issue (if it ever does), or to determine the application
    but to provide (in the event the Tribunal is minded  to  discharge  the
    anonymity order) for its order not to take effect until SC has had  the
    opportunity to bring the matter before the Court of Appeal, whether  by
    way of appeal against the order for its discharge, or  application  for
    anonymisation before the Court of Appeal,  or  both.   What  procedural
    course to take is, Mr Gullick says, a matter for the Upper Tribunal.



C.  PRACTICE AND GUIDANCE

17. Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2011  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Anonymity Directions) says:-

         "4.  The power to direct anonymity is derived from article  8  ECHR
             and such directions should be made where public  knowledge  of
             the person or the case might impact on that person's protected
             rights.  An interim anonymity direction is more likely  to  be
             appropriate during initial stages of an appeal to  enable  the
             parties  to  prepare  their  cases  without  interference   or
             hindrance.  At the CMR  or  at  the  substantive  hearing  the
             Immigration Judge should review the application for  anonymity
             and direct whether the appellant should be granted  anonymity.
             There may well be appeals where  no  application  is  made  by
             either party but the court will  self  direct  that  anonymity
             should be granted.

         5.   Anonymity directions will often, if not always, be made  where
             the appeal involves:-

             i)   a child or vulnerable person

             ii)  evidence that the appeal  concerns  personal  information
                  about the lives of those under 18 and their welfare may be
                  injured if such details are revealed and their  names  are
                  known

             iii) there is highly personal  evidence  in  the  appeal  that
                  should remain confidential

             iv)  there is a claim that the appellant would be at  risk  of
                  harm and that by publishing their names and details it may
                  cause them harm or put others at real risk of harm

             v)   publication of the determination may be used subsequently
                  to support a sur place claim.

             First tier

             It is unusual, (but not unknown) for the determinations of the
             first tier to be  published.   If  anonymity  is  granted  the
             determination should  give  brief  reasons  why  anonymity  is
             granted with fuller reasons if either party objects."

18. The Practice Note of the Court of Appeal (Anonymisation in  Asylum  and
    Immigration Cases in the Court of Appeal) [2006] EWCA Civ 1359 states:-

         "Hearings will continue to take place in  open  court  (unless  the
         court otherwise directs).  If judgment is given in an asylum appeal
         (or a permission to  appeal  application,  where  the  judgment  is
         released from the usual restriction on citation), there will  be  a
         presumption that the asylum-seeker's anonymity  will  be  preserved
         unless the court gives a direction  to  contrary  effect.   On  the
         other  hand,  there  will  be  a  presumption  that  judgments   in
         immigration appeals will identify the name of  the  person  seeking
         relief  under  the  immigration  laws  unless  the  court  gives  a
         direction requiring anonymity."  (Emphasis supplied)

19. We have already made mention of the Guidance Note  2013  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  So far as relevant this provides as follows:-

         "6.  The starting point for consideration of  anonymity  orders  in
             UTIAC, as in all courts and tribunals, is open justice.   This
             principle promotes the rule of law and  public  confidence  in
             the legal system.  UTIAC sits in open court  with  the  public
             and press able  to  attend  and  nothing  should  be  done  to
             discourage the publication to the wider  public  of  fair  and
             accurate reports of proceedings that have taken place.

         7.   Given the importance of open justice, the general principle is
             that an anonymity order should only be made by  UTIAC  to  the
             extent that the law requires it or it is found necessary to do
             so.

         ...

         9.   UTIAC has power to make an anonymity order or otherwise direct
             that information be not  revealed,  where  such  an  order  is
             necessary to protect human rights, whether (for  example)  the
             private life of a party subject to  the  jurisdiction  or  the
             life, liberty and bodily integrity of a witness  or  a  person
             referred to in proceedings.  The Tribunal may also  make  such
             an order where it is necessary in the interests of the welfare
             of a child or the interests  of  justice  would  otherwise  be
             frustrated.

         10.  Parties may apply for an anonymity order or UTIAC may consider
             making one of its own volition.  Where anonymity is an  issue,
             the UTIAC judge should deal with the matter as  a  preliminary
             issue and decide, first, the extent  of  any  anonymity  order
             made, if any.

         11.  A decision to make an anonymity order where  not  required  by
             law may require the weighing of the competing interests of  an
             individual and their rights (for example, under Articles 3  or
             8 of the ECHR or their ability to present their case  in  full
             without hindrance) against the need for open justice.

         12.  An anonymity order will not be made because  an  appellant  or
             witness has engaged in conduct  that  is  considered  socially
             embarrassing to reveal.  In particular,  that  the  fact  that
             someone has committed a criminal offence will not justify  the
             making of an anonymity order, even if it is known that such  a
             person has children who may be more readily identified if  the
             details of the person are known.

         13.  It  is  the  present  practice  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
             Immigration and Asylum Chamber that an anonymity order is made
             in  all  appeals  raising  asylum   or   other   international
             protection claims.  An appellant will be identified by initial
             and country in such cases unless and until a judge has decided
             that anonymity is not necessary. UTIAC will  follow  the  same
             general practice, with the result that anonymity will  remain,
             unless a UT judge decides it is unnecessary.

         14.  Where details of witnesses or relatives abroad form part of  a
             protection case, particular consideration should also be given
             as to whether publication of those details would be likely  to
             cause serious harm."





D.  CASE LAW

20. In re Guardian News and Media Ltd and Others [2010] UKSC 1, the Supreme
    Court held that, where both Articles 8 and 10 of the ECHR are in  play,
    it is for the court to weigh the competing claims under  each  Article.
    Since both Article 8 and Article 10 are qualified rights, the weight to
    be attached to the respective interests of the parties will  depend  on
    the facts.  Amongst the factual matters  will  be  whether  the  person
    concerned has already been identified in relevant publications.

21. Having analysed the Article 8 arguments in favour  of  anonymity,  Lord
    Rodger went on to examine the position under Article 10:-

         "63. What's in a name?  "A lot", the press would answer.   This  is
             because stories about particular individuals are  simply  much
             more attractive to readers  than  stories  about  unidentified
             people.  It is just human nature.  And this is why, of course,
             even when reporting major disasters, journalists usually  look
             for a story about how  particular  individuals  are  affected.
             Writing stories which capture the attention of  readers  is  a
             matter of reporting technique, and the  European  court  holds
             that article 10 protects not only the substance of  ideas  and
             information but also the form in which they are conveyed: News
             Verlags GmbH & Co KG v Austria (2000) 31 EHRR 246,  256,  para
             39, quoted at para 35 above.  More succinctly,  Lord  Hoffmann
             observed in Campbell v MGN Ltd [2004] 2 AC 457, 474, para  59,
             "judges are not newspaper editors".  See  also  Lord  Hope  of
             Craighead in In re British Broadcasting Corpn [2010] 1 AC 145,
             para 25.  This is not just a matter of deference to  editorial
             independence.  The judges are recognising  that  editors  know
             best how to present material in a way that will  interest  the
             readers of their particular publication and so  help  them  to
             absorb the information.  A requirement to report  it  in  some
             austere, abstract form, devoid of much of its human  interest,
             could well mean that the report would  not  be  read  and  the
             information would not  be  passed  on.   Ultimately,  such  an
             approach  could  threaten  the  viability  of  newspapers  and
             magazines, which can only inform the public  if  they  attract
             enough readers and make enough money to survive.

         ...

         65.  On the other hand,  if  newspapers  can  identify  the  people
             concerned,  they  may  be  able  to  give  a  more  vivid  and
             compelling account which will stimulate discussion  about  the
             use of freezing orders and their impact on the communities  in
             which  the  individuals  live.   Concealing  their  identities
             simply casts a shadow over entire communities.

         ...

         68.  Certainly, the identities of the claimants cannot  affect  the
             answers that this court gives to the legal  questions  in  the
             substantive appeals.   So  those  identities  may  not  matter
             particularly to the judges.  But the  legitimate  interest  of
             the public is wider than the interest of judges qua judges  or
             of lawyers qua  lawyers.  Irrespective  of  the  outcome,  the
             public has a legitimate interest in not being kept in the dark
             about who are challenging the TOs and the AQO. The case of HAY
             is  instructive  in  this  respect.   Most  people   will   be
             astonished, for example, to learn  that,  up  until  now,  the
             courts have prevented them from discovering that  one  of  the
             claimants, Mr Youssef, has already successfully sued the  Home
             Secretary for wrongful detention after  a  failed  attempt  to
             deport him to Egypt.   Equally  importantly,  even  while  the
             Treasury is defending these proceedings brought  by  him,  the
             Government are trying to have his name removed from  the  1267
             Committee  list.   Meanwhile,   he   is   busy   writing   and
             broadcasting from London on Middle East matters.

         69.  By lifting the anonymity order in HAY's case the court  allows
             members of the public to receive  relevant  information  about
             him which they can then use to make connexions  between  items
             of information in the public domain which otherwise appear  to
             be unrelated.  In this way the true position is  revealed  and
             the public can make an informed judgment.  There may well,  of
             course, be no similar revelations in  the  case  of  M.   But,
             assuming that is so, this  would,  in  itself,  be  important,
             since it would contribute to showing  how  the  freezing-order
             system affects different people in different  situations  -  a
             point to be considered in any debate  on  the  merits  of  the
             system.   At  present,  the  courts  are  denying  the  public
             information which is relevant to that debate, even though  the
             whole freezing-order system has been created and  operated  in
             their name.

         ...

         72.  Of course, allowing the press to  identify  M  and  the  other
             appellants would not be risk-free.   It  is  conceivable  that
             some of the press coverage might be outrageously hostile to  M
             and the other appellants - even  though  nothing  particularly
             significant appears to have been published when Mr al-Ghabra's
             identity was revealed.  But the possibility of some sectors of
             the press abusing their freedom to report cannot,  of  itself,
             be a sufficient reason for curtailing  that  freedom  for  all
             members of the press.  James Madison long ago pointed out that
             "Some degree of abuse is inseparable from the  proper  use  of
             everything, and in no instance is this more true than in  that
             of the press":  "Report on the Virginia  Resolutions"  (1800),
             in Letters and Other Writings of James Madison (1865) Vol 4, p
             544.  The Press Complaints Commission is the appropriate  body
             for dealing with any lapses in behaviour by  the  press.   The
             possibility of abuse is therefore  simply  one  factor  to  be
             taken into account when considering whether an anonymity order
             is a  proportionate  restriction  on  press  freedom  in  this
             situation."

22. Where the argument for anonymity depends  upon  an  unqualified  right,
    such as Article 2 (right to life), the approach is not one of balancing
    competing interests.  Nevertheless, there  needs  to  be  a  "real  and
    immediate" risk of an Article 2 breach.  That is a high threshold, with
    the requirement that the risk be  real,  meaning  that  it  has  to  be
    objectively well-founded.  These propositions derive from In re Officer
    L and Others [2007] UKHL 36.   The  issue  in  that  case  was  whether
    serving or former police officers in Northern Ireland should be able to
    give evidence anonymously on the ground that they would be in fear  for
    their lives due to exposure to terrorist attack if they  were  publicly
    identified.  (Paragraphs 24 to 29; Lord Carswell).

23. In A v British Broadcasting Corporation [2014] UKSC 25, A claimed  that
    he would suffer treatment contrary to Article 2 and Article 3  (inhuman
    and degrading treatment or punishment), if  he  were  returned  to  his
    country of origin and publicity had been given to the fact that he  was
    a sex offender.  The Supreme Court held it was a general principle that
    justice is to be determined by the courts in public so as to be open to
    public scrutiny.  This was an aspect of the rule of law in a  democracy
    and, furthermore, a constitutional principle to be found in the  common
    law.  The courts, however, had an inherent power to make exceptions  to
    the  principle  by  withholding  certain  information,  including   the
    identity of an  individual,  from  public  disclosure  where  this  was
    necessary in the interests of  justice.   Whether  that  was  so  would
    depend on the facts of each case.  The principle of  open  justice  was
    expressly protected by Article 6 of the ECHR.  Article 6, is,  however,
    a qualified right, unlike Articles 2 and 3.  Where an unqualified right
    is in conflict with a qualified right, there can be derogation from the
    unqualified right.  Nevertheless, care has to be taken to  ensure  that
    the extent of interference is no more than is necessary (paragraphs 41,
    46 to 49).  In the event, the House of Lords upheld the anonymity order
    in respect of A on the basis that there was a real risk of Article  2/3
    harm if his identity as a sex offender became known.  The media did not
    have the right to publish information at the known potential cost of an
    individual being maimed or killed.

24. In LLD v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] NICA 38, the
    Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland considered an immigration appeal by
    an individual aged 16 who wished to enter the United Kingdom for family
    reunification purposes.  No anonymisation had taken place in the First-
    tier Tribunal; but the Upper Tribunal  had  made  an  anonymity  order,
    together with its decision disposing  of  proceedings.   McCloskey  LJ,
    giving the judgment of the court said:-

         "[13].   We determine the issue of the Appellant's anonymity in the
             following way.  In so doing we adopt as our point of departure
             the overarching principle of open justice.   We  note  further
             the absence of any mandatory statutory  provision  or  binding
             judicial  authority  mandating  this  court   to   adopt   any
             particular course. We also take into account the general  rule
             promulgated in the two aforementioned tribunal instruments, in
             relatively strong terms, that neither the identity of a  child
             nor  information  which  could  identify  a  child  should  be
             published.  While it is not for this  court  to  question  the
             wisdom of this  general  rule  in  the  forum  of  specialised
             tribunals and we understand it to be one of some longevity, we
             conceive our primary duty  to  be  to  apply  the  common  law
             principles and Arts 6 and 8 ECHR.

             In summary, the principle of open justice, vouchsafed by  both
             the common law and Art 6(1)  ECHR,  falls  to  be  applied  in
             conjunction with the Art 8 ECHR private  life  rights  of  the
             Appellant and other family members in the context of the  duty
             owed by the court qua public authority under s 6 of the  Human
             rights Act 1998.  In Article 8 cases, it is incumbent  on  the
             court to conduct a balancing exercise, weighing the extent  of
             the interference with the individual's privacy on the one hand
             against the general interest at issue on the  other  hand.  In
             cases of the present type, the public interest in play is  the
             imperative for justice to  be  transacted  in  public  in  all
             respects.  Every case in which some  degree  of  anonymity  is
             permitted by the court involves an adjustment of  this  public
             interest, with the individual's right prevailing.

         [14] It follows from the foregoing that the Appellant  should  have
             been anonymised in like manner  in  the  application  to  this
             court  and  in  all  documents  generated  thereby,  with   an
             accompanying application for continuing anonymity.   This  did
             not occur.  The likely explanation would appear  to  be  human
             error.  We need enquire no further.   The  question  for  this
             court, which must form its own independent  view  and  make  a
             fresh assessment and ruling, is whether there are grounds  for
             differing from the UT.  Having considered all of the  material
             evidence and  submissions,  including  the  recently  provided
             affidavit, we are satisfied that the Appellant should continue
             to benefit from anonymity.  In a nutshell,  the  intimate  and
             sensitive details and features of her private and family  life
             and that of other family members outweigh the public  interest
             in open justice in this  discrete  respect.   Accordingly,  we
             replicate the anonymity order of the UT. The principle of open
             justice will prevail otherwise."

25. In re S (a child) (identification: restrictions on publication)  [2004]
    UKHL 47 concerned the question  of  whether  a  mother,  who  had  been
    prosecuted for the murder of one of her children, should be  anonymised
    in  connection  with  the  criminal  proceedings,  on  the  basis  that
    publicity would have a seriously detrimental effect upon S, a boy of  5
    who was the sibling of the deceased.  The House of Lords held that  the
    foundation of the jurisdiction to restrain  publicity  to  protect  the
    child's private and family life was now derived from  the  ECHR  rather
    than the inherent jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court.   Again,  it  was
    emphasised that where Article 8 is in conflict with Article 10, neither
    article as such has precedence over the other.  The correct approach is
    to focus on the comparative importance of the specific  rights  claimed
    in the individual case, with  the  justifications  for  interfering  or
    restricting each right being taken into account and the proportionality
    test applied to each.  There was a report from a child psychiatrist who
    opined that if there were a long period of adverse name publicity,  the
    effect on S would, in her opinion, be significantly harmful.

26. The House of Lords, however, held that the balance fell to be struck in
    favour of Article 10, given the  importance  of  open  justice  in  the
    sphere of criminal  law.   By  contrast,  the  effect  on  S  would  be
    "essentially indirect", in that he would not be involved in  the  trial
    as a witness and it would not be necessary to refer to him  (paragraphs
    24 to 31).

27. In HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176; [2021]  Imm  AR  59,  the  Court  of
    Appeal was concerned with deportation of a foreign criminal who  had  a
    child in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 5, Underhill LJ said:-

         "I confess to some concern about the over-use of  anonymisation  in
         this field, and I am not entirely persuaded that the mere fact that
         a foreign criminal has minor children is sufficient to justify  not
         using his or her full name.  However, it seems  that  most  of  the
         appeals concerning  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  have  been
         anonymised, not only in the UT but in this Court  and  the  Supreme
         Court; and in all the circumstances I am contend not to seek to  go
         behind the order of the UT."

28. In re Trinity Mirror plc [2008] EWCA Crim 50 concerned an  order  in  a
    criminal trial restraining the media from  identifying  the  defendant,
    who had pleaded guilty to child pornography offences, on the basis that
    the order was necessary to protect the  rights  and  interests  of  the
    defendant's  children,  notwithstanding  that  they  had  been  neither
    witnesses in the proceedings as against the defendant  nor  victims  of
    his offences.  A five judge  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  proper
    balance between the rights of the children  under  Article  8  and  the
    freedom of the public and  media  under  Article  10  did  not  justify
    granting the order.  A judge who granted the order in the  Crown  Court
    had been concerned that the defendant's children were  "vulnerable,  of
    school age and liable to the risk of social exclusion by  their  peers,
    teasing and taunting, harassment, intimidation, bullying and  violence"
    if their father were identified.  Although the appeal in the  Court  of
    Appeal succeeded on a jurisdictional argument, the court disagreed with
    the way in which the trial judge had struck  the  balance  between  the
    rights of the children and the rights of the media and the public:-

         "33. It is sad, but true, that the criminal activities of a  parent
             can bring misery, shame and  disadvantage  to  their  innocent
             children.   Innocent  parents   suffer   from   the   criminal
             activities of their sons and daughters.   Husbands  and  wives
             and partners all suffer in the same way.  All this  represents
             the further consequences of crime, adding to the list  of  its
             victims.  Everyone appreciates the risk that innocent children
             may suffer prejudice and damage when a parent is convicted  of
             a serious offence.  ... If  the  court  were  to  uphold  this
             ruling so as to protect the rights of the defendant's children
             under article 8,  it  would  be  countenancing  a  substantial
             erosion of the principle of open justice, to the  overwhelming
             disadvantage of public  confidence  in  the  criminal  justice
             system, the free reporting of criminal trials and  the  proper
             identification of those convicted and sentenced in them.  Such
             an  order  cannot  begin  to  be   contemplated   unless   the
             circumstances  are  indeed  properly  to   be   described   as
             exceptional."



E.  JURISDICTION

29. Before we embark upon our analysis of the facts  by  reference  to  the
    relevant case law, it is necessary to deal with two matters.  The first
    concerns jurisdiction.  All the parties  were  agreed  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal   has   jurisdiction   to   entertain    NGN's    application,
    notwithstanding that it has made decisions disposing of  the  appellate
    proceedings in SC's case.  In Dring v Cape  Intermediate  Holdings  Ltd
    [2019] UKSC 38, the Supreme Court held that, unless  inconsistent  with
    statute or rules of court, all courts and tribunals  have  an  inherent
    jurisdiction to determine what the  constitutional  principle  of  open
    justice requires in terms of access to documents or  other  information
    placed before the court or tribunal in  question.   It  is  plain  from
    paragraph 47 of the judgment in Dring that a court or tribunal  retains
    jurisdiction to deal with "open justice" aspects arising from  a  case,
    after that case has  concluded  before  that  court  or  tribunal.   In
    paragraph 47, the  Supreme  Court  held  that,  whilst  it  was  highly
    desirable that the application for documents was made during the trial,
    this was because a person who sought such access after the  proceedings
    were over "may find that it is not practicable to provide the  material
    because the court will probably not have retained it  and  the  parties
    might  not  have  done  so".   There  is   no   suggestion   that   any
    jurisdictional problem was envisaged.




F.  WHAT IS THE APPROPRIATE FORUM FOR DETERMINING THE APPLICATION?

30. The fact that the Upper  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to  decide  NGN's
    application does not mean that it should do  so  if  there  is  a  more
    appropriate forum.

31. In Spiliada Maritime Corp v Cansulex Ltd [1987] 1 AC 460, the House  of
    Lords considered the principle of forum non conveniens.  In  a  dispute
    about the appropriate jurisdiction for trial,  it  was  held  that  the
    burden rested on the defendant "not just to show that  England  is  not
    the natural or appropriate forum for the trial, but to  establish  that
    there is another available forum which is clearly  or  distinctly  more
    appropriate than the English forum" (477E: Lord Goff).

32.  Mr  Malik  submits  that  the  appropriate  forum,  in   the   present
    circumstances, is the Court of Appeal.  The matter is now  before  that
    court, awaiting a decision on permission.  Mr  Malik  seeks  to  invoke
    rule 5(3)(k) of the 2008 Rules. This empowers  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    transfer proceedings to another court or tribunal with jurisdiction  if
    "the Upper Tribunal considers that the other court  or  tribunal  is  a
    more appropriate forum for the determination of the case".

33. Mr Malik says that, for the purposes  of  rule  14,  the  "proceedings"
    referred to in the anonymity  order  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  the
    proceedings in SC's appeal under  section  82  of  the  2002  Act.   He
    disagrees with Mr Bunting's submission that the "proceedings"  in  this
    context mean only the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal and  not  those
    in the First-tier Tribunal. If Mr Bunting's submission on this issue is
    correct, NGN's application would be strengthened,  in  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal's  anonymity  order[1]  would  not  prevent  the  press   from
    reporting the proceedings in SC's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. On the issue, we agree with Mr Malik.  The  consequences  of  regarding
    the First-tier Tribunal's proceedings  as  conceptually  separate  from
    those in the Upper Tribunal for this purpose would be problematic.  If,
    as indeed happened in the present case, the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to make an anonymity order  in  a  protection  appeal,  but  the  Upper
    Tribunal then did so in respect of the "proceedings", it  would  defeat
    the purpose of the Upper Tribunal's anonymity order if, as  Mr  Bunting
    submits is the position, the press or others were able to disclose  the
    identity of the person in question, in the context of  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The same point applies, as regards the
    Upper Tribunal and the  Court  of  Appeal.   We  consider  the  correct
    position to be that the higher court or tribunal may,  at  each  stage,
    impose an anonymity order that has an effect in respect of the entirety
    of the proceedings under section 82 and, conversely, may discharge such
    an order.  Such  a  discharge  may  occur  expressly  or  by  necessary
    implication.

35. The process we have described is, in our view, entirely compatible with
    what Lord Neuberger had to say in Pink Floyd Music Ltd:-

         "66. I consider, therefore, that the present appeal provides a good
             opportunity for this court to make it  clear  that  a  private
             hearing or party anonymisation will be granted in the Court of
             Appeal only if, and only to the extent that, a member  of  the
             court is  satisfied  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  proper
             administration of justice.

         67.  The fact that the first instance judge granted or  refused  to
             permit a private hearing or anonymisation cannot be conclusive
             of such issues in the Court of Appeal  (although  the  judge's
             refusal of  such  relief  will,  in  most  cases,  render  any
             subsequent application on appeal pointless).  A first instance
             judge's decision on such an issue self-evidently does not bind
             the Court of Appeal, and cannot determine  how  an  appeal  in
             this court proceeds.  However, this court would  normally  pay
             close regard to the judge's decision, especially if  expressed
             in a  reasoned  judgment.   None  the  less,  in  relation  to
             appeals, the Court  of  Appeal  should  not  depart  from  the
             general rule that litigation is to  be  conducted  in  public,
             unless a judge of that  court  is  persuaded  that  there  are
             cogent grounds for doing so.

         68.  In a case where permission to appeal  is  required  from  this
             court, then, where the applicant wants a  private  hearing  or
             anonymisation, the  correct  procedure  is  to  apply  for  an
             appropriate order at the time permission to appeal is  sought.
             If another party to such an appeal wants a private hearing  or
             anonymisation, or in a case where  permission  to  appeal  has
             been granted below, if any party has such a  wish,  the  party
             concerned should make an appropriate  written  application  to
             this court.  Where any application for a hearing in private or
             anonymisation is made, it will be referred to  a  single  Lord
             Justice, who will, at  any  rate  initially,  consider  it  on
             paper.  If such an application is granted ex parte and another
             party (or a representative of the media)  objects,  the  order
             will, of course, be reconsidered.

         69.  Of course, particularly in a case in  which  anonymisation  or
             privacy was granted below, where anonymisation or  privacy  is
             sought in an appeal to this court, it would (at least  in  the
             absence of  unusual  circumstances)  be  appropriate  for  the
             parties and the court to maintain anonymisation or privacy  on
             an interim basis, without a direction from  a  judge  of  this
             court, until it was possible for this court  to  rule  on  the
             question of whether an  order  for  anonymisation  or  privacy
             should be made."

36. Thus, in the present case, which is no longer a protection appeal,  the
    Court of Appeal will expect the party who seeks to  continue  anonymity
    to make the appropriate application to that court.

37. There is also the following point. Whilst rule 14(1)(a) refers  to  the
    proceedings, rule 14(1)(b) confers a power to  prohibit  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify  any  person  whom  the  Tribunal  considers  should  not   be
    identified. Even if, contrary to our  finding,  the  reference  to  the
    proceedings in sub-paragraph  (a)  were  confined  to  the  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal, the power to make an anonymity order in  any
    event extends  beyond  the  ambit  of  the  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

38. Having said all this, we nevertheless agree  with  Mr  Bunting  on  the
    actual issue under this heading. In  the  particular  circumstances  of
    this case, it is  appropriate  for  this  Tribunal  to  consider  NGN's
    application to lift the Tribunal's  anonymity  order.   As  Mr  Gullick
    submits, if permission to appeal were refused by the Court  of  Appeal,
    it is unlikely that the issue of SC's anonymity would be  addressed  by
    that court.  In any case,  there  is  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    evidence upon which to make the necessary fact-sensitive  determination
    of whether the anonymity order should be lifted. If the Court of Appeal
    in due course addresses the issue of anonymity,  it  is  likely  to  be
    assisted by the process that Mr Bunting invites us  to  undertake.   We
    shall, however, endeavour to do so in a way which pays  due  regard  to
    the stage at which the proceedings have reached.




G.  ARTICLE 10 CONSIDERATIONS

39. We take account of the importance ascribed to the ability of the press,
    in the public interest, to report freely to the public  on  matters  of
    genuine concern.  The case law reveals that, in the case  of  qualified
    rights,  powerful  reasons  are  required  to  overcome  the  interests
    enshrined in Article 10.  This  is  particularly  so  in  the  area  of
    criminal law, for the reasons we have seen.

40. The present case does not involve an  individual  who  has  received  a
    criminal conviction in the United Kingdom.  To that extent,  SC's  case
    differs from those such as In re  S  and  In  re  Trinity  Mirror  plc.
    Nevertheless, there are powerful factors  pointing  to  there  being  a
    legitimate and strong public interest in lifting the  anonymity  order.
    SC  is  a  convicted  murderer,  who  received  a  long   sentence   of
    imprisonment in Albania.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  1997,
    claiming asylum using  a  false  identity  and  nationality  (Kosovan).
    After protracted legal proceedings,  SC  was  extradited  according  to
    English law.  He re-entered the United Kingdom illegally.  He also told
    his wife that she should use a false identity in  order  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom.

41. SC has employed persistent dishonesty.  As well as his  false  identity
    and nationality, he has not told the truth about being the victim of  a
    blood feud.  Before the Upper Tribunal, he admitted lying to the  court
    during his extradition proceedings.  He  also  admitted  lying  to  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  He  also  lied  when,  in  his  false
    identity, he denied knowing the victim of his crime.  He gave  evidence
    before the Upper  Tribunal  which  we  characterised  as  "incoherent",
    "wholly bogus", "totally unbelievable", and "false" (paragraphs 82,  85
    and  98).   As  found  in  paragraph  87,  SC  was  "fundamentally  and
    persistently dishonest ... over a significant period of time".

42. SC's case has, in fact, attracted significant press attention.  We were
    unaware of this press coverage when making the anonymity direction,  as
    no doubt were the other constitutions of the Tribunal mentioned at  the
    beginning of this decision.  Articles identifying SC by name and giving
    details  of  his  business  and  home  town,  together  with  captioned
    photographs, featured in The Scottish Sun, The Sun, The Mail Online and
    The Telegraph in 2017.  MPs expressed public disquiet at the fact  that
    SC was still in the United Kingdom at that time.  The fact that so much
    of this is in the public domain, is, we consider, highly relevant.

43. We place less weight, however, on the fact that  the  Divisional  Court
    proceedings named SC.  Given the passage of time,  this  aspect  is  of
    less  significance  than  the  2017  articles  in  demonstrating   that
    knowledge of SC and  his  background  have  significantly  entered  the
    public domain.

44. For the reasons we have given earlier, we do not  accept  Mr  Bunting's
    submission that, even if this anonymity  order  were  to  remain,  news
    organisations  could  report  freely   on   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    proceedings.

45. Despite what we have just said about the Divisional Court and the First-
    tier Tribunal proceedings, the Article 10 case is  still  very  strong.
    The public has a legitimate interest in knowing  about  a  man  with  a
    conviction for  murder,  who,  as  a  serious,  persistent  immigration
    offender, has done his best to take improper advantage of laws designed
    to protect those genuinely at real risk of harm. His case is already in
    the public domain to a significant degree as  a  result  of  relatively
    recent press coverage.




H.  ARTICLE 2/3 CONSIDERATIONS

46. In his witness statement of 19 November 2020, filed in connection  with
    the present application, SC raises a  new  issue.   He  says  that  his
    "family is very well-known [in Albania] and people recognise me and  my
    family there.  If the people recognised them,  they  will  kidnap  them
    either for ransom or to sell them to my enemy".  Later, SC says that:-

         "If my case is refused by the Court of Appeal, my wife and  I  have
         decided to move to Albania with our young  children.   More  people
         know my family and me there than here.  As I mentioned above,  that
         the News not only travels there but the Albanian  media  exaggerate
         it  even  more.   They  will  make  my   young   British   children
         identifiable there as well and will put their lives at  great  risk
         there as well.  Also, I will be left with no other  option  but  to
         return to the UK and claim a fresh asylum on these basis [sic]".

47. The statement of SC's wife of 20 November  2020  talks  about  Albanian
    media attracting the attention  of  "big  mafias  and  kidnappers  over
    there".  SC "is already in news as big shot here.  If we were to return
    to Albania, then not only my husband's life would be in danger not only
    by these kidnappers but also from our enemy  with  whom  he  has  blood
    feud".  She also says that this would  expose  the  British  children's
    lives to great risk and danger.

48. There is not a shred of objective evidence to support these  assertions
    regarding the threat of kidnapping.  Given our findings  in  the  April
    2020 decision regarding the credibility of SC and his wife, we are  not
    prepared to accept their latest  utterances  at  face  value.   On  the
    contrary, they are, we consider, further evidence of  their  persistent
    mendacity.  By referring to SC's "enemy" they seek  to  perpetuate  the
    false claim regarding the blood feud.

49. The claims are also undermined by the fact that the older  children  of
    SC travelled to Albania on their own in the  summer  of  2020,  without
    incident.  Although SC's wife said they were "recognised by  the  local
    police", in the light of the problems we have with her evidence, we are
    not prepared  to  accept  this  unsubstantiated  assertion.  There  is,
    furthermore, no justification whatsoever for her  inference  that  this
    recognition, even if it occurred, would "put their lives in  danger  in
    future travel if any adverse news are published in the  media".   There
    already has been publicity, of the kind we have described, as  recently
    as 2017.

50. So far as risk in the United Kingdom  is  concerned,  the  local  press
    carried a report in June 2020 of a gun being fired at  the  door  of  a
    house in SC's home town.  This is said to be  the  house  of  SC.   The
    report says that armed officers were called "following reports  that  a
    firearm had been discharged in the  street".   There  is  some  witness
    evidence, filed by SC, from neighbours who refer to  the  incident,  as
    well as SC's  children.   However,  nothing  further  appears  to  have
    emerged and there is no indication of the  police  taking  any  further
    interest.

51. SC has not explained how this incident impacts in any material  way  on
    the present application.  It is, frankly, fanciful to believe  that  it
    relates to the publicity that occurred in 2017.  There is no basis upon
    which to assume that lifting the anonymity order would give rise to any
    repetition of this incident.

52. Finally, we note that since SC has not sought to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal on the protection issue, that aspect can no longer  justify  the
    continuation of an anonymity order.

53. For the above reasons,  having  had  regard  to  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before us, we find there is no real risk of Article  2/3  harm
    if the anonymity order were to be lifted.



I.  ARTICLE 8 CONSIDERATIONS

54. In his latest  statement,  SC  described  the  background  to  The  Sun
    newspaper articles in 2017.  SC says that they published "a  misleading
    and negative news" [sic].  The next day he woke up  with  "hundreds  of
    notifications from friends and family asking if everything was okay and
    telling them to be careful because people were writing very  unpleasant
    comments".  SC said that his family's  life  after  publication  became
    miserable and hard as he had to witness the negative  effect  of  being
    published on his family's mental and physical state.  It put them under
    tremendous pressure to deal with this at a very young age.  It put  his
    children's welfare at risk.  The children would  constantly  come  back
    from school, saying that classmates  and  other  students  were  saying
    negative comments about them or students would ask them questions  such
    as how it feels to have a father as a criminal.  The children could not
    confront these people making negative comments and remarks about  their
    father.  This was said to be affecting their education and careers  and
    also their physical and mental development and wellbeing.

55. SC's wife describes the media putting "incorrect facts about my husband
    in the news".  What the newspapers were saying was "not completely  the
    truth".  It had had an effect on her children's wellbeing and sometimes
    they had come home from school or college upset in that the media  were
    saying "appalling things which were not true".

56. The 22 year old adult son of SC said that it was unpleasant to see  his
    father being approached by the  media  "as  if  he  is  a  cold-hearted
    criminal which broke my heart".  Seeing him exposed in a  very  popular
    local newspaper and seeing him on TV "affected my life massively".  The
    witness felt he was "being treated differently" at the schools he  went
    to.  In November 2017, newspapers wrote "very  negative  and  incorrect
    information about my father and his  previous  history".   The  witness
    says that this led to having a firearm  shooting  at  his  house.   The
    media  attention  is  described  as  "negative  propaganda  against  my
    father".  Any further publication by The Sun newspaper  "will  bring  a
    downfall on my life and possibly my future".

57. We have already noted that there can be no rational connection  between
    the November 2017 publicity and the June 2020 firearm incident.  So far
    as the rest of this witness's evidence is concerned,  it  suffers  from
    the fundamental defect, identified by Mr  Bunting,  that  SC  has  been
    unable to point to any aspect of the 2017 reporting that is untrue.  As
    a result, it is not possible to place weight on this evidence.

58. There is a statement from the second elder son of SC.  He describes The
    Sun newspaper as publishing "fake stories about  my  father"  which  is
    said to have "ruined my  life  because  they  have  caused  me  stress,
    anxiety and depression".

59. Once again, there is nothing to indicate that  The  Sun  newspaper  has
    published a "fake" article.  Insofar as this  witness,  and  the  other
    witnesses, described distress when being confronted with the publicity,
    this has to be assessed by reference to the fact that  the  information
    about their father was not untrue, however much they  may  believe  (or
    wish to think) it were otherwise.

60. Another son of SC has submitted a  witness  statement  of  19  November
    2020.  He describes not believing the newspaper articles because SC "is
    such a good role model in my life and the world's media say  about  him
    do not portray who he really is".  A further article in The  Sun  would
    "make me very upset having to witness the things they  will  say  about
    him".

61. A statement from another child of SC says: "our house was in  news  and
    therefore some people decided to open fire at our house".  We reiterate
    what we have already said about this incident.  The witness  says  that
    "making my father look like a criminal and a  bad  person,  has  really
    affected me and made me upset at my young age".

62. We have seen that the outcome of both In re Trinity Mirror plc  and  In
    re  S  was  that  anonymity  was  not  granted,  despite  there   being
    independent  medical  evidence  regarding  the  adverse   effect   that
    publicity would be likely to have on a  child.   Although  those  cases
    involved domestic criminal proceedings, for the reasons we  have  given
    we do not consider that the Article 10 factors  pointing  towards  open
    justice in the present case fall significantly below the level  set  by
    the courts in the case of domestic  criminal  law.   There  is  in  the
    present case a complete dearth of objective  evidence  that  shows  any
    member of SC's family was subjected to any significant psychological or
    other harm, as a result of the publicity in 2017.

63. The high point of the case for SC  for  continuing  anonymity  concerns
    what we said at paragraph 99 of our decision:-

         "99. Insofar as  the  evidence  from  the  children  articulates  a
             concern that, if the appellant were  removed  to  Albania,  he
             would be at risk from the blood feud, this  evidence  has,  we
             find, either been composed in the light of pressure  from  the
             appellant and his wife; or else  is  the  genuine  concern  of
             children who have, regrettably, being fed  untruths  by  their
             parents.  For the purposes of assessing the  strength  of  the
             appellant's case for resisting deportation, we are prepared to
             follow the latter approach to the children's evidence."

64. Mr Malik submitted that this was a finding that was critical of some of
    the children of SC.  As a result, lifting  the  anonymity  order  would
    risk adverse consequences for them, in  terms  of  reactions  by  their
    peers,  and  so  forth.   After  careful  consideration,  however,   we
    concluded that this is not  the  case.   The  ending  of  paragraph  99
    indicates that the Tribunal, on balance,  treated  the  evidence  as  a
    genuine concern on the part of the children; but that this concern  was
    objectively misplaced because it was rooted in the false claim of SC to
    be at risk of a blood feud.  As a result, there is no  cause  to  think
    that the children who gave evidence to the Tribunal would  be  held  in
    lower esteem by others.  This conclusion also meets  Mr  Malik's  point
    that, because the children were not named in the decision, paragraph 99
    could apply to those who would not, in fact, have given evidence.

65. This is not to say, of course, that a renewed bout of publicity, of the
    kind faced by the family in 2017,  would  not  be  unpleasant  for  the
    family; in particular for the children. It plainly would.   The  family
    has, however, faced  this  before,  without  lasting  or  serious  ill-
    effects.  For the reasons we have  given,  we  do  not  find  that  the
    consequences of that publicity were anything like  as  extreme  as  has
    been sought to be portrayed in the latest witness statements.



J.  DECISION

66. Having had regard to the  totality  of  the  evidence  and  despite  Mr
    Malik's able submissions, for the reasons we have  given,  the  Article
    10/Article 8 balance falls to be struck in favour of  Article  10.   We
    reiterate that the resulting publicity will not  be  pleasant  for  the
    family.  It is, however, a degree of unpleasantness that is  occasioned
    by the need to give effect to the freedom of the  press  under  Article
    10.

67. We accordingly decide that the  anonymity  orders  made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal should be lifted.  Subject to submissions in  writing  by  the
    parties, we intend to impose a  stay  on  this  decision,  whereby  the
    lifting will take effect ten working days after the Court of Appeal has
    informed SC of its decision on permission  to  appeal.   SC  is  hereby
    directed to communicate that decision to NGN, as  soon  as  it  becomes
    known to him.

68. A period of ten working days will afford SC the opportunity of  seeking
    an anonymity order from the Court of Appeal; alternatively, of  seeking
    to challenge this decision.  Since our decision to lift  the  anonymity
    order is, in our view, an ancillary decision made  in  relation  to  an
    appeal under section 82 of the 2002 Act, it is an excluded decision  by
    reason of article 2(n) of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions)  Order  2009
    and, thus, challengeable only by means of judicial review.


                      Signed Mr Justice Lane     Date: 21 December 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



                                  ADDENDUM
   1.  By  an  Order  dated  11  January  2021,  having  considered  written
      submissions filed and served by  the  applicant  and  respondent,  the
      Tribunal stayed its decision to lift the anonymity order consequent to
      the respondent having filed an appeal with  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      respect of the Tribunal's substantive consideration of his  article  8
      appeal: [2020]  UKUT  00187  (IAC).  The  Tribunal  ordered  that  the
      decision to lift the anonymity order would take effect at the  end  of
      the period of ten working days after the date on which  the  Court  of
      Appeal informed the respondent of its decision on the application  for
      permission.

   2. By an Order dated 19 February 2021  Elisabeth  Laing  LJ  refused  the
      respondent permission to appeal from the decision in [2020] UKUT 00187
      (IAC). She found no reason to interfere with the Tribunal's subsequent
      order that the respondent continue to be anonymised until ten  working
      days of her decision on the application for permission to appeal.  The
      tenth working day was 5 March 2021.

   3. The respondent filed an application for  judicial  review  challenging
      the Tribunal's decision to lift the anonymity order  and  applied  for
      interim relief (CO/809/2021). By an Order dated 5 March 2021 Linden  J
      stayed the Tribunal's decision to lift  the  anonymity  order  pending
      determination, on the papers, of the  application  for  permission  to
      apply for judicial review.

   4. The interested party detained the respondent and took steps to  remove
      him  to  Albania  on  13  May  2021.  The  respondent  filed   further
      representations which were considered by the  Interested  Party  in  a
      decision dated 12 May 2021 not to satisfy the fresh claim requirements
      of para. 353 of the Immigration Rules.

   5. The respondent filed an application for  judicial  review  challenging
      his  removal  and  seeking  a  stay  of  removal  (JR/670/2021).   The
      application for a stay of  removal  was  initially  refused  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Allen by an Order dated 12 May 2021.

   6. On the same day, the respondent renewed the application for a stay  of
      removal out of hours to the High Court. Following a hearing  conducted
      by telephone, Mrs. Justice Moulder refused the application.

   7. The respondent was removed to Albania on 13 May 2021.

   8. The respondent instructed his legal representatives  to  withdraw  his
      challenge against removal (JR/670/2021) and by means of a decision  of
      Upper  Tribunal  Lawyer  Bakhshi  dated  21  June  2021  the  Tribunal
      consented to the withdrawal of the applicant's case, pursuant to  rule
      17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   9. By an Order of Ms. Margaret Obi, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge,
      dated 22 June 2021, the respondent was refused permission to challenge
      the  Tribunal's  decision  to  lift  the  anonymity  order   and   the
      application was certified as totally without merit: (CO/809/2021). The
      Order of Linden J was discharged. The decision of the Tribunal to lift
      the anonymity order made in respect of the respondent was stayed until
      seven days after the date of service  of  the  Order.  The  Order  was
      served on 25 June 2021 and  the  stay  imposed  by  the  Deputy  Judge
      expired on 2 July 2021.

  10. The decision of this Tribunal previously reported as SC  (paras  A398-
      339D: 'foreign criminal': procedure) Albania [2020] UKUT  00187  (IAC)
      will now be reported as Cokaj (paras A398-339D:  'foreign  criminal':
      procedure) Albania [2020] UKUT 00187 (IAC).
                               Signed: [pic]     Date: 19 July 2021
                       The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                       President of the Upper Tribunal
                                Immigration and Asylum Chamber
-----------------------
[1] "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings."

