
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of KA and another) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (ending of Kumar arrangements) [2018] UKUT 00201 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                              |
|On 22 May 2018                                |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF
                                   (1) KA
                       (2)  OMOTADE OYEBOLA AWOFADEJU

                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Appearances:

For KA:     Ms L Hooper, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For Mr Awofadeju:      Mr D Ball, Counsel, instructed by Hackney Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Thomann, Counsel, instructed by the Government
Legal Department


(1) In R (on the application of Kumar) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department (acknowledgment of service:  tribunal  arrangements)  IJR  [2014]
UKUT 00104 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal stated  that  it  would  not  generally
consider "on the papers" an application for permission to bring  immigration
judicial review proceedings until after six weeks from the  filing  of  that
application. As a result, it was not considered necessary for the  Secretary
of State to file an application for an extension of the 21  day  time  limit
for filing an acknowledgment of service, as provided in rule  29(1)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (unless  the  Secretary  of
State was unable to file within six weeks of being provided with a  copy  of
the judicial review application). Certain  consequential  arrangements  were
also made.

(2) The arrangements described in Kumar will not have effect in  respect  of
any application for permission to bring judicial  review  proceedings  which
is filed with the Upper Tribunal after 1 January 2019.


                                  DECISION


1. The Kumar arrangements

 1. The main proceedings in these judicial  reviews  were  severed  by  the
    Upper Tribunal from the present ones, which now  provide  the  Tribunal
    with the opportunity of revisiting the arrangements contained in R  (on
    the application of Kumar) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    (Acknowledgement of service: Tribunal  arrangements)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
    00104 (IAC) "Kumar".  In this regard, we have been greatly assisted  by
    the submissions of Ms Hooper, Mr Ball and Mr Thomann and by the written
    statements  and  other  material   compiled   by   those   respectively
    instructing them.

 2. The following synopsis of the arrangements in Kumar is drawn  from  the
    applicants' joint statement of case:

      a) The Tribunal  will  not  generally  consider  "on  the  papers"  an
         application for permission to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings
         until after six weeks from the filing of that application.

      b) The Tribunal will not consider it necessary for  the  Secretary  of
         State to file an application for an extension of the  21  day  time
         limit for filing an acknowledgement of service (rule 29(1)  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008),  unless   the
         Secretary of State is unable to file an AoS  within  six  weeks  of
         being provided by the applicant with a copy of the judicial  review
         application.  There is an expectation that the Secretary  of  State
         will continue to try to file the AoS within 21 days but an AoS that
         is before a judge when he or she  comes  to  consider  the  "paper"
         application will be read, whether or not filed outside any relevant
         time limit.

      c) Judicial review applications will be considered within six weeks if
         a separate application for urgent consideration (on Form  T483)  is
         made by the applicant; or in response to a request by the Secretary
         of State for  expedition,  pursuant  to  arrangements  between  the
         Secretary of State and the Tribunal.

      d) An applicant who  is  not  seeking  a  stay  on  removal  or  other
         injunctive  relief  who  wishes  to  advance  reasons  for  earlier
         consideration of his or her claim can  do  so  by  writing  to  the
         Tribunal (copying to the Secretary of State), rather than by way of
         a fee-paid application.

      e) Any such letter will be placed before a judge, who  will  determine
         whether  the  application  to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings
         requires earlier consideration than it would otherwise receive.




 3. Rule 29  provides as follows:-

         "Acknowledgment of service

             29. - (1) A person who is sent or provided with a  copy  of  an
                     application   for   permission   under   rule    28(8)
                     (application for permission to bring  judicial  review
                     proceedings) or rule 28A(2)(a) (special provision  for
                     immigration judicial review proceedings) and wishes to
                     take part in the proceedings must provide to the Upper
                     Tribunal an acknowledgment of service so  that  it  is
                     received no later than 21 days after the date on which
                     the Upper Tribunal sent, or  in  immigration  judicial
                     review proceedings the applicant provided, a  copy  of
                     the application to that person.

                 (2)   An acknowledgment of service under paragraph (1) must
                     be in writing and state -

                     (a)     whether  the  person  intends  to  support  or
                         oppose the application for permission;

                     (b)     their grounds for any  support  or  opposition
                         under sub-paragraph (a), or any  other  submission
                         or information which they consider may assist  the
                         Upper Tribunal; and

                     (c)     the name and address of any other  person  not
                         named  in  the  application  as  a  respondent  or
                         interested party whom  the  person  providing  the
                         acknowledgment  considers  to  be  an   interested
                         party.

                 (2A)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, a  person
                       who  provides  an  acknowledgment  of  service  under
                       paragraph (1) must also provide a copy to -

                     (a)     the applicant; and

                     (b)     any other  person  named  in  the  application
                         under rule 28(4)(a) or acknowledgement of  service
                         under paragraph (2)(c)  no  later  than  the  time
                         specified in paragraph (1).

                 (3)    A  person  who  is  provided  with  a  copy  of   an
                     application  for  permission  under  rule   28(8)   or
                     28A(2)(a) but does not provide  an  acknowledgment  of
                     service to the Upper Tribunal may not take part in the
                     application for permission unless allowed to do so  by
                     the  Upper  Tribunal,  but  may  take  part   in   the
                     subsequent   proceedings   if   the   application   is
                     successful."

 4. The need for the arrangements in Kumar arose because of  the  inability
    of the Secretary of State to file an AoS in immigration judicial review
    proceedings within the 21 day time limit contained in rule 29(1).   The
    difficulties faced by the Secretary  of  State  had  been  examined  by
    Hickinbottom J (as he then was) in R (on the application of  Singh  and
    Others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  2873
    (Admin) "Singh".

 5. Although  Singh  concerned  the  position  in  the  High  Court,  where
    proceedings are governed by the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  ("CPR"),  the
    reasons put forward by the Secretary  of  State  for  being  unable  to
    comply with the  21  day  time  limit  in  rule  29(1)  for  filing  an
    acknowledgement of service in Upper Tribunal were  the  same  as  those
    which led to the Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  comply  with  the
    corresponding 21 day requirement  in  CPR  54.8.   They  involved  what
    Daniel Hobbs, then Director of UK Visas and Immigration,  described  as
    the  "rapid  and  unprecedented  rise  in  challenges  to  asylum   and
    immigration decisions, which were some 69% higher in July 2013 than  in
    July 2012" (Kumar: paragraph 13).

 6. At paragraph 70 of Kumar, it was said:-

         "The Chamber will keep these  arrangements  under  regular  review.
         They are intended to be a  temporary  response  to  what  has  been
         presented by the Secretary of State as a temporary systemic problem
         affecting her ability to comply with the relevant  requirements  of
         the rules."




2. The legal status of the arrangements

 7. Before reviewing  the  arrangements,  it  is  necessary  to  address  a
    submission made in the applicants' skeleton argument  concerning  their
    legal status.  Ms Hooper and Mr Ball contend that it  is  not  possible
    for  the  Tribunal  to  grant  a  party  a  general  dispensation  from
    compliance with the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  That, however,  is
    what they say  the  Tribunal  did  in  Kumar  and,  as  a  result,  the
    arrangements are ultra vires.

 8. Ms Hooper and Mr Ball pray in aid  a  passage  in  the  report  of  the
    Independent Chief Inspector of Borders  and  Immigration  entitled  "An
    Inspection  of  the  Home  Office's  Mechanisms   for   Learning   from
    Immigration Litigation" (April - July 2017).  We shall have more to say
    about this report in due course.  In advancing their vires argument, Ms
    Hooper and Mr Ball draw attention to footnote 62 of the  report,  which
    reads:-

         "R (on the application of Kumar and Another) v Secretary  of  State
         for the  Home  Department  (acknowledgement  of  service:  Tribunal
         arrangements) IJR [2014] UKUT 104 (IAC) permits lodgement within 42
         days except for urgent claims."

 9. Counsel  might  also  have  mentioned  paragraph  3.7  of  the  summary
    conclusions in the report.  This states:-

         "Originally, the deadline imposed by HMCTS for AoS responses was 21
         days.  This was extended to 42  days  for  non-urgent  immigration-
         related cases in 2014."

10. The relevant legislative  framework  is  contained  in  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007.  Section  22  makes  provision  for
    Tribunal Procedure  Rules.   These  Rules  are  made  by  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Committee, which is established by section 22 and Schedule 5.
     The Act also makes provision in section 23  for  practice  directions.
    These may be made either by the Senior President of Tribunals or  by  a
    Chamber President.  In the  former  case,  the  approval  of  the  Lord
    Chancellor is required whilst, in the latter, approval must  come  from
    both the  Lord  Chancellor  and  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals.
    Paragraph 7 of  Schedule  4  requires  a  Chamber  President  "to  make
    arrangements for the issuing of guidance on  changes  in  the  law  and
    practice as they relate to the functions  allocated  to  the  chamber".
    Pursuant to paragraph 7, the President of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber of the Upper Tribunal has issued several sets of guidance.

11. Against this background, Ms Hooper and Mr Ball submit that there is  no
    scope for the Tribunal, when speaking as it did in Kumar,  to  grant  a
    general dispensation from the requirements of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules.

12. At the hearing on 22 May 2018, it was common ground between the parties
    that a relevant authority on this matter is the judgment of  the  Court
    of Appeal in Bovale Ltd v the Secretary of State  for  Communities  and
    Local Government and Another [2009] EWCA Civ 171.  In  that  case,  the
    Court of Appeal held that Collins J had no power to  disapply  or  vary
    the CPR, as they applied to challenges brought under section 288 of the
    Town and Country Planning Act 1990.  Under the CPR, a  defendant  to  a
    claim brought pursuant to section 288 had to serve an acknowledgment of
    service; but there was no requirement in the Rules either  to  indicate
    the grounds of resistance or to serve a defence.  Collins J  considered
    this was wrong.  He made directions, which were intended to be followed
    in the generality of cases,  requiring  grounds  of  resistance  to  be
    served within a period of ten weeks, set by reference to the time limit
    for the filing of evidence by a defendant.

13. As Mr Thomann pointed out, this arrangement was intended by  Collins  J
    to be permanent, in the sense that it would continue unless  and  until
    the Procedure Rules Committee made  specific  provision  regarding  the
    matter.

14. There are significant differences between the judgment of Collins J  in
    Bovale and that of the Tribunal  in  Kumar.   As  the  applicants'  own
    statement of case acknowledges, the expectation in Kumar was  that  the
    Secretary of State would continue to try to file an acknowledgement  of
    service within the period prescribed by rule 29(1).

15. It is instructive to step back and look at what rule 29 does  and  does
    not do. So far as rule 29(1) is concerned, the consequence  of  failing
    to meet the time limit is that, unless the Tribunal  expressly  extends
    the 21 day period (by a direction under rule 5), a person who does  not
    file an acknowledgement of service within 21 days runs a risk that  the
    Tribunal  will  determine  the  application  for  permission  to  bring
    judicial review, without knowing if the person who made the  challenged
    decision is seeking to defend it and, if so, on what  basis.   That  is
    not a  sanction.  Rather,  it  informs  when  the  next  stage  of  the
    procedural process will start. Rule  29(3),  however,  does  contain  a
    sanction, which we describe in paragraph 17 below.

16. It was made clear  in  paragraph  34  of  Kumar  that  "the  burden  of
    immigration judicial review work in the Tribunal is currently such that
    an application which is not treated as urgent  will  not  routinely  be
    considered earlier than six weeks after service  on  the  Secretary  of
    State".  This informed the approach that the  Tribunal  would  normally
    regard an AoS filed within six weeks as falling for consideration.   As
    a result, during the currency of the Kumar arrangements, the  Secretary
    of State would be aware that the risk of consideration  without  regard
    to his position would not, in practice, arise in the period between  21
    and 42 days after service on him of the application. But that awareness
    cannot properly be said to equate  to  a  purported  amendment  by  the
    Tribunal of rule 29(1), so as to substitute "42 days"  for  "21  days".
    Nor can Kumar be regarded as creating a general relief from sanction in
    respect of a failure to comply with rule 29(1).  As is plain from  what
    we have said in paragraph 15 above, there is no sanction to relieve.

17. There is, however, a sanction in  rule  29(3)  for  those  who  do  not
    provide an acknowledgement of service. It is of  a  limited  ambit.  In
    order to understand this ambit, it is necessary to compare  rule  29(3)
    with CPR 54.9. This reads as  follows:

         "Failure to file acknowledgement of service

         54.9 - (1)    Where a person who is served with a  claim  form  has
                 failed to file an acknowledgement of service in  accordance
                 with rule 54.8, he -

                 (a)   may not take part in  a  hearing  to  decide  whether
                     permission should be given unless the court allows him
                     to do so; but

                 (b)   provided he complies with rule  54.14  or  any  other
                     direction  of  the  court  regarding  the  filing  and
                     service of -

                     (i)     detailed grounds for contesting the  claim  or
                         supporting it on additional grounds; and

                     (ii)    any written evidence,

                 may take part in the hearing of the judicial review.

              (2)      Where that person takes part in the hearing  of  the
                 judicial review, the court may take its failure to file  an
                 acknowledgement of service into account when deciding  what
                 order to make about costs."

18. Unlike CPR 54.9,  rule  29(3)  does  not,  in  terms,  apply  where  an
    acknowledgement of service has in fact been filed, albeit  outside  the
    21 day period set by paragraph  (1).   The  words  "acknowledgement  of
    service" in rule 29(3) are unqualified.  In CPR 54.9(1),  by  contrast,
    the words "acknowledgement of service" are followed by  "in  accordance
    with rule 54.8".

19. We consider that if the drafters of rule 29(3) had intended  to  mirror
    the position in the CPR, then some such words as  "in  accordance  with
    rule 29" or "in accordance with rule 29(1) and  (2)"  would  have  been
    inserted in rule 29(3).

20. But be that as it may, there is nothing in Kumar which can be construed
    as amounting to a purported general relief from the  sanction  that  is
    contained in rule 29(3), whereby a person who has not filed an AoS  may
    not take part in the application for permission, unless allowed  to  do
    so by the Tribunal.  It is still for the Tribunal to decide, in such  a
    scenario, whether to allow the respondent to take part.  Just as in the
    High Court, the Tribunal will decide, in all the circumstances, whether
    to allow such participation  by  a  respondent  at  a  hearing  of  the
    application for permission.

21. At paragraph 56 of Kumar, the Tribunal considered the  position  where,
    although an AoS is filed late, it is filed  before  a  judge  comes  to
    consider  the  judicial  review  application.   The  context  here   is
    consideration "on the papers".  In  this  situation,  counsel  for  the
    applicants in Kumar "accepted that the interests of justice require the
    judge to have regard to "the AoS and summary grounds" (Kumar: paragraph
    56).

22. Ms Hooper submitted that there might be circumstances in which it would
    not be right for the Tribunal to consider the AoS  and  grounds.   When
    pressed, however, she was unable  to  identify  an  example  where  the
    lateness of the grounds (as opposed to their contents) might entitle or
    require the Tribunal to ignore them.

23. Strikingly, there is nothing in the CPR that precludes the  High  Court
    from considering an  AoS  and  grounds,  on  a  consideration  "on  the
    papers", even though these have been filed late. As can  be  seen,  CPR
    54.9(1) is confined to the situation where there is a hearing (such  as
    a "renewed" permission hearing).

24. As the Tribunal pointed out in argument, it is by  no  means  the  case
    that  applicants  who  obtain  permission  to  bring  judicial   review
    proceedings thereby unequivocally gain a material  advantage,  where  a
    perusal of the AoS and grounds would have made it plain  to  the  judge
    that permission should not, in fact, have been granted.  Although  some
    applicants may welcome an extension of  time  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    occasioned by the grant of permission, an applicant who, in truth,  has
    an unarguable case,  faces  the  prospect  of  being  made  liable  for
    substantial costs, if the case proceeds to a full hearing.

25. Applicants who are represented can expect to be warned by  their  legal
    advisers, following receipt of detailed grounds of defence, that  their
    claims are unlikely to succeed,  and  to  withdraw  their  applications
    before  the  full  hearing  takes  place.   Unrepresented   applicants,
    however, may not appreciate the position. There is, therefore,  a  real
    danger that they will end up being materially disadvantaged by a  grant
    of permission that could have been avoided if the AoS and  grounds  had
    been considered.

26. In short, the lateness of an AoS cannot amount to a valid reason for  a
    judge to ignore it and its summary grounds, when these are  before  him
    or her at the time of considering the  application  for  permission  to
    bring judicial review proceedings.

27. Our conclusion on legal status is  that  we  are  satisfied  the  Upper
    Tribunal had power to make the Kumar arrangements. They did not  amount
    to a purported  amendment  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  or  any
    practice directions made under the 2007 Act. The arrangements  did  not
    provide any general relief from sanction under rule 29.




3. Should the arrangements be ended?

28.  The real question, therefore, is whether the time has come to end  the
    arrangements.

29. In their statement  of  case,  the  applicants  make  the  point  that,
    following Kumar, the Court of Appeal has reinforced the  importance  of
    adherence to rules of procedure and made  it  plain  that  these  rules
    apply to public authorities, just as they do  to  others.  In  Hysaj  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 166,  Moore-
    Bick LJ said:-

         "42.     ... I am unable to accept that  the  court  can  construct
             special rules for public authorities.  I am  well  aware  that
             the resources of many  public  authorities  are  stretched  to
             breaking point, but in my view they have the responsibility to
             adhere to the rules just as much as any other litigants ... ."

30. At the time of Kumar, the pressures facing the  Upper  Tribunal  had  a
    bearing on the arrangements that were made in that case.  However,  the
    fact that the Tribunal continues to face similar  pressures  is  not  a
    sufficient reason to continue the arrangements.   It  is  important  to
    stress that it was the Secretary of State's chronic inability to comply
    with the 21 day time limit that necessitated the Kumar arrangements.

31. We therefore need to look at the Secretary of State's situation  as  it
    is in 2018.  The witness statement of Mark Davidson, Head of Litigation
    Operations  within  the  Appeals,   Litigation   and   Subject   Access
    Requirements Directorate of the UK Visas and  Immigration,  contains  a
    detailed and helpful analysis of the way  in  which  the  Secretary  of
    State deals with immigration judicial review cases and how the position
    has changed since 2014.

32. At the time of Kumar, the Treasury Solicitor (now the Government  Legal
    Department) was experiencing delays in obtaining instructions from  the
    Home Office officials on how to respond to an application for  judicial
    review.  Mr Davidson's statement explains how  this  problem  has  been
    ameliorated by ring-fencing the operational resources for dealing  with
    litigation  from  more  general   operational   activities,   such   as
    immigration decision-making and case work.  This has been possible as a
    result of a creation in 2013 of a  unit  called  Litigation  Operations
    ("LO"), which deals with the vast majority of  immigration  and  asylum
    judicial review claims issued  in  both  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    Administrative Court.  Prior to the creation  of  the  LO,  operational
    teams had to balance  decision-making  and  case  work  with  providing
    instructions to the GLD and its predecessor.

33. Mr Davidson says:-

         "18.     The new process enables the  allocated  LO  caseworker  to
             undertake an initial consideration of the claim and to provide
             instructions to GLD at an earlier stage that they  would  have
             been able to previously.  This allows  the  LO  caseworker  to
             provide other relevant  information  and  documents  (such  as
             Tribunal determinations and decision  letters)  to  GLD  where
             they are not included  in  a  judicial  review  claim  bundle.
             Previously, GLD would not have  the  complete  picture  before
             commencing their work in such cases.  This  resulted  in  time
             being wasted when the GLD lawyer advising on a claim  did  not
             have all the relevant information to hand."

34. A further development has  been  the  introduction  of  new  litigation
    management software, bearing the acronym JIRA, which went live in April
    2016.  JIRA allows  pre-action  letters  and  judicial  reviews  to  be
    tracked as they progress through the litigation system.  JIRA now plays
    an important part in helping LO staff to manage litigations.

35. Mr Davidson's statement also deals with current compliance levels:-

         "24.     GLD management information shows  that  there  were  2,323
             cases where an AoS was due to be  filed  between  January  and
             March  2018.   This  figure  includes  cases  issued  in   the
             Administrative Court and the Upper Tribunal taking the 21  day
             deadline as a point of reference.  Of that number:

             A.  GLD have AoS filing data on 1,924 cases where an  AoS  was
                  due between January and March 2018.  Of those 1,924 cases,
                  SSHD and GLD met the 21 day deadline in 635 cases (33.0%).
                   The average filing times for these 1,924 cases  are  31.5
                  days overall, 32 days in  the  Upper  Tribunal  (1,772  of
                  1,924 cases) and 26.8 days in Administrative Court (152 of
                  1,924 cases).

             B.  Of the 1,772 Upper Tribunal cases where  AoS  filing  data
                  was available, cumulatively  541  were  filed  by  day  21
                  (30.5% of cases where an AoS was filed),  772  by  day  28
                  (43.6% of cases where an AoS was filed),  981  by  day  35
                  (55.4% of cases where an AoS was filed) and 1,591  by  day
                  42 (89.8% of cases where an AoS was filed).

             C.  Of the 152 Administrative Court cases, 94 had  AoSs  filed
                  by day 21 (61.8% of cases where an AoS  was  filed).   110
                  had been filed by day 28 (72.4% of cases where an AoS  was
                  filed) and 137 by day 42 (90.1% of cases where an AoS  was
                  filed).

             D.  64 cases had  been  struck  out  or  permission  had  been
                  refused before an AoS had been filed.

             E.  There  was  insufficient  information  at  the  time  this
                  statement was prepared in relation to  the  remaining  335
                  cases in which the AoS was outstanding.  This could be for
                  a variety of reasons, including the fact that an  AoS  may
                  be filed at a later date, or that settlement is ongoing."

36. Mr Davidson acknowledges - as he must - that in a significant number of
    cases, the 21 day deadline is not being met.  This is said to be due to
    finite    resources,    together    with    continuing     difficulties
    (notwithstanding the improvements mentioned earlier) sometimes faced by
    LO in providing instructions to the GLD in certain cases.

37. Importantly, the Secretary of State recognises the importance of moving
    to the position where the Kumar arrangements can be ended.  Thereafter,
    the Secretary of State would need to apply for an extension of time, if
    he was unable to meet the 21 day time  limit  for  filing  an  AoS  and
    grounds.

38. Mr  Davidson's  statement  contains  proposals  for  changing  what  is
    currently commonly provided by way of summary grounds of  defence.   We
    shall return to that matter later.  His  statement  ends  by  proposing
    that, instead of a "wholesale and immediate move away  from  the  Kumar
    principle" there should be a "staggered reduction of the time available
    for [the Secretary of  State]  to  file  and  serve  an  AoS  with  the
    respective reductions taking place as follows:

    . For all claims issued between 30 June 2018 and 30  January  2019  the
         AoS deadline would be 35 days.

    . For all claims issued between 31 January 2019 and 31 May 2019 the AoS
         deadline would be 28 days.

    . From 1 June 2019 the AoS deadline would be 21 days".

39. The applicants welcome the Secretary of State's proposal to move to the
    position where the Kumar  arrangements  are  no  longer  required.   Ms
    Hooper and Mr Ball, however, stressed the importance  of  doing  so  as
    early as possible.

40. As a general matter, it is plainly important for parties to make  every
    effort  to  comply  with  relevant  procedure  rules.  The   overriding
    objective of the Upper Tribunal Rules is "to enable the Upper  Tribunal
    to deal with cases fairly and justly" (rule 2). This is not confined to
    any particular case but to the overall caseload of the Tribunal. If one
    person's appeal or application absorbs  a  disproportionate  amount  of
    judicial time and resources, other cases  waiting  in  the  system  may
    suffer. A system of procedure rules enables a party  to  know  what  is
    expected of them and what is expected of the opposing party.

41. A recent high-level pronouncement on this issue is to be found  in  the
    judgment of Singh LJ in Talpada v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841:


        "67. I turn finally to the question of procedural rigour  in  public
          law litigation.  In my view, it cannot be emphasised  enough  that
          public law litigation must be conducted with an appropriate degree
          of procedural rigour.  I  recognise  that  public  law  litigation
          cannot necessarily be regarded in the same way as  ordinary  civil
          litigation between private parties.  This is  because  it  is  not
          only the private interests of  the  parties  which  are  involved.
          There is clearly an important public interest which  must  not  be
          overlooked or undermined.  In particular procedure must not become
          the master of substance where, for  example,  an  abuse  of  power
          needs to be corrected by the court.  However,  both  fairness  and
          the orderly management of litigation require that there must be an
          appropriate degree of formality and predictability in the  conduct
          of public law litigation as in other forms of civil litigation."

42. Ms Hooper, in her oral submissions, also  made  the  significant  point
    that, quite apart from what we have just  said,  there  is  a  material
    advantage in requiring the Secretary of State, as a general matter,  to
    do his best to comply with the 21 day time limit in rule 29(1).

43. The advantage derives from the fact that - whether or not the  Tribunal
    can generally process applications as soon as the 21 day time limit has
    ended - the existence of the time limit means the Secretary of State is
    required within that timeframe to turn his mind to the  nature  of  the
    challenge to his decision.  The sooner he does so, the  sooner  he  can
    act to remedy what the application for judicial review may persuade him
    is a piece of problematic decision-making on his part.

44. Mr Thomann submitted that any such turning of the mind  would,  in  any
    event, occur at the stage where the Secretary of State is faced with  a
    pre-action  protocol  ("PAP")  letter  from  the   applicant   or   the
    applicant's advisers.  We do not consider that is  a  complete  answer.
    It is well-known that the Secretary of State does  change  his  stance,
    when faced with a judicial review, notwithstanding what might have been
    said in the PAP letter.

45. We have already recorded that part of the arrangements in Kumar involve
    the  ability  of  an  applicant  to  write  (without  making  a  formal
    application requiring a fee) to the Upper Tribunal  in  a  case  where,
    although urgent consideration is not sought, the applicant nevertheless
    wishes to have his or her application put before  a  judge  before  the
    period of six weeks from filing of the application.

46.  Ms Hooper emphasised the difficulties that can be faced by  applicants
    within this category.  Ms Awofadeju is a case in point.   The  decision
    under challenge in her case comprised a restriction on access to public
    funds.  As a result, she  and  her  children  faced  serious  financial
    hardship, including problems with her council  tax  benefit.   KA,  the
    second of the present applicants, is  a  child  whose  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain has been outstanding  since  19  June  2014.
    The fact that she was only granted twelve months'  discretionary  leave
    is said to have affected her participation in  school  activities;  but
    her main concern and those of her foster parents involves the worry and
    anxiety caused by her lack of immigration status.

47. For all these reasons, it is  necessary  to  dispense  with  the  Kumar
    arrangements.  The question is how to do so in a way that  is  fair  to
    applicants and the respondent.



4. Ending the arrangements

48. The applicants oppose the Secretary of State's proposal  for  a  phased
    return, as described by Mr Davidson. In his witness  statement,  Trevor
    Hatton, Director of Public Law of Duncan Lewis, has this to say:-

         "34.      A  timetable  for  phased  compliance,  particularly  one
             contained  in  a  court  judgment  rather  than  the  relevant
             Tribunal Rules, will inevitably  prove  problematic  for  busy
             practitioners  and  time-pressed   duty   judges   alike,   as
             implementation will entail calculating varying deadlines based
             upon precisely when a Judicial  Review  claim  was  originally
             lodged.

         35.      I am additionally concerned that litigants in person  will
             find it  far  harder  to  navigate,  let  alone  monitor,  the
             Respondent's compliance with a  phased  compliance  timetable,
             especially as litigants in person will look to the  Rules  and
             correspondence from the Upper Tribunal, for  guidance  on  how
             their cases will be handled, as opposed  to  jurisprudence  of
             which they are unlikely to be aware."

49. There is force in this.  We do not consider that  a  phased  return  is
    appropriate.  We have concluded  that  the  Kumar  arrangements  should
    cease altogether on a particular date.

50. That date should, however, be fixed so as  to  give  the  Secretary  of
    State a reasonable opportunity of making the necessary arrangements  to
    ensure that, as from that date, he will be in a position to meet the 21
    day requirement in the majority of cases,  and  that,  in  those  cases
    where he cannot, applications for extensions of time under rule  5  can
    be duly made.

51. In all the circumstances,  we  consider  that  the  appropriate  period
    should be approximately six months from  the  date  of  this  decision.
    Given that this would fall shortly  before  Christmas  2018,  it  makes
    sense to make the date 1 January 2019.

52. Accordingly, the Kumar arrangements will not have effect in respect  of
    any application for permission to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings
    which is filed with the Tribunal after 1 January 2019.

53. At the hearing, there was discussion as to whether  any  alteration  to
    the  arrangements  would  be  necessary,  in  the  intervening  period.
    Attention focused on paragraphs 36 and 37 of Kumar.   These  paragraphs
    concern the making of a written request for consideration  (in  effect)
    between the 21 and 42 day period.  Mr  Ball  submitted  that,  provided
    that what is stated in those paragraphs is applied, in particular, that
    no fee is to be charged, as it would be for a formal application,  then
    no interim arrangements would be needed.  We agree.

5. The contents of summary grounds of defence

54. Finally, we return to the issue of the contents of the summary  grounds
    of defence.  In his witness statement, Mr Davidson says  the  Secretary
    of State intends to "move away from the traditional approach of  filing
    full summary grounds of defence in most cases  which  were  contested".
    Mr Davidson points out that:-

         "As an expert tribunal, the Upper Tribunal will benefit  less  from
         summary grounds of defence which set out that the  settled  law  in
         cases challenging decisions under, for example,  section  94(1)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (clearly unfounded
         cases) or paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules (fresh claims)."

55. In this regard, it is worth reminding ourselves of what Hickinbottom  J
    said in Singh:-

         "43.     The purpose of the "summary of grounds" is not to  provide
             the basis for full argument  of  the  substantive  merits  but
             rather ... to assist the judge in deciding  whether  to  grant
             permission, and if so on  what  terms  ...  .   If  a  party's
             position is sufficiently apparent from the protocol  response,
             it may be appropriate simply to refer to that  letter  in  the
             acknowledgement of services.   In  other  cases  it  would  be
             helpful to draw attention to any "not quite finite  point"  or
             procedural bars, or the practical  or  financial  consequences
             for other parties (which may,  for  example,  be  relevant  to
             directions for expedition)."

56. Mr Thomann submitted that, particularly in unrepresented cases, it  may
    be necessary for the summary grounds of defence to  set  out  what  the
    Secretary  of  State  considers  to  be  the  applicant's  grounds   of
    challenge.  This would be where the grounds are, in  their  own  terms,
    hard to follow.

57. Without wishing to be overly prescriptive, the Tribunal considers  that
    it is possible to say the following.

58. First, a full  chronology,  setting  out  the  applicant's  immigration
    history as it appears to the Secretary of State, including  details  of
    the outcome of any appeal or previous  judicial  review,  is  extremely
    important and should continue to feature in the summary grounds.

59. Second, we agree with  Mr  Thomann  that,  in  appropriate  cases,  the
    grounds should set out what the Secretary of State considers to be  the
    nature of the applicant's complaint.  In some cases, this  may  not  be
    readily apparent.  Although it  will,  of  course,  be  for  the  judge
    considering the application to take his or her own view, the  Secretary
    of State's understanding will nevertheless be helpful.

60. Third, as Mr Davidson says, recitations of well-established case law on
    matters such as certification under  section  94  or  consideration  of
    Article 8 within and outside the Immigration Rules is unnecessary.

61. Fourth, in all cases, what the considering judge  wants  to  understand
    from the summary grounds is the Secretary of State's  response  to  the
    grounds of challenge. The judge wishes to know whether and, if so,  why
    the Secretary of State thinks the applicant's challenge is unarguable.

62. Fifth, in particular, where the challenge concerns a decision under the
    Immigration Rules, the relevant rule (including the version  which  the
    Secretary of State considers was in force at the date of the  decision)
    should be set out, along with the succinct reason or reasons why (if it
    be  the  case)  the  Secretary  of  State  takes  the  view  that   the
    requirements of the rule or rules have unarguably not been satisfied.

                    [pic]
            Signed:
                   Mr Justice Lane, President




        Dated:   13 June 2018
