
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Akudike)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00213 (IAC)


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre        |                              |
|On 26 February 2015                          |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

              R (on the application of samuel okebaram akudike)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Applicant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jowett instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

                                  JUDGMENT

Judge Grubb:

 1. The applicant claims that the Secretary of State  acted  unlawfully  by
    failing to grant him leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under
    para  245ZX  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (Statement  of   Changes   in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended) following a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal notified on 16 July 2013 allowing the applicant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 22 February  2013  to  refuse  him
    leave as a Tier 4 Student.

The Background

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 20 June 1972.  On
    18 October 2010, the applicant applied for leave to enter as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student in order to undertake  study  at  the  University  of
    Wales.  With that application he submitted a Confirmation of Acceptance
    of Studies ("CAS").  On 27 October  2010,  the  applicant  was  granted
    leave to enter until 15 July 2012.  The applicant then undertook  study
    in the UK.

 3. On 13 July 2012, the applicant applied for further leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 Student in order to undertake an MSc Accounting  Course  at  the
    University of Glamorgan (now the University of South Wales).  With that
    application he submitted the same CAS as  he  had  submitted  with  his
    previous successful application for entry clearance and leave to enter.
     That CAS expired on 15 July 2012 and, in any event,  could  not  under
    the Rules be used a second time.  On 28 November 2012,  the  respondent
    wrote  to  the  applicant's  (then)  solicitors,   Albany   Solicitors,
    requesting that the applicant should submit his "most recent CAS number
    which has been used for his current course of study".  In  response  to
    that letter, Albany Solicitors wrote to the respondent  on  4  December
    2012 stating that:

         "Our client confirms that the CAS number for our  client's  current
         course of study is  from  University  of  Wales,  Newport  and  the
         original CAS document was submitted with the original  application.
         However, a copy is provided  with  this  correspondence.   The  CAS
         number is: E4G2KE5A04N0U1.  We note that the CAS document  sets  an
         expected end date of his course as the 15th May 2012.  However, our
         client confirms that  his  course  is  still  ongoing  due  to  the
         complaint against the university, evidence  of  which  is  enclosed
         with this letter."

 4. On 23 February 2013 the respondent refused the applicant's  application
    for further leave as a Tier 4 Student on the basis  that  the  CAS  had
    been "used" in his previous application made on  18  October  2010  and
    was, as such, no longer valid.  Consequently,  the  applicant  was  not
    awarded the required points under Appendix A of the Rules.

 5. The applicant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Archer  on  2  July  2013.   Judge  Archer  allowed  the
    applicant's appeal on the basis that the decision was not in accordance
    with the law.  Judge Archer appears  to  have  accepted  that  the  CAS
    submitted by the applicant was not valid but found that it  was  unfair
    and not in accordance with the  respondent's  "evidential  flexibility"
    policy not to have given the applicant an opportunity  to  rectify  the
    deficiency in his application by submitting a valid CAS.  At para 22 of
    his determination, Judge Archer set out his conclusion as follows:

         "I have concluded that the principles of fairness require  in  this
         case that the respondent should make a fresh  decision.   No  valid
         decision has yet been made in the applicant's case as a  result  of
         the failure to make reasonable enquiries with the  applicant.   The
         decision as a whole is therefore not in accordance with the law."

 6. Thereafter, matters appear to go quiet in relation to the  application.
    The respondent did not challenge Judge Archer's decision.  However,  on
    29 August 2013, the applicant was arrested and charged with an  offence
    contrary to s.25 of the Immigration Act 1971, namely  facilitating  and
    arranging a marriage in order to facilitate the commission of a  breach
    of immigration law.  On 26 May 2014, the  applicant  was  acquitted  of
    that offence at the Cardiff Crown Court when the prosecution offered no
    evidence.

 7. On 22 May 2014, the respondent  wrote  to  the  applicant's  solicitors
    seeking to give effect to Judge  Archer's  decision  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Before we make a final decision on your client's application,  and
         in line with our Rules, we will allow your client a  period  of  60
         calendar days to find a new Tier 4 sponsor so that  they  may  vary
         their initial Tier 4 application.  This 60 day period will  end  on
         21 July 2014.  We will not allow further extensions beyond  the  60
         calendar day period.  We will make  a  decision  on  your  client's
         application at the end of the 60 day period."

 8. The effect of Judge Archer's decision was, as he explicitly said,  that
    the applicant's original in time application of 13 June  2012  remained
    undecided and, as a result of s.3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the
    applicant continued to  have  leave  as  a  student  in  the  UK.   The
    respondent's letter of  22  May  2014  deferred  consideration  of  the
    applicant's application for a further 60 days in order that  he  could,
    if he wished, find a new sponsor and submit a new and valid CAS.   With
    that  letter,  the  respondent  included  a  certified  copy   of   the
    applicant's  passport,  his  Tier  4  application   form,   a   sponsor
    information leaflet and a page required for enrolling biometrics.

 9. On 27 May 2014, the applicant's solicitors wrote to  the  applicant  at
    his home address as follows:

         "We write further to  our  previous  correspondence.   Please  find
         enclosed a letter that we received  from  the  Home  Office  today,
         along with the following documents:

         1    Information leaflet from the Home Office

         2    Certified copy of your passport

         3    Tier 4 application

         Please note that the Home Office is providing you 60 days to find a
         new Tier 4  sponsor.   This  period  will  end  on  21  July  2014.
         Thereafter, a decision will made (sic) be made on your application.

         As you are aware, we do not have an active and open file for you at
         present.  If you would like our  office  to  assist  you  with  the
         preparation and completion of your Tier 4  application,  I  confirm
         that a fee of [] plus VAT would be payable."

10. On 30 May 2014, the applicant wrote to the Home Office in  relation  to
    his "pending visa extension" stating that:

         "However, I would appreciate if you could kindly expedite action to
         grant and issue  my  visa  without  further  delay  and  return  my
         original credentials with  you  to  enable  me  start  life  again,
         particularly as admission for new session is on now".

11. The applicant was clearly,  as  this  letter  demonstrates,  under  the
    (erroneous) impression that the effect of Judge  Archer's  decision  to
    allow his appeal was that the respondent  was  required  to  grant  him
    leave.  Indeed, on that same day the applicant wrote to the  First-tier
    Tribunal expressing concern that he had only  been  provided  with  "60
    days to find a new sponsor".  On 6 June 2014, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    responded to the applicant's letter indicating that: "The Tribunal  has
    no power enforcement once an appeal has been concluded".

12. It would  appear  that,  thereafter,  the  applicant  did  not  further
    instruct Albany Solicitors.  He told me at  the  hearing  that  he  was
    unable to pay the requested fee.

13. The applicant did, however, contact a number of universities concerning
    further study.  The email exchanges are set out at pages 36-46  of  the
    applicant's bundle.  The correspondence with Swansea University  (pages
    36-38), Cardiff University (page 39), the  University  of  South  Wales
    (pages 40-42), Bath University (page 43),  Lancaster  University  (page
    44) and Manchester University (pages 44-46).   I  will  return  to  the
    content of this exchange later.  For the present, it suffices  to  note
    that the applicant is variously advised to  provide  further  documents
    and, in the case of the University of South Wales, is advised to obtain
    a visa before making a new application to it.

14. At some point, the applicant instructed new  solicitors,  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors.  On 14 July 2014, they wrote to  the  respondent  enclosing
    the email correspondence from Cardiff University, Lancaster University,
    Swansea University and the  University  of  South  Wales.   The  letter
    continued:

         "As can be seen from the  enclosed  emails  from  universities  our
         client has been unable to obtain a  new  CAS  as  the  universities
         require evidence that he currently holds Leave  to  Remain  in  the
         United  Kingdom.   Whilst  we  note  that  our  client's  leave  is
         statutorily extended under Section 3C of the Immigration  Act  1971
         the only evidence that our client has of his status in the UK is  a
         copy of his visa that states it has expired.  In light of the above
         it is of little surprise that  the  universities  that  our  client
         approached to be unable (sic) to offer our client a new CAS.  It is
         further noted that our the (sic) letter dated 22  May  2014  states
         that our client's former sponsor has had their licence revoked.  It
         is noted that our client's previous sponsor was the  University  of
         South Wales who currently holds a valid Tier 4 Sponsorship Licence.

         In the light of the above we request that our client is  granted  a
         short period of Leave to Remain on a discretionary basis  to  allow
         him to obtain a valid Confirmation of  Acceptance  of  Studies  and
         then to submit a new application for a Tier  4  General  Visa.   We
         suggest a period six months would be sufficient.

         We confirm that our client will continue to attempt to  attempt  to
         apply for a valid CAS whilst this application is outstanding and we
         will forward any responses to you in due course."

15. The 60 day period deferring a decision by the respondent  ended  on  21
    July 2014.  However, the respondent did not proceed to make a  decision
    as she had indicated she would in her letter of 22 May 2014.

16. On 4 August  2014,  the  applicant  wrote  to  the  Home  Office  again
    requesting that he should be granted a visa in order that he could seek
    admission for the coming academic year.

17. No response was received by 18 August  2014  and,  on  that  date,  the
    applicant filed the present claim challenging the respondent's  failure
    to implement Judge Archer's decision.

18. On 18 August 2014, the same day as the claim was filed, the respondent,
    apparently in response to the letter from Duncan Lewis of 14 July 2014,
    granted  the  applicant  60  days'  discretionary  leave  outside   the
    Immigration Rules on an exceptional  basis.   The  respondent's  letter
    states as follows:

         "Following your allowed appeal  you  have  been  granted  leave  to
         remain outside the Immigration Rules.  You have been granted  leave
         to remain for a period of 60 days until 17 October 2014  to  enable
         you to find a new Tier 4 sponsor and submit  an  application.   You
         will  be  allowed  to  switch  into  the  Tier  4  category  on  an
         exceptional basis within this period of leave.  If you do not  make
         an application by the end of this period you are expected to  leave
         the United Kingdom."

19. That letter was sent to the applicant's solicitors,  Duncan  Lewis,  at
    their  Harrow  address.   Thereafter,  the   applicant   attended   his
    solicitors on 2 September 2014 when he collected the documents enclosed
    with the respondent's letter (see pages 11-12 of the applicant's second
    bundle).

20. Thereafter, the applicant contacted a  number  of  universities  again.
    The email exchanges are at pages  14a-21b  of  the  applicant's  second
    bundle with Lancaster University (pages  14a-14b),  Swansea  University
    (pages 15-16), Cardiff University (page 17), Bath University (pages 18-
    19), Manchester University (page 20) and the University of South  Wales
    (pages 21a-21b).  Again, I will return to the content of  these  emails
    shortly.  Suffice to say for present, the emails  reflect  variously  a
    need for the applicant to make a  formal  application,  that  time  for
    applying for the 2014-2015 academic year has passed and that his 60 day
    visa was not sufficient to allow his admission.

21. On 29 September 2014, the applicant wrote to  the  respondent  pointing
    out, inter alia, that he was unable to obtain admission on the basis of
    his 60 day visa.  The respondent replied to that letter  on  3  October
    2014 pointing out that in her letter of 22 May 2014 the necessary steps
    for obtaining a new CAS were set out including  that  a  "CAS  must  be
    obtained before submitting an application for leave to remain as a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant".

22. The letter went on to point out that the applicant did  not  appear  to
    have made an application for admission to any of the universities.   On
    9 October 2014 and on 10 October 2014, the  applicant  replied  to  the
    respondent's letter stating, in effect, that the universities would not
    admit him on the basis of his 60 day visa.

23. On 17 October 2014, the applicant's 60 day grant of leave expired.

24. On 21 October 2014, HHJ Vosper QC, sitting as  a  judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted the applicant permission to bring these proceedings.

The Relevant Rules

25. The requirements for the grant of leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student are set out in para 245ZX which provides, inter alia,  at  para
    245ZX(c):

         "The applicant must have a minimum of 30  points  under  paragraphs
         113 to 120 of Appendix A."

26. Paragraph 114 of Appendix A provides that "30" points shall be  awarded
    for  a  "Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies".   Paragraph  115A
    provides that:

         "In order to obtain points for a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
         Studies,  the  applicant  must  provide  a  valid  Confirmation  of
         Acceptance for Studies reference number."

27. Paragraph 116, so far as relevant, provides that:

         "A Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies will only  be  considered
         to be valid if:

         .... (ea)     The migrant must  not  previously  have  applied  for
                entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain using the
                same Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies reference number
                where that application was either approved or  refused  (not
                rejected  as  an  invalid  application  declared   void   or
                withdrawn) ..."

Discussion

     Some Preliminary Points

28. I begin with a few preliminary issues before turning to  the  substance
    of the parties' submissions.

29. First, it is clear that the  CAS  (or  more  accurately  its  reference
    number) submitted with the applicant's application for leave on 13 July
    2012 was  not  valid.   It  had  previously  been  submitted  with  his
    application made on 18 October 2010,  as  a  result  of  which  he  was
    granted leave to enter on 27 October 2010  until  15  July  2012.   The
    effect of para 116(ea) of Appendix A is that the  applicant  could  not
    further rely upon that CAS reference number.  As a result, in his  most
    recent application he did not have the minimum 30 points required under
    paragraphs 113 to 120 of Appendix A.  The respondent's refusal to grant
    him leave under para 245ZX on  22  February  2013  was,  therefore,  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

30. Secondly, Judge Archer's decision to allow the  applicant's  appeal  on
    the basis that it was unfair not to give the applicant  an  opportunity
    to submit a CAS was, on one view, somewhat  generous.   The  respondent
    had, in fact, done just that in her letter of  28  November  2012  (see
    para 3 above).  Further, the case law plainly  recognises  that,  as  a
    matter of fairness, the Secretary of State is not required to  give  an
    applicant notice that she considers that there is a deficiency in a CAS
    before making an adverse decision on  that  basis  (see,  Kaur  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 13).  Whilst Kaur postdated  Judge  Archer's  decision,
    the earlier authority to which it refers was not, unfortunately,  drawn
    to Judge Archer's attention.

31. In any event, Judge Archer's decision stands having not been challenged
    by the  respondent.   Indeed,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the
    respondent sought to give effect to  Judge  Archer's  decision  in  her
    letter of 22 May 2014 by deferring  her  decision  on  the  applicant's
    outstanding application for 60 days in order to give him an opportunity
    to submit a valid CAS prior to a decision being taken.

32. Indeed, even though the  applicant  did  not  submit  a  new  CAS,  the
    respondent again sought to give effect to Judge Archer's  decision  (in
    response to the letter of 14 July 2014 from the applicant's solicitors)
    by granting him a further period of 60 days leave  on  18  August  2014
    valid until 17 October 2014.

33. In regard to this grant  of  leave,  Mr  Jowett,  who  represented  the
    respondent, acknowledged that,  in  fact,  the  applicant  has  at  all
    relevant times, including to the present day, had leave under  s.3C  of
    the  Immigration  Act  1971.   That  is  undoubtedly  correct  as   his
    application made on 13  July  2012,  as  a  result  of  Judge  Archer's
    decision, remains outstanding as no decision, I was told, has yet  been
    made on it.

34. Thirdly, the structure of the Immigration Rules, as they apply to  Tier
    4 Student applications, is beyond doubt.  In order to succeed under the
    Rules, the applicant must already have a valid CAS.   In  other  words,
    acceptance on a course of study followed by the issuing of a CAS  is  a
    prerequisite to a successful application for leave as a Tier 4  Student
    under the Rules.  The purpose of such an application is to  obtain  the
    required leave to study the applicant's chosen  course.   It  would  be
    nonsensical to require that an applicant already have  leave  to  study
    the course for which he is applying  for  leave  to  study.   Paragraph
    245ZX  does  lay  down  some  requirements  concerning  an  applicant's
    immigration status but it does not require either  that  the  applicant
    should have existing leave (providing he has not  overstayed  for  more
    than 28 days) (see paragraph 245ZX(n)) and,  with  one  exception,  the
    leave to remain must be for the purposes of study which  will  commence
    within 28 days of the expiry of  the  individual's  current  leave  or,
    where he has  overstayed,  within  28  days  of  when  that  period  of
    overstaying began (see para 245ZX(l)).

    The Submissions

35. With those points in mind, I turn to the  main  issues  raised  by  the
    applicant in his  submissions  and  by  Mr  Jowett  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.

36. The applicant submitted that the Secretary of State had failed to  give
    effect to Judge Archer's decision and to grant him  leave  adequate  to
    obtain admission to a university to continue his  studies.   He  relied
    upon the  emails  from  the  various  universities  denying,  he  said,
    admission on the basis of his immigration status.   In  particular,  he
    relied upon the email exchanges in  September  2014  which  denied  him
    admission on the basis of his 60 day visa granted in August 2014.

37. Mr Jowett submitted that the Secretary of State had acted  lawfully  in
    her response to Judge Archer's decision.  First, he submitted that  the
    deferment by 60 days of the decision on the applicant's application set
    out in the respondent's letter of 22 May 2014 was a rational  response.
    Indeed, he submitted that the Secretary of  State  had,  perhaps,  been
    "generous"  in  granting  a  60  day  deferment  when  the   evidential
    flexibility rule in para 245AA (when it applied)  required  a  response
    within seven days.  He  submitted  that  the  60  day  period,  perhaps
    reflecting  the  respondent's  policy  when  an  educational  sponsor's
    licence was revoked, allowing for 60 days for an individual to  find  a
    new  sponsor,  was  sufficient.   It  reflected  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    adoption of 60 days as a fair period of time in  cases  such  as  Patel
    (Revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  Mr
    Jowett submitted that was a fair period for the applicant to remedy the
    defect in his application, namely the  absence  of  a  valid  CAS.   Mr
    Jowett submitted that, even if the applicant had not been  informed  by
    his  then  solicitors,  Albany  Solicitors,  of  the  contents  of  the
    respondent's letter of 22 May 2014 immediately (which delay he did  not
    accept), any delay was in any event a matter between the applicant  and
    his solicitors and not for the Secretary  of  State.   Likewise  if  an
    academic institution misunderstood the application of the Rules  so  as
    to consider the applicant's (then) leave under  s.3C  as  insufficient,
    that, again, was not a matter which demonstrated  unlawfulness  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State.   Mr  Jowett  submitted  that,  in  any
    event, the email exchanges in June and July 2014 did not show that  the
    applicant had taken the step  of  making  an  application.   Mr  Jowett
    submitted that, as a result, the applicant's case must fail.

38. Further Mr Jowett submitted that, even though the  Secretary  of  State
    had, subsequently, gone on further to assist the applicant by  granting
    60 days' discretionary leave to remain on an  exceptional  basis,  that
    further generous approach  to  the  applicant  was  immaterial  as  the
    respondent's first decision to defer consideration of  his  application
    for 60 days was,  in  itself,  a  reasonable  implementation  of  Judge
    Archer's decision.  However, Mr Jowett submitted that even if the first
    decision did not  defeat  the  application  for  judicial  review,  the
    subsequent grant of 60 days' leave on 18  August  2014  reasonably  and
    rationally implemented Judge Archer's decision.

    My Conclusions

39. Judge Archer's decision did not require the Secretary of State to grant
    the applicant leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.  It simply  required
    that the applicant should have a fair opportunity to obtain and  submit
    a new valid CAS.  It has not been suggested that the respondent's delay
    until May 2014 in responding to Judge Archer's decision was, in itself,
    unlawful.  That delay was necessitated by the  applicant's  arrest  and
    subsequent criminal proceedings which only terminated on 26 April 2014.
     It would,  frankly,  have  been  wholly  unrealistic  to  require  the
    applicant to sort out his student status with a  view  to  beginning  a
    course during this time.  There was, therefore, nothing unlawful in the
    Secretary of State delaying until those proceedings were completed.

40. In my judgement, the respondent's decision (communicated in her  letter
    of 22 May 2014) to defer consideration of the  applicant's  application
    for 60 days until 21 June 2014 was an entirely reasonable  response  to
    Judge Archer's decision that the respondent's decision was unfair.   Mr
    Jowett was correct to point out that if paragraph 245AA  of  the  Rules
    applied, so that the Secretary of State requested  from  an  individual
    further documents not submitted with  the  application,  the  documents
    must be submitted within seven working days (see para 245AA(iv)).   The
    applicant's circumstances did not, however, fall within the  rubric  of
    paragraph  245AA(b)  so  as  to  engage  the  "evidential  flexibility"
    provisions of that Rule.  This  was  not  a  case  where  one  or  more
    documents in a sequence had been admitted, a document was in the  wrong
    format, a copy document rather than an original had been submitted or a
    document had been submitted which did not  contain  all  the  specified
    information.  Here, a required document, namely a  valid  CAS  (or  its
    reference number) had not been submitted.  On the  basis  of  the  case
    law, most recently Kaur, the Secretary of State's letter of 22 May 2014
    went beyond the strict requirements of the law but  properly  reflected
    the judicial decision of Judge  Archer  which  was  binding  upon  her.
    Deferring a decision for 60 days was a rational and reasonable response
    to Judge Archer's decision.

41. Further, nothing in the evidence suggests other than that  the  60  day
    deferral provided the applicant with a reasonable and  sufficient  time
    to obtain a valid CAS.  The applicant was unable to  tell  me  when  he
    received the respondent's letter.  As  I  have  already  set  out,  his
    (then) solicitors wrote a letter to him on 27 May 2014  in  which  they
    enclosed the respondent's letter  together  with  the  three  documents
    which had been enclosed with that letter from  the  Home  Office.   The
    representative's letter is addressed to the applicant's  home  address.
    It is difficult to see how he did not receive  it  shortly  thereafter.
    In any event, it is clear that he had received it no later than 20 June
    2014 because in a number of emails to the Universities he attaches  the
    documents that had been enclosed with his solicitor's letter of 27  May
    2014, namely his passport, biometrics and information leaflet.  That is
    clear, for example, from his email of 20 June 2014 addressed to Cardiff
    University (at page  39  of  the  first  bundle).   Indeed,  the  email
    exchanges show that the applicant had begun to enquire about  admission
    to courses prior to 20 June 2014.  It is not clear that I have the full
    email correspondence in the bundles but, for example,  the  applicant's
    email to Cardiff University on 20  June  2014  starts  "Thank  you  for
    reply" which shows that the applicant had been in contact prior to that
    date and Cardiff University had also responded prior to that date.

42. The applicant places reliance upon the email exchanges in the June/July
    2014 period to demonstrate, he says, that the respondent had not  acted
    lawfully so as to put him in a position to  obtain  admission  and,  in
    particular, a valid CAS.  I do not accept that submission.

43.  First,  it  is  far  from  clear  on  this  correspondence  that   the
    universities were indicating that the applicant could  not,  given  his
    current  immigration  status,  gain  admission  providing   all   other
    admissions requirements were met.  In his correspondence  with  Swansea
    University the applicant, in an email dated 17 June 2014, stated:

         "I want to seek for 2014 admission in your university to study  MSc
         Accounting and Finance but my visa extension is being processed  by
         the Home Office and not yet granted.  I would like to know  if  you
         can offer admission without visa as my visa is yet  to  be  granted
         and/or issued.  Please confirm".

44. In response, the university replied:

         "Please can you confirm what visa you have  at  any  (sic)  moment?
         Please would you be able to send me a copy?  Also  what  visa  have
         you applied for?  Is it a different type?"

45. The applicant then replied:

         "I had a student visa that expired in July 2012 and I  applied  for
         extension but Home Office refused the application in February 2013.
          Then I went to court for appeal  in  July  2013  which  the  court
         allowed.

         Thereafter Home Office took me to another court (not an appeal  for
         the case I won in July 2013) but on a different case though related
         to immigration case, which I still won.  Home Office  had  recently
         asked whether I should first gain  admission  (sponsor)  before  it
         grant visa extension.  This is the area of the problem.  Right  now
         I do not have any valid visa and I  would  like  to  know  if  your
         university can offer  admission  before  my  visa  is  granted  and
         issued".

46. Then, on 23 June the university responded saying:

         "We need to have more information to assess your admission  status.
         Could you please send us copies  of  your  visas  and  any  appeals
         decision to help us assess your  visa  status  and  eligibility  to
         study in the UK.  Please send any immigration related query  to  []
         ".

47. As that exchange makes clear, the issue of the applicant's  immigration
    status as a factor relating to his  admission  remained  open  and  the
    university simply sought more information.

48. In relation to Cardiff University in response to the applicant's  email
    of 20 June 2014, to which I have already referred, in  which  he  asked
    for confirmation  whether  the  passport,  biometrics  and  information
    leaflet sufficed in place of a visa and to "Please confirm if  you  are
    able to use them as substitute to visa  to  offer  admission",  Cardiff
    University responded on the same day stating:

         "Can you please let us know why you do not have your visa  we  have
         noticed that the date on the Biometric Enrolment  letter  is  dated
         21/12/2012."

    Again, the applicant's  immigration  status  remains  a  matter  to  be
    explored between the university and him.

49. In relation to  the  University  of  South  Wales,  the  correspondence
    relevant to this period is an email dated 20 June 2014  which  attaches
    the  certified  copy  of  the  applicant's  passport,  biometrics   and
    information leaflet from the Home Office and seeks confirmation  as  to
    whether these may be used to offer admission in place of a visa.

50. In relation to Bath University, following the applicant's inquiry on 16
    July 2014, on 17 July 2014 the university responded that  the  deadline
    for international applications had passed on 30 June 2014 and they were
    no longer accepting any applications.

51. In relation to Lancaster University, the applicant made an  inquiry  on
    17 June 2014 and on 18 June 2014 the university responded that:

         "In  order  for  us  to  consider  your  suitability  for  our  MSc
         Accounting and Finance course, you  will  need  to  supply  a  full
         application."

52. Neither of these responses indicates  the  universities'  positions  as
    regards the applicant's immigration status.

53. Finally, as regards  Manchester  University,  the  applicant  made  his
    initial inquiry on 16 July 2014 and the  university's  response  on  17
    July 2014, in some detail, directed the applicant to  the  process  for
    making a full application.

54. In my judgement, nothing  in  these  responses  demonstrates  that  the
    respondent  had,  by  deferring  a   decision   on   his   application,
    irrationally failed to provide him with  an  opportunity  to  obtain  a
    valid CAS.

55. At this stage, at least, none of the universities were propounding  the
    erroneous position that the applicant's leave was inadequate to  permit
    a  successful  application  under  the  Tier  4  Student  Rules.    The
    applicant, of course, had (as he has throughout had) s.3C leave on  the
    same basis as he was  granted  student  leave  in  October  2010.   The
    applicant clearly had personal notice of the respondent's position  set
    out in her letter of 22 May 2014.  In my  judgement,  it  was  entirely
    reasonable for the Secretary of State to communicate directly with  the
    applicant's solicitors who appear to have informed the applicant of the
    respondent's letter, enclosing the documents enclosed with that letter,
    in their own letter to the applicant  of  27  May  2014.   Despite  the
    invitation by the universities to do so, the applicant did not make  an
    application, and indeed as I  understand  it  has  still  not  made  an
    application, to any university seeking leave as a Tier 4  Student.   At
    that time, and  subsequently,  he  has  gone  no  further  than  making
    inquiries.

56. Mr Jowett submitted that it was not  necessary  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to rely upon her decision to grant the applicant 60  days'  leave
    on 18 August 2014  because  her  letter  of  22  May  2014  was  itself
    sufficient to defeat the application  for  judicial  review.   However,
    even if it was not, he submitted that the subsequent grant of 60  days'
    leave on 18 August 2014 reasonably  and  rationally  implemented  Judge
    Archer's decision.

57. I agree that the respondent's response to Judge  Archer's  decision  as
    set out in her letter of 22 May 2014 was, in itself, a  reasonable  and
    rational response to his finding that her original decision was  unfair
    and is a complete answer to the  applicant's  claim.  Nevertheless  the
    subsequent decision of the respondent  on  18  August  2014  only  adds
    weight to the view that the respondent has acted reasonably throughout.

58. As  I  have  already  noted,  on  14  July  2014  the  applicant's  new
    solicitors, Duncan Lewis, wrote to the respondent seeking  a  grant  of
    six months' discretionary leave in order  to  allow  the  applicant  to
    apply for a course and obtain a valid CAS.   On  18  August  2014,  the
    applicant was granted 60 days' discretionary leave  outside  the  Rules
    and,  in  particular,  the  respondent's  letter  indicated  that   the
    applicant would be allowed to "switch" into the Tier 4 category  within
    this period.

59.  It  is  not  entirely  clear  to  me  why  the  applicant  needed  any
    dispensation in order to "switch" into a category in which  he  already
    was, namely a Tier 4 Student.  Nevertheless, armed with that  grant  of
    leave, the applicant  again  contacted  the  universities.   The  email
    exchange is set out at pages 14a-21b of the applicant's second  bundle.
    The  applicant  argues  that  these   emails   demonstrate   that   the
    respondent's response to Judge Archer's decision was not reasonable  as
    some of the responses indicated that his "60 day  visa"  would  not  be
    acceptable.  That view is expressed  by  Lancaster  University  in  its
    email of 1 September 2014 (at page 14a) and by  Cardiff  University  in
    its email dated 4 September 2014 (at page 17).  In similar, but perhaps
    not  identical,  terms  the  University  of  South  Wales  advised  the
    applicant that:

         "As your visa has not yet been extended we would advise you to wait
         for your visa to be granted.  Once you have successfully obtained a
         Tier 4 visa you can then  make  a  new  application  to  study  MSc
         Accounting at the  University  of  South  Wales  using  the  online
         application form."

60. Not  all  the  responses  were  in  those  terms.   The  response  from
    Manchester University (at page 20)  dated  8  September  sets  out  the
    correct chronology as follows:

         "You would first need to apply for the MSc Accounting and  Finance,
         then if your application is successful we will issue a Confirmation
         of Acceptance to Study (CAS) number, which you would  then  use  to
         apply for your Tier 4 visa with UK Visas and Immigration."

61. The email goes on to state that, unfortunately, as the course  was  due
    to start on 15 September 2014 there was not enough time  to  apply  for
    the course that year and that applications  for  September  2015  would
    open in October 2014.

62. Further, the applicant having attached his 60 day visa valid  until  17
    October 2014, Bath University  responded  that  the  closing  date  for
    international students was 30 June and the course was now  closed  such
    that the university would only consider applications for 2015.

63. In my judgement, the Secretary of State cannot be held responsible  for
    the fact that a  university  misunderstands  the  process  by  which  a
    student can successfully obtain a Tier 4 visa.  The process begins with
    an application to the university which, if successful, leads to  a  CAS
    being issued and the individual then applying for  his  Tier  4  leave.
    That position appertained (and as far as I can see still does so) given
    that the applicant has since 15 July 2012 had  continuing  leave  under
    s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  If  that  was  not  sufficient,  the
    respondent's letter of 18 August 2014 makes plain that the grant of  60
    days' discretionary leave on an exceptional basis (at  the  request  of
    the applicant's own solicitors) was sufficient to found an  application
    by the applicant for Tier 4 leave  and  was  not  a  bar  to  any  such
    application and, if that were successful, to  a  university  issuing  a
    CAS.

64. That letter was sent to the applicant's new  solicitors  on  18  August
    2014.  The applicant raised with me that he had not  in  fact  received
    that letter, and its enclosures,  until  he  collected  them  from  the
    solicitor's office on 2 September 2014.  Any delay between the  receipt
    of the respondent's letter and 2 September 2014 was, in  my  judgement,
    not something for which the respondent could be held at fault.  It  was
    entirely reasonable for the respondent  to  send  the  letter  and  any
    enclosures directly to the applicant's solicitors as notified  by  them
    to the Home Office.  I am unable to say  that  the  applicant  was  not
    given a reasonable period of time in which to make  a  new  application
    following the letter of 14 August 2014.  Even if some universities  had
    "closed their books" by this time, others had not.  The applicant had a
    reasonable opportunity to make a  new  application  for  the  2014-2015
    academic year.  It was not unreasonable or irrational for the Secretary
    of State to expect universities to apply the  Tier  4  process  in  its
    proper, and chronological, order.

65. My conclusion in respect of the 18 August 2014 letter,  of  course,  is
    not strictly necessary as the respondent's initial  decision  to  defer
    consideration of his application set out in her letter of 22  May  2014
    was, in any event, a reasonable response in order  to  give  effect  to
    Judge Archer's decision.

66. I would  add  finally  that  the  applicant  referred  to  his  medical
    condition in the course of the hearing.  Suffice for  me  to  say  that
    there  is  nothing  before  me  to  suggest  that  any  aspect  of  the
    applicant's health affected  whether  he  could  apply  for  or  obtain
    admission to a university in the UK.  It is not, in  my  view,  of  any
    relevance to  the  legality  of  the  respondent's  response  to  Judge
    Archer's determination.

Decision

67. Consequently, the Secretary of  State's  responses  to  Judge  Archer's
    determination in her letters of 22 May 2014 and 18 August 2014 were not
    irrational or unreasonable.

68. For these reasons, the Secretary of State acted lawfully and this claim
    for judicial review is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed





                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



