
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                             MD (Women) Ivory Coast CG [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|On 16 and 17 October, 24 November 2008;       |                             |
|7 and 8 May, 9 June, 18 August 2009           |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
                       Senior Immigration Judge Jordan
                            Mr M G Taylor CBE DL

                                   Between

                                     MD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B. Bedford, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


   1.    There is a wide variation in attitudes towards women in different
      parts of the Ivory Coast.  In particular there is a strong contrast
      between traditional rural communities, particularly in the North and
      Central regions when compared with Abidjan, a relatively cosmopolitan
      city of mixed ethnicity, along with other urban centres.

   2.    This variation in attitude impacts on the risk faced  by  women  of
      FGM, forced marriage, domestic violence, the effects of  adultery  and
      discrimination.

   3. If in a particular area, a woman faces one or more of those risks, the
      state is unlikely to offer a sufficiency of protection. In such a case
      internal relocation may be possible without undue hardship.

   4. In the Ivory Coast, women as such do form a  particular  social  group
      for the purposes of the  Refugee  Convention.  Whether  an  individual
      applicant is at risk of persecution by reason of  membership  of  that
      particular  social  group  will   depend   on   her   own   particular
      circumstances including her cultural, social and  tribal  or  regional
      background.

   5.   Operational  Guidance  Notes  should  not  be  regarded  as  country
      information. They are not  produced  by  the  Country  of  Information
      Service. They are, in essence, policy statements and as such fall into
      a different category.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction, immigration and procedural history

1.    This appeal is the determination of the Tribunal to which each of  its
    members has contributed. Although we heard this matter  as  members  of
    the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal,  this   determination   is   a
    determination of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber  as
    provided by paragraph 4 of Schedule 4 to the Transfer of  Functions  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Order 2010 (SI 2010/21).

2.    The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast who was born on  7  July
    1987.  She is now 22 years old. She arrived in the United Kingdom on  9
    September 2005 and applied for asylum on the same  day.  She  was  then
    aged 18. By a decision made on 1 December 2006, the Secretary of  State
    refused her asylum claim and,  on  6  December  2006,  made  a  further
    decision to give directions for her removal to the  Ivory  Coast.  This
    gave rise to a right of appeal under section 82(1) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which the appellant exercised by giving
    notice of appeal on 28 December 2006.


3.     The appeal came before Immigration Judge D Harris on  1  March  2007.
    He rejected her appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds  and  found
    that she was  not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.  It  is  the
    reconsideration of this determination  that  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.

4.    The  Immigration  Judge  addressed  two  specific  issues.  The  first
    concerned the protection available to women generally.  Relying on  the
    decision of the Tribunal in DI (IFA-FGM) Ivory Coast  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
    04437, he concluded that there was an element  of  protection  and  the
    authorities would be willing and able to use the law to protect her. He
    then went on to consider internal relocation  and  found  that  it  was
    reasonable for the appellant to relocate in Abidjan or indeed  anywhere
    else away from her home area. He accepted that the appellant would fall
    within the definition of a particular social group for the purposes  of
    the Refugee Convention.

5.     Senior  Immigration  Judge  Nichols  found  that  the   determination
    contained a material error of law.   She  gave  her  reasons  in  these
    terms:


    1.      This is a reconsideration of a decision  of  Immigration  Judge
        Harris who on 1st March 2007 dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
        asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  a  decision  of   the
        respondent on 1st December 2006 to refuse to grant her  asylum  and
        to remove her as an illegal entrant to the Ivory Coast, her country
        of origin.


    2.      No challenge is  made  to  the  appellant's  account  and  that
         remains the position.  She was forced into marriage with a 70  year
         old man in her village by her father.  She was repeatedly raped  by
         her husband  and  ill-treated.   In  December  2004  she  began  an
         adulterous affair with a young man called B and in June  2005  fell
         pregnant by him.  She fled her home  and  eventually  ended  up  in
         Abidjan with B.  In September 2005 fearing that her father and  her
         husband would kill her as a result of what happened, the  appellant
         fled the country and arrived in the United Kingdom.


    3.      The Immigration Judge accepted that the case had little  to  do
        with fear of FGM as sadly the appellant had already undergone  that
        procedure when she was  forcibly  circumcised  after  her  mother's
        death in 2003.  Nevertheless, he accepted, as  the  respondent  had
        done that the appellant had fled the Ivory Coast because she feared
        family retribution as a result of her adultery.  The appellant  had
        since given birth to a son.


    4.       The  Immigration  Judge  was  addressed  by  Counsel  for  the
        appellant on the general problems for  women  in  the  Ivory  Coast
        however in particular  he  was  referred  to  the  House  of  Lords
        decision in Fornah [2006] UKHL 46.  It  was  submitted  before  him
        that since the House of Lords had decided  in  Fornah  that  Sierra
        Leonean women suffered persecution as a result of their gender  and
        that the practice of FGM was a component part of that  persecution,
        then the same principle could be applied to women  from  the  Ivory
        Coast.


    5.      The Immigration Judge purported to  look  at  the  position  of
        women  generally  in  the  Ivory  Coast  at  paragraph  19  of  the
        determination as follows:


            "I address the two specific issues.  Firstly, the position  with
              regard to protection for women generally.  DI (IFA-FMG) Ivory
              Coast CG [2002 UKIAT 04437]  is  authority  for  saying  that
              protection is available.  However, I do acknowledge that that
              case is now some five  years  old  and  that  that  authority
              centred very largely on the issue of FGM.  The  Human  Rights
              Watch World Report 2007 notes that the law does not  prohibit
              domestic violence and that the courts and police have  viewed
              domestic violence as a family problem unless  serious  bodily
              harm was inflicted or the victim lodged a complaint, in which
              case they could initiate criminal proceedings.  However,  the
              report notes  that  victims  were  not  encouraged  to  bring
              proceedings due to the shame that could be  brought  upon  an
              entire  family.   Whilst  the  report  notes  that  the   law
              prohibits rape and provides prison sentences for up  to  five
              to ten years, it notes that women's advocacy groups  continue
              to protest the indifference of authorities to female  victims
              of violence.  However, the national committee  in  charge  of
              fighting against violence against women  and  children  under
              the Ministry of Women, Family and Children's Affairs had  set
              up a hotline for abused  women  and  had  helped  to  provide
              shelters  for  victims  of  abuse  and   counselled   abusive
              husbands.   Consequently  whilst  I   do   acknowledge   that
              conditions are  far  from  ideal  for  women,  the  objective
              evidence does show that there is an  element  of  protection.
              As the Tribunal said in DI 'The law is there to  protect  the
              appellant and we find that the authorities would  be  willing
              and able to use the law to protect her.'"


    6.      At paragraph 20 the judge found that there were "no reasons  to
        suppose that that scenario does not apply in this case."  Whilst he
        acknowledged the submission that the reality on the ground was  not
        the same as that painted in the objective material, the Immigration
        Judge clearly said that he had to follow the objective material and
        the case law.  He then went on to say this:

      "In this case the appellant has made no effort whatsoever to seek the
             protection of the authorities.  I  may  well  be  told  by  the
             appellant and by her Counsel that that is  simply  because  the
             reality of the position is that such state protection does  not
             exist.  That does not sit well with the case law nor,  overall,
             the objective evidence.  This appellant has made no  effort  to
             pursue the route of state protection at all."

    7.      At paragraph 21 the Immigration Judge then went on to  look  at
        the question of internal flight and whether that was  open  to  the
        appellant.   He  accepted  the  appellant  had  been  subjected  to
        horrific abuse and said that "due  to  her  personal  circumstances
        [she] would not be in a position to return  to  her  home  town  of
        Odienne."  However he was of the view that she could go to  Abidjan
        having been there in the past with  her  lover  B.   He  found  the
        couple had spent a period of time there and there was  no  evidence
        that the appellant could not relocate.  There was no  evidence  her
        father or  husband  would  pursue  her  across  the  country.   The
        Immigration Judge found it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
        appellant to relocate and that she  would  not  have  any  fear  of
        persecution for a Convention reason  if  she  were  to  return  and
        relocate there.

    8.      Following this at  paragraph  22  the  Immigration  Judge  then
        considered whether the appellant  was  a  member  of  a  particular
        social group for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.  He stated
        as follows:

      "I have already expressed a view as  to  the  extension  that  Fornah
             makes for the criteria for a social group.  The  question  here
             is 'Will the  appellant  be  persecuted  if  she  returns?'   I
             acknowledge that Fornah provides  authority  for  widening  the
             scope of the group that are likely to be persecuted and that in
             all the circumstances of this instant case, I conclude that the
             appellant would fall within that social group.   However,  that
             alone is not sufficient for the appellant  to  succeed  in  her
             case.  In this case, I am perfectly satisfied that this  is  an
             appellant for reasons I have given clearly above, would be able
             to relocate to another part of the Ivory Coast without fear  of
             persecution from either her family or her husband.  She is  not
             being pursued by the agents  of  state  persecution,  something
             quite properly conceded by Mr Shafi.   Internal  flight  is  an
             option to the appellant and therefore the appeal must fail".

    9.      Reconsideration was ordered because  it  was  thought  arguable
        that the Immigration Judge had not properly determined the question
        as to whether or not the appellant  would  receive  adequate  state
        protection in her town of origin.  Instead he had  concentrated  on
        whether she had sought to avail herself of state protection  before
        her flight to the UK.  Secondly that he had strongly relied on  the
        authority of DI which was now well out of date and the evidence  in
        the Human Rights Watch Report 2007 which  he  had  quoted  properly
        reflected the reality of the situation.  Finally that he had failed
        to consider the correct test on internal flight.

    10.     I heard brief submissions from both parties.  Mr Bedford sought
        to persuade us that the Immigration Judge had been correct  in  his
        interpreter of  Fornah,  i.e.  that  it  extended  the  meaning  of
        particular  social  group  with  regard  to  women  in  general  in
        countries where FGM is practised.  He argued that  the  Immigration
        Judge had made a clear finding that women in the Ivory  Coast  were
        discriminated against as a social group and that  at  paragraph  19
        the Immigration Judge had found that there was not a sufficiency of
        protection.  He submitted  that  at  paragraph  21  the  judge  had
        clearly accepted the appellant was at risk of  persecution  in  her
        home town however he appeared not to have addressed the issue as to
        whether it was unduly harsh for her to live in Abidjan.

    11.     Ms Mapstead also agreed  that  there  had  been  an  inadequate
        consideration of the proper legal test  to  apply  in  relation  to
        internal flight.

    12.     Having heard the submissions and considered the determination I
        am of the view that the Immigration Judge has materially  erred  in
        law and that in fact, Ground 1 of  the  application  identifies  to
        some extent the real difficulty with the determination.


    13.     I say at the  outset  that  I  reject  entirely,  Mr  Bedford's
        argument that the  case  of  Fornah  was  only  authority  for  the
        proposition that women in the Ivory Coast must also be members of a
        particular social group in the light of what was found  in  Fornah.
        That is clearly not correct and the obvious and  immediate  problem
        with his argument is that in the House of Lords decision in  Fornah
        the House was very clear that the general  position  for  women  in
        Sierra Leonean society was one of social inferiority  that  existed
        whether or not the practise of FGM was carried  out  although  that
        was an "extreme and very cruel expression of male dominance" - Lord
        Bingham of Cornhill at paragraph 31 of the decision.  The House had
        no hesitation in finding in those  circumstances  that  the  social
        group of women in Sierra Leone was a persecuted group in the  light
        of the evidence as to their position in Sierra Leonean society  and
        that the appellant in that case had established,  on  those  facts,
        that she was entitled to refugee  status.   By  contrast,  in  this
        appeal, it is impossible to say what the evidence  was  before  the
        Immigration Judge generally as to the  position  of  women  in  the
        Ivory Coast because he has simply not dealt  with  the  issue.   At
        paragraph 19 the judge was not concerned with whether or not  women
        from the Ivory  Coast  were  a  particular  social  group  for  the
        purposes of the Convention, he considered the  Human  Rights  Watch
        World Report in relation to whether  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
        protection available to the appellant against the domestic violence
        that she feared.  Whilst there was some evidence  before  him  that
        there was a lack of protection  in  this  regard,  nevertheless  he
        noted that the action taken by the government to try to help abused
        women and concluded that that demonstrated there was a  sufficiency
        of protection.  His conclusion at paragraph 22  that  the  case  of
        Fornah allowed him to conclude that the appellant was a member of a
        particular  social  group  and  at  real  risk  of  persecution  is
        fundamentally flawed.  The case of Fornah says nothing of the  kind
        and what was required was a proper analysis of the  evidence  about
        the position of women in Ivorian society to determine whether, as a
        result  of  their  gender  they  can  properly  be  regarded  as  a
        particular social group and secondly whether they are  at  risk  of
        persecution for reasons of that membership.  Certainly the evidence
        before him that he quotes from the Human Rights Watch World  Report
        was not remotely supportive of the appellant's case in this regard.




    14.     In any event the Immigration Judge's findings are confused.  On
         the one hand he finds that the appellant  would  have  an  adequate
         level of protection available to her and that she never sought  the
         protection of the state authorities presumably in her home town and
         on the other he considered the issue of internal  flight  which  is
         predicated  on  a  finding  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of
         persecution in her home town and  concludes  that  she  can  safely
         relocate.   If  there  was  an  adequacy  of  protection   in   the
         appellant's home town then she was not at risk  of  persecution  or
         Article 3 ill-treatment in any event.  If there was a real risk  of
         ill-treatment in her home town from her father and/or  husband  and
         the authorities could not give her adequate protection, was  it  by
         reasons of her membership of a particular social group  i.e.  as  a
         woman in Ivorian society or was this  purely  an  Article  3  risk.
         None of these questions  have  been  adequately  addressed  by  the
         Immigration Judge: his findings  are  confused;  made  without  any
         reference to relevant evidence and wrong in law.


    15.     In the circumstances the appeal will have to  be  reconsidered.
        As I have indicated there is no issue as to the credibility of  the
        appellant's account and therefore the  issues  for  reconsideration
        will be:-


         (i)      whether or not having regard to all of the  evidence,  the
             appellant can establish that she is a member of  a  particular
             social group, namely women in Ivorian society and that she  is
             at risk of persecution for that reason - this will  include  a
             consideration of women who are victims  of  domestic  violence
             and/or forced into marriage and the level of state  protection
             available.  It follows however that if the appellant  is  able
             to establish she is at real risk  on  this  ground,  it  would
             apply wherever she went in the Ivory Coast:


         (ii)     and/or whether she is at real risk of Article 3 level ill-
             treatment in her home town and  if  so,  whether  there  is  a
             sufficiency of protection available there or  internal  flight
             coupled with sufficiency of protection is a viable option.


    16.     In the circumstances I make it clear that none of the  findings
          of Immigration Judge Harris can stand in  relation  to  the  legal
          issues set out above".


 6.    For reasons that we shall explain later  in  this  determination  and
    with great respect to Senior Immigration Judge Nichols who, unlike  us,
    did not have the opportunity to consider this matter in greater  depth,
    we have found that her view that if the appellant was able to establish
    that she was at real risk of persecution on grounds of being  a  member
    of a particular social group "it would apply wherever she went  in  the
    Ivory Coast", would not apply to every part of the Ivory Coast.

7.    The Senior Immigration Judge found that the determination  was  flawed
    by virtue of the Immigration Judge's confused treatment of the  various
    distinct elements of the claim. If the appellant were able to draw upon
    an adequate level of protection in her home area but she had not sought
    to avail herself of that protection, she had failed to establish a real
    risk of serious harm and her appeal failed at the first  hurdle.   Were
    she to be at risk of harm in her  home  area,  that  risk  would  arise
    because of their being an inadequate level of  protection  to  her.  In
    that event, if she further established that  she  was  a  member  of  a
    particular social group she would be able  to  establish  the  risk  of
    persecution limited to her home area and the enquiry would continue  as
    to whether it would be unduly harsh for her  to  obtain  protection  in
    another part of the Ivory Coast bearing in mind that the source of harm
    was non-state actors whose influence might not extend beyond  the  home
    area. If the  appellant  were  unable  to  establish  membership  of  a
    particular social group but nonetheless established she was at risk  of
    serious harm in her home area, she would have made out  a  claim  under
    Article 3  or  for  humanitarian  protection  if  relocation  were  not
    possible without it being unreasonable. If relocation were  reasonable,
    her claim to be a risk of serious harm would fail both under Article  3
    and  under  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (humanitarian
    protection). Hence the Tribunal directed that the second-stage  of  the
    reconsideration required a comprehensive reassessment of the risk.


The Legal Framework

Burden and Standard of Proof

8.    The burden of proof rests on the Appellant to prove her  case  on  the
    lower standard of a reasonable degree of likelihood, which we  take  to
    be the same as "substantial grounds  for  believing"  or  "real  risk".
    Where below we refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be  understood
    as an abbreviated way of identifying: (1) whether on return there is  a
    well-founded fear of being persecuted  under  Refugee  Convention;  (2)
    whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  a
    person would face a real risk of  suffering  serious  harm  within  the
    meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended  Immigration  Rules;  and  (3)
    whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  a
    person would face a real risk of  being  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3 of ECHR.


9.    We have to consider the evidence in the  round  and,  so  far  as  the
assessment of the      Appellant's  case  is  concerned,  place  it  in  the
context of all of the background  evidence.

Internal Relocation

10.   Of particular relevance to part of the guidance given in this case  is
    paragraph 339O headed "Internal Relocation".  This states:

    'i.      The Secretary of State will not make:

         (a)     a grant of asylum if in part of the country  of  origin  a
             person will not have a well-founded fear  of  being  persecuted
             and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part
             of the country; or


         (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the country
             of return a person would not face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
             serious harm, and the person can reasonably be expected to stay
             in that part of the country.

    ii.       In examining whether a part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
         country of return meets the requirements in  i.  the  Secretary  of
         State, when making his decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
         humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the   general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the person.


    iii.     It applies notwithstanding technical obstacles  to  return  to
         the country of origin or country of return."


11.    In  considering  the  proper  approach  to  the  issue  of   internal
    relocation we have also to apply the principles set out by the House of
    Lords in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 (which adopts the criteria now  contained
    in paragraph 339O but also contains  more  detailed  guidance)  and  AH
    (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49.

12.   In Januzi their Lordships held that the test for whether it  would  be
    unreasonable for an asylum seeker to relocate to a  safe  haven  within
    his own country, was not whether the quality of life  there  failed  to
    meet the basic norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-economic  human
    rights, but whether he would face conditions such as utter  destitution
    or exposure to cruel or inhuman treatment, threatening his  most  basic
    human rights.  There was no presumption that when persecution  emanated
    from agents of the state or where the state encouraged or  connived  in
    that persecution by others, there could be no  viable  internal  flight
    option.  The greater the power of the  state  over  all  parts  of  the
    asylum seeker's country the less viable such an  option  would  be  and
    vice versa.


13.   In AH (Sudan) their Lordships repeated  that  the  test  to  determine
    whether internal relocation was available was  as  set  out  in  Januzi
    namely whether it was reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.   The  'unduly
    harsh' test did not require conditions in the place  of  relocation  to
    reach the Article 3 ECHR level.  The inquiry was to be directed to  the
    situation of the particular Appellant, whose age,  gender,  experience,
    health, skills and family ties might all be very relevant.   Cases  had
    to  be  assessed  holistically  with  specific  reference  to  personal
    circumstances, including past persecution or fear thereof in family and
    social relationships.

Sufficiency of Protection

14.    As  the  House  of  Lords  decision  in  Horvath   [2000]   UKHL   37
    demonstrates, to qualify as a 'non state agent of  persecution'  it  is
    not enough to show the person or group concerned has a  real  potential
    to cause a claimant serious harm. There must also be  an  insufficiency
    of state protection.  Unless there is a failure of state protection the
    non-state actor simply remains an 'agent of serious harm' not an 'agent
    of persecution'. As Lord Hope stated:

         "The standard to be applied is therefore not that which  eliminates
         all risk and would thus amount to a guarantee of protection in  the
         home state.  Rather it is a practical standard which  takes  proper
         account of the duty which the state owes to all its nationals."

Particular Social Group (PSG)

15.   In Fornah [2006] UKHL 46 their  Lordships  held  that  in  seeking  to
    establish refugee status under the Refugee Convention,  where  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution was based on  membership  of  a  particular
    social group, a claimant had to show that the relevant group  consisted
    of persons who shared, other than their risk of persecution,  a  common
    characteristic that was innate or otherwise  fundamental  to  identity,
    conscience or the exercise of human rights or  who  were  perceived  by
    society as a group.

16.   Lord Bingham who  gave  the  leading  judgment,  in  particular,  gave
    approval to the UNHCR's Guidelines on International Protection,  issued
    in May 2002 and set out his proposed definition of a particular  social
    group, as a group of persons who shared a  common  characteristic  that
    would often be  one  which  was  innate,  unchangeable  and  which  was
    otherwise fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of  one's
    human rights.  That  definition  included  characteristics  which  were
    historical and therefore could not be changed and those which, although
    possible to change, ought not to be required to be changed because they
    were so closely linked to  the  identity  of  the  person  or  were  an
    expression of fundamental human rights.

17.   Sex could properly be within the ambit of the  social  group  category
    with women being a clear example of the social subset defined by innate
    and  immutable  characteristics  and   who   are   frequently   treated
    differently to men.


Article 3 ECHR

18.   In the context of the present case and  indeed  the  medical  evidence
    (see post) it would be as well to refer as our starting  point  to  the
    decision of the House of Lords in N [2005]  UKHL  31  that  held  inter
    alia, that Article 3 did not require contracting  states  to  undertake
    the obligation of providing aliens indefinitely  of  medical  treatment
    lacking  in  their  home  countries;  did  not  impose   medical   care
    obligations  on  contracting  states;  could  not  be  interpreted   as
    requiring contracting states giving an extended  right  to  remain,  to
    would-be immigrants who had received  medical  treatment  whilst  their
    applications were being considered; if their applications were refused,
    the improvements in their  medical  treatment  brought  about  by  that
    interim medical treatment and the prospect of serious or fatal  relapse
    on expulsion  could  not  make  expulsion  inhuman  treatment  for  the
    purposes of Article 3.

19.   Their Lordships in N [2005] added that it  would  be  strange  if  the
    humane treatment of a would-be  immigrant  whilst  his/her  immigration
    application was being considered were to  place  such  a  person  in  a
    better position for the purposes of Article 3 than a person  who  never
    reached this country at all.

20.   In NA v UK [2008] ECHR 616; (Application no.  25904/07)  it  was  held
    that it was for the  applicant  to  adduce  evidence  that  there  were
    substantial grounds for believing that  he  would  be  exposed  to  the
    risk.  Where such evidence was adduced, it was for  the  government  to
    dispel  any  doubts  about  it.   The  assessment  must  focus  on  the
    foreseeable consequences of removal in the light of  the  situation  in
    the  country  of  destination  as  well  as  the  applicant's  personal
    circumstances.  The court could form its own view of the  situation  in
    the destination country and assess the risk of a violation of Article 3
    on the basis of the objective evidence including any  obtained  of  its
    own motion.

21.   The court in NA  refer  to  the  absolute  nature  of  Article  3  and
    reiterated that a breach of Article 3 might come from a threat posed by
    non-government  bodies  if  the  government  was  not  able  to   offer
    protection.

22.   The Court of Appeal in RS (Zimbabwe)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  839  observed
    that Article 3 jurisprudence had developed along two  separate  lines:
    cases in which the interest of the contracting state could be  balanced
    against the risk of  ill-treatment,  the  Article  3  obligation  being
    absolute and; healthcare cases such as in N v  UK  holding  that  as  a
    'general principle' Article 3 could not be relied upon to alleviate the
    disparity in medical care between Contracting States and an applicant's
    state of origin.  However the articulation in N v UK recognised that  a
    broader approach might be  taken  to  Article  3  in  cases  where  the
    humanitarian considerations made such a case 'very exceptional'.  In  Y
    and Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362 it was held that where an  asylum
    claim had failed and there was considered to be no  objective  risk  to
    the asylum seeker on return to their home country, but  the  individual
    was said to be at  risk  of  suicide  if  returned,  it  was  right  to
    scrutinise the claim  with  care.   Sedley  LJ  who  gave  the  leading
    judgment applied J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and the test of real risk as:

         "1.     An assessment of the severity of the  treatment  which  was
             said the applicant would suffer if removed.  This must attain a
             minimum level of severity.


         2.      A causal link must be shown to exist  between  the  act  or
             threatened act of expulsion and the inhuman treatment relied on
             as violating the applicant's Article 3 rights.


         3.      In the context of a foreign case, the Article  3  threshold
             was particularly high and even higher where the alleged inhuman
             treatment was not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authority of  the  receiving  state  but  resulted  from
             naturally occurring illness whether physical or mental.


         4.      An Article 3 case could in principle succeed in  a  suicide
             case.


         5.      In deciding whether there was a real risk of  a  breach  of
             Article 3 in a suicide  case,  a  question  of  importance  was
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the  receiving
             state was objectively well-founded.  If not, that  would  weigh
             against there being a real risk that the removal  would  be  in
             breach of Article 3.


         6.      A  question  of  considerable  relevance  was  whether  the
             removing and/or the receiving state had effective mechanisms to
             reduce the risk of suicide."


23.   However his Lordship continued at paragraph 62 of his judgment:

         "None  of  this  reasoning  represents  a  licence  for   emotional
         blackmail by asylum-seekers.   An efficient Immigration Judge would
         be right to continue to scrutinise the authenticity of such  claims
         as these with care".


Article 8 ECHR


24.   In Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the  court  identified  the  approach  to  be
    adopted when considering Article 8.  The Appellant has to show that the
    subject matter of Article 8 exists and that the decision  under  appeal
    interferes with it.  If she does so, the Respondent has  to  show  that
    the decision is in accordance with the law, for one of  the  legitimate
    purposes set out in Article 8(2) that it is necessary in  a  democratic
    society and that it  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  being
    pursued.


25.   Where the claim rests on Article 8 the decision-maker should ask:

    "1.    Will the  proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
        authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
        his private or family life?  If not there would be  no  ground  for
        challenge.


    2.      If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
        as potentially to engage the risk of Article 8?  A minimum level of
        severity is required to engage the Convention:  Costello-Roberts  v
        UK [1993] 19EH4412.


    3.      If so, is such an interference in accordance with the law?


    4.      If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
        satisfying the criteria  set  out  in  Article  8(2)?   Removal  in
        pursuance of  a  lawful  immigration  policy  would  almost  always
        satisfy this test.


    5.      If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
        public end sought to be achieved? A fair  balance  must  be  struck
        between the rights of the individual and the interests of the whole
        of the community in the Convention in assessing the severity of the
        interference and consequences, taking  into  account  all  material
        available at that stage."


    Lord Bingham pointed out that:

         "Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful  operation  of  immigration
         control will be proportionate in  all  save  a  small  minority  of
         exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis".


26.   The guidance in Razgar  was  followed  by  their  Lordships  in  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11 who held inter alia,  that  if  family  life  could  not
    reasonably be expected to be engaged elsewhere, the question was simply
    whether taking full account  of  all  the  considerations  weighing  in
    favour of refusal, the refusal of leave prejudiced the family  life  of
    the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of
    the fundamental right protected by Article 8. It was not  necessary  to
    ask in addition whether the case met the test of exceptionality.

The claim


27.   The appellant was born  in  Daloa.  She  is  Muslim.  The  appellant's
    father comes from the Diaby tribe.  He was born in the town of Odienne.
     The appellant's mother comes from the Toure clan.   Both  clans  speak
    Dioula.  In her further statement, the appellant described  her  ethnic
    group as (Dioula) Mallenke.

28.   The appellant described both communities  as  deeply  conservative  in
    nature in which many of the homes are huts and  where  water  is  drawn
    from wells. The women wear modern  dress,  although  not  trousers  and
    their heads are covered. Women would have to be accompanied by  a  male
    if travelling long distances.

29.   Her mother's Toure clan do not practice compulsory  FGM  and  she  was
    strongly opposed to the practice for her daughter. Amongst her father's
    clan, FGM was universally practised.  As far as he  was  concerned,  to
    have  a  daughter  who  had  not  been  ritually  circumcised   brought
    ostracism, shame and ridicule.

30.   There was strong opposition on the part of her father's family to  her
    parents' marriage and the couple left the village of Daloa and moved to
    the capital of Abidjan where the family settled and  where,  we  think,
    her sister was born.  Abidjan is some 13 hours by car from Odienne.

31.   When the appellant was 15 years old, and her sister was aged 9,  their
    mother  died.  Four  months  later,  in  or  about  August  2003,   the
    appellant's father and his two children  returned  to  the  village  of
    Daloa from Abidjan. Immediately after the formal period of mourning had
    ended, the appellant was forcibly circumcised. The  appellant  suffered
    great pain and felt betrayed by  her  father  who  had  instigated  the
    procedure and who could have prevented  it.  Five  months  later,  once
    again apparently following customary practice, the appellant was forced
    to marry an elderly man from the village.  She was  the  third  of  his
    wives and the youngest. She was mistreated and abused  but  refused  to
    have sexual relations with him.

32.   In December 2004 she met a man called B. According to  her  interview,
    B lived in Abidjan but had come to Daloa to see his people.  She formed
    a relationship with him and became pregnant by him. Her husband did not
    find out about the relationship.  When her pregnancy became apparent in
    June 2005, she fled the village fearing both her father because of  the
    shame her conduct would bring on the family and her husband  by  reason
    of her 'adultery'. In her interview, the appellant spoke  of  a  cousin
    who had been beaten to death when  it  was  believed  she  had  brought
    dishonour to the family.  The appellant found refuge in Abidjan at  the
    home of one of her former teachers. Although B had by then returned  to
    Abidjan, she had received no news of  him  and  did  not  know  of  his
    current whereabouts.

33.    Using her mother's jewellery, the  appellant  left  the  Ivory  Coast
    with the help of an agent on 7 September 2005, arriving in  the  United
    Kingdom on the following day. Her son was  born  in  Birmingham  on  16
    December 2005. He is now aged 3. Since her arrival  the  appellant  has
    had no contact with her father, (whom she does not wish to  see).   The
    appellant submitted a letter from her younger sister Fatima,  dated  10
    March 2006,  in  which  she  described  how  an  attempt  was  made  to
    circumcise her too but which she resisted by fleeing.  The  letter  was
    apparently written in Abidjan, although it is also said her sister  has
    now left the country. She has had no contact with her since.

34.    The appellant says that there are no family members on  her  mother's
    side to whom she could turn. She claims that she would be discovered by
    her husband or her father were she  to  be  returned  to  Abidjan.  She
    claims that both her husband and her father would kill her for bringing
    shame and dishonour to their families and  the  authorities  would  not
    intervene to protect in what they  would  consider  to  be  a  domestic
    dispute. She claims that she could not return to Abidjan as her  father
    is living there, nor to the area around Odienne, where her husband came
    from, nor where her father's relatives continue to live.  As  a  single
    woman, with a young child, she claims that she would be  vulnerable  to
    sexual  exploitation.  Were  she  to  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities, the information is likely to be passed back to her  father
    or husband. As a single mother, she claims that she would not  be  able
    to work and could not fall back on the extended family to support  her.
    As a single woman, without home  or  without  work,  she  would  become
    destitute. Her presence in any community  would  arouse  suspicion  and
    elicit questions about her background, particularly so  as  she  has  a
    son.


The refusal letter

35.   In her letter of 1 December 2006, the Secretary of State  relied  upon
    background  information  that  the  Ivorian  authorities  maintained  a
    Ministry of Women, Family and Children's  Affairs  and  had  set  up  a
    National Committee in Charge of Fighting against Violence against Women
    and Children. Under their auspices,  shelters  were  provided  for  the
    female victims of abuse. FGM had  been  criminalised  and  was  on  the
    decrease although 60% of women had  undergone  the  procedure.  It  was
    particularly prevalent in rural areas  to  the  north  and  west.  NGOs
    operated to help women affected by FGM.

36.   The Secretary of State accepted that the appellant  had  undergone  an
    enforced customary marriage but this was not a legal one.  Once  again,
    she  referred  to  the  availability  of  protection  provided  by  the
    authorities in the Ivory Coast and NGOs. In any event, the Secretary of
    State considered  that  internal  relocation  was  feasible.  She  drew
    attention to the fact that the appellant had travelled to Abidjan where
    B lived without suffering  harm  and  that  the  appellant  could  have
    remained there, rather than seeking asylum in the United Kingdom.

37.   A third witness statement of the  appellant  dated  22  February  2007
    comments upon specific paragraphs in the Secretary of  State's  refusal
    letter. It takes the form of a critique of  the  reasoning  within  the
    refusal letter and a repetition of her claim that she and her  son  are
    at risk on return to the Ivory Coast.

Medical evidence


38.   In her interview, conducted on 23 November 2006,  the  appellant  said
    that she had difficulty  in  sleeping,  suffered  from  depression  and
    required medication to  remain  calm.  She  said  that  in  October  or
    November 2005 she was diagnosed as suffering from depression.  However,
    by the  time  of  her  interview,  she  had  completed  her  course  of
    medication and was  no  longer  taking  any.  She  also  complained  of
    suffering abdominal pain as a result of the FGM.

39.   Since March 2006, the appellant has received counselling in  order  to
    help her work through the trauma  and  difficulties  arising  from  her
    experiences in the  Ivory  Coast.  The  counselling  has  consisted  of
    providing support and practical help. A letter  from  Ms  Lynn  Learman
    dated 21 November 2006 spoke of  her  expectation  that  therapy  would
    continue for some time.

40.   It is apparent from the report prepared by Ms Doocey  dated  15  April
    2008, that Ms Doocey has been seeing the appellant since 29 March  2006
    on  a  weekly  basis.  She  stated  that  the  appellant  continued  to
    experience persistent headaches and  was  prone  to  becoming  severely
    distressed. Her distress was centred upon a fear of  a  return  to  the
    Ivory Coast. Her fear had inhibited her ability to move therapeutically
    beyond her trauma. She recorded the appellant's success in attending an
    ESOL course and the  progress  made  in  learning  English.  Ms  Doocey
    recorded that the appellant had a limited ability to trust  others  and
    remained very isolated and reliant  on  her  own  limited  and  fragile
    resources. It was her opinion that the appellant struggled to cope with
    suicidal ideation and her deeply depressive moods. Her trauma would  be
    exacerbated by a return to the  Ivory  Coast;  she  would  struggle  to
    function well enough to allow her to work, to negotiate the payment  of
    bills and to make important decisions. Her hyper-arousal would increase
    making it difficult for her to focus on practical issues. It  was  also
    Ms  Doocey's  belief  that   the   appellant   would   need   continued
    psychological support for some time.  The report of April 2008 followed
    a report of 19 February 2007 in a  similar  vein.  The  earlier  report
    spoke of the destabilising effect upon the appellant of a return to the
    Ivory Coast, although the appellant had displayed great resilience  and
    some improvement in her psychological well-being.

41.   The appellant was admitted to hospital on 5  July  2006  for  a  minor
    operation following the birth of her son.  The  contents  of  a  report
    from the Liverpool Women's Hospital do not require further comment. The
    outcome of the procedure should result in a complete recovery.

42.   The appellant came under the care of Adult Mental Health Service on  3
    April 2008 following a referral by her General  Practitioner.  By  then
    she  was  already  on  antidepressant  medication  and  was   receiving
    counselling.  A psychiatric report prepared by Dr  Perera  on  13  June
    2008 followed a full psychiatric assessment  of  the  appellant  on  24
    April 2008 and a review held on 5 June 2008.  The  appellant  described
    herself as suffering from persistent low mood, difficulty in  sleeping,
    experiencing a continuous headache, feeling frightened and not  wishing
    to leave the house.

43.   Dr Perera noted  that,  although  she  was  supposed  to  have  weekly
    sessions with a counsellor, the effect of these sessions  was  to  make
    her feel so much worse that she waited a further  two  or  three  weeks
    before attempting another. As at the date of the report, 13 June  2008,
    the  appellant  was  receiving  100  mg  a  day  of  Sertraline  as  an
    antidepressant.

44.   In Dr Perera's opinion, the appellant was suffering from a  Depressive
    Disorder, Moderate in severity with somatic syndrome. He recorded  that
    she lived in fear that her father could pursue her and take her back to
    the Ivory Coast. He accepted that this was irrational but the fear  has
    made her paranoid and therefore reluctant to venture outside her  home.
    In his opinion, the fact that she was not living in the Ivory Coast was
    pivotal to the improvement  or  stability  of  her  mental  state.  Her
    biggest worry appeared to be to the safety of her  child  were  she  to
    return and the risk he faces  of  being  killed.  In  his  opinion  her
    condition was related to the trauma she suffered in  the  Ivory  Coast.
    The appellant had not, however, directly expressed suicidal thoughts to
    Dr  Perera.  He  believed  that  her  prognosis  would  depend  on  her
    circumstances; she remained highly distressed about past events  and  a
    prerequisite for effective treatment was that she be made to feel  safe
    which he did not believe would occur in the Ivory Coast.

The appellant's evidence

45.   In her evidence to us, the appellant described how her  father  worked
    as a driver in a road haulage business, carrying goods from Abidjan  to
    Odienne and other towns and villages in the  area.  She  described  the
    area in which they lived in Abidjan as a mixed community in which there
    were many ethnic groups. To  her  knowledge,  most  districts  comprise
    mixed communities and the Dioula people  live  alongside  other  ethnic
    groups. The family compound was in a predominantly Dioula area but  the
    various clans were otherwise evenly spread.

46.   She described how conditions were different in  Abidjan  for  a  young
    Muslim woman. She could dress  as  she  wanted.  She  did  not  wear  a
    headscarf. This was not because she was a child but, as  she  expressed
    it,  because  Abidjan  is  'modern'.   She  was  not  required  to   be
    accompanied when walking outside her father's  compound  and  the  only
    restrictions on her movements were the normal limitations placed by any
    parent that she should return home before midnight. Provided her father
    knew where she was (and she was 15 years old at the time), she could do
    as she wished. The sort of incident that she described as occurring  in
    Odienne where a married woman who refused to remain  with  her  husband
    was beaten up in an act of communal punishment was not  something  that
    would occur in Abidjan.

47.   The appellant, however, said that she would not be safe  there  whilst
    her father lived there and that it would not be easy to find a place to
    live. She spoke of how, on return to the airport or if she attempted to
    rent property, the information would filter back to her father.

48.   The appellant also spoke of her  employment  prospects  in  the  Ivory
    Coast. She said that those who find work have gone  to  university  and
    obtain certificates, having already undergone a long private education.
    In contrast, she spoke of the relative ease with which she could find a
    job in the United  Kingdom,  particularly  at  the  conclusion  of  her
    education here. She spoke of the difficulty of obtaining a job and  how
    the income would be insufficient to support her and her son.

49.   The appellant was cross-examined about the period that  the  appellant
    spent with her old teacher in Abidjan after she had fled  her  husband.
    The woman with whom she stayed was her mother's best friend, a  married
    woman. The couple did not mind putting the appellant up for a period of
    three months. The  appellant  was  asked  whether  she  had  maintained
    contact with the woman since arriving in the United Kingdom.  She  told
    us that she did not have her contact  details  and,  although  she  had
    lived there for three months,  she  did  not  know  the  address.   She
    explained that she did not think of taking  contact  details  with  her
    after arrangements had been  made  for  her  departure  to  the  United
    Kingdom. She said her main concern was for her life and  that,  in  the
    anxiety of departure,  she  had  overlooked  doing  so.  She  accepted,
    however, that if she returned to Abidjan,  she  would  know  where  the
    teacher lived.


The background information

The overall situation

50.   The US State Department Report 2007 deals with the overall political
    situation in the Ivory Coast:
             Cote d'Ivoire is  a  democratic  republic  with  an  estimated
             population of 18 million. Laurent  Gbagbo,  candidate  of  the
             Ivorian People's  Front  (FPI),  became  the  country's  third
             president in 2000. In 2002 a failed coup attempt evolved  into
             a rebellion, which split control of the  country  between  the
             rebel New Forces (FN) in the north and the government  in  the
             south. The failure of subsequent peace accords resulted in the
             2004 deployment of 6,000 peacekeepers under the  UN  Operation
             in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), who joined the  4,000-member  French
             Operation Licorne peacekeeping force already in  the  country.
             Approximately  8,000  UNOCI  and  1,800  Licorne  peacekeepers
             remained in the country at year's end to support  the  ongoing
             peace  process.  Civilian  authorities  generally   maintained
             effective  control  of  the  security  forces  in  government-
             controlled zones. Authorities in FN controlled zones generally
             did not maintain effective control of the security forces.
             In 2007 President Gbagbo and FN rebel  leader  Guillaume  Soro
             signed  the  Ouagadougou  Political  Agreement  (OPA),   which
             mandated elections and led to the dismantling of the  zone  of
             confidence (ZOC) dividing  north  and  south.  At  year's  end
             nearly 90 percent of civil administration had returned to  the
             north, and mobile courts had distributed birth certificates to
             many of those persons  who  were  never  registered.  However,
             implementation of  other  key  tenets  of  the  OPA--including
             disarmament of armed factions and determination of citizenship-
             -remained incomplete.
51.   In the 21st progress report of the  Secretary-General  on  the  United
    Nations Operation in  the  Ivory  Coast  (7  July  2009),  the  overall
    security situation during the period April  -  July  was  described  as
    remaining generally stable. The main security incidents included  armed
    robberies and other criminal activities in both rural and urban  areas,
    as  well  as  killings,  armed  attacks  perpetrated  by   unidentified
    individuals, coupled with abductions and rape of women and  girls,  and
    theft and extortion of money in some areas, particularly in the western
    part of the country.

52.   According to the 7 July 2009 report,  significant  progress  has  been
    made in the past two years in the  implementation  of  the  Ouagadougou
    Agreement. The  main  achievements  included  the  end  of  hostilities
    between the Forces Nouvelles and  the  national  defence  and  security
    forces; the removal of the  zone  of  confidence  that  had  physically
    divided the country; the restoration of free  movement  of  people  and
    goods throughout the country; the  successful  conduct  of  a  credible
    process to identify the population and  register  voters;  the  overall
    improvement of the  human  rights  situation  throughout  the  country;
    sustained dialogue among the main political leaders; the gradual return
    to the north of State officials  displaced  during  the  conflict;  the
    encouraging rebound of the economy; and the technical preparations  for
    the first round of the presidential elections to be held on 29 November
    2009 and announced on 14 May 2009.

53.    Progress  in  the  implementation  of  processes   related   to   the
    reunification of the country  as  part  of  the  Ouagadougou  Agreement
    process, including the disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration of
    former combatants and the  disarmament  and  dismantling  of  militias,
    centralisation of the collection of revenues and the  reunification  of
    the defence and security forces, has been  limited,  according  to  the
    Secretary General.

54.   Dealing with the humanitarian situation,  while  an  estimated  77,860
    IDPs, out of approximately 120,000, have voluntarily returned to  their
    areas of origin, land disputes and an overall weak social fabric  still
    pose a threat to the sustained pace of return of the remaining IDPs and
    hinder the provision  of  durable  solutions  for  returnees  and  host
    communities in the west. UNHCR, leading the protection cluster  in  the
    west,  has  been  working  closely  with  the  local  authorities   and
    traditional  leaders,  including  through  the  deployment   of   UNHCR
    protection monitors to several IDP displacement and  return  areas,  to
    find lasting solutions to the underlying causes of conflict, to promote
    a favourable protection environment conducive to return and to rekindle
    the declining IDP return momentum.  Meanwhile,  financial  requirements
    for responding to critical humanitarian were revised to $36.7 million.

55.    While  humanitarian  assistance  efforts  were,  according   to   the
    Secretary  General,  being  consolidated,  the  needs  of   communities
    affected by the Ivorian crisis are gradually shifting towards recovery.

56.   Dealing with human  rights,  the  Secretary  General  noted  that  the
    prevailing insecurity in certain areas provided a  fertile  ground  for
    serious human rights violations and led to demonstrations by the  local
    population, who demanded full respect for their  right  to  safety  and
    security. Acts of violence by student groups  provoked  disruptions  in
    the education sector  and  caused  the  death  and  injury  of  several
    persons, as well as the destruction of  public  and  private  property.
    These abuses very often went unpunished.  Recurrent  conflicts  in  the
    north between farmers and cattle-breeders over the destruction of crops
    by  cattle,  as  well  as  inter-community  violence  fuelled  by   the
    resistance of  the  native  population  to  the  return  of  non-native
    internally displaced persons, particularly in the western part  of  the
    country, threatened social cohesion in several villages. In the  north,
    several instances of killings, torture  and  ill  treatment,  arbitrary
    arrest, illegal and incommunicado detention, harassment, forced labour,
    extortion and intimidation of  civilians  were  perpetrated  by  former
    combatants and traditional hunters.

57.   A disturbing trend of abduction, rape and violence against  girls  and
    women persisted, especially in the west and north, where young children
    were raped by unidentified men. UNOCI efforts to  prevent  and  address
    impunity and violence against girls and women  continued  with  limited
    progress, including because of delays in the effective redeployment  of
    judicial services. In many instances, the families of victims of sexual
    violence withdrew complaints and opted for extrajudicial settlement  of
    the matter.

58.   In the sections marked 'Gender'  and 'Child Protection'  in  the  21st
    progress report of the Secretary-General, it is said that UNOCI focused
    on sensitizing national and international partners on the  campaign  to
    end violence against women, in particular in the context of an  upsurge
    in sexual violence in the country. UNOCI also continued  to  strengthen
    the capacity of local women's groups to encourage  their  participation
    in the electoral process, and provided technical and financial  support
    in that regard. Furthermore, UNOCI organized a round  table  on  female
    genital mutilation following a series of awareness-raising sessions for
    school youth. The round table explored legal, social and health-related
    implications   of   female   genital   mutilation    with    Government
    representatives  and  local  stakeholders.  Sexual   violence   against
    children remained prevalent throughout the country,  in  particular  in
    areas where law enforcement is weak. Most of these abuses  occurred  in
    connection with other serious criminal incidents.

59.   In July  2007  UNHCR  provided  an  update  of  its  position  on  the
    international protection needs of asylum-seekers  from  Cte  D'Ivoire.
    Reciting the fact that in January 2004, the UNHCR issued a "Position on
    the  Return  of  Rejected  Asylum  Seekers  to  Cte  d'Ivoire,"  which
    recommended a moratorium on returns with the exception  of  individuals
    from Abidjan whose relatives had been contacted in the  city  prior  to
    their return. For asylum-seekers originating from outside Abidjan,  but
    not meeting the refugee definition, the position recommended that  they
    be  extended  complementary  forms  of  protection.   An   "Update   on
    International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Cte  d'Ivoire",
    issued in October 2006, reaffirmed and expanded the  previous  position
    with regard to the granting of asylum of asylum to persons fleeing  the
    Ivory Coast and urged that no asylum-seeker from the Ivory Coast should
    be forcibly returned, including those  from  Abidjan.   By  July  2007,
    however, the situation in the Ivory  Coast  had  undergone  significant
    positive changes that warranted an update of UNHCR's  position  on  the
    international protection needs of asylum-seekers from the Ivory Coast.

60.   In its assessment of international protection  needs,  UNHCR  said  it
    was apparent that with the signing of the Ouagadougou  Agreement  on  4
    March 2007, and a clear demonstration of  the  parties'  commitment  to
    respect its implementation,  the  situation  in  the  Ivory  Coast  had
    undergone positive changes. While the  full  completion  of  the  UNHCR
    process and  the  identification  process  would  take  time,  and  the
    security in some areas remained a source of concern,  the  progress  in
    the implementation of the Agreement had allowed the Ivory Coast to make
    significant steps towards stability. In consequence, UNHCR revised  its
    position on the international protection needs of  asylum-seekers  from
    the Ivory Coast so that, amongst other things, all  claims  of  Ivorian
    asylum-seekers were being considered on the basis of  their  individual
    merits.

Women

61.   The Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) report  (2006)  provides
    an insight into the position of women and attitudes towards them.   The
    study surveyed 7,500 households taken as a  cross-section,  identifying
    about 13,000 women who surveyed.  19% of the heads  of  household  were
    women.  The report continued:


        "36% of women had already been subjected to excision. The  practice
        of excision occurs with women in town locations (34%) as with women
        in rural locations (38%). According to regions women  from  Central
        region (13%) and Central West (15%) are less excised than those  in
        other regions. The opposite is true in the north, north west,  west
        and central north, and north east, where the practice is  the  most
        prevalent ranging from 53% to 88%.


        When one considers the age of the women questioned,  one  observes,
        overall, higher proportions with older women.  From  the  point  of
        view of education, the facts reveal that there is an important  gap
        between educated women and non-educated women. In the  latter  case
        there is a little over half that have been excised. This is similar
        when one considers the  economic  welfare  of  the  households.  In
        effect, only 23% of women who live in the richest  households  have
        been  excised,  against  56%  of  women  living  in   the   poorest
        households.  It  is  also  in  the  poorest  households  that   one
        encounters women who have been subjected  to  an  extreme  form  of
        excision (7%) against women from the richer households (2%)."


        Matrimonial violence


        Nearly 2 out of 3 think that a husband has  the  right  to  hit  or
        battered his wife/partner for different reasons...the proportion of
        women who think that a husband can hit or batter  his  wife/partner
        in certain circumstances is higher in rural areas (72%) than in  he
        towns (57%) and in Abidjan (44%).  At a regional level,  the  great
        majority of women affirm that husbands have the  right  to  hit  or
        batter their wives/partners in certain circumstances.  However,  it
        is in the north west (94%) and northeast (86%) that it is highest."
62.   The legal position of women is  considered  in  a  report  by  the  US
    Center for Reproductive Rights: Women of the World - Laws and  Policies
    affecting their reproductive lives.  Although produced in 2003, neither
    side suggested  that  its  contents  were  out-dated,  although  it  is
    inevitable that some changes will have occurred.
Marriage law


63.   Marriage law is governed by the Marriage Act of 1964.  Only  marriages
    that are performed by a registry official are legal. All other forms of
    marriage, particularly polygamy and marriages in which a bride-price is
    paid, are prohibited. Polygamy is prohibited both under civil  law  and
    is criminally punishable by six months to 3 years  imprisonment  and  a
    fine. To attempt polygamy is also punishable.  Under  the  transitional
    provisions, however, the law recognises a polygamous  marriage  entered
    into before 1964.

64.   Formally declared customary marriages that took place before the  1964
    Act have  the  same  legal  standing  as  civil  marriages.  Undeclared
    customary marriages are considered "common law" marriages that it is, a
    de facto household that is not regulated by Ivorian laws.

65.   Forced marriage is prohibited. Forced marriages involving  minors  may
    result in imprisonment of  1  to  5  years  and/or  a  fine  for  those
    responsible.

66.   Adultery  is  both  a  ground  for  divorce  and  a  criminal  offence
    punishable by imprisonment of two months to one  year.  A  woman  found
    guilty of adultery is punished along with her partner. For a  husband's
    adultery to be punished however he must have committed the act  in  the
    matrimonial home or have had an  ongoing  sexual  relationship  with  a
    woman other than his wife outside the marital home. The  man's  partner
    is not punished.


Property rights

67.   There is no gender discrimination regarding access to  land  ownership
    in urban areas. In the case of a spouse's death, the household's common
    property is divided  according  to  the  Marriage  Act.  The  share  of
    property  reserved  for  the  surviving  spouse  is  then   distributed
    according to  the  inheritance  law,  which  bars  discrimination.  The
    surviving spouse ranks fifth among those eligible to inherit, and he or
    she is excluded from inheritance if there are  children.  Children  and
    their descendants can inherit  from  parents,  grandparents,  or  other
    relatives regardless of gender and even if they were born to  different
    marriages or out of wedlock. Rural communities tend to apply their  own
    customs despite the existence of the inheritance law.  If  the  persons
    involved take the dispute to court, however, the courts will base their
    ruling upon civil law.


   Labour law


68.   In 1991, there were 109,000 civil servants of whom  women  represented
    24,000 or 22%. A salaried woman who  is  a  mother  has  the  right  to
    maternity and nursing leave. Maternity leave is at full  pay;  half  is
    paid for by the employer and half by the state. It is  payable  for  14
    consecutive weeks, 8 after childbirth. Short-term absences due  to  the
    illness of a child under a woman's care do not constitute a  breach  of
    the contract of employment. Pregnancy is not a ground for  refusing  to
    employ a person nor justification for the termination of the  contract.
    A woman may not be dismissed during pregnancy or in the 12 weeks  after
    childbirth unless there are special circumstances.

   Access to education


69.   According to information in 1994, education levels in the Ivory  Coast
    are average compared with the education levels  of  similar  countries.
    There are clear differences between men and  women.  Women's  education
    levels remain significantly below that of men  but  there  is  a  clear
    trend toward improvement. The percentage of women with no education has
    decreased from 98% among women aged 60 and over to 47% for  those  aged
    15 to 19. That said, access to education beyond primary school  remains
    much more limited for women than for men. Between the ages  of  15  and
    19, 38% of men had an education above primary level, compared to 18% of
    women. Significantly, the illiteracy rate for women is 70%, compared to
    a national average of  50%.  There  is  a  similar  pattern  of  gender
    disparity in school enrolment with an increasing disparity as  children
    and students get older. Between the ages of 21 and  24,  male  students
    represent 19%; women a mere 4%


   Domestic violence


70.   Marital rape is not considered an  offence  in  the  Ivory  Coast  and
    there is no  specific  criminal  offence  prohibiting  a  husband  from
    assaulting his wife although  general  provisions  in  the  law  punish
    assault and battery.

71.   The situation faced by women in the Ivory Coast is dealt with  in  the
    US State Department Report for 2008 (February 25, 2009) in these terms:
      "The law prohibits rape and provides for prison terms of five  to  10
        years;  however,  the  government  did  not  enforce  this  law  in
        practice.  Claims  were  most  frequently  brought  against   child
        rapists. A life sentence can be imposed in cases of  gang  rape  if
        the rapists are related to or hold positions of authority over  the
        victim or if the victim is under 15 years of age. The law does  not
        specifically penalize spousal  rape.  Rape  was  a  problem.  Since
        January 2007, for example, the Court of  Abidjan  has  received  an
        average of 16 cases of child rape per month.
      Women's advocacy groups continued  to  protest  the  indifference  of
        authorities to female victims of violence. Women who reported  rape
        or domestic violence to the police were often ignored. Many  female
        victims were convinced by their relatives and  police  to  seek  an
        amicable resolution with the rapist  rather  than  pursue  a  legal
        case. The Ministry of Family and Social Affairs sought  justice  on
        behalf of rape victims, but as of September 30, only  nine  persons
        had officially been convicted and sentenced  for  rape.  Twenty-one
        additional persons accused of  rape  were  sentenced  for  "immoral
        offense."
      The  law  does  not  specifically  outlaw  domestic  violence,  which
        continued to be a serious problem throughout the country.  However,
        penalties for assault provided for prison terms of one to 20 years,
        depending on the extent of the offense. Government  enforcement  of
        domestic violence complaints remained minimal,  however,  partially
        because the courts and police viewed domestic violence as a problem
        to be addressed within the family. The  exception  was  if  serious
        bodily harm was inflicted or the  victim  lodged  a  complaint,  in
        which case criminal proceedings could be initiated.  Many  victims'
        own parents often urged withdrawal of a complaint  because  of  the
        effect of social  stigma  on  the  family.  As  of  September,  the
        National Committee to Fight Violence  Against  Women  and  Children
        (CNLV) had handled 19 cases of  battered  wives  and  10  cases  of
        forced and early marriage during the year.
        During the year the Ministry of Family and Social Affairs continued
        to provide limited assistance to victims of domestic  violence  and
        rape. The ministry's support included providing government-operated
        counseling centers with computers, printers,  and  other  equipment
        for record-keeping and visiting a few victims  in  their  homes  to
        attempt to  reconcile  troubled  couples  and  to  remove  domestic
        servants from homes in which they had been sexually abused.
      The CNLV did not operate a shelter or a  hotline  for  abused  women.
        Instead, committee members gave out their own cell phone numbers on
        weekly  radio  programs.  The  committee  also  monitored   abusive
        situations through frequent home visits.  Young  girls  who  feared
        becoming victims of abuse, FGM, or forced marriage could appeal  to
        the committee. The committee often  stopped  abuse  by  threatening
        legal action against offending parents or husbands.
      In  May,  June,  and  July,  the  government  held  awareness-raising
        seminars on sexual violence for more than 1,000 judges and security
        personnel. In August the government conducted similar seminars  for
        traditional kings, chiefs, and religious leaders. As  a  result  of
        the  seminars,  some  security  forces  reportedly  modified  their
        behavior to provide victims with greater privacy, and courts  began
        recording the testimony of rape victims who are minors in  private.
        Judges also increased the provision of statistics  and  information
        on cases to enable the CNLV to follow up with victims.
      Other cases of societal violence against women  included  FGM,  dowry
        deaths, levirat (forcing  a  widow  to  marry  her  dead  husband's
        brother), and sororat (forcing a woman to marry her  dead  sister's
        husband).
      Prostitution is legal between consenting adults in private,  and  the
        practice was reported to be increasing due  to  worsening  economic
        conditions.  Soliciting  and  pandering  are  illegal.  There  were
        credible reports that police demanded bribes or sexual  favors  for
        allowing prostitution.
       The law prohibits sexual harassment; however, the government  rarely
        enforced the law and such harassment was widespread  and  routinely
        accepted as a cultural norm. The penalties  for  sexual  harassment
        are between one and three years' imprisonment and  a  fine  ranging
        between 360,000 and one  million  CFA  (approximately  $720-2,000).
        During the  year  the  government  initiated  one  case  against  a
        prospective employer who sexually harassed a runner-up in the  2008
        Miss Cote d'Ivoire pageant. He was tried and sentenced to one month
        in prison.
      The law prohibits discrimination on the  basis  of  gender;  however,
        women experienced economic discrimination in access to  employment,
        credit,  and  owning  or  managing  businesses.  Women  occupied  a
        subordinate role in  society.  Government  policy  encouraged  full
        participation by women in social and economic life; however,  there
        was considerable resistance among employers in the formal sector to
        hiring women, who were considered less dependable because of  their
        potential  for  becoming  pregnant.  Some  women  also  encountered
        difficulty in obtaining loans as they could not  meet  the  lending
        criteria established by banks, such as  a  title  to  a  house  and
        production of a profitable cash crop.
      NGOs supervised efforts to create economic  cooperatives  to  provide
        poor women access to small loans from  the  government  or  private
        microfinance banks. Women in the formal sector usually were paid at
        the same rate as  men;  however,  because  the  tax  code  did  not
        recognize  women  as  heads  of  households,  female  workers  were
        required to pay income  tax  at  a  higher  rate  than  their  male
        counterparts. Women's organizations continued to campaign  for  tax
        reform to enable single mothers whose children have been recognized
        by  their  fathers  to  receive  deductions  for  their   children.
        Inheritance law also discriminated against women. Women's  advocacy
        organizations  continued  to  sponsor  campaigns   against   forced
        marriage, marriage of minors, patterns of inheritance that excluded
        women, and other practices considered harmful to women  and  girls.
        Women's organizations also campaigned against legal provisions that
        discriminated against women. The Coalition of Women Leaders and the
        Ministry of Family and Social Affairs continued  their  efforts  to
        promote greater participation of women in political decision-making
        and in presenting  themselves  as  candidates  in  legislative  and
        municipal elections".
72.   The US State Department, issued 1 June 2001, entitled  Cote  d'Ivoire:
    Report on Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)  or  Female  Genital  Cutting
    (FGC)  released  by  the  Office  of   the   Senior   Coordinator   for
    International Women's Issues reports on the practice:

         "The form of female genital  mutilation  (FGM)  or  female  genital
         cutting (FGC) practiced in  Cote  d'Ivoire  is  Type  II  (commonly
         referred to as excision). The practice is  prevalent  among  Muslim
         women and is also deeply rooted in traditional  Animist  initiation
         rites in western, central and northern Cote  d'Ivoire.  It  crosses
         ethnic and socioeconomic lines".


73.         The report continues:


         "According to a 1999 Demographic and Health Survey of  3,040  women
         nationally, 44.5  percent  of  the  women  of  Cote  d'Ivoire  have
         undergone Type II.


         The fact that a greater number of Ivorian are now living in  towns,
         far from  the  elders  and  the  traditions,  is  also  playing  an
         important role in the progressive eradication of this practice.


         A December 18, 1998 law provides that harm to the integrity of  the
         genital organ of a woman by complete or partial removal,  excision,
         desensitization or by any other procedure will,  if  harmful  to  a
         women's health, be punishable by imprisonment of one to five  years
         and a fine of 360,000 to two million francs (approximately  US$576-
         3,200). The penalty is five to twenty years' incarceration  if  the
         victim dies and up to five years' prohibition of medical  practice,
         if this procedure is carried out by a doctor. Before the  1998  law
         was enacted, existing provisions of the Criminal Code could be used
         to prohibit this practice.  However,  despite  laws  on  the  books
         governing crimes against the person, there were no Ivorian cases of
         women challenging this practice in court.


         Protection: Before the adoption of the 1998 law, the possibility of
         enforcing a law at the village level, where the  practice  is  most
         likely to take place, was almost nil. The powerful  association  of
         this practice with  religion  and  witchcraft  made  reporting  and
         prosecuting  excisors  virtually   impossible.   Furthermore,   the
         government had  no  interest  in  imposing  the  existing  laws  on
         unwilling families and antagonizing village elders and  chiefs  who
         are the guardians of tradition. This has begun to change. Following
         the adoption of the law in 1998, the  government  and  the  various
         NGOs and institutions fighting this practice gave  themselves  some
         time  to  pursue  information  and   education   campaigns   before
         requesting the enforcement of the law. In 1999,  AIDF  launched  an
         intensive  campaign  aimed  at  informing   the   population,   law
         enforcement authorities  and  local  government  officials  of  the
         existence of the law. The campaign gathered  momentum  when  AIDF's
         president was appointed Minister of Family  and  the  Promotion  of
         Women in January 2000. During 2000,  her  Ministry  and  AIDF  held
         several  seminars  in  the  regions  where  the  practice  is  most
         prevalent, working primarily with police  officers  and  gendarmes,
         administrative authorities (Prefects and Sub-Prefects), as well  as
         traditional, political and religious authorities. AIDF  focused  on
         information dissemination and  enforcement  of  the  new  law.  The
         Minister  received  additional  support  from  the  Ministries   of
         Interior and Security. In addition  to  the  formal  seminars,  the
         Minister used  every  opportunity,  such  as  the  inauguration  of
         economic projects, to talk to women and local authorities about the
         negative impact on women  of  harmful  traditional  practices.  The
         Minister also initiated  a  basic  management  training  and  small
         economic projects implementation program for  excisors  willing  to
         abandon the practice".

74.   The OGN of 13 February 2009, where material, provides as follows:

    "3.9    Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)


        3.9.1 Some applicants will apply for asylum based on  ill-treatment
             amounting to persecution at  the  hands  of  non-state  agents,
             usually community elders or tribal leaders, because  they  have
             undergone, are liable for, or face pressure  to  carry  out  on
             others, FGM.


        3.9.2 Treatment. FGM is a serious problem in Ivory Coast. In  2007,
             it was practised most frequently among rural populations in the
             north and west and to a lesser extent in central  and  southern
             regions. The procedure usually is performed on young  girls  or
             at puberty as a rite of passage. An estimated 60% of women have
             undergone the procedure. Unlike the previous year,  no  arrests
             related to  FGM  were  made  in  2007.  Local  non-governmental
             organisations (NGOs), such as the Djigui Foundation,  Animation
             Rurale de Korhogo, and the  National  Organization  for  Child,
             Woman, and Family, have established programmes to  prevent  FGM
             and in 2007 continued to work to persuade FGM practitioners  to
             turn in their instruments.


        3.9.3 Sufficiency of protection. Ivorian law  specifically  forbids
             FGM and provides penalties for  practitioners  of  up  to  five
             years'  imprisonment  and  fines  of  approximately  US$720  to
             US$4,000 (360,000 to 2 million CFA  francs).  Double  penalties
             apply to medical practitioners. In 2007, the National Committee
             in Charge  of  Fighting  against  Violence  against  Women  and
             Children (under  the  Ministry  of  Women,  Family  and  Social
             Affairs) maintained a hot line for abused women, helped provide
             shelters for victims of abuse, and counselled abusive husbands.
             The  Committee  also  monitored  abusive   situations   through
             frequent visits. Young girls who  feared  becoming  victims  of
             abuse, FGM, or forced marriage could appeal to  the  committee,
             which arranged for shelter in facilities run by the  Government
             or NGOs. The Committee often stopped abuse by threatening legal
             action against offending parents or husbands. Those in fear  of
             undergoing, or being forced to perform FGM are  therefore  able
             to seek and receive adequate protection from the authorities.


        3.9.4 Internal relocation.  Although  both  members  of  government
             forces and FN rebels reportedly engage in acts of extortion and
             intimidation at roadside checkpoints, the Government  generally
             does not  prevent  internal  travel  or  freedom  of  movement.
             Furthermore, the Zone of Confidence, which divided  the  rebel-
             held north and the Government-held south for almost four years,
             was dismantled following the peace  agreement  of  March  2007.
             With  FGM  being  a  localised  practice,  those  in  fear   of
             undergoing,  or  being  forced  to  perform  FGM  are  able  to
             internally relocate to another part of the  country  to  escape
             this threat.


        3.9.6 Conclusion. While FGM remains  a  serious  problem  in  Ivory
             Coast,  particularly  in  the  north,   it   is   illegal   and
             practitioners have been prosecuted under anti-FGM  legislation.
             The availability of adequate  state  protection  and  a  viable
             internal relocation  alternative  means  that  claims  in  this
             category are unlikely to engage the UK's obligations under  the
             1951  Convention  or  the  ECHR.  The  grant   of   asylum   or
             Humanitarian Protection in such cases is therefore unlikely  to
             be appropriate.


    4.4     Medical treatment


        4.4.1 Applicants may claim they cannot return to Ivory Coast due to
             a lack of specific medical treatment. See the  IDI  on  Medical
             Treatment which sets out in detail the requirements for Article
             3 and/or 8 to be engaged.


        4.4.2 Medical care in Ivory Coast outside of Abidjan  is  extremely
             limited. Abidjan has privately-run medical facilities that  are
             adequate and good physician specialists can  be  found,  though
             few speak English.  While  pharmacies  are  well  stocked  with
             medications  produced  in  Europe,  newer  drugs  may  not   be
             available. According to Mdecins Sans Frontires,  most  people
             in Ivory Coast cannot afford healthcare under the current cost-
             recovery system.


             [This material replicates the travel advice of  2  April  2009
             given by the US authorities to its citizens:


             Medical  Facilities  and  Health  Information: Abidjan   has
             privately-run medical and dental facilities that are adequate,
             but  do  not  fully  meet  U.S.  standards.   Good   physician
             specialists can be found,  though  few  speak  English.  While
             pharmacies are  well  stocked  with  medications  produced  in
             Europe, newer drugs may not be available. Medical care outside
             of Abidjan is extremely limited. Malaria is a  serious  health
             problem in Cote d'Ivoire.]


        4.4.3    Mental health is part of the primary health  care  system.
             Actual treatment of severe mental disorders  is  available  at
             the primary level. There are  community  care  facilities  for
             patients with mental disorders and regular training of primary
             care professionals  is  carried  out.  Therapeutic  drugs  are
             generally available. HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate for adults
             was estimated to be 7% in 2003.


        4.4.4    Where a case owner considers that the circumstances of the
             individual applicant and the situation in  Ivory  Coast  reach
             the threshold detailed in the IDI on Medical Treatment  making
             removal contrary to Article 3 or 8 a  grant  of  Discretionary
             Leave to remain will be appropriate. Such cases should  always
             be referred to a Senior Caseworker for consideration prior  to
             a grant of Discretionary Leave.


    5.     Returns


         5.1      Factors that affect the practicality of return such as the
             difficulty or otherwise of obtaining a travel document  should
             not be taken into account when considering the  merits  of  an
             asylum  or  human  rights  claim.  Where  the  claim  includes
             dependent family members  their  situation  on  return  should
             however be considered in line with the Immigration  Rules,  in
             particular paragraph 395C requires the  consideration  of  all
             relevant factors known to the Secretary  of  State,  and  with
             regard to family members refers also to the factors listed  in
             paragraphs 365- 368 of the Immigration Rules.


        5.2      In a position paper dated January 2004, the United Nations
             High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) advised that the return
             of unsuccessful asylum seekers originating from Abidjan should
             be approached with caution and that it is not safe  for  those
             originating from outside the capital to return. This view  was
             reaffirmed in the UNHCR's paper of October 2006, in  which  it
             was stated that no asylum seeker should be  forcibly  returned
             to Ivory Coast until such  time  as  the  security  and  human
             rights situation in the country has improved  sufficiently  to
             justify it. The UNHCR's position provides a  broad  assessment
             of the situation in Ivory Coast and it  presents  an  accurate
             overview of the general humanitarian situation and the  social
             and security problems inherent in Ivory Coast. However, asylum
             and human rights claims are not decided on the  basis  of  the
             general situation - they are based on the circumstances of the
             particular individual and the  risk  to  that  individual.  We
             therefore do not share the UNHCR's  view  that  every  Ivorian
             should automatically be entitled to some form  of  protection.
             Similarly, we do not share the UNHCR's view with regard to the
             return of Ivorian failed asylum  seekers  and  any  individual
             Ivorian applicant found by the Home Office and the independent
             appeals process not to be in need of international  protection
             may return safely to Ivory Coast.


        5.3      Ivorian nationals may return voluntarily to any region  of
             Ivory Coast at any time  by  way  of  the  Voluntary  Assisted
             Return and  Reintegration  Programme  (VARRP)  implemented  on
             behalf  of  the  UK  Border  Agency   by   the   International
             Organization for Migration (IOM) and co-funded by the European
             Refugee Fund. IOM will provide advice and help with  obtaining
             travel documents and booking flights, as  well  as  organising
             reintegration assistance in Ivory  Coast.  The  programme  was
             established in 1999, and is open to those awaiting  an  asylum
             decision or the outcome of an appeal, as well as failed asylum
             seekers".

75.   DI (Ivory Coast) CG [2002] UKAIT 04437 concerned the threat of  female
    genital mutilation in the Ivory Coast. The claimant  alleged  that  her
    Articles 3 and 8 rights would be breached due to the threat of FGM. The
    Tribunal found that there was protection available in the  Ivory  Coast
    and that an internal flight option was available.


Assessment of Evidence of Ms Ticky Monekosso

76.   We need to make some comments about our approach to the oral  evidence
    and reports of Ms Monekosso who explains that she was  commissioned  to
    write her reports by the appellant's solicitors in her capacity  as  an
    independent expert on the affairs of the Ivory Coast.

77.   There are a number of general  observations  that  we  would  wish  to
    make.   Our starting point  is  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    Practice Directions where at paragraph 8A.4 (now Practice Direction  10
    of February 2010) it  is  stated  that  an  expert  should  assist  the
    Tribunal by providing an objective, unbiased opinion on matters  within
    his or her expertise and should not assume the role of an advocate.

78.   Practice Direction 8A.5 (now 10.5) reminds us that  an  expert  should
    consider all material facts, including those which might  detract  from
    his or her opinion.  Paragraph 9A.6  (now  10.6)  points  out  that  an
    expert should make it clear:

    a)      when a question of issue falls outside his  or  her  expertise;
        and


    b)      when the expert is not able to reach a  definite  opinion,  for
        example because of insufficient information.


79.   The role of a country expert is thus to  assist  the  Tribunal  giving
    expert evidence in a field where specialist knowledge is  required,  in
    particular providing comprehensive  and  balanced  factual  information
    relating to the issues that the Tribunal must resolve.


80.   In that regard, it is important to bear in  mind  that  the  UTIAC  is
    itself a specialist Tribunal that has its own level  of  expertise  and
    therefore it is for the Tribunal on the basis of the  totality  of  the
    material before it, including the opinion of  the  country  expert,  to
    conduct its own assessment and reach its own conclusions.

81.   A competent expert's report is always  entitled  to  respect  and  due
    consideration but from the point of  view  of  the  judicial  decision-
    maker, such reports may sometimes (if not often) amount in the  end  to
    just one among other items of evidence which have to be weighed in  the
    balance.

82.   As held by the Tribunal in SK [2002] UKAIT 05613, the Tribunal  builds
    up its own expertise.  Naturally an expert's  report  can  assist,  but
    that does not mean that heavy reliance  is  or  should  necessarily  be
    placed on such reports.  All will depend upon the nature of the  report
    and the particular expert.  The Tribunal is accustomed to being  served
    with reports of experts, many of whom have their  own  points  of  view
    which the reports seek to justify.  The  whole  point  of  the  country
    reports is to bring together all relevant  material.   From  them,  the
    Tribunal will reach its own conclusions  about  the  situation  in  the
    country and they will see whether the facts found in  relation  to  the
    individual before it establish to the required standard, a real risk.

83.   Ms Monekosso described herself as  an  independent  journalist  and  a
    French citizen,  originally  from  Cameroon.   She  told  us  that  her
    professional experience and knowledge has been  accumulated  over  more
    than twenty years as  an  independent  journalist  reporting  on  human
    rights, development issues and related humanitarian affairs in  Africa.
    She stated that she had visited many African  countries  on  a  regular
    basis.  Ms Monekosso described her  career  background  as  that  of  a
    freelance journalist and independent consultant with a number of  media
    groups, international organisations, non-government  organisations  and
    the private sector for twenty years.


84.   Ms Monekosso holds a Masters Degree in Mass Communication Studies  and
    Journalism, a post graduate Diploma in Audio-visual Communication, post
    graduate studies in Communications and Cultures, post graduate  studies
    in Applied Anthropology as well as a Graduate Diploma in Economics  and
    other qualifications.

 85.   She states that she has prepared a number of research studies on  the
    United Nations Information System.

86.   Ms Monekosso obtained  an  International  Press  Award  in  2000.   Ms
    Monekosso was a Programme Support Officer (1993-1995) with the Regional
    Bureau for Africa and the Middle East at the International Organisation
    for Migration (IOM) Geneva Headquarters, gathering information on human
    rights and historical research on migrations in Francophone Africa  and
    Maghreb countries.

87.   Ms Monekosso worked as an  independent  consultant  in  communications
    with public information organisations in  what  she  describes  as  the
    "United Nations System" including the United Nations Information Centre
    (UNIC/Brazzaville),  the  UN  Information  Office  (Geneva)  and  other
    associated organisations.

 88.  Ms Monekosso is a founding member of Femmes  Africa  Solidarit  (FAS)
    that she describes as a Geneva-based African women's' NGO dealing  with
    "gender mainstreaming in  management  and  resolution  of  conflict  in
    Africa - monitoring and assessing women and  children's  conditions  in
    African countries; Communications and public information advisor to the
    group".

89.   Her CV states that she was based at  the  UN  Headquarters  in  Geneva
    between 1995 and  2005,  that  she  reported  on  humanitarian  issues,
    development economies and Africa related  diplomacy  for  a  number  of
    organisations  that  included  BBC  News  on-line  (Africa  and   World
    Services) and  various  African  and  pan  Africa  news  agencies.   In
    particular, and notably under the heading "Journalism", she states that
    she has conducted research "into  the  position  of  refugees  and  the
    provision of humanitarian  relief  in  Cte  d'Ivoire,  Congo  and  the
    Central African  Republic  for  monthly  country  bulletins  issued  by
    Writenet /UNHCR and Writenet /UNHCR special reports  on  Cte  d'Ivoire
    and the Central African Republic".

90.    Ms Monekosso states that she remains a  regular  visitor  to  Africa
    "for meetings and other professional trips" and that she has  extensive
    knowledge  of  Africa  and  has  "regular  contact  with  friends   and
    journalist colleagues living in Africa  from  where  I  get  up-to-date
    first-hand information".

91.   Ms Monekosso describes herself as having "detailed  country  expertise
    on Sub-Sahara Africa" and that she has "developed extensive  specialist
    knowledge on social structures and traditions, the position of women in
    local issues in several regions of Africa  -  Central  Africa  and  the
    Great Lakes, West Africa and the Horn of Africa".  Further that she has
    substantial experience of detailed case-specific research  into  social
    and legal issues and the position of women in these regions.

92.   Ms Monekosso further claims that in her work  as  an  expert  witness,
    she has carried out a large  number  of  detailed  investigations  into
    issues including:

          "The customary punishment of  women  such  as  customary  adultery
         laws, national legislation related to nationality laws,  rights  of
         sexual minorities, ethnic of origin dispute and the impact of post-
         colonial borders ..."


93. Ms  Monekosso  describes  her  current  occupation  as  that  of  Office
    Director for Afromedi@net.  She describes Afromedi@net as a:

         "Leading Network Journalist and Researcher specialised  in  African
         issues.  The office Afromedi@net is based in France and working  in
         partnership with Hawksmoore  Bureau  BUK-focuses  on  investigative
         journalism and  providing  up-to-date  first-hand  information  and
         independent analysis on human rights, development and  humanitarian
         affairs in Africa".


94.    Ms  Monekosso's  language  skills  include  fluency  in  Douala,  she
    qualifies that claim by adding "Cameroonian language".

95.   Ms Monekosso produced two reports in respect of the appellant.

Ms Monekosso's first report

96.   In her first report dated 19 June 2008, she  explained  that  she  had
    last visited the Ivory Coast between 1 and 8  December  2007  when  she
    described having had "a high level political meeting with  the  country
    authorities".   She visited Abidjan and met President Gbagbo and  on  a
    visit to Bouake in the North she met the Prime Minister and the Head of
    Forces Nouvelles, Guillaume Soro.  On a visit to Yamoussoukro  she  met
    the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of Communication and other members
    of the current  government  and  what  she  describes  as  "many  other
    important personalities including traditional leaders".   Ms Monekosso
    tells us that she  discussed  with  them  a  number  of  the  country's
    political matters that included economic and  humanitarian  conditions.
    Further that  she  discussed  in  private  with  a  number  of  Ivorian
    journalist colleagues who lived and worked in the Ivory Coast and  with
    other foreign press correspondents to the country,  matters  concerning
    conditions in the country and in the region.

97.   In the course of her evidence before us, it  became  clear  that  such
    meetings were largely the result of  her  having  attended  the  Annual
    Congress of the International Francophone Press Union where she was one
    of approximately 200 journalists visiting the country  for  eight  days
    with the  programme  being  focused  on  the  Cte  d'Ivoire's  current
    situation and its position in Francophone Africa.  In the course of  Ms
    Monekosso's cross-examination, it became apparent that these were  not,
    as we had first thought, face-to-face meetings with  the  President  of
    the Ivory Coast, its Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and other  senior
    government officials, but meetings that occurred as one of  this  group
    of 200 journalists.  Ms Monekosso had not  personally  spent  any  time
    alone with the President on her visit in December 2007.

98.   Ms Monekosso explained that she retained regular  contacts  with  her
    friends and journalist colleagues living in the Ivory Coast, "from whom
    I get up-to-date first-hand information".

99.   Ms Monekosso explained that her report  drew  "on  a  wide  range  of
    sources some of which may not be familiar".  The report  set  out  what
    was described as a "a brief guide to major sources" from which  it  was
    apparent that she was largely  endorsing  material  from  international
    news agencies such as Agent France Presse (AFP) and  Reuters.   Account
    was also taken of US State Department reports and what she described as
    "a range of Cte d'Ivoire  domestic  and  externally  based  electronic
    media sources reflecting diverse points of view".

100.  In that latter regard, Ms Monekosso acknowledged  that  "some  have  a
    pro or anti-government slant and must be treated with caution but  they
    provide useful insights into debates and trends and tips about  insider
    news and politics".

101. The three issues that Ms Monekosso was asked to address in  her  report
    were described by her as follows:

         "1.       Firstly,  whether  women  in  Cte   d'Ivoire   share   a
              fundamental condition of social inferiority compared  to  men
              and  whether  FGM,  marriage  and/or  domestic  violence  are
              expressions of  discrimination  against  women  in  the  Cte
              d'Ivoire.


           2.     Secondly, whether the appellant would be at real  risk  of
              persecution in Odienne for defying  the  institution  of  her
              customary marriage by giving birth to a  child  outside  that
              marriage and if so to what extent would  she  be  at  similar
              risk in the rest of Cte d'Ivoire.


           3.     Thirdly, if the appellant is not at  risk  of  persecution
              for her actions in defiance of her customary marriage in Cte
              d'Ivoire outside Odienne, I am asked  to  state  whether  the
              appellant, as a single mother, could reasonably  and  without
              due harshness live outside Odienne".


102.  As to the first issue, it was Ms Monekosso's understanding  that  only
    forty per cent of  the  female  population  of  the  Ivory  Coast  were
    literate.

103.  The practice of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) was common  especially
    among the rural population in the North and West.  Sixty  per  cent  of
    women had undergone FGM in the Ivory Coast.  This is the figure seen in
    the OGN but a more accurate indication of the variable incidence of FGM
    appears in paragraph 86 where as  little  as  13%  and  18%  have  been
    incised in central and central west ranging to as high as 88%  in  some
    areas.

104.   Spousal abuse occurred frequently in the Ivory Coast and as  many  as
    seventy per cent of  Ivorian  women  had  experienced  domestic  abuse.
    Nevertheless domestic violence was widely regarded as a private  family
    problem.

105.  At paragraph 12 of her  report  Ms  Monekosso  claimed  that  the  law
    prohibited sex discrimination as it did discrimination  of  all  kinds,
    but that in practice, women occupied  a  subordinate  role  in  Ivorian
    society.

106.  In rural areas women and men divided the  labour.   Government  policy
    encouraged full participation by women  in  social  economic  life  but
    there  was  considerable  informal  resistance  among   employers   who
    considered women of child-bearing age less dependable then men.   Women
    were under-represented in some professions and in the managerial sector
    as a whole.  Some women  also  encountered  difficulty  with  obtaining
    loans because they could not meet the lending criteria mandated by  the
    banks.

107. Ms Monekosso continued that in the  Ivory  Coast  the  state  organised
    religion and traditional society all played  a  part  in  creating  and
    maintaining the social inferiority of women compared to men by coercing
    female conformity with norms of customary behaviour.

108.  The State had failed in practice to protect young women  and  children
    from FGM.  It did not afford women property rights in  marriage  or  on
    dissolution of marriage.  Moreover,  the  state  discriminated  against
    women in the matter of adultery and it did  not  outlaw  marital  rape.
    This is corroborated by what we have said in paragraphs 71 to 75 above.

109.  Ms Monekosso  referred  to  what  she  described  as  "three  powerful
    customary norms" that women were expected to obey. Firstly, that  women
    should undergo FGM; secondly, that they should  get  married  and  have
    children; thirdly that women should not dishonour their communities.

110.  For Ivorian women to attain any honourable condition they  had  to  be
    married although they were only expected to marry once  and  beforehand
    they were required to be circumcised.  Adultery was a criminal  offence
    for women.  For men on the other hand  polygamy  was  respectable.   Ms
    Monekosso stated that "men are not punishable under  the  criminal  law
    for marital rape or adultery".  (For reasons which later  appear,  this
    is not accurate).

111.  Ms Monekosso considered that  these  norms  "marked  women  as  second
    class because they are coercive".  Traditional society  enforced  these
    norms and serious transgressions were punished.  Traditional  societies
    had customary powers to investigate, try  and  punish  individuals.  In
    secular matters most cases were adjudicated upon in  informal  hearings
    often convened by the village chief.

112.  Traditional society in effect sought  to  guide  women  and  reinforce
    their acceptance of living  within  community  norms  as  second  class
    citizens.

113.  There were rituals of purification as well  as  punitive  measures  to
    deter and curb  the  tendency  to  deviate  from  these  norms.   Every
    extended family or tribe evolved its distinct ethical code.

114. In the case of adultery, customary decisions might be taken that  women
    were punished by cutting their  backs  with  razors.   The  results  of
    mutilation or "scarifications" would communicate that the women was  an
    adulteress.  She was then beaten and repudiated in public.

115.  On the issue  of  FGM,  Ms  Monekosso  placed  reliance  on  what  she
    described as the preliminary results of the MICS  2006  Report.    MICS
    refers to "The Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  Programme"  developed
    by UNICEF that assists countries in filling data  gaps  for  monitoring
    the situation  of  children  and  women  through  statistically  sound,
    internationally  comparable  estimates  of  socio-economic  and  health
    indicators.

116.  Those results showed that nearly eighty seven per  cent  of  women  in
    Northern Ivory Coast had  been  the  victims  of  FGM/Cutting  (FGM/C).
    FGM/C was still practiced among most population  groups  in  the  Ivory
    Coast even though the prevalence of such was higher within some  ethnic
    groups, the Muslim population and in rural areas.

117.  Ms Monekosso referred to the UNICEF MICS  2007  analysis  that  showed
    that there was a  strong  social  consensus  around  these  mutilations
    initially done to prepare a young girl  to  womanhood.   FGM  practices
    affected an increasing number of younger girls and even babies.   These
    practices continued despite the adoption almost ten years ago of a  law
    prohibiting FGM.   In  Ms  Monekosso's  opinion,  FGM  was  an  extreme
    expression of discrimination against women in the Ivory  Coast  because
    they were forced to undergo FGM before being considered full members of
    Ivorian society. In addition, those women who refused  to  undergo  FGM
    were "socially rejected, stigmatised and ostracised".

118.  Ms Monekosso described FGM as a "gender based form of violence  and  a
    typical form of domestic violence practiced within the family".

119.  She considered that given the presence of FGM in the Ivory Coast,  the
    State had failed to protect women, particularly girls from  FGM.   This
    is clearly one of the more controversial  passages  of  Ms  Monekosso's
    evidence to which we will return later.  Whilst there is no doubt  that
    the practice is widespread, its impact is variable and we will need  to
    consider the  steps  taken  by  the  authorities  to  counter  it.   Ms
    Monekosso  pointed  out  that,  until  1998,  there  was  no  law  that
    specifically prohibited the practice which was considered illegal  only
    as a violation of general laws prohibiting crimes against persons.

120.  However, the Law Concerning Crimes against Women enacted  in  December
    1998 specifically forbade FGM and subjected those who performed  it  to
    criminal penalties, imprisonment of up to some five years and a fine of
    approximately $650 to $3,500 (360,000 to  2  million  CFA  francs)  and
    there were double penalties for medical practitioners.

121.  As regards marriage in  the  Ivory  Coast,  this  was  an  institution
    highly esteemed by Ivorian society and women especially  were  expected
    to get married and stay married.  If a woman could not get married  she
    was considered to be of low morality.

122. Unmarried women were not seen as full members of society.  They  lacked
    social status.  Unmarried women were considered blameworthy by society.
     Marriage and children conferred more value and status  on  women  than
    education which was believed to reduce a woman's prospect  of  marriage
    so in  the  Ivory  Coast  there  was  one  official  form  of  marriage
    recognised by law which was married under ordinance.

123.  According  to  the  Ivorian  Civil  Code,  only  marriages  that  were
    performed by a registry were legal. Official polygamy was  outlawed  in
    the  Ivory  Coast  although  it  continued  to  be  widely   practiced,
    particularly in Muslim communities. However in  Ivorian  society,  male
    polygamy was common and respected. Further, both customary and  Islamic
    marriages  conferred  marriage  status  on  women  even  though   those
    marriages did not prevent their husbands entering into other polygamous
    marriages.

124.  Customary or traditional marriages usually  took  place  by  agreement
    between families and were commonly confirmed by the payment of a dowry.
    Many such marriages were arranged marriages or  even  forced  marriage.
    Nearly all Ivorian marriage was customary.  Even couples contracting  a
    marriage under ordinance, performed a customary marriage first.

125.  Husbands were regarded as the head of  the  household.  Spousal  abuse
    (usually wife beating) occurred frequently and it was not  specifically
    penalised, nor  was  marital  rape.   A  woman  was  presumed  to  have
    consented to sexual intercourse by marriage even if a union was  at  an
    early age and/or forced.

126.  In relation to inheritance rights, Ms Monekosso explained that on  the
    death of a spouse, household property  was  divided  according  to  the
    Marriage Act.  A surviving  female  spouse  ranked  fifth  among  those
    eligible to inherit and she was excluded from inheritance if there were
    children because the children got this share in that case.

127.  Ms Monekosso referred to Article 391 of the  Penal  Code  that  stated
    that "adultery is not only grounds for  divorce  but  also  an  offence
    punishable by imprisonment of two months to one year.   A  woman  found
    guilty of adultery is punished along with her partner".

128.  Notably, at paragraph 48 of her  report,  Ms  Monekosso  continued  as
    follows:

      "Only the female spouse is punishable under the criminal law if  found
      guilty of adultery, together with her partner.  A male  spouse  cannot
      be punished for adultery." (Emphasis added).


129.  Ms Monekosso continued that men  were  heads  of  household  and  were
    permitted to rape and abuse their spouses with impunity.

130.  Although the law specifically penalised  anyone  who  forced  a  minor
    under 18 years of age to enter a  religious  or  customary  matrimonial
    union, twenty six per cent of 15 to 19 year old girls were  married  in
    the Ivory Coast and the state failed to protect  children  from  forced
    marriage in traditional ceremonies rather than to illegal registration.

131.  In Ms Monekosso's opinion,  whether  marriage  was  legal,  customary,
    forced  or  consensual,  it  was  the  fundamental  expression  of  the
    inferiority of women in the Ivory Coast.   It  institutionalised  their
    inferior status compared to men.

132.  Ms Monekosso explained there was no reliable statistical data  on  the
    extent of domestic violence in the Ivory Coast, though according to the
    Association Ivoirienne de  Dfense  des  Droits  de  la  Femme  (AIDF),
    seventy per cent of women in the Ivory Coast were victims  of  domestic
    violence.  This is consistent with the 2006 MICS report (from a  survey
    sample of 13,000 persons) which  indicated  that  nearly  2  out  of  3
    (roughly 60% or more) thought a husband had the right to hit his  wife.
    (But we recall, this figure was significantly  less  in  Abidjan,  44%,
    less than half, suggesting the different attitudes in urban areas.)

133.  The inferior status of women and the considerable number of  newspaper
    reports suggested that domestic violence was widespread throughout  the
    country.  Women who  complained  of  domestic  violence  were  socially
    excluded  and  suffered  tremendous  pressure  from   their   families.
    Traditional attitudes did not permit women to reject domestic violence.
     Much of this is supported by the US State Department report  to  which
    we have referred in paragraphs 72 to 73 above.

134.  Ms Monekosso considered that the prevalence of  domestic  violence  in
    the Ivory Coast was an expression of social  inferiority  because  wife
    beating which was a  criminal  offence  that  constituted  grounds  for
    divorce under civil law was common in the Ivory Coast  but  the  police
    rarely intervened in domestic disputes.

135.  Ms Monekosso continued that the  courts  and  police  viewed  domestic
    violence as a problem to be addressed within the family unless  serious
    bodily harm was inflicted or the victim lodged  a  complaint  in  which
    case criminal proceedings could be initiated.  However a  victim's  own
    parents often urged withdrawal of a complaint because of the effect  of
    social stigma on the entire family.

136.   It was  Ms  Monekosso's  opinion  that  the  prevalence  of  domestic
    violence in Ivorian society was an expression of the inferior status of
    women compared to men.

137.  On the second issue, (the risk of persecution in Odienne or  elsewhere
    for defying the institution of her customary marriage by  giving  birth
    to a child outside marriage), it was Ms Monekosso's considered  opinion
    that if the  appellant  returned  to  Odienne  she  would  face  ritual
    punishment for  adultery  and  abandoning  her  husband.    In  secular
    matters most cases were adjudicated upon  in  informal  hearings  often
    convened by the village  chief  but  that  in  any  event,  family  and
    community members might also apply disciplinary procedures even  trying
    and torturing individuals for serious  violations  of  norms,  such  as
    adultery.

138.  The vast majority of norms,  taboos  and  prohibitions  were  directed
    towards protecting the community.

139.  Every extended family or  tribe  evolved  its  distinct  ethical  code
    which it would act to preserve.  The  observance  of  tradition  was  a
    matter of  honour  and  having  a  child  born  of  adultery  could  be
    considered a crime of honour.  Furthermore, the Muslim society  in  the
    Ivory Coast would regard the appellant's actions as particularly taboo,
    offensive and humiliating.

140.  Customary laws relating to adultery  "undoubtedly  existed".   It  was
    however "uncertain" whether  the  appellant  could  be  punished  under
    Article 391 for adultery given that  she  was  not  married  under  the
    ordinance.  Nevertheless  Article  391  reinforced  the  legitimacy  of
    customary law  which  punished  women  for  adultery  rejecting  forced
    marriage, and in the appellant's case disobeying her  father  and  also
    her husband.  By customary law the appellant had  broken  the  contract
    under which she was married.  It would, in Ms Monekosso's opinion, "be
    impossible to defy these customary laws".

141.  As to the existence of risk  to  the  appellant  outside  Odienne,  Ms
    Monekosso pointed out that Muslim social and community structures  were
    highly traditional and placed great importance on marriage  and  female
    fidelity.  The appellant's particular circumstances would thus  prevent
    her from seeking the assistance of local Muslim  communities  elsewhere
    in the Ivory Coast  as  these  communities  would  seek  to  punish  or
    ostracise her.

142.  Ms Monekosso referred to the security climate in the Ivory  Coast  and
    the forthcoming national elections and was of the view that it was thus
    certain that the police would control the appellant as they would other
    ordinary citizens.  The police in the South would regard the  appellant
    with suspicion as  a  Muslim  woman  from  the  North.   She  would  be
    interrogated for information concerning Forces Nouvelles.

143.  In addition, there were credible reports that gendarmes entered  homes
    and businesses to extort money, that police detained persons  overnight
    in police stations where they beat detainees and  forced  them  to  pay
    bribes.  The police also harassed persons of northern  origin  or  with
    northern names.  (We note the latter claim was sourced from a  2006  US
    State Department Report).

Ms Monekosso's view of appellant's situation

144.  Ms Monekosso believed that during interrogation it was "certain"  that
    the appellant would be asked about her marital status as was usual  for
    young women when  confronted  by  the  security  forces.   If  she  was
    identified as a single mother and a Muslim then it was  "certain"  that
    the security forces would try to abuse her for they would be able to do
    so with impunity.  They would act in the knowledge that  the  appellant
    had nobody to intervene on her behalf.

145.  Ms Monekosso continued  that  the  appellant  would  require  official
    identity papers to access public services, develop a business  or  pass
    through checkpoints that were commonly  established  on  roads  by  the
    security forces.  Without an official identity the appellant would have
    to live as a 'non-person' deprived of  access  to  public  services  or
    formal sector employment, on the margins of society.

146.  The appellant would require identity papers  to  prove  that  she  was
    Ivorian given the proximity of national elections and the suspicion  on
    the  part  of  the  security  forces  that  the  Ivory  Coast  Northern
    neighbours would seek  to  infiltrate  the  country  to  influence  the
    election results.

147.  Ms Monekosso considered the relevance of  the  appellant's  name  that
    identified her as a Douala, a Northerner and a member of a cross-border
    ethnic group.  As such she would face discrimination from the  security
    forces and could not present herself as a member of any community.

148.  Ms Monekosso considered that it would be extremely difficult  for  the
    appellant to live in any provincial region outside  of  her  home  area
    because she would be viewed with suspicion and socially ostracised.  As
    a woman living alone without access to land  or  economic  assets,  the
    appellant would find it extremely difficult to be  accepted  and  would
    have no ready access to a basic means of livelihood and she would be at
    risk of maltreatment or sexual exploitation.  Thus the appellant  would
    be certain to suffer social exclusion and severe discrimination even in
    areas far from the North.

149.  The judiciary would not offer effective protection  to  a  lone  woman
    who had an elicit child from an adulterous  relationship  even  if  her
    marriage was traditional as opposed to a marriage under ordinance.

150.  As to the third issue, that essentially focused on whether or not  the
    appellant could safely and  internally  relocate  outside  Odienne.  Ms
    Monekosso acknowledged  that  in  Abidjan,  the  capital,  "the  social
    climate (was) more relaxed".  The appellant would  however  be  without
    any means of support in business, employment or farming.

151. Ms Monekosso considered that the appellant would face  prostitution  or
    being trafficked in West Africa.  Indeed wherever she went as a Douala,
    Ms D would "lack the privileged and  protected  social  position  which
    married women enjoy".

152.  Away from her home area, the appellant without access  to  land  would
    find herself in exceptional difficulty to survive in a rural area.  She
    would not be accepted in a rural community elsewhere in the Ivory Coast
    where discrimination was at its worst.   As  a  young  woman  from  the
    Douala community without any family links in the new area she would  be
    considered to be a foreigner.

153.  Ms Monekosso continued that the appellant's status as a single  Muslim
    mother in the Ivory Coast would leave her in an  acutely  isolated  and
    weakened position where she would face discrimination,  stigmatisation,
    ostracism and rejection.

154.  Being a Muslim and single mother was a case of dishonour in the  Ivory
    Coast and would lead to all kinds of suspicion, that the appellant  was
    "an adultery mother or a sex worker".   The  appellant  would  find  it
    exceptionally  difficult  to  live  as  an  independent  single  mother
    elsewhere in the country as the  entire  Muslim  and  Douala  community
    would consider her to be the "wife of ..." even  if  it  was  a  forced
    marriage.

155.  Further the appellant if returned to the Ivory Coast as a young  woman
    who had been to Europe was likely to be rejected  by  Ivorian  society.
    Many people would assume that she had  been  a  sex  worker.   She  was
    likely to be marginalised in society.

156.  Ms Monekosso continued that such risks would be sharply  increased  if
    it were known that the appellant committed adultery and was raising  an
    illicit child and that she had run away from a forced marriage and  had
    defied domestic violence.  The appellant's risk would be  increased  as
    she would be perceived  as  a  woman  of  low  morality  and  a  likely
    prostitute.  If the appellant sought to move elsewhere she  would  lack
    access to a source of income or land and would also  be  regarded  with
    suspicion in social terms.

157.  In addition, Ms Monekosso considered that given the  number  of  myths
    well-known in the country about  traditional  matters  and  witchcraft,
    other communities would not wish to  have  a  'Muslim  fugitive  woman'
    living in  their  community.   Not  having  acted  in  accordance  with
    tradition, the appellant would be widely perceived by any community  as
    threatening and dangerous; for other ethnic groups to harbour  such  an
    individual would be embarrassing.  This stigma and discrimination would
    seriously affect the appellant's attempts at relocation.

158.  Ms Monekosso thus concluded her report as follows:

         "The institutions in Cte d'Ivoire who should in theory protect  an
         individual such as Ms D are in fact  completely  ineffective.   The
         judiciary is highly corrupt; the police and army are  characterised
         by frequent resorts to brutality and show no concern for protecting
         women against harsh traditional social practices, regardless of the
         letter of the law that bans domestic violence".


Ms Monekosso's second report


159.  In her second report dated 8 October 2008  Ms  Monekosso  set  out  in
    French and also in translation the provisions of  Article  391  of  the
    Ivory Coast's  Penal  Code.   It  will  be  as  well  to  set  out  the
    translation:

         "Adultery is not only grounds for  divorce,  but  also  an  offence
         punishable by imprisonment of two months  to  one  year.   A  woman
         found guilty of adultery is punished along with her  partner.   For
         her husband's adultery to be  punishable,  however,  he  must  have
         committed the act in the marital home or have had an ongoing sexual
         relationship with a woman other than his wife outside  the  marital
         home.  The man's partner is not punished.  Divorce proceedings  may
         be averted  or  halted  by  the  offending  spouse's  collusion  or
         forgiveness."


160.  Ms Monekosso continued that she now recognised that it was:

         "Immediately apparent that paragraph 48 of my original  report  was
         mistaken in suggesting that the penal code did not  criminalise  or
         punish male spouses for adultery."


161.  Ms Monekosso continued that:

         "Plainly, a male spouse may be criminally liable for  adultery  but
         in more limited circumstances than female spouses.  A female spouse
         is exposed to criminal liability for any act of adultery, whereas a
         male spouse is only liable for an adulterous  act  in  the  marital
         home or for a series of adulterous acts with a woman.


      It would seem that a male spouse is not  punishable  under  the  penal
      code for single acts of adultery with different women outside  of  the
      marital home".


162.  Ms Monekosso's report continued by reference to  information  she  had
    received from Fatimata Diabate who was described as:

         "The Training Officer of the Association of Women  Jurists  of  the
         Ivory Coast, who was admitted to the Bar of Abidjan in  [date]  and
         who practices as an advocate, that in practice it is very much more
         difficult for a woman to bring a charge  of  adultery  against  her
         spouse than it is for a man to do so against his spouse. Ms Diabate
         is from the Northern Ivory Coast as is the appellant". (The  square
         bracket reference  is  Ms  Monekosso's  who  did  not  subsequently
         provide us with any information as to  the  date  of  Ms  Diabate's
         admission to the Abidjan Bar).


163.  Ms Monekosso summarised the information that she had gleaned  from  Ms
    Diabate. Indeed, many of the paragraphs that follow begin or  end  with
    the expression "Ms Diabate advised that ..."

164.  Ms Monekosso was told by Ms Diabate, that before a male  spouse  could
    be prosecuted for adultery,  consent  was  required  from  two  sources
    firstly the Procureur de  le  Republique  and  secondly  from  a  court
    bailiff.  There were no  restrictions  governing  the  commencement  of
    criminal  proceedings  against  women  for   adultery.    In   practice
    therefore, Ms Diabate advised that only female spouses were  punishable
    under Article 391.  Ms Diabate had however, further advised that there
    were no reported cases in the Ivory Coast concerning the prosecution of
    female spouses under Article 391.  That was not to say  there  had  not
    been any prosecutions, but the court archive could  only  be  consulted
    with the permission of the Procureur de le  Republique  and  then  only
    after a legal process to determine whether  access  was  necessary  and
    relevant to the needs of the country.

165.  Ms Diabate advised that it was much more common for  husbands  to  use
    traditional or informal institutions to punish their female spouses for
    adultery.

166.  Ms Diabate advised that  a  woman  such  as  the  appellant  would  be
    publicly shamed and blamed.  The appellant would be  required  to  take
    the Calabash  and  make  several  tours  of  the  village  roads.   The
    appellant would be forced  to  confess  her  adultery  in  the  various
    compounds that housed the community and  beg  for  forgiveness.   Local
    community leaders would question the appellant in front of her husband.
     The appellant's husband would have the choice of pardoning, punishing,
    tolerating or repudiating  his  wife.   Punishments  could  range  from
    forced servitude on the husband's land for both the appellant  and  her
    child, beatings followed by repudiation,  ritualistic  cutting  of  the
    appellant's back to leave scars indicating that she was an  adulteress,
    ostracism or even honour killings.

167.  Ostracism was a particularly devastating form of  punishment  in  that
    the appellant would no longer be allowed  to  share  the  life  of  her
    community. So severe was the punishment of ostracism, that every member
    of the community would dread it and do everything possible to avoid it.
     It deprived one of access to land and any means of livelihood.

168.  Notably, Ms Monekosso conceded that she had no personal  knowledge  of
    the rituals or punishments observed by the Muslim community in Odienne.
    Every extended family or tribe would  have  evolved  its  own  distinct
    ethical  code.   Ms  Monekosso  sourced  that  information   from   the
    following: "Crime and African Traditional Religion", S A Adewale.

169.  Ms Monekosso concluded her second report  by  repeating  that  it  was
    unrealistic to expect a lone Muslim woman  with  a  child  to  live  an
    independent life which would not be unduly harsh  in  the  Ivory  Coast
    pointing out that:

         "Apart from or outside a traditional family or community network of
         support  such  a  life  would  be  below  the  minimum  level   for
         subsistence, alternatively, the  appellant  would  be  forced  into
         prostitution and trafficking".




Ms Monekosso's Oral Evidence and evaluation


170.  In addition to her written reports, we have  had  the  opportunity  of
    listening to and evaluating Ms Monekosso's lengthy oral evidence before
    us over a period of two days.  Although  we  do  not  underestimate  or
    undervalue  the  expressed  opinion  of  someone   whose   professional
    experience and knowledge of related humanitarian affairs in Africa  has
    extended over more than twenty years, we  have  nevertheless  concluded
    that her evidence falls to be treated with caution.   Our  reasons  for
    so finding are as follows.

171.  At an early stage in her  oral  evidence  we  asked  Ms  Monekosso  to
    explain to us why there was no report directly from  Ms  Diabate.   Her
    response was as follows:

         "Women do not want to be named publicly.  I did not ask Ms  Diabate
         for a statement I  told  her  I  was  preparing  the  report  as  a
         journalist not that I was preparing a report for the court.  In  my
         experience I have learned every time I have  asked  questions  from
         people, if I say it is for a court to be publicised they would be a
         little afraid.  I told her that I  was  not  going  to  name  her."
         (Emphasis added)


172.  When it was drawn to  Ms  Monekosso's  attention,  that  her  evidence
    (insofar as it related to the Ivory Coast's Civil Code  Procedures  and
    particularly Article 391 of the Penal Code) appeared to us to be second-
    hand, her candid response was as follows:

      "The only evidence I have in this matter is what  I  was  told  by  Ms
      Diabate". (Emphasis added)


173.  When asked as to whether Ms Diabate had provided details of the  proof
    required in terms of establishing the fact of  adultery,  Ms  Monekosso
    responded that she did receive an explanation from Ms Diabate:

      "But I do not think I mention that in my report because that  was  not
      asked of me and I did not want to give more  information  than  I  was
      asked - but there are several forms of proof according to  the  ethnic
      groups".


174.  When asked if she had undertaken any research  studies  in  the  Ivory
    Coast her response was evasive in her stating:

         "It depends on what you mean.  I am an investigator."


175.  On being further pressed, Ms Monekosso explained that she worked  with
    a colleague who conducted research for the UNHCR under the auspices  of
    Writenet which was in fact an UNHCR bulletin.  Ms Monekosso had  worked
    "most for the confidential press and the public press".

176.  Whilst we are mindful that an expert can be  perfectly  well-qualified
    to speak about the territory without herself having been there (see for
    example, K [2005] EWCA Civ 1627) we have concluded upon a consideration
    of Ms Monekosso's evidence, oral and documentary,  that  her  expertise
    has significant limitations in the sense that she  has  a  wide-ranging
    interest in Pan African/ethnic affairs as a  journalist,  with  a  very
    keen interest in African issues.  She last visited the Ivory Coast  for
    one week with a  group  of  some  200  journalists  in  December  2007.
    However, it became apparent to us in the course of her  oral  evidence,
    that her direct knowledge of matters relating to the Ivory Coast was in
    fact limited.

177.  Much of her evidence in relation to the Ivory Coast was  derived  from
    what she was told by Ms Diabate in the course of a telephone  interview
    that Ms Monekosso admitted had been conducted in circumstances where Ms
    Diabate had been misled as to its purpose.  Ms  Monekosso  on  her  own
    admission misled Ms Diabate when assuring her that any information that
    she gave would not be  the  subject  of  a  report  or  for  a  Court's
    evaluation.  She also said that she would maintain the  confidentiality
    of her source.

178.  Although much of Ms Monekosso's report is  clearly  derived  from  the
    same sources as we have set out above, we are concerned  about  certain
    aspects  of  the  report  and,  in  particular,  her   evidence   about
    punishments meted out in traditional communities upon those accused  of
    adultery. Mr Bedford both before us and in his skeleton  argument  (see
    for example paragraph 54 of his skeleton) was clear that  Ms Monekosso
    was:

         "... the principal source of the evidence that female  adultery  is
         severely punished by traditional society for which she  is  reliant
         on Ms Diabate, Training Officer of the Association of Women Jurists
         in the Ivory Coast and Barrister  in  Abidjan:  Monekosso's  report
         Oct. 2008 paras 11 to 15".


179.  Ms Monekosso gave evidence that Ms Diabate had  given  her  permission
    to mention her name and she admitted that Ms Diabate was  unaware  that
    it was for court proceedings.  When  asked  to  explain,  Ms  Monekosso
    responded:

         "I think I need to go back to my recollection.   Generally I say to
         people they won't be quoted just to reassure  them.   That  is  the
         best way to preserve my contact for me to be able to approach  them
         in the future without any problem - but as a journalist I  am  free
         to mention them - it is up to me  to  deal  with  it  ...   In  our
         profession we are free to quote or not quote someone".


180. When asked if it was so, even  if  it  meant  breaking  a  promise,  Ms
    Monekosso responded:

         "Yes - even if it would cause a scandal - we have the right and  in
         some instances when we are asked  to  reveal  our  sources  we  can
         refuse ... that is how we work in general - apart from  the  formal
         interviewing most of the time we just have an  informal  discussion
         rather than a formal interview". (Emphasis added).


181.  It was put to Ms  Monekosso  that  her  answers  meant  that  she  was
    prepared to mislead an interviewee in the cause of  journalism  on  the
    basis that  the  means  justified  the  ends.   To  this  Ms  Monekosso
    responded that it was:

         "... a working technique an investigative technique and we  get  in
         step by step to obtain the most credible information".


182.  Ms Monekosso continued that she recalled telephoning  Ms  Diabate  and
    informing her that she was a journalist gathering  information  on  the
    Ivory Coast but that:

         "I didn't mention at any time court proceedings.  As  a  journalist
         and woman I must have mentioned to her that  I  was  interested  in
         women's' rights in the Ivory Coast.  I asked  the  questions  about
         adultery and I said  to  her  that  I  wanted  to  find  out  about
         traditional practices since it was not written law - and  she  gave
         me all the details on what she knew so I did not mention the  court
         or any hearings".


183.  When asked in what context Ms Monekosso informed Ms Diabate  that  her
    name would not be mentioned, Ms Monekosso responded in general terms as
    follows:

         "I told her not to worry.  Once  I  have  introduced  myself  as  a
         journalist I say 'Listen I just want some  information  -  I  won't
         mention your name anywhere - it's not a formal interview'. This  is
         to put people at ease. Then they would not have to  ask  me  'Would
         you publish my name?'."


184.  Ms Monekosso continued:

         "It was better that she should feel I  was  writing  for  a  female
         magazine".

185.  In our judgment, Ms Monekosso's approach was not only  misleading  and
    regrettable but  also  prejudiced  the  integrity  of  the  information
    provided.  She should have appreciated that  an  interviewee  would  be
    likely to speak in different terms if told that what she had to say was
    for the purposes of a court report as distinct from  information  given
    in the course of a casual discussion about her work with  a  friend  or
    acquaintance.

186.  Formal interviews attributable to an official speaking  on  behalf  of
    an organisation for whom she works with the knowledge that the material
    will be used for the purposes of a Tribunal's proceedings are likely to
    provide  different  information  from  an  off-the  cuff,  unattributed
    expression of opinion.  Far from providing more  reliable  information,
    (as Ms Monekosso appears to have thought), we would have thought it  is
    likely to be less reliable; all the more so, if it is the  sole  source
    for that information.

187.  At paragraph 18 of her first report, Ms Monekosso told us that:

         "Men are not punishable under the criminal law for marital rape  or
         adultery".


188.  In the same vein at paragraph 48 of her report Ms Monekosso stated:

         "Men are permitted to rape and abuse their spouses with impunity".


189.  By the time of her second report, Ms Monekosso acknowledged  that  she
    was mistaken in suggesting that the penal code did not  criminalise  or
    punish male spouses for adultery and that:

         "Plainly a male spouse may be criminally liable for adultery ...".


190.  At paragraph 7 of her first report, Ms Monekosso quoted from a  source
    that asserted that:

         "In secular matters, most cases are adjudicated  upon  in  informal
         hearings, often convened by the village  chief  but  in  any  event
         family  and  community  members   may   also   apply   disciplinary
         procedures, even  trying  and  torturing  individuals  for  serious
         violations of norms, such as adultery".


191.  In fact, the document from which Ms Monekosso was quoting, related  to
    Uganda and as Ms  Kiss  rightly  noted,  Ms  Monekosso  has  not  since
    submitted alternative written background  evidence  demonstrating  such
    practices in the Ivory Coast.

192.  This was not the only occasion in the course of Ms  Monekosso's  first
    report where her evidence as  to  the  position  of  women  in  Ivorian
    society was sourced from material relating to a different country.   At
    paragraph 20 of her first report, Ms Monekosso had stated as follows:

           "Traditional  society  in  effect  seeks  to  guide  women   and
           reinforce their acceptance of living within community  norms  as
           second  class  citizens.    There   are   equally   rituals   of
           purification, as well as punitive measures to deter and curb the
           tendency to deviate from these norms.  Every extended family  or
           tribe evolves its distinct ethical code."


193.  That contention was sourced as a  footnote  to  her  report  from  the
    following: "Crime and African Traditional Religion", S.A. Adewale.

194.  When cross-examined, Ms Monekosso was informed by Ms  Kiss,  that  she
    had obtained a copy of Mr Adewale's report from which it was clear that
    it did not relate to the Ivory Coast but  to  Nigeria.   There  was  no
    mention of the Ivory Coast in the document.  Ms Monekosso was therefore
    asked on what basis (given that she again referred to the  same  report
    at paragraph 11 of her second report) she relied  on  it  as  being  of
    probative effect in relation to conditions in the Ivory Coast.

195.  Ms Monekosso's response largely  evaded  the  issue.   She  sought  to
    explain that she worked:

         "... on different ethnic groups  across  Africa  and  these  ethnic
         groups  often  have  the  same  traditions   but   with   different
         approaches".


196.  There may or may not be traditions which  cross  national  borders  or
    ethnic groupings.  In some cases, therefore,  it  may  be  possible  to
    derive support from information from other countries.  Where,  however,
    this is relied upon, we  would  expect  to  see  the  source  carefully
    explained and suitable consideration given as to whether a  correlation
    is established.

197.  Ms Monekosso continued  that  insofar  as  Mr  Adewale's  report  was
    concerned he talked about adultery and that:


         "... even if it is not the same practice in the Ivory  Coast  -  in
         the Ivory Coast itself the practice is different but the logics  of
         punishment are more or less the same".


198.  When asked why she had not made these matters clear in her report,  Ms
    Monekosso stated that she worked:

         "... on traditional questions.  My  aim  is  towards  the  'ethnic'
         rather than the 'country'."


199.  Ms Monekosso was aware that Mr Adewale was Nigerian  and  provided  no
    satisfactory explanation as to  how  a  traditional  paper  on  African
    Traditional Religion had direct relevance to the  appellant  who  comes
    from a Muslim background.

200. Although in paragraph 11 of her second report, Ms Monekosso  said  that
    she had "no personal knowledge of the rituals or  punishments  observed
    by the Muslim community in Odienne" she had then referred to an extract
    from Mr Adewale's report.  When asked to explain how, at paragraph  14,
    she could thus state that the appellant would suffer "beatings followed
    by repudiation, ritualistic cutting of the appellant's  back  to  leave
    scars, indicating that she is an adulteress, ostracism or  even  honour
    killing", she failed to provide an adequate response and accepted  that
    she had no specific evidence  that  the  Muslim  community  in  Odienne
    practised beatings and the treatment that she had  earlier  identified.
    She had relied on the information given to her by Miss Diabate although
    she again accepted that Ms Diabate's  information  was  based  "on  the
    people of  the  North  without  being  specific  about  the  people  in
    Odienne".

201.  Ms Monekosso came from Cameroon.  We had seen  references  to  Nigeria
    and Uganda.  What Ms Monekosso appeared to  be  talking  about  was  in
    global terms over all the continents of West Africa and  was  thus  not
    limited to the Francophone areas.  We  were  not  persuaded  that  such
    parallels might properly be drawn, at least without a suitable level of
    caution, not expressed in her report.


202.  Ms Monekosso also told us about the existence  of  "secret  societies"
    in the Ivory Coast of which we observed there was no mention in  either
    of her reports.  Her explanation for its omission  was  unsatisfactory,
    saying that it was implied although not expressly stated.  We were  not
    told where the implication is said to have arisen.

203.  In oral evidence, Ms Monekosso accepted that her reports  contained  a
    number of errors and in that regard we are mindful of the  observations
    of the Tribunal at paragraph 58 of SD Lebanon [2008] UKAIT 00078:

         "The fact that an expert has included a quote attributing it  to  a
         report which does not in fact include that quote, raises  questions
         about the accuracy of the expert's report  in  other  respects  ...
         Experts ... can make mistakes.  On the other hand we cannot dismiss
         this error out of hand as  a  trifling  matter  either,  given  the
         Tribunal is entitled to expect the material quoted in  an  expert's
         report is actually taken from the  document  indicated  to  be  the
         source of the  quote  and  that  sources  for  any  quotations  are
         adequately indicated."


204.  We have found that Ms Monekosso's errors, as Ms Kiss  aptly  described
    them, went "beyond the mere typographical".

205.  On 20 June 2008, Senior Immigration Judge Gill  adjourned  the  appeal
    to give the Home Office time to consider additional evidence lodged  by
    the  appellant.   SIJ  Gill  issued  specific  directions   and   asked
    Ms Monekosso to produce her background source.  Ms Monekosso's  report
    dated 19 June 2008 did not comply with that observation.

206.  It was Ms Kiss who managed  to  ascertain  that  the  source  for  the
    material referred  to  in  paragraph  190  (disciplinary  action,  even
    amounting to torture, taken by local chiefs for  adultery)  related  to
    Uganda to which we have above referred in paragraph 192.

207.  Further in her second report, having stated no personal  knowledge  of
    the Douala, Ms Monekosso then relied on the report of Mr Adewale which
    was sourced from an article that was predominantly a polemic about  the
    Yoruba in Nigeria.

208.  It is against this background  that  we  assess  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Monekosso insofar as it relates to risk on return.  Ms Monekosso  is  a
    journalist  who  uses  investigative  techniques  in  order   to   seek
    information.  When asked if she had published any recent  papers  since
    she left university, Ms Monekosso explained that  her  techniques  were
    simply investigative, describing herself as an investigator.  There  is
    something of the campaigner in her, seeking to  advance  the  cause  of
    women in Africa for which she must be applauded but in  our  view  this
    has led to the loss, in part, of a rigorously objective approach.

209.   We  find  it  difficult  to  follow  the  logic  of  Ms   Monekosso's
    uncertainty as to whether the appellant could be punished under Article
    391 for adultery given that she was not married under  ordinance.    If
    the appellant had entered into  a  customary  marriage,  there  was  no
    reasonable  prospect  of  her  being  prosecuted.   That  Ms  Monekosso
    maintained that the risk was "uncertain" and  expressed  reluctance  to
    change her position, does not properly  reflect  the  evidence  as  the
    Record of Proceedings reveals. Ms Monekosso acknowledged at paragraph 9
    of her second report, that there  were  no  reported  cases  of  female
    spouses being prosecuted for adultery under Article 391.

210.  Having finally accepted that the appellant would not be prosecuted  by
    the law, she then insisted that the appellant would face punishment  by
    traditional methods in her home town. She "did not think the law  would
    consider her legally married..." and accepted that the appellant  would
    "not be prosecuted by the law - but by traditional methods in her  home
    town".

211.  In that regard we would  refer  to  the  following  extract  from  our
    record:

         "Ms Kiss:     You say family and community members may  also  apply
              disciplinary procedures?


         Ms Monekosso: I made a mistake.


         Q. I have obtained the documents in  relation  to  which  you  have
              sourced that claim (Ssenyonjo International  Law  Policy  the
              Family 2007).  It seems you have not added that  it  actually
              relates to Uganda why didn't you mention it?


         Ms Monekosso: I think I made a very big mistake maybe I  was  doing
                          some research.


         Chairman:            Why did you  not  bring  this  matter  to  our
                      attention of your own volition?


         Ms Monekosso:  It was only this morning when I saw this document  -
                          no one asked
                                       me to bring it to your attention.


         Ms Kiss:      This is a document upon which you rely -  surely  you
              cannot say                     you didn't know all  that  was
              in the document till this morning?


         A.       The contents of that document had nothing to do with  what
              I wrote in  that  paragraph.   This  document  talks  of  the
              Constitution in relation to Uganda and the rights of women, I
              am talking about traditional punishment - I am so sorry.


         Ms Kiss:      How can you say what you said  in  paragraph  57  and
              source it to an          unsound document  which  is  talking
              about another country to that        which you are  referring
              to in this report?


         Ms Monekosso:    I made a mistake." (Emphasis added)


212.  We turn now to what appears to  have  been  Ms  Monekosso's  essential
    source of information on  the  Douala,  namely  that  gleaned  from  Ms
    Diabate.  For the reasons we have given, the weight that we  attach  to
    this information is limited.  Ms Diabate is the Training Officer of the
    Association of Women Jurists of the Ivory Coast, a practising  advocate
    of uncertain experience.  This does not assist  us  in  evaluating  her
    evidence.

213.  Having obtained the evidence of Ms  Diabate,  Ms  Monekosso  does  not
    appear to have attempted to verify it through any independent  sources.
     When referred to the US State Department Reports, in which there  were
    no known incidents of resorts to physical  punishment,  Ms  Monekosso's
    attitude was somewhat dismissive.

214.  She admitted that she was mistaken in  relation  to  earlier  evidence
    that women in the Ivory Coast did not have property rights.

215.  Ms Monekosso continued that there was:

         "... something I noticed in the Civil Code.  Ms D's  husband's  age
         is very significant indeed. In 2003 he was 70 meaning today 75  and
         if one considers the birth certification in the olden days he could
         be 80 but the 1964 Law which abolished polygamy and  brought  about
         civil marriage, did not abolish the existing polygamous marriage or
         the customary marriage".


216.  At this point in her evidence, Ms  Monekosso  was  reminded  that  the
    appellant's marriage took place in 2004/2005 and therefore the Marriage
    Act of 1964 would not have permitted a polygamous marriage  that  post-
    dated it.

217. We are thus reinforced in our view that Ms Monekosso's evidence  should
    be approached with care and we are  not  persuaded  (unless  the  legal
    provisions  permitting  it  were  strictly  proved)  that  a   marriage
    celebrated after 1964 might be a lawful polygamous  marriage,  even  if
    the first marriage had been conducted before 1964.


The FCO Political Officer's letter of 19 December 2008

218.  The letter of 19 December 2008 stated as follows:

      "This answer has been papered by the FCO Political  Officer  who  has
         been at post in Cote  d'Ivoire  since  July  2007.   The  Political
         Officer spoke to LIDHO, a local Human Rights NGO, a member  of  the
         Human Rights Division of the UN Mission  in  Cote  d'Ivoire  and  a
         Dioula community leader resident in Abidjan and  a  member  of  the
         Association of Women Jurists in Cote d'Ivoire in order  to  prepare
         this answer.


         The only legally recognised form of marriage in Cote d'Ivoire is  a
         civil wedding.  Religious and customary marriage  services  do  not
         have legal status although they are widespread.  According  to  all
         interlocutors it is  common  practice  in  Northern  Cote  d'Ivoire
         (including for members  of  the  Dioula  community)  for  customary
         marriage to be religious service conducted by an Imam.


         The legal age for marriage in Cote d'Ivoire is 18 for girls and  21
         for men.   However,  all  interlocutors  confirmed  that  customary
         practice allows girls to be married at any time after  puberty  and
         this is generally tolerated.


         Forced marriage  of  minors  is  common  in  rural  areas  of  Cote
         d'Ivoire.   ONUCI (the UN Mission to Cote  d'Ivoire)  Human  Rights
         Division are regularly asked to intervene before a  marriage  takes
         place but their scope is limited.  They talk to the  girl's  family
         and explain that under age marriage is illegal.  In most cases this
         is proven adequate to stop or  postpone  the  marriages.   On  some
         occasions ONUCI has consulted the Children's  Law  Courts  and  the
         judges then speak to the parents, the  threat  of  prosecution  has
         today proven sufficient deterrent in cases  where  ONUCI  has  been
         involved.  ONUCI believes that  as  under  age  marriages  are  not
         considered unusual therefore the legal systems are  likely  to  get
         involved unless one party brings a complaint.


         I have been unable to find statistics for the  number  of  divorces
         granted in Cote d'Ivoire.  The ONUCI Human Rights Officer  and  the
         representatives of all LIDHO believe that legal divorces are  rare.
         In part this is due to the small  proportion  of  unions  that  are
         legalised.  A civil marriage can be dissolved in a  court  of  law.
         Either party may start divorce  proceedings  although,  it  is  the
         impression of the LIDHO representatives that judges tend to set the
         burden of proof higher for women asking for a divorce than for men.
          No court process is required to dissolve  customary  or  religious
         marriages as they do not have legal status in Cote d'Ivoire.


         According to the member of the Dioula community I spoke with,  most
         Dioula marriages are blessed by an Imam.  An Imam could be asked to
         dissolve the marriage but this is purely for religious reasons,  it
         would not be necessary for legal  ones.   Should  one  party  to  a
         customary or religious marriage wish to remarry there is  no  legal
         obstacle, the other party would have no legal  recourse  to  oppose
         the marriage.  I was told by the Dioula community leader that it is
         straightforward for  a  man  to  repudiate  a  wife  married  under
         customary traditions.  It is considerably more difficult for a wife
         to do this, because her  family  will  try  to  keep  the  marriage
         together.


         The  Dioula  community  member  and  the  representatives  of   the
         Association of Women Jurists stress the fact that families play  an
         important role both in forming an alliance, settling  any  problems
         during a marriage, and in dissolving it.  Families  will  endeavour
         to stop a marriage breaking down as it would dishonour the  family.
         Parents may not accept the daughter back into  their  home  if  she
         leaves her husband and a woman who has left her  husband  may  have
         difficulty finding a second husband in the same village.  But  this
         varies on a case by case basis.


         Customary practices can vary from village to village in the area of
         handling a separation or infidelity.  None of the people  consulted
         had ever heard of any sort of traditional punishment for  adultery.
         The NGO representatives pointed out that a legal charge of adultery
         would be difficult to defend in court when the  marriage  does  not
         have legal status.  The NGO representatives and the member  of  the
         Dioula community said that a common traditional  marriage  in  Cote
         d'Ivoire would be for the father of a child born to  another  man's
         wife to apologise and settle the matter  with  the  woman's  family
         and/or her first husband.  This  would  take  the  form  of  family
         representatives meeting to discuss the matter and usually  settling
         damages (this  could  mean  the  return  of  dowry/payment  of  new
         dowry/payments relating to the maintenance of  wife  and/or  child.
         These negotiations are usually undertaken by senior family  members
         of all  parties.   They  felt  that  it  is  highly  unlikely  that
         negotiations would be conducted directly  by  those  involved.   In
         addition my interlocutors from the Human Rights field said that  as
         forced marriages are illegal (but happen) village community leaders
         would be reluctant to seek legal intervention as  this  would  risk
         scrutiny of their affairs.


         Under Article 391 of Ivoirian law both husbands and  wives  can  be
         convicted of adultery and given a sentence between 2 months and one
         a year.  Charges must be brought by the injured party.   It  should
         be noted that the law only applies to legally recognised marriages.
          No one I consulted had ever heard of  women  of  Dioula  ethnicity
         being subject to any form of ritual punishment if  they  have  been
         accused of adultery or of having an  illegitimate  child.    It  is
         possible that traditions vary from village to village but  this  is
         not standard or widespread Dioula practice.


         The representative of the Dioula  community  said  that  in  Dioula
         society it is unlikely that a woman would be expected to speak  for
         herself and would not be expected to undergo  any  sort  of  public
         ceremony or be tried by village elders.  If a problem needed to  be
         solved the normal course of action would be for families to meet to
         agree reparations if for example she was pregnant  and  the  father
         was not her husband.  None of my interlocators had ever heard  talk
         of a purification ceremony in such a case.  Purification ceremonies
         are limited to puberty and all FGM initiations.  They are conducted
         in private with no men involved.  None of the cases  consulted  had
         heard of cases where a  village  would  subject  a  woman  with  an
         illegitimate child to punishment or threaten the life of the child.


         A woman who has left her husband may have difficulty being accepted
         by her immediate family.  But this is unlikely to extend  to  being
         ostracised by all members of the community, or by the wider  family
         living outside the village.


         Although frowned upon in rural areas,  the  member  of  the  Dioula
         community and the NGO representatives believe that it is common  in
         Cote d'Ivoire for women to have illegitimate children.   In  towns,
         such as Abidjan, it is normal for couples only to marry  after  the
         birth of  one  or  two  children.   This  also  applies  in  Dioula
         communities.  According to the member of the  Dioula  community,  a
         woman returning to her village with illegitimate children would  be
         accepted although it would be preferable for her to  be  cohabiting
         with the father of the child  or  children.   This  may  vary  from
         village to village and family to family.


         There are reports of children disappearing and unconfirmed  rumours
         of ritualistic killing  of  children  in  Cote  d'Ivoire.  This  is
         confirmed by media  stories  and  children's  NGOs.   There  is  no
         evidence to suggest that this is in any way linked to the elections
         nor that this practice is widespread.  The police and  military  in
         Cote d'Ivoire can be intimidating and many regularly ask for bribes
         but I am not aware of evidence to suggest that police target  women
         with illegitimate children.  None of my interlocutors  raised  this
         as a particular problem.


         The Dioula live in a large area  across  the  north  east  of  Cote
         d'Ivoire around the town of Odienne.  The Dioula also live in Mali,
         Burkina Faso  and  Guinea.    According  to  the  Dioula  community
         representative they  are  seasonally  nomadic,  moving  with  their
         livestock although they have a paternal village to which they  will
         return if the rains permit.


         Communities in Cote d'Ivoire retain a distinct ethnic identity  but
         there is much intermarriage and  communities  live  side  by  side.
         According to the Dioula community representative  a  single  Dioula
         woman with a child will be looked after by her community until  she
         can stand on her  own  feet.   She  would  also  be  able  to  live
         alongside other communities.   According to the representatives  of
         Women Jurists a single mother is vulnerable and may  have  problems
         being accepted by her family if she cannot support herself,  but  a
         single woman able to earn enough to  look  after  herself  and  any
         children is unlikely to have  difficulty  to  be  accepted  by  her
         community."


219.  This letter was a response to an earlier letter of  10  November  2008
    which had been placed before us at the hearing  of  24  November  2008.
    Mr Bedford had challenged the weight that should be attached  to  that
    earlier letter  from  the  Embassy.  Mr  Bedford  complained  that  the
    identity of the Political Officer was not known nor anything about  his
    or her  standing,  educational  background,  experience,  expertise  or
    material on which he or she had relied.  Mr Bedford complained that the
    points raised by the Political Officer could and should have  been,  if
    not put to the expert, dealt with  earlier.   The  responses  from  the
    Political Officer clearly still had to be put to Ms Monekosso  for  her
    consideration.

220.  Ms Kiss had accepted that her request  to  the  Embassy  was  received
    after the earlier hearing in October 2008.  It was on  8  October  2008
    when the Home Office had received Ms Monekosso's second report  and  Ms
    Kiss thus raised questions of the Political Officer that needed  to  be
    answered.

221.  It was for these reasons that  the  November  2008  hearing  had  been
    adjourned.  We gave the following directions, amongst others:

    "1.    The respondent to ask the Political  Officer  who  authored  the
         letter of 10 November 2008 to give his/her reasons  for  remaining
         anonymous or if not to reveal his/her identity.
    2.      To  provide  details  of  his/her   standing,   expertise   and
         educational background (we do not see how the writers gender  would
         be relevant).
    3.     To identify the sources of the information (where applicable) in
         the respective paragraphs of the letter.
    4.     Such information will be required from the Political Officer  in
         writing to be served on the Tribunal and the appellant's solicitors
         no later than Monday 22 December 2008.
    5.     The appellant is  at  liberty  to  obtain  and  serve  upon  the
         Tribunal  and  the  respondent  any  written  response   from   the
         appellant's expert, Ms Monekosso, no later than Monday  12  January
         2009.
    6.     The respondent must notify the Tribunal in writing no later than
         22 December 2008 as to whether a video/telephone link with  Abidjan
         is technically possible in order to secure the Political  Officer's
         oral evidence and if so whether the Political Officer concerned  is
         willing and able to give such oral evidence."


222.  The respondent's response was the letter of 19 December 2008.

223.  The Tribunal subsequently received a  letter  dated  12  January  2009
    from Peter Jones who described himself as Deputy Director, Migration at
    the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office.   The  letter  referred  to  the
    present case and stated as follows:

         "Following a request by the UK Border Agency, the  British  Embassy
         in Abidjan obtained  information  in  relation  to  certain  issues
         regarding customary marriage in d'Ivoire.  This was provided  in  a
         letter  from  the  Embassy  dated  10  November  2009,  which   was
         subsequently submitted by UKBA as evidence in the above case.


         We understand  that  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  in  the  case
         directed that the author of the letter should clearly identify  the
         sources of the information provided.  Accordingly, the  letter  has
         been re-cast, clearly attributing each piece of information to  the
         source or sources it was obtained from.  We hope that this would be
         of assistance.  We understand that  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge
         also directed that the Political  Officer  who  wrote  the  letter,
         should give reasons for remaining anonymous and provide details  of
         her standing, experience and educational background; and  that  she
         should take part as a witness if practically possible.


         The author of the letter has indicated how long she has been in her
         current post. However, we would prefer that author did not  provide
         further personal details or appear as a witness, for the  following
         reasons:


          . The author simply collected the information from the  identified
            sources.  She is not the source of the information  herself  and
            cannot  expand  upon  the  information  supplied.   She   should
            therefore not be seen as an 'expert'.


          . In our view, the authority of the letter lies in the  fact  that
            it has been issued by the British  Embassy  in  Abidjan,  rather
            than the personal credentials of the individual who provided it.


          . Such letters are regularly provided by posts abroad to UKBA  and
            often have input from senior/legal staff as well as  the  actual
            signatory.  If embassy staff were to be  routinely  required  to
            give evidence in cases where these letters are used in evidence,
            there would be considerable practical and resource implications,
            which would  likely  impact  on  the  ability  to  provide  this
            service.


         I hope this is helpful.  If any further information is required  by
         the Tribunal, we will be happy to try to provide  it  on  the  same
         basis as the revised letter".


224.  There was attached to Mr Jones' letter the  revised  letter  dated  22
    December 2008 to which he had referred.  It read as follows:

      "I attach a copy the evidence supplied by the FCO in response to  the
         Tribunal's directions at the hearing.


         The Political Officer has revised her document to  enable  specific
         identification of the sources of the  information.    However,  the
         Political Officer would prefer not to be identified or take part as
         a witness as she has  simply  gathered  the  information  from  the
         identified sources and cannot add to the  information  supplied  as
         she is not the direct source of that  evidence.   The  Tribunal  is
         respectfully reminded that the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Procedure
         Rules 2005 do not give it power to  issue  a  summons  outside  the
         United Kingdom (Rule 50(1)).   It is believed this  restriction  to
         its  powers  may  well  be  a  reflection  of  the  major  resource
         implications that would arise where FCO personnel abroad are to  be
         required to participate in AIT hearings.


         Although the FCO Political Officer has noted that she has  been  at
         post since July 2007, having discussed the matter with COI Service,
         it  is  not  considered  appropriate  to  provide  details  of  her
         'standing-    expertise/experience/educational    background'    as
         requested.  It is held that the authority of 'FCO advice' lies  not
         in the personal credential of the individual who has  supplied  it,
         but in the fact that the FCO has authorised that  person  to  speak
         for them, often with input from other senior colleagues."

 225. At the resumed hearing on  19  January  2009,  Ms  Monekosso  had  not
    replied to  the  observations  of  the  Political  Officer.    Ms  Kiss
    reminded us that the new evidence was served in November 2008 and  that
    the respondent had followed the directions and provided more details of
    the sources of the Political Officer's information.   That  information
    had  been  provided  to  Ms  Monekosso  on  22  December  2008  and  if
    Ms Monekosso chose not to respond then Ms Kiss invited the Tribunal to
    draw their conclusions from her lack of response;  that  there  was  no
    need for Ms Monekosso to attend any further and a  statement  would  be
    sufficient.

226.  We wanted  to  hear  Ms  Monekosso's  response  and  the  hearing  was
    adjourned for her to attend.


227.  At the resumed hearing, no further statement  from  Ms Monekosso  was
    served upon the Tribunal.  However, Ms Monekosso told us that  she  had
    read the  report  and  properly  analysed  it.   No  doubt  mindful  of
    representations made by Mr Bedford in her presence, as  to  the  weight
    the Tribunal should attach to the report, Ms Monekosso told us that she
    could not identify the person who wrote the  report  or  the  name  and
    address.  She was, however, reminded in that regard  that  the  address
    was the British Embassy in Abidjan. Ms Monekosso continued that she was
    not aware of the credentials or titles of the  organisations  that  had
    been mentioned or the identities of the informants.

228.  Ms Monekosso made it clear that  she  had  no  personal  knowledge  of
    Douala but insisted that she  had  demonstrated  in  both  reports  her
    knowledge of Douala history and geographical location.  She  sought  to
    demonstrate that she could simply not identify the specific rituals  of
    the  Muslim  community  in  Odienne.   Ms  Monekosso   had   no   other
    observations to make in relation to the FCO report.

229.  The Political Officer did not attend before us.  Mr  Bedford  accepted
    that it might not be reasonable for the officer to come to  the  United
    Kingdom but he maintained that the Officer's absence went to the weight
    to be attached to the material. Miss Kiss submitted that to ignore  the
    evidence of the Political Officer would be to deprive the Tribunal of a
    proper objective assessment of the situation in the Ivory Coast.

230.  Ms Kiss reminded us of what the Tribunal had said in  LP  (Sri  Lanka)
    CG [2007] UKAIT 00076.  The nature of work of British Embassy  officers
    meant that they had connections with the countries  which  they  worked
    in, as in the case of the Political Officer who had been in post at the
    Ivory Coast  since  July  2007.   Although  the  persons  to  whom  the
    Political Officer spoke were not named, a synopsis  of  the  area  from
    which those people came was given.  These were relevant sources.

231.  Mr Bedford began his closing submissions to us on 9 June 2009  and  in
    the course of those submissions he made reference to the risk  of  rape
    to a lone woman without support and continued that:

         "... In such circumstances women are likely to be exposed  to  such
         risk. See for example the risk of such a person at roadblocks.


         If you have got a house in a community then the likelihood is  that
         you can avoid places of extreme danger.  These are matters relevant
         to the issue of internal relocation -  because  she  can  still  be
         alone and without support in Abidjan - the appellant  would  be  at
         risk for example at roadblocks and would not be able to avoid  that
         risk.  This is sure to be the position right up to the USSD  Report
         of 2009."


232.  Mr Bedford returned to his submissions  in  relation  to  "roadblocks"
    later in his submissions when he told us as follows:

         "Insofar as the Ivory Coast is concerned the fact of roadblocks  is
         relevant to this issue because the appellant would be vulnerable to
         risk at such blocks given that she  was  homeless,  unemployed  and
         without community support.  The objective  evidence  is  that  such
         women were at risk of being raped/sexually exploited  and  everyone
         is subject to extortion at these places, subject to the demands  of
         bandits, police who man the roadblocks.


         The objective evidence does not say where the roadblocks are".


233.  We asked Mr Bedford if he appreciated the importance of  what  he  had
    just stated in terms of  our  assessment  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant could safely relocate  to  Abidjan.   Could  he  for  example
    provide us with any material that indicated the prevalence or otherwise
    of such roadblocks in Abidjan?  Were they for instance prevalent within
    the city or did they only exist at the entrance and exit  of  the  city
    and other such cities?  The Tribunal needed to have some information as
    to the prevalence of the roadblocks to which Mr Bedford referred so  as
    to determine the level of risk to women that he sought to identify.  Mr
    Bedford said that he  was  unaware  of  any  background  material  that
    provided this information.

234.  His comments  elicited  a  response  in  a  further  letter  from  the
    Political Officer in Abidjan dated 30 July 2009 that we set out below:

         "This answer has been prepared by the FCO Political Officer who has
         been at post in Cote d'Ivoire since July 2007.  It is based  on  my
         own experiences and observations from living the Cote d'Ivoire  and
         travelling extensively both within the capital Abidjan  and  around
         the   country,   together   with   information   gathered    during
         conversations with Ivoirians in the past two years.


         Road blocks have significantly decreased over  the  period  that  I
         have been observing Cote d'Ivoire and they no longer pose a serious
         safety problem, although there are still instances of petty  police
         corruption at roadblocks and checkpoints.


         Firstly, it is worth pointing out that the only roadblocks now seen
         in Abidjan  are  those  mounted  by  uniformed  men,  who  are  now
         instructed to wear clearly visible identity cards.  The  roadblocks
         are better described as checkpoints and take  the  form  of  random
         vehicle checks, which often include a check  on  a  passenger's  ID
         papers.  Passengers whose  papers  are  in  order  do  not  usually
         encounter difficulties.  If a passenger does not have ID with  them
         the police will either accept a small bribe  (between  1-2,000  CFA
         about 70p-1.50) or will make the person wait  for  hours  or  take
         them to the police station until a 'fine' is  produced.   The  main
         targets though are taxi drivers who will be asked to pay  a  'fine'
         if there is anything wrong with their papers or their vehicle.


         Secondly the Forces Nouvelles and the Ivorian Army  jointly  agreed
         to reduce roadblocks and checkpoints across the country.  There are
         now official checkpoints on the  way  into  and  out  of  the  main
         cities.  These are staffed by a mixture  of  police,  military  and
         customs officers depending on their location.  They are busy  areas
         and the officers concerned do occasionally take advantage of  their
         position to impose impromptu 'fines' or request bribes.  But  I  am
         not  aware  of  reports  of  violence  targeting  women  at   these
         checkpoints since the implementation of the Ouagadougou  Accord  in
         2007.  Prior  to  the  Accord  there  were  instances  of  violence
         targeting women as set out in the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  on
         sexual violence in Cote d'Ivoire in August 2007.


         There continues to be a degree of insecurity on  rural  roads  with
         bandits holding up vehicles to rob a passenger; they usually target
         cash and cell phones.


         FCO travel advice to British Citizens regarding Checkpoints states:


             'Throughout the country, including in Abidjan,  the  army  and
             police operate checkpoints, particularly after dark at city or
             town limits  they target taxis  and  civilian  vehicles.   You
             should avoid confrontation with the police and security forces
             and co-operate politely if  you  need  to  pass  through  one.
             Police will request vehicle documents and passenger  ID.   The
             authorities have launched a crackdown  on  racketeering  which
             appears to be reducing random demands for money (and making it
             harder  for  drivers  to  sidestep  regulations).   They  have
             launched a hot line to report racketeering - TEL: 20 21 82  or
             06 57 00 93.  Police will frequently impose small fines.   You
             should expect them to provide a receipt for any fine paid.  If
             your car and papers are in order you should be  able  to  pass
             through without paying although this may  necessitate  a  long
             and patient wait.


             Some access roads to major roads are closed from  midnight  to
             0600.  This applies to the western approach road  to  Abidjan,
             Yamoussoukro, San Pedro and  all  other  major  towns  in  the
             south.   You  should  seek  local  advice  about   whether   a
             'corridor' is in operation.  Checkpoints will be more rigorous
             at night and it is better to avoid attempting to pass  through
             after dark'."


235.  At the resumed hearing on 18 August 2009, Ms Kiss was able to  further
    clarify to us that the Political  Officer's  recent  letter  was  cross
    referenced to a UNOCI Weekly Report but that the respondent's  attempts
    to access the document were abortive as UNOCI considered  the  document
    to be restricted and efforts by the FCO Legal Officer in  New  York  in
    approaching UNOCI for  permission  to  disclose  the  relevant  extract
    relating to Freedom of  Movement  from  their  report  had  yet  to  be
    forthcoming.  Ms Kiss had initially sought an  adjournment  to  obtain
    this document but on reflection informed  us  that  she  withdrew  that
    adjournment request but asked us to find and take note of the Political
    Officer's own experience based on over two years of her appointment  at
    Post.

236.  We have  concluded  that  we  can  place  significant  weight  on  the
    clarificatory evidence submitted by the Political Officer in Abidjan in
    her letters of 19 December 2008 and 13 July  2009.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion, we have also been assisted by  the  letter  of  explanation
    from Peter Jones the Deputy Director of Migration at  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office to the Tribunal dated 12 January 2009.

237.  It was Mr Bedford's submission, that the Political  Officer's  replies
    were compiled by an anonymous author  citing  anonymous  sources  whose
    identities were concealed and that there was no good reason  given  for
    withholding the identity of the author or indeed the identities of  the
    various sources.

238. Mr Bedford prayed in aid, the principles enunciated  by  the  House  of
    Lords in R v Davis  [2008]  UKHL  36.    However  subsequently  in  his
    closing submissions to us, Mr Bedford accepted that their Lordships  in
    Davis were dealing with  criminal  law  evidence  in  which  they  made
    reference to the case of Murphy [1990] NI 306 where it  was  held  that
    the criminal courts could take steps to protect  witnesses  in  certain
    circumstances.  Issues arose as to the use of anonymous  witnesses  and
    whether that as such would contravene the provisions of  Article  6  of
    the European Convention.  Their Lordships were thus concerned with  the
    possible fairness or unfairness of any trial in the light of Article 6.
      It was, however, recognised by their Lordships  that  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence properly understood did not condemn the use of  protected
    measures.

239. We have concluded that Davis concerned issues relating to  where  proof
    'beyond reasonable  doubt'  was  required  and  that  as  such,  it  is
    distinguishable from the present case, where the requisite standard  of
    proof is lower than the balance of probability.  With great respect  to
    Mr Bedford, and in fairness to him, he did not in  any  event  seek  to
    pursue his reliance on this case further, with any  particular  vigour.



240.  We do however  find  most  persuasive  the  helpful  guidance  of  the
    Tribunal in LP (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo - risk? Sri Lanka)  [2007]
    UKAIT 00076.  Although this was a country guidance case relating to the
    safety of return of Tamils to Sri Lanka, in particular  on  arrival  at
    Colombo Airport, a challenge arose in that case to letters provided  by
    the British High Commission (BHC) from Colombo.   In  that  regard  the
    Tribunal observed at paragraph 204 that such letters:

          "... appear to be an innovation on the part of the respondent  for
         such country guidance cases.  Whilst on the odd occasion there  are
         reports provided by High Commissions and diplomatic representatives
         in many  of  the  countries  where  we  have  to  assess  risk  for
         applicants on return, this is perhaps one of the first times  where
         a series of letters on topical issues have been provided.  We  note
         however that in other countries and for other  situations  much  of
         this material may in fact be passed to the COIR and is sourced  and
         attributed.  However, we  did  find  this  new  practice  to  be  a
         particular use in the careful balancing task we have to  undertake.
         We would strongly endorse the comments made by Buxton LJ in AH,  IG
         and NM (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 297, at  paragraph  55,  that
         whilst the onus of proof is clearly on the applicant 'it does  mean
         that the content  of  primary  evidence  going  towards  the  wider
         situation in the country in question depends on  what  experts  are
         known to and readily to give evidence on behalf of the  applicants'
         he then rightly states:


             'But it is the Secretary of State who is likely  to  have  the
             most comprehensive knowledge  of  the  conditions  in  foreign
             countries, not least through diplomatic and consular  channels
             and if decisions with  enhanced  status  of  country  guidance
             cases are to be made  about  those  countries  it  might  seem
             appropriate for the Secretary of State directly to  contribute
             to that knowledge'."


 241.        The Tribunal continued at paragraph 205 as follows:


         "Mr Mackenzie challenged the weight that should be given to BHC  or
         like information if it is not sourced in a similar manner  to  that
         expected from expert witnesses  and  other  reporting  authorities.
         Whilst this on the  face  of  it  has  some  obvious  validity,  we
         consider that the advice and information provided in  such  letters
         must be given significant weight as it is compiled by  professional
         diplomats we consider are skilled and trained  in  the  observation
         and acquisition of knowledge in the countries where they are based.
          Unless there are significant reasons why such evidence  is  to  be
         treated at biased or unreliable, as appears to  be  the  case  with
         some of Dr Smith's evidence, we do not consider that omissions from
         sources should of necessity  negate  the  value  of  such  reports.
         Often they may arise from sources that cannot be disclosed and also
         often  they  will  be  well  informed  opinion  based  on   lengthy
         experience and observation by the diplomatic post.  It should  also
         be noted that these are reports from a  permanent  diplomatic  post
         and thus must be compared with a temporary or occasional  procedure
         of a researcher.  Their opinion should be given equal value to that
         of a well-informed, balanced country expert  who  provides  sources
         and evidence of his or her  expertise.   Such  BHC/diplomatic  post
         reports   or   information,   in   the   interests   of    balanced
         determinations, should therefore, in our  view,  be  encouraged  as
         much as the information coming  from  expert  witnesses,  with  the
         objective of obtaining the  highest  quality  of  country  guidance
         determinations".


242.  We thus attach  weight  to  the  letters  provided  by  the  Political
    Officer at post in the British Embassy in  Abidjan,  for  like  reason.
    Fact finding  mission  reports  often  contain  information  where  the
    identity of the source was often not disclosed  and  this  appeared  to
    raise no difficulty. It is in the nature of  country  information  that
    the Tribunal has to take into account information sourced in a  variety
    of ways. The Tribunal is entitled to attach weight to the fact  that  a
    British Embassy has vouchsafed that one  of  its  staff  has  furnished
    information in good faith. (See also for  example,  BK  (Failed  asylum
    seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00098). As part of its consideration,  the
    provenance of the information  has  to  be  considered.   In  the  end,
    however, it is a matter of judgment as to the  weight  that  should  be
    attached to the material.

243.  We do not accept Mr Bedford's invitation to select  only  those  parts
    of the FCO's evidence that are  consistent  with  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Monekosso. That would not advance the evidence and would emasculate its
    effect to an extent that would not provide us with material that  might
    assist us.

244.  We can appreciate the FCO's  position  that  the  authority  in  their
    letters, lies in the fact  that  they  were  issued  from  the  British
    Embassy  in  Abidjan  rather  than  the  personal  credentials  of  the
    individual who provided it.   As  Mr  Jones,  the  Deputy  Director  of
    Migration, pointed out in his letter to us of  12  January  2009,  such
    letters were regularly provided by posts abroad to the UKBA  and  often
    had input from senior/legal staff as well as the actual signatory.   If
    embassy staff were to be routinely required to give evidence  in  cases
    where those letters were used in evidence, there would be  considerable
    practical and  resource implications that would likely  impact  on  the
    ability to provide this service.

245.  It was asserted that the appellant would be persecuted  on  the  basis
    of her adultery by her family, her tribe and the authorities.   It  was
    common ground that the appellant was forced into a customary  marriage,
    not marriage by ordinance.  Consequently the contention that she  would
    be subject to prosecution or persecution by the authorities is a matter
    that we do not accept.  Although those who  commit  adultery  following
    marriage by ordnance might be subject to penalties under  Articles  391
    of the Penal Code, penalties apply to both men and women but it  simply
    cannot be applied to a woman within a customary marriage.  Paragraph  9
    of the original FCO letter supports this conclusion.  Article 391  does
    not apply to the appellant.

246.  Paragraph 11 of the FCO letter accepts that a woman who has  left  her
    "customary" husband might have difficulties being  re-accepted  by  her
    immediate family.

247.  Further the appellant claimed that  she  was  forcibly  married  in  a
    customary ceremony but the FCO letter stated that:

         "An Imam could be asked to dissolve the marriage but this would  be
         for purely religious reasons not legal ones.  Should one party to a
         customary marriage ... wish to remarry there is no legal  obstacle,
         the other party will have no legal recourse to a person's marriage.
          It is straightforward for a man to repudiate a wife married  under
         customary traditions.  It is considerably more difficult for a wife
         to do this because  her  family  will  try  to  keep  the  marriage
         together".


248.  It follows that if the appellant's family forced her into a  customary
    marriage whilst she was a minor (in contravention  of  the  law),  they
    cannot prevent the appellant repudiating the marriage.

249.  The appellant also claimed that she would be persecuted by her  Dioula
    tribe on the basis of her  adultery.   The  FCO  letter  accepted  that
    Dioula live in large areas across the North East of the Ivory Coast and
    that they were seasonally nomadic but the allegations submitted by  the
    appellant and her expert, Ms Monekosso, regarding customary punishments
    of adulterous women was rejected.  Ms Monekosso wrote at  paragraph  11
    of her second report that she had 'no personal knowledge of the rituals
    or punishments observed by  the  Muslim  community  in  Odienne'.   Her
    evidence  regarding  violent  ritual   punishments   and   purification
    ceremonies was, as it turned out, based upon a combination of her  'Pan
    African' knowledge and responses from the Dioula Advocate  Ms  Diabate,
    to an undisclosed question obtained without that person's awareness  of
    the purpose to which her responses were to be put.

250.  At paragraph 57 of Ms Monekosso's first report  she  quoted  a  source
    that asserted:


         "In secular  matters  most  cases  are  (dealt  with)  in  informal
         hearings, often convened by the village  chief  but  in  any  event
         family  and  community  members   may   also   apply   disciplinary
         procedures, even  trying  and  torturing  individuals  for  serious
         violations of norms such as adultery".


251.  The document she quoted from related to Uganda and she had  not  since
    submitted alternative written  objective  evidence  demonstrating  such
    practices in the Ivory Coast.

252.  In contrast, the  FCO  Political  Officer  contacted  four  apparently
    reliable sources and in paragraph 20  of  the  Officer's  first  letter
    stated:

         "If a problem needed to be solved the normal course of action would
         be for families to  meet  to  agree  reparations  ...  None  of  my
         interlocutors had ever heard talk of  a  purification  ceremony  in
         such a case ... None of the sources consulted had  heard  of  cases
         where a village would subject a woman with an illegitimate child to
         punishment or threatening the life of the child".


253.  This is information of significantly greater breadth.   We  have  also
    noted that the USSD 2007 Report also states  that  'dispute  resolution
    was by extended debate with no known incidence of  resort  to  physical
    punishment'.  Such an observation  correlates  with  the  December  FCO
    letter.

254.  The appellant's assertion that she would be ostracised  on  the  basis
    of her adultery and being a single mother with  an  illegitimate  child
    was not supported by the Political Officer in her letter of 19 December
    2008 where she stated:

         "Although frowned upon in rural areas, the  member  of  the  Dioula
         community and the NGO representatives believe that it is common  in
         Cote D'Ivoire for women to have illegitimate children.   In  towns,
         such as Abidjan, it is normal for couples to only marry  after  the
         birth of  one  or  two  children.   This  also  applies  in  Douala
         communities.  According to the member of the  Dioula  community,  a
         woman returning to her village with illegitimate children would  be
         accepted although it would be preferable for her to be  co-habiting
         with the father of the child  or  children.   This  may  vary  from
         village to village and family to family".


255. Thus whilst it was accepted that a single woman  with  an  illegitimate
    child may be 'frowned up in rural areas 'it  was not  accepted  by  the
    respondent, that treatment of this  nature  was  reasonably  likely  to
    bring the appellant  within  either  Convention.   In  any  event,  the
    evidence  from  the  Political  Officer  was  that  in  towns,  it  was
    considered the norm for couples to marry only after the birth of one or
    two children.

256. The Tribunal in the present case have  been  presented  with  evidence
    effectively from two sources, Ms Monekosso and by the FCO.   We  prefer
    the evidence of the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office.   Thus  the  risk
    faced by the appellant is limited to the personal animosity felt by her
    husband and his family towards the appellant's conduct  in  Odienne,  a
    place where she would not have others to support or  protect.   We  are
    not satisfied this ill-will will result in violence but we do  consider
    that it is likely to result in ostracism and marginalisation.


Assessment - General

257. Mr Bedford relied upon the comparison between the 21st Progress  report
    all the Secretary-General on  the  United  Nations  Operation  in  Cote
    d'Ivoire and the earlier reports.  In the 20th report of 13 April 2009,
    for example, it is said:

             "The overall security situation in Cote D'Ivoire has  remained
             stable, with largely unhindered freedom of movement of people,
             goods and services throughout the  country,  although  several
             incidents  during  the  reporting   period   highlighted   the
             continuing  fragility  of  the  security  situation   in   the
             country".


258.  He relied  upon  this  passage  as  evidencing  deterioration  in  the
    security position of the country compared with that  of  7  July  2009.
    The equivalent passage in the 19th progress report of  a  January  2009
    also speaks of the fragility of the security situation  and  refers  to
    the  overall  improvement  in  security  on  the  one  hand  and  other
    destabilises events on the other, such as the  continued  existence  of
    armed militias and violent youth groups, the incomplete  cantonment  of
    former combatants of Forces Nouvelles, the difficulties encountered  by
    the government to pay allowances and other factors.


259. Taken together, we do not regard the obvious differences that exist  in
    the phraseology in the reports between January 2009 and  July  2009  as
    establishing a general deterioration in the security situation. Even if
    the reporting of events appears to put the progress back,  the  overall
    picture is one of continuing stability.

260.  Mr Bedford relied upon a  statement  dated  24  April  2006  from  the
    Secretary General's Representative on the Human  Rights  of  Internally
    Displaced Persons (pub. 25 April 2006).  In it the Representative spoke
    of the fact that the Ivory Coast was then facing  a  protection  crisis
    due to the lack of an adequate response  to  the  needs  of  internally
    displaced persons. He spoke of the state of destitution in  which  many
    of the displaced persons were  forced  to  live  and  the  difficulties
    created by the lack of access to food, education and healthcare.  These
    difficulties were particularly felt by children and  had  resulted,  in
    some cases, in their exploitation.

261.  The statement of April 2006 must, however, be read  in  the  light  of
    the later material to which we have earlier referred.

262.  By July 2007, generally,  UNHCR  considered  that  conditions  in  the
    Ivory Coast had continued to improve and a framework for lasting  peace
    was in place. Nevertheless, as the position paper highlighted,  violent
    incidents and inter-communal tension remained a cause of  some  concern
    in certain parts of the country. Those areas had to  be  monitored  and
    their concerns addressed by the new Government, but it was and  remains
    UNHCR's  position  that  the  current  conditions  can  no  longer   be
    characterized as a situation of generalized violence.

263.   Ms Kiss produced the Operational Guidance Note (OGN) of  13  February
2009.

264.  We are of the view that  this  document  should  not  be  regarded  as
    country information.  The Country Information and Policy  Unit  of  the
    Home Office last prepared an Assessment in October  2001.   These  were
    followed by a series of Bulletins, the last of which was  published  in
    June 2005.  Since then, the Home Office's own material has been in  the
    form of Operational Guidance Notes.  These OGNs are not produced by the
    Country of  Information  Service.   The  current  COIS  reports  are  a
    selection of background material provided from sources other  than  the
    Home Office and without comment  or  analysis.   Whilst  the  editorial
    selection of the passages is a matter of choice for the editor  of  the
    Report, (and therefore potentially liable to  subjectivity),  he  comes
    from  a  part  of  the  Home  Office,  RDS,  that  is  independent   of
    policymakers and caseworkers.  The  Research,  Development,  Statistics
    section of the Home Office describes itself as made  up  of  specialist
    staff, communication professionals and scientists.   The  selection  of
    material is subject to peer review and  the  overall  scrutiny  of  the
    Chief Inspector of the Border Agency  acting  through  the  Independent
    Advisory Group  on  Country  Information,  formerly  the  Secretary  of
    State's Advisory Panel on Country Information, (APCI).

265.  Operational Guidance Notes fall into a different category.  They  are,
    in essence, policy statements.   On  many  occasions,  the  Operational
    Guidance Notes will be supported by references to  background  material
    and may have sought assistance from RDS, as well as Tribunal  case  law
    taken from reported decisions.   Insofar  as  they  include  background
    material, the background material is to  be  regarded  like  any  other
    background information, subject to the fact that its selection may  not
    have the same objectivity and is not independently scrutinised.

 266. In the case of the Ivory Coast Operational Guidance Note, much of  the
    contents are supported by references  to  key  documents  and  the  FCO
    Country  Profile  and  other  background  material.   Such   background
    material must be evaluated in the normal way.  Insofar as its  contents
    are a statement of policy, it should be regarded as  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission. It should not be regarded as country information in
    the normal sense  but  as  the  caseworker's  own  assessment  of  that
    material.  As such, it is to be assessed on its merits but  should  not
    be treated as if it were an expert report or having  greater  authority
    solely by reason of its coming from the UK Border Agency.


267.        Ms Monekosso considered that in practice  the  State  failed  to
    protect women generally from domestic violence and spousal rape and  in
    that regard Ms Monekosso referred to a 2006 US State Department  Report
    that stated:

         "The law does not define domestic  violence  which  was  a  serious
         problem.  Female  victims  of  domestic  violence  suffered  severe
         social stigma and as a result  often  did  not  report  or  discuss
         domestic violence".


268.  In our consideration we  prefer  to  rely  on  the  2008  report,  (in
    similar terms) to which we have referred above.


269.  In some areas of the Ivory  Coast,  the  practice  of  FGM  is  almost
    universal.  In contrast, it cannot be said that all women in the  urban
    areas face FGM.  Once again we do not say that there will be no-one  at
    risk in an urban area because this will depend on the specific dynamics
    of the community in which an applicant finds herself.  It  is  unlikely
    that the pressure is  anything  like  as  great  amongst  well-educated
    sections of society or among the well-off.   Where  the  parents  of  a
    child are against the practice, we see  no  mechanism  by  which  their
    wishes will not determine the issue.  No evidence of physical  coercion
    against parents in order to effect circumcision on their daughters  was
    produced before us.  In other words, there is no evidence that the non-
    circumcised are abducted in order to effect FGM in the face of parental
    opposition.


270. The most we can say is that amongst a traditional  community  there  is
    likely to be social pressure exerted to conform to  the  mores  of  the
    community  and,  depending  on  the  attitude  and  fortitude  of   the
    individuals concerned, the pressure may or may not be capable of  being
    withstood.  In practice, this will not arise in the majority  of  cases
    in a traditional  community  because  most  will  willingly  adopt  the
    practice as a rite of passage  for  whatever  reasons  they  may  have.
    Social pressure to  conform,  however,  does  not  inevitably  lead  to
    parents succumbing to it if they are set against the practice.


 271.  For the purposes of this determination, it is necessary  to  consider
    the risk on return to those parts of the Ivory Coast where  traditional
    practices are much more  pervasive.   The  Multiple  Indicator  Cluster
    Survey Programme developed by UNICEF provides a valuable  insight  into
    the substantial variation that exists between traditional rural  areas,
    particularly in the north, the central region and  urban  areas.  There
    is, for example, evidence that the practice of FGM is as high as 88% in
    some areas but as low as  13%  in  others.  Perhaps  not  surprisingly,
    attitudes towards domestic violence are similarly  variable.  In  rural
    areas, some 72% treat  wife-battering  as  acceptable  and  the  figure
    reaches as high as 94% in some parts of  the  north  but  significantly
    less in urban areas. In Abidjan, the survey indicated  less  than  one-
    half (44%) of respondents considered a  husband  had  a  right  to  use
    violence upon his spouse.


272.  Literacy rates also demonstrate substantial variations. 98%  of  women
    aged 60 and over receive no education according to information obtained
    in 1994. As we set out in paragraph 94, between the ages of 21 and  24,
    male students accounted for some 19% whereas women, a mere 4%.

273. A traditional society is likely to hold conservative views in  relation
    to FGM, a woman's role in society, education for women,  the  value  of
    arranged marriages, a wife's duty of obedience to her  husband,  female
    chastity outside marriage and female fidelity within marriage,  amongst
    other things.

Sufficiency of protection

274.  We have already set out the problems  faced  by  women  in  the  Ivory
    Coast.  It is as well to recall  that  in  Fornah,  Lord  Bingham  when
    considering the definition of a particular social group in the case  of
    women in Sierra Leone, chose the broadest classification on  the  clear
    evidence that women shared a common characteristic  because  they  were
    forced into a position of social inferiority compared with men.  If FGM
    afforded a means by which a woman  was  accepted  into  Sierra  Leonean
    culture, it did so on the basis  of  institutionalised  inferiority  as
    paragraph 31 of his opinion makes clear:

           "FGM is an extreme expression of the discrimination to which all
           women in Sierra Leone  are  subject,  as  much  those  who  have
           already undergone the process as those who have not."


275.  This inferiority is seen in many other ways and we have probably  only
    referred to some of them.  Hence the prevalence of  domestic  violence,
    discrimination in levels  of  education  between  men  and  women,  the
    discriminatory treatment of women in the legal  system  as  it  affects
    women guilty of adultery compared with men and the pervasive  influence
    of traditional practices which perpetuate the  stereotypical  image  of
    women as socially inferior are all examples of  the  methods  by  which
    women are discriminated against.  To  this  might  also  be  added  the
    informal resistance to the employment of women in some areas of the job
    market.  We may have fallen short of agreeing with  Ms  Monekosso  that
    these techniques are coercive in the sense  that  they  are  backed  by
    sanctions or punishments but they remain a pervasive influence.


276.  Whilst the prevalence of these attitudes varies  from  area  to  area,
    the fact that  such  attitudes  survive  is  evidence  of  the  State's
    reluctance or inability to stamp them out.  It  seems  to  us  unlikely
    that the arm of the state operates with consistent force throughout the
    country.  Indeed,  it  cannot  do  so  if  the  law  provides  for  the
    criminalisation of a particular form of conduct and yet  the  incidence
    of the practice suggests in some areas it is almost  universal.    Once
    again, however, we would caution about making generalisations about the
    sufficiency of protection.

Internal Relocation -General

277.  If a person who has been found to be a refugee in her home area  seeks
    to relocate to another part of the Ivory Coast, the normal  destination
    will be Abidjan but it may  also  be  one  of  several  urban  centres.
    Abidjan will be able to offer opportunities for a returning refugee  by
    way of accommodation, work and a variety of ethnic cultures.  A  single
    woman will be confronted  with  the  difficulties  attendant  upon  her
    status but she will not be at risk of persecution or serious  harm  for
    that reason alone.  As a matter of common sense, the difficulties  will
    be greater for a single woman with a child but we are satisfied Abidjan
    is able to provide an environment where those without a network of male
    or family support are able to lead a relatively normal life without the
    risk of destitution or being forced,  through  want,  into  beggary  or
    prostitution.  Nevertheless, such cases will require consideration on a
    case-by-case  basis,  paying  particular  attention  to   the   support
    mechanisms that are likely to exist  in  a  mixed  urban  area  without
    significant evidence of fierce racial or ethnic divides.


278.  There is a wide variation in  attitudes  towards  women  in  different
    parts of the Ivory Coast.  In particular there  is  a  strong  contrast
    between traditional rural communities, particularly  in  the  North  or
    Central regions when compared with Abidjan, a  relatively  cosmopolitan
    city of mixed ethnicity along with other urban cities.


279.  This attitude impacts upon the risk faced  by  women  of  FGM,  forced
    marriage,   domestic   violence,   the   effects   of   adultery    and
    discrimination.

280.  If in a particular area, a woman faces one of those risks,  the  state
    is unlikely to offer a sufficiency of protection in that area, in which
    case internal relocation may be possible without undue hardship.

281. We have said that there is a big variation  from  place  to  place  and
    that a decision-maker must look at,  on  a  case  by  case  basis,  the
    specific community from which the appellant comes to make an assessment
    of risk in the home area.


Conclusions on risk of persecution and Article 3

282.  We have concluded that women in the Ivory Coast are capable  of  being
    members of a Particular Social Group and that the risks they may suffer
    from FGM,  domestic  violence  and  forced  marriage  are  sufficiently
    serious to  amount  to  persecutory  treatment  in  the  absence  of  a
    sufficiency of protection,  but  the  risk  is  not  universal  and  in
    particular is very much less likely in an urban area such as Abidjan.

283.  There is the option of seeking protection  by  relocating  in  another
    part of the Ivory Coast.

284.  We have already found that women are  at  risk  of  treatment  serious
    enough  to  warrant  the  description,  persecutory  and  crossing  the
    threshold of Article 3.

Assessment of the appellant's evidence

285. We have the task  of  assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    further evidence before us and in so doing, we of course have given her
    credit for the fact that her account of her experiences  in  the  Ivory
    Coast has been found to be credible. Even so, we do not accept that the
    appellant has been unable to maintain contact with  her  mother's  best
    friend.  She travelled there herself after  leaving  Odienne  and  must
    have acquired the means of locating her mother's friend.   Nor  are  we
    satisfied, even to the lower standard of proof that she forgot to  take
    the means of  contacting  her  mother's  friend.   Indeed,  the  friend
    herself would have been anxious to know that the appellant had  reached
    her destination safely.  Whilst the appellant's own safety  would  have
    been of paramount importance, she remained there for three  months  and
    her departure was arranged during this period.  There was therefore  no
    precipitous departure when minds were so overwrought as to  forget  the
    obvious.  The appellant's travel arrangements were orderly and planned.
     It is not likely that such an important point of  contact  would  have
    been overlooked.  If the appellant had realised she did  not  have  the
    means of contacting her mother's friend whilst  she  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom, we see little difficulty in the agent  being  asked  to
    make contact.


286.  This finding as we later explain, is not without its significance  for
    it goes to the way in which people maintain links with the country from
    which they have fled and which provide them  with  a  means  of  making
    arrangements  for  their  safe  return.   We  are  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was well aware of the significance of having friends to  whom
    she might turn.  She spoke of having only been able  to  turn  to  this
    particular friend of her mother but we  also  remain  unpersuaded  that
    there are not other friends or relatives on her mother's side  or  whom
    the appellant has befriended over the years she spent  in  Abidjan  who
    were and remain sympathetic to her and who, like us, would  immediately
    see the injustice of  her  father's  conduct  and  would  not  wish  to
    prejudice the appellant by revealing her presence in Abidjan to him  or
    her husband's family.  To do  so  would  be  highly  dangerous  to  the
    appellant - as they would immediately recognise - and we do  not  think
    they would even contemplate doing so.


287.  In paragraph 2.4 of  Dr  Perera's  report,  the  doctor  recorded  the
    appellant as saying that she had nothing in Liverpool, no  friends  and
    that nobody came to see her. In  her  evidence  to  us,  the  appellant
    stated that this was not correct and  that  it  was  mistranslated.  In
    2008, she was attending college and had acquired a group of friends. We
    see no reason to doubt her evidence that, as a student, she  is  likely
    to have surrounded herself with friends and acquaintances.

288.  During the course of the evidence, the appellant  confirmed  that  she
    continued to see Dr Perera at two monthly intervals and that  she  also
    saw Ms Doocey once or twice a  month.    In  her  evidence  to  us  she
    maintained that she has suicidal ideation and that she had told this to
    Dr Perera. It is apparent that this is contrary to Dr  Perera's  report
    and his conclusion that she had never expressed  suicidal  thoughts  to
    him. We do not consider it remotely likely that Dr  Perera  would  have
    omitted to mention this, had it been said by the appellant.

289.  Nor do we consider that any misunderstanding can be attributed to  the
    error on the part of an interpreter. In this context,  we  are  talking
    about the appellant's thought processes.  The  conversation  would  not
    have been confined to a single word, even one of  a  technical  nature,
    which an interpreter may have misheard or misunderstood. If  Dr  Perera
    had asked the appellant to talk about her feelings, the appellant would
    have been required to provide an answer. It does not seem to us that it
    is likely the answer would have been omitted in  its  entirety  without
    someone realising a misunderstanding had arisen. We are sure  that  the
    reference in Dr Perera's report to the appellant expressing no suicidal
    ideation to him was because she did not do so. We do  not  accept  that
    she did so and that her efforts were mistranslated.

290.  The appellant  confirmed  that  her  dosage  of  sertraline  had  been
    increased to 150 mg per day. She also accepted that, although  she  had
    told Dr Perera that she was frightened of  going  out  because  of  her
    feelings of paranoia, she had, since  September  2007,  been  going  to
    college on her own three or four times a week. Her son goes  to  school
    between Monday and Friday which he started in January 2009 but,  before
    that, he attended the College Nursery. She was asked about Dr  Perera's
    comments that she had told him there was nothing for her  in  Liverpool
    and that she had no friends. She accepted that she had said this to  Ms
    Doocey just after she had arrived  in  Liverpool  but  denied  she  had
    repeated it to Dr Perera years later.  She attributed the error to  the
    interpreter or to the possibility that the information had come from Ms
    Doocey.  We do not consider either explanation to  be  likely.  In  our
    judgement, Dr Perera was reporting  the  appellant's  own  conversation
    with him, as his report suggests.  We are satisfied that the  appellant
    has exaggerated her sense of isolation when describing her life  to  Dr
    Perera.

Findings and conclusions

291.  Our task is to determine:

         (i)      whether or not having regard to all of the  evidence,  the
             appellant can establish that she is a member of  a  particular
             social group, namely women in Ivorian society and that she  is
             at risk of persecution for that reason - this will  include  a
             consideration of women who are victims  of  domestic  violence
             and/or forced into marriage and the level of state  protection
             available.


         (ii)     and/or whether she is at real risk of Article 3 level ill-
             treatment in her home town and  if  so,  whether  there  is  a
             sufficiency of protection available there or  internal  flight
             coupled with sufficiency of protection is a viable option.

The home area

292.  Although the appellant was born in Daloa, as a result of the  family's
    opposition to her parents' marriage, her  parents  settled  in  Abidjan
    where the appellant was brought up. This was, in a sense, their own way
    of  resolving  the  effect  of  a  marriage  that  did  not  meet   the
    expectations of the community in which they lived.  Following the death
    of her mother on 9 April 2003, the appellant, then aged 15, moved  back
    to the area in which she was born.  This  was  approximately  4  months
    after her mother's death. It was here  that  she  was  circumcised  and
    where, some five months later and against her consent, she entered into
    an arranged traditional marriage with a 70-year  old  man.  This  would
    suggest  the  marriage  took  place  at  the  beginning  of   2004   or
    thereabouts. The appellant left her elderly husband in June 2005.


293.  Accordingly, apart from the short  period  immediately  following  her
    birth, the appellant has only spent about two years  in  a  traditional
    rural community. The first 15 years of her life or  so  were  spent  in
    Abidjan. When she left the village after the disaster of her  marriage,
    the appellant returned to Abidjan where  she  remained  with  a  family
    friend for 3 months and from where arrangements were made  for  her  to
    travel to the United Kingdom.


294.  By that time, B (the  father  of  her  child)  had  also  returned  to
    Abidjan and his current whereabouts are unknown.


295.  Thus, Abidjan is the place of her upbringing but also the place  where
    she would return. Notwithstanding the unhappy  interlude  during  which
    she returned with her father to Odienne, this is not her home  area  in
    any real sense. Her father continues to live in Abidjan and, as far  as
    we are aware, there would be no reason for her to  return  to  Odienne.
    She has no relatives there whom she would wish to remain and the father
    of her son does not live there.

296.  Whilst much of the evidence has been directed  towards  conditions  in
    Daloa and Odienne, we do not regard these places as the  home  area  in
    any meaningful sense when considering her asylum claim. Her  home  area
    is Abidjan and has been for almost her entire life.  The exception  is,
    of course, the period preceding and immediately after her marriage.

The risk of FGM


297.  The appellant herself has undergone FGM and does  not  therefore  face
    any  further  risk  of  the  same.  However,  the  background  material
    demonstrates that, notwithstanding the government's attempts to  outlaw
    the practice,  it  remains  a  common  practice,  particularly  in  the
    northern sections of the country.  We would  note,  however,  that  the
    practice is variable and assessments of risk must properly take account
    of the wide variations that exist between  the  various  parts  of  the
    country and, in particular, between, urban and rural  areas.   Although
    this  appeal  did  not  develop  the  distinctions  between   different
    religious or ethnic groups, it is likely that there will be cases where
    these differences are also significant.  Ms Monekosso is likely  to  be
    correct when saying that the Muslim social and community structures, in
    particular, are highly traditional.

298. Thus, the  appellant's  actions  in  rejecting  traditional  values  by
    demonstrating her reluctance to participate in the practice of FGM,  or
    to comply with the demands made upon her in her arranged  marriage  and
    to form a relationship outside marriage and to desert her  husband  are
    likely to have aroused the antipathy of the community as  a  whole  but
    only in the locality where these actions took place.

Domestic violence

299.  For reasons that we explain  later  in  this  determination,  we  have
    concluded that there is no  prospect  of  the  appellant  returning  to
    Odienne or suffering traditional punishment as result  of  her  conduct
    anywhere in the Ivory Coast. However and for the sake of  completeness,
    we find that if the appellant were to return to Odienne and were she to
    be subjected to physical violence, the  police  would  be  unlikely  to
    intervene  if  they  classified  the  violence  as  domestic  violence.
    However, we see no reason  why  they  would  not  intervene  where  the
    offending conduct was unlikely to be viewed in this light.

300.  We do  not  consider  the  same  would  apply  in  Abidjan  where  the
    incidence of domestic violence is much  less,  signifying  less  social
    acceptance of it and  accordingly  less  tolerance  towards  those  who
    perpetrate it.

 301. The appellant will not be relocating because Abidjan is the area  from
    whence she comes.

Abidjan

302.   Abidjan is the principal city in the Ivory Coast  (although  not  its
    capital) and some estimates suggest it has  a  population  of  about  3
    million people.  The appellant described the area in which she and  her
    family lived as a mixed community  in  which  there  were  many  ethnic
    groups. To her knowledge, most districts comprise mixed communities and
    the Dioula people  live  alongside  other  ethnic  groups.  The  family
    compound was in a predominantly Dioula area but the various clans  were
    otherwise evenly spread.

303.  She described how conditions were different in  Abidjan  for  a  young
    Muslim woman. She could dress  as  she  wanted.  She  did  not  wear  a
    headscarf. This was not because she was a child but, as  she  expressed
    it, because Abidjan is 'modern'. She was allowed a considerable  degree
    of personal freedom.  She was  not  required  to  be  accompanied  when
    walking outside her father's compound and the only restrictions on  her
    movements were the normal limitations placed by  any  parent  that  she
    should return home before midnight.

304.  The appellant, however, said that she would not be safe  there  whilst
    her father lived there and that it would not be easy to find a place to
    live. She spoke of how, on return to the airport or if she attempted to
    rent property, the information would filter back to her father.

305.  We do not consider there is  a  real  likelihood  of  the  appellant's
    father who is a lorry-driver  operating  between  Abidjan  and  Odienne
    ascertaining the appellant's whereabouts were  she  to  return  to  the
    Ivory Coast.  The information of passengers returning to the country is
    not accessible to him and he is not described as a  man  of  influence.
    The appellant suggests the information will filter back to him but this
    suggests an almost parochial system of information exchange  that  lies
    uneasily with the population of  a  large  modern  city.   We  are  not
    satisfied the appellant's father  has  the  means  or  the  ability  to
    ascertain the fact of her return or where she might settle.

306.  Were he able to locate her, we are not  satisfied  the  appellant  has
    established what he might  then  do.   We  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant has committed a criminal offence for which she is  liable  to
    be prosecuted; nor that her father has the means of  adducing  evidence
    to support such a charge were it possible to make it.  Were  he  to  do
    so, it would appear his only motive in  making  the  attempt  would  be
    revenge or vindictiveness.  We would not lightly conclude that a father
    would pursue his estranged daughter for so little purpose.  A customary
    marriage does not have the force of the law to protect it and it is not
    therefore likely the appellant's 'husband'  would  have  the  right  to
    require her return to Odienne, were he alive or were that his wish.

307.  Both husband and father are  powerless  to  take  effective  steps  to
    impose sanctions.  There is insufficient evidence to support the  claim
    of customary punishment for adultery in the area around Odienne.  There
    is no evidence of customary punishment in Abidjan.  The  evidence  does
    not suggest who might initiate  the  process,  or  prosecute  it  to  a
    conclusion, or carry out the  sanction  or  punishment.   Although  the
    appellant said that her father and husband would kill her for  bringing
    shame and dishonour upon the families, there is  scant  evidence  of  a
    system of 'honour killings' and even less evidence that her  father  or
    her husband has the means to effect the appellant's  death.   Thus,  we
    are satisfied that  the  appellant's  fear  is  not  objectively  well-
    founded. We are not even persuaded that her fear is subjectively  well-
    founded. Were she to have held such a belief, we are certain she  would
    have explained to us why, if only in an effort to persuade  us  of  the
    objective risk. We  are  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  holds  a
    subjective fear that her father or her husband can or will harm her.

308.  For these reasons,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established that she is at risk of harm in Abidjan as a result  of  her
    forced marriage and her adultery.

309.  She is not, therefore at risk of  ill-treatment  sufficiently  serious
    to amount to persecutory treatment; nor such as to violate her  Article
    2 or 3 rights.  The corollary of this is that she has not established a
    risk of serious harm such as to engage the positive duty to afford  her
    humanitarian protection.

310.  There remains the consideration of whether she is  at  risk  of  other
    types of harm on a return to Abidjan where she has spent  the  bulk  of
    her life and  where  she  was  educated.   In  order  to  succeed,  the
    appellant would have to establish  the  real  likelihood  that  Abidjan
    offers  her  no  means  of  survival,   other   than   destitution   or
    prostitution; in other words that for a  lone  woman  without  parental
    support and with a young child, she is unable to lead a life there that
    would  not.   As  the  Tribunal  has  said  before,  although  not  all
    prostitutes are destitute, the risk of prostitution represents the most
    degrading form of destitution  and  one  that  is  alien  to  universal
    principles of  human  dignity.   Prostitution,  destitution  and  their
    associated risks of damage to health and dignity are the result  of  an
    individual's failure to find survival techniques in  the  community  in
    which he or she is living.

311.  She is now aged 22 and is the mother  of  a  child  born  16  December
    2005, now aged 4.  She has no male protector.  She  has  no  family  or
    extended   family to whom she can turn.  However, she is returning to a
    city with which she is familiar and where, in the past, she was able to
    turn for help to others. The  appellant  spoke  of  limited  employment
    prospects for non-graduates or for those poorly educated  or  qualified
    and of the relative ease with which she could find a job in the  United
    Kingdom, particularly at the conclusion  of  her  education  here.  She
    spoke of the difficulty of obtaining a job and how the income would  be
    insufficient to support her and her son.  We are satisfied however that
    the appellant attends college three or four times a week and  that  her
    son is currently  attending  school.   There  is  therefore  compelling
    evidence that the appellant is able to juggle the commitments of  study
    and looking after a son.

312   We have prefaced this passage by reference to  Abidjan  but  the  same
    consideration would apply in relation to any other urban centre.

The risk in Odienne


313.  We are not satisfied that the appellant's actions  will  result  in  a
    prosecution for adultery.  This was a traditional marriage  and  not  a
    legal one.  This was a polygamous marriage which the Marriage Act  1964
    does not recognise.  This effectively bars criminal proceedings against
    the appellant.    In practice prosecutions against women  for  adultery
    do not occur save in the rarest of circumstances.


314.  Nor are we  satisfied  that  the  appellant  will  suffer  traditional
    punishment as a result of her conduct wherever she may go in the  Ivory
    Coast.  We have considered the source of Ms  Monekosso's  opinion  that
    such consequences are certain to occur and we are  not  satisfied  that
    she is able to establish this in relation to a Muslim community in  the
    north of the Ivory Coast.  Whilst  there  may  be  parallels  that  can
    properly be drawn between traditional African societies, we  would  not
    consider that we can infer that evidence of practices  in  one  society
    establishes the practice in another.  In our  judgment,  we  should  be
    slow to make inferences of this nature  unless  supported  by  evidence
    that bears rigorous academic scrutiny.


315.  The appellant left Odienne in 2005, nearly 5 years ago.   Her  husband
    was already of an advanced age and may well no longer be alive given  a
    lower life expectancy in the Ivory Coast. The appellant's father is  in
    Abidjan.  Nevertheless, in view of our findings of fact in relation  to
    the animosity that a traditional society may express towards  a  person
    who transgresses the social norms,  we  consider  it  likely  that  the
    appellant would face isolation and ostracism  were  she  to  return  to
    Odienne.  As Odienne was not the  place  in  which  the  appellant  was
    brought up, the appellant might even be in a worse position in that she
    does not have the school  friends  and  acquaintances  she  would  have
    developed had it been her  home  for  any  years  and  who  might  have
    protected her against the ill-will of the community at large.

 316. Were the appellant to relocate to Odienne, we think it  unlikely  that
    she would be able to draw upon the assistance of the police  because  a
    course of conduct that  would  result  in  her  being  marginalised  or
    isolated is unlikely to amount to a criminal offence.


317. We are satisfied that there is no prospect of the appellant wishing  to
    return to Odienne but we are also satisfied that there is no reason for
    her to do so as it is neither her home nor the  place  where  she  will
    find support and protection.  Were the appellant, however, to do so, we
    are satisfied that she would suffer  isolation  and  stigmatisation  to
    render her life there intolerable such as to amount to serious harm.

Internal relocation

318.  Internal relocation does not arise  in  the  case  of  this  appellant
    because she will be returning to her home area.

Article 8 ECHR

319.  We have summarised the medical evidence in paragraphs  39  to  45  and
    287 to 290 above.   The  appellant  suffers  from  depression  and  has
    suffered headaches and was prone to becoming severely  distressed.  Her
    distress was centred upon a fear of a return to the  Ivory  Coast.  Her
    fear had inhibited her  ability  to  move  therapeutically  beyond  her
    trauma. There have however, been a number of significant advances.  She
    successfully attended an ESOL  course.  She  has  required  significant
    psychological support and the  evidence  speaks  of  the  destabilising
    effect upon the appellant of a return to  the  Ivory  Coast.   In  June
    2008, the appellant was receiving 100 mg a  day  of  sertraline  as  an
    antidepressant  and  was  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  a  Depressive
    Disorder, moderate in severity with somatic  syndrome.   She  had  also
    experienced irrational fears about her father taking her back from  the
    United Kingdom to the Ivory  Coast  with  paranoid  associations.   The
    appellant had never expressed suicidal  thoughts  to  Dr  Perera.   The
    sertraline had been increased to 150 mg per day.  Although she had told
    Dr Perera that she was frightened of going out because of her  feelings
    of paranoia, she had, since September 2007, been going  to  college  on
    her own three or four times a week. Her  son  goes  to  school  between
    Monday and Friday which he started in January 2009 but, before that, he
    attended the College Nursery As we  said  earlier,  the  appellant  had
    exaggerated her sense of isolation  when  describing  her  life  to  Dr
    Perera.


320.  The medical evidence has to be assessed with reference  to  the  steps
    the appellant has taken in the United Kingdom to make progress  in  her
    social and private life.  She has completed  educational  courses,  she
    has managed to bring up her child.  We  do  not  accept  that  she  has
    experienced the degree of isolation and marginalisation  of  which  she
    spoke to those  assessing  her  medical  condition.   Nevertheless,  we
    accept she suffers from depression and her mental health is impaired by
    her past experiences.

321.  It is necessary to evaluate the appellant's Article  8  claim  on  the
    proper structured basis as set out in particular by the House of  Lords
    in Razgar and further explained in  subsequent  decisions.   In  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] UKHL 39 their Lordships held that  the  direct  impact  on
    other family members could be considered in an appeal under  Article  8
    against an immigration decision.  The right to respect for  the  family
    life of one necessarily encompassed the right to respect for the family
    life of others with whom that family life was enjoyed.  We bear in mind
    that decision makers should  indeed  avoid  restricting  themselves  to
    looking at the circumstances of family life and should also  take  into
    account the significant elements of the much wider  sphere  of  private
    life.


322.  Applying that guidance to the facts as found in the present  case,  we
    find that there  is  of  course  a  family  life  enjoyed  between  the
    appellant and her child, but we do not find that their removal  to  the
    Ivory Coast would involve an interference with that family life as they
    will of course be returning together.


323.  In terms of the appellant's  private  life  she  has  of  course  been
    undergoing a course of  study  whilst  her  child  has  been  attending
    nursery school.  In that latter regard, we have borne in mind that  the
    appellant's child is of an adaptable age.


324.  Although we find that the appellant has  understated  her  links  with
    the community and emphasised  her  isolation  we  think  that  she  has
    integrated herself more fully into the community than she herself would
    admit.  We therefore find that the appellant's removal from the  United
    Kingdom would cause an interference with her private life.


325.  However, mindful of the guidance  in  Razgar  and  in  the  particular
    circumstances of the appellant  and  her  child,  we  find  that  their
    removal would be a proportionate response to the legitimate public  end
    sought  by  the  respondent,  namely  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control


Humanitarian Protection


326.  In that we have earlier reasoned our findings that  the  appellant  is
    not  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to
    persecutory treatment; nor such as  to  violate  her  Article  2  or  3
    rights, it follows that she has not established a risk of serious  harm
    such as to entitle her to the grant of humanitarian protection.

Decision

327.  The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
    on a point of law.

328.  We set aside the previous decision.

329.  Our decision is that the appeal is dismissed on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

Funding

330.  We order  that  the  appellant's  costs  in  respect  of  the  hearing
    (including the application for reconsideration and the preparation  for
    it) shall be paid out of the relevant fund (within the meaning of  rule
    33 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005).

Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                    APPENDIX: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED



|      |Document                                           |Date           |
|1     |Allafrica.com: 'Cote d'Ivoire: Ahead of polls,     |30/07/2009     |
|      |security council extends UN force by six months'   |               |
|      |                                                   |               |
|2     |United Nations Security Council: 'Twenty first     |07/07/2009     |
|      |progress report of the Secretary-General of the    |               |
|      |United nations operation in Cote d'Ivoire'         |               |
|3     |United Nations Security Council Report: 'Cote      |07/2009        |
|      |d'Ivoire'                                          |               |
|4     |US Department of State: 'Trafficking in Persons    |16/06/2009     |
|      |Report 2009 - Cote d'Ivoire'                       |               |
|5     |IRIN humanitarian news and analysis West Africa:   |06/05/2009     |
|      |'Regional bodies, Governments gear up H1N1         |               |
|      |influenza response'                                |               |
|6     |World Health Organisation Crisis Management Team   |01/05/2009     |
|      |Report: 'Cote d'Ivoire'                            |               |
|7     |Health Systems 20/20: 'Cote d'Ivoire Minister of   |30/04/2009     |
|      |Health visits health systems 20/20 headquarters'   |               |
|      |                                                   |               |
|8     |United Nations Security Council: 'Twentieth        |13/04/2009     |
|      |progress report of the Secretary-General of the    |               |
|      |United Nations operation in Cote d'Ivoire'         |               |
|9     |UMNS Report: 'Malaria initiatives join for 1st time|01/04/2009     |
|      |in Cote d'Ivoire outreach'                         |               |
|10    |UNICEF: 'Cote d'Ivoire: UNICEF and partners        |03/03/2009     |
|      |mobilize to eradicate polio in Cote d'Ivoire'      |               |
|11    |UN News Centre: 'UN backed workshop to boost the   |02/03/2009     |
|      |status of policewomen in Cote d'Ivoire'            |               |
|12    |US Department of State: Human Rights Report: Cote  |25/02/2009     |
|      |d'Ivoire 2008                                      |               |
|13    |UKBA: Operational Guidance Note for Ivory Coast    |13/02/2009     |
|14    |                                                   |               |
|      |Health Systems 20/20: 'From health labour market   |28/01/2009     |
|      |analysis to result based financing: Insights from a|               |
|      |post-conflict Country, Cote d'Ivoire'              |               |
|15    |Daily brief on Cote d'Ivoire: www.ounci.org        |27/01/2009     |
|16    |Humanitarian Appeal: 'Cote d'Ivoire: Critical      |22/01/2009     |
|      |humanitarian needs 2009'                           |               |
|      |                                                   |               |
|17    |United Nations Security Council: 'Nineteenth       |08/01/2009     |
|      |progress report of the Secretary-General of the    |               |
|      |United Nations operation in Cote d'Ivoire'         |               |
|18    |IPSNews.Net: 'Cote d'Ivoire: Rural Women in need of|02/01/2009     |
|      |a helping hand'                                    |               |
|19    |                                                   |2009           |
|      |Family Health International (FMI): 'Supporting life|               |
|      |under the shade of the cocoa trees'                |               |
|20    |US Department of State: 'Cote d'Ivoire: Report on  |06/10/2008     |
|      |female genital mutilation (FGM) or female genital  |               |
|      |cutting (FGC)'                                     |               |
|21    |IRIN: 'Report on election process'                 |01/10/2008     |
|22    |United Nations Security Council Resolution 1826    |29/07/2008     |
|23    |United Nations - Executive board of the United     |28/07/2008     |
|      |Nations development programme and of the United    |               |
|      |Nations population fund                            |               |
|24    |United Nations Security Council: 'Seventeenth      |10/07/2008     |
|      |progress reports of the Secretary-General of the   |               |
|      |United Nations operation in Cote d'Ivoire'         |               |
|25    |Security Council Report: 'Women, Peace and         |11/06/2008     |
|      |Security: Sexual violence in situations of armed   |               |
|      |conflict '                                         |               |
|26    |Human Rights Watch: 'UN: Africa trip should focus  |28/05/2008     |
|      |on human rights'                                   |               |
|27    |Amnesty International: 'Amnesty International      |28/05/2008     |
|      |Report 2008: Cote d'Ivoire'                        |               |
|28    |United Nations Security Council: 'Sixteenth        |15/04/2008     |
|      |progress report of the Secretary-General on the    |               |
|      |United Nations operation in Cote d'Ivoire'         |               |
|29    |US Department of State: 'Country report on human   |11/03/2008     |
|      |rights practices: Cote d'Ivoire'                   |               |
|30    |Human Rights Watch: 'Cote d'Ivoire Country Summary'|01/2008        |
|31    |Embassy News: 'Embassy of the United States Abidjan|2008           |
|      |- Conference on development and gender equality'   |               |
|32    |UK Home Office Border and Immigration Agency:      |02/08/2007     |
|      |'Ivory Coast: Operational Guidance Note'           |               |
|33    |Human Rights Watch: 'Cote d'Ivoire: Peace Process  |02/08/2007     |
|      |fails to address sexual violence'                  |               |
|34    |Amnesty International Report 2007: Cote d'Ivoire   |23/05/2007     |
|35    |Worldwide Guide to Women in Leadership: 'Female    |09/04/2007     |
|      |ministers of the republique de Cote d'Ivoire/ Ivory|               |
|      |Coast'                                             |               |
|36    |US Department of State: 'Cote d'Ivoire: Country    |08/03/2007     |
|      |Reports on Human Rights Practices'                 |               |
|37    |Manisuli Ssenyonjo: 'Women's Rights to Equality and|2007           |
|      |Non-discriminatory family legislation in Uganda and|               |
|      |the role of Uganda's Constitutional Court'         |               |
|38    |                                                   |07/2007        |
|      |Update of UNHCR's position on the international    |               |
|      |protection needs of asylum-seekers from Cte       |               |
|      |D'Ivoire                                           |               |
|39    |Department of Justice Canada: 'Polygamy and        |09/2006        |
|      |Canada's obligations under international human     |               |
|      |rights law'                                        |               |
|40    |Republic of Cote d'Ivoire: Report of Cote d'Ivoire |10/08/2006     |
|      |on the implementation of the African Union's       |               |
|      |"Solemn declaration on gender equality in Africa"  |               |
|41    |Womenwarpeace.org: 'Gender profile of the conflict |2006           |
|      |in Cote d'Ivoire'                                  |               |
|42    |The Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS)      |2006           |
|      |Report                                             |               |
|43    |                                                   |2006           |
|      |Ministry of Family and Social Affairs Report       |               |
|44    |UNICEF: 'Early Marriage Report:  A harmful         |2005           |
|      |traditional practice'                              |               |
|45    |Center for Reproductive Rights: 'Women of the World|2003           |
|      |- Laws and Policies affecting their reproductive   |               |
|      |lives'                                             |               |

