

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT
                                                                 00211 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  17 May 2011                               |On 6 June 2011               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                       MR JUSTICE BLAKE, THE PRESIDENT
                  MR BATISTE, A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         aSHVIN KUMAR SOMABHAI PATEL
                        SHILPABEN ASHVIN KUMAR PATEL
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs T White, Counsel instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1) Immigration Judges have jurisdiction to determine  whether  decisions
      on variation of leave applications are in accordance  with  the  law,
      where issues of fairness arise.
   2) Where a sponsor licence has been revoked by the  Secretary  of  state
      during an application for variation of leave  and  the  applicant  is
      both unaware of the revocation and not party to any  reason  why  the
      licence has been revoked, the Secretary of  State  should  afford  an
      applicant  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  vary  the  application  by
      identifying a new sponsor before the application is determined.
   3) It would be unfair to refuse an application without opportunity being
      given to vary it under s.3C(5) Immigration Act 1971.
   4) Leave to remain granted by s.3C  Immigration  Act  1971  is  relevant
      leave for the purposes of the Immigration Rules and the cases  of  QI
      (para 245ZX(1) considered) Pakistan [2010] UKUT 217 (IAC) and HM  and
      others (PBS - legitimate expectation - paragraph 245ZX(I) [2010] UKUT
      446 (IAC) have been overruled by QI (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ
      614, 18 April 2011.
   5) Where the Tribunal allows an appeal on the grounds that the  decision
      was not taken fairly and therefore not in accordance with the law, it
      may be sufficient to direct that any fresh decision is not to be made
      for a period of sixty days from the date  of  the  reasoned  decision
      being transmitted to the parties, in order to give  the  appellant  a
      reasonable opportunity to vary his application.
   6) By analogy with the present UKBA policy on curtailment of leave where
      a sponsor licence is revoked a 60 day period to amend the application
      would provide such a fair opportunity.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of India and  are  husband  and  wife.  The
    second appellant's  appeal  depends  upon  the  outcome  of  the  first
    appellant's who will be referred to as "the appellant".  The  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 September 2007 and was granted leave
    to enter as a student until 30 November  2009.  During  his  period  of
    leave he successfully studied for an Information Technology Diploma  at
    South Bank College between November 2007 and April 2009. He then wanted
    to continue his stay for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  post-graduate
    diploma in Information Technology. He had been accepted on an  eighteen
    month course for that purpose by the Lyceum  Academy.  On  18  November
    2009, the appellant applied for  further  leave  to  remain  under  the
    points based system with a sponsorship letter from the Lyceum  Academy.
    At that date the Academy was a sponsor approved by the Home Office. The
    appellant heard nothing more about his application until he received  a
    notice of decision dated 5 March 2010 refusing his application  on  the
    basis that the Lyceum  Academy  had  been  removed  from  the  list  of
    approved sponsors and he therefore had no sponsorship letter capable of
    earning him points under the points  based  system.  According  to  the
    appellant's evidence the Academy had been  removed  from  the  list  of
    sponsors that day or shortly before and he was wholly unaware  of  this
    until he received his refusal letter.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Judge.  In  August  2010  the
    Immigration Judge allowed the appeal on the basis that  the  respondent
    had not applied to the appellant its policy as the Judge understood  it
    to be. He directed that the application should be reconsidered  in  the
    light of the policy. He did  consider  an  alternative  case  that  the
    refusal was a violation of Article 8 of the  ECHR  but  dismissed  that
    case on its merits. The judge understood that the  Home  Office  policy
    was that where a point based system  application  was  to  be  rejected
    because the sponsor was no longer an approved sponsor a period of sixty
    days leave to remain was granted to enable  an  appellant  to  make  an
    application  with  an  alternative  approved  sponsor.   That   was   a
    misunderstanding of the UKBA policy that was restricted to cases  where
    it proposed to  curtail  leave  of  more  than  six  months;  in  those
    circumstances and where the appellant was unconnected with the  reasons
    for the loss of the sponsor licence UKBA would exercise its  powers  of
    curtailment to reduce the leave to two months  that  would  enable  the
    holder of the leave to make a variation application with a new sponsor.



 3. The respondent did not appeal the IJ's decision  but  on  16  September
    2010 wrote refusing to grant an extension of stay because  the  IJ  had
    misunderstood the policy. It recognised  that  there  was  a  right  of
    appeal against this fresh  decision  because  by  reason  of  the  IJ's
    allowing of the appeal the leave to remain that had  been  extended  by
    operation of s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 as amended continued.

 4. On 9 February  2011  a  second  Immigration  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered this appeal. He recognised that it  was  now  clear
    that the first judge had  misunderstood  the  policy  in  reaching  the
    decision the previous August. This error was established  in  no  fewer
    than three decisions of the Upper Tribunal namely MM and  SA  (Pankina:
    near-miss)  Pakistan  [2010]  UKUT  481  (IAC);   JA   (Revocation   of
    registration - Secretary of State's policy) India [2011] UKUT 52 (IAC);
    and Patel (Tier 4 - No sixty  day  extension)  India  [2011]  UKUT  187
    (IAC). The law is now certain on what the respondent's policy was.

 5. Nevertheless the appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis that the second Immigration
    Judge had not considered  the  alternative  Article  8  claim  and  had
    confined his consideration to the applicable Immigration Rules relating
    to the point based system.

 6. In the skeleton argument prepared for the purposes of this appeal,  Mrs
    White drew attention to the important decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    the case of Thakur (PBS decision  -  common  law  fairness)  Bangladesh
    [2011] UKUT 151 (IAC) promulgated on 23 March 2011.  That  was  a  case
    where the Tribunal proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  was
    unaware that his college had lost it sponsor's license and he  had  "no
    adequate opportunity  of  finding  an  alternative  college".  It  drew
    attention to and relied upon the case of R (on the application of Q)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ  364  where
    the Court of Appeal applied the common law  principle  of  fairness  to
    immigration decision making (see paragraphs 69 to 70).

 7. The Tribunal agreed with the previous UT decisions clarifying what  the
    sixty day policy was but concluded that those decisions either did  not
    or did not need to address the question of fairness, on the  particular
    facts before them. In both JA and Patel  the  Tribunal  expressed  some
    concern as to the potential for arbitrariness of the application of the
    sixty day policy in revocation cases but without  having  some  similar
    opportunity of enrolling  at  another  college  and  substituting  that
    college in the immigration application in refusal cases.

 8. The Tribunal in Thakur observed as follows at [19]:


           "In the present case the appellant had neither sixty days nor  a
           reasonable period to find an alternative course by the  date  of
           decision. We were told at the hearing that the practical problem
           which appellants are faced with when seeking  further  leave  to
           remain under the points based scheme when they  were  previously
           granted leave to remain under the student  rules  is  that  they
           have difficulty in persuading colleges to offer them  places  as
           there is concern about whether they have extant leave to remain,
           colleges not being aware that appellants in these  circumstances
           have leave under section 3C."


      The Tribunal concluded that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because of the failure to  comply  with  common
    law requirements of fairness.

 9. Mr Kandola accepted that the principle in Thakur applied in this  case.
    He did not seek to oppose the appeal. We nevertheless concluded that we
    should hear submissions about what the content of the duty of  fairness
    was in this class of case and how the duty could be  fulfilled  in  the
    course of this appeal. Having received  further  submissions  from  the
    parties we indicated that his appeal would be allowed with  reasons  to
    be given later. We now give those reasons.

Jurisdiction

10. Under s. 82 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 there is
    a general right of appeal in respect of immigration decisions  as  they
    are defined. By s. 84 the grounds of appeal may include:
        a) that the decision is not  in  accordance  with  the  immigration
           rules;
        b) that the decision is unlawful by reason of  the  Race  Relations
           Act;
        c) that the decision is unlawful by reason of the Human Rights Act;
        d) that the decision breaches the appellant's rights under  the  EE
           Community Treaties in  respect  of  entry  or  residence  United
           Kingdom;
        e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;
        f) that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised
           differently discretion conferred by the immigration rules;
        g) removal would be  contrary  to  obligations  under  the  Refugee
           Convention or the Human Rights Act 1998.

11. By s. 86:

                  "(2) The Tribunal must determine:

        a) any matter raised as ground of appeal and;
        b) any matter which section 85 requires it to consider;


        (3)      the Tribunal must allow the appeal insofar  as  it  thinks
that:
           a)    a decision against which  the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
              treated as being brought was not in accordance with  the  law
              (including Immigration Rules) or;
           b)    a discretion exercise in making a decision  against  which
              the appeal is brought or is treated as being  brought  should
              have been exercised differently".

12.  The  "law"  referred  to  in  ss.  84  and  86  includes  the  general
    requirements of public law fairness that may apply in  the  context  of
    immigration decision making.

The requirement to act fairly

13. Although the requirements of fairness always depend  upon  the  context
    and the specific facts of the case, it is clear  from  Thakur  and  the
    authorities  there  cited  that  people  making  applications  for   an
    extension of stay are entitled to be treated fairly by the Secretary of
    State in determination of those applications

14. We also note the  discussion  of  procedural  fairness  in  De  Smith's
    Judicial Review (Sixth Edition 2007) at paragraphs 7-003 to  7-009.  We
    accept the author's proposition that the law has advanced from imposing
    a public law requirement of fairness in particular situations,  to  the
    general proposition that wherever a public function is being  performed
    there is an inference that the function is  required  to  be  performed
    fairly, in the absence of an express indication to the contrary.

15. We further note that in the case of the R (on the application  of)  New
    London College Limited and Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWHC 856 (Admin) Wyn Williams J concluded that there was a  duty
    on the defendant to act  fairly  when  considering  whether  to  revoke
    status of approved sponsor at a college.

Article 8
16. We recognise that the point on which permission to appeal  was  granted
    was the application of Article 8 ECHR to a  points  based  refusal.  We
    recognise that whilst there is no human right to an extension  of  stay
    under the points based system,  bona  fide  applicants  who  have  been
    permitted to enter the United Kingdom to pursue a course which may lead
    either to qualification or some other benefit in the United Kingdom may
    well develop a private life during such a  stay  which  should  not  be
    arbitrarily interfered with and requires justification,  although  this
    is far from saying that Article 8 will fill any gap in the  failure  to
    comply with Immigration Rules (see CDS (PBS:  "available":  Article  8)
    Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC) and MM and SA [2010] UKUT 481 (IAC).

17. We are prepared to  accept  that  the  appellants  have  established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom by reason of their  lawful  presence
    here for four and three years respectively. Normally the requirement of
    consistent application of immigration policy will justify  interference
    with such private life because of the importance of the principle  that
    the Secretary of State's treats  applicants  fairly  and  consistently.
    However any structured analysis of the Article 8  claim  in  this  case
    would require consideration of whether the interference in question was
    in accordance with the law.  At  that  point  the  Article  8  analysis
    reflects the  Tribunal's  general  jurisdiction  to  determine  whether
    decisions are in accordance with the law.

Error of law

18. For reasons which  we  will  briefly  explain  we  conclude  that  this
    decision  was  not  made  in  accordance  with  the  law,  because  the
    appellant's application was not treated fairly. The IJ appears to  have
    given no consideration to this matter although submissions  relying  on
    Article 8 were advanced before him. We conclude that there was material
    error of law in his approach to this case. We set  aside  the  decision
    and remake it.

Remaking the decision

19. The salient facts in the present case are as follows:-

        1) The appellant was lawfully present in the  United  Kingdom  with
             leave to remain as a student and was a bona fide student.
          2) He made a bona fide application for an extension of stay  as  a
             student at a college which was an approved sponsor at the  time
             of the application;
          3) Unbeknown to the appellant the college  was  removed  from  the
             list of approved sponsors by the Home Office during the time it
             was considering the application;
          4) Removal of the college from the list of sponsors was  taken  at
             about the same time as the decision to refuse the  application,
             there was therefore no opportunity  for  the  appellant  to  be
             informed  of  the  consequences  on  his  application  of   the
             respondent's action.

20. A refusal of leave to remain is a very serious step for the appellants.
    Subject to a successful appeal their leave to remain expires and  their
    continued presence in the United Kingdom is unlawful and susceptible to
    summary removal. Further, there are now statutory restrictions on  what
    material can be submitted post decision in certain classes of case: see
    s.85A NIAA 2002 inserted by s.19 Borders Act 2007 as from 23 May  2010;
    Commencement Order. Although we accept that such a person  is  free  to
    make a subsequent application for  leave  that  application  cannot  by
    definition comply with the Immigration Rules since the applicant has no
    leave to remain. We recognise that a broad construction of  what  is  a
    variation of an existing application for leave to remain is required to
    be taken see JH (Zimbabwe and the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department) [2009] EWCA Civ 78 at paragraphs 35 and  36.   However,  we
    consider it unlikely that a fresh application made after a  refusal  of
    the existing could be  said  to  amount  a  variation  of  the  refused
    application, albeit that leave is extended  whilst  an  appeal  can  be
    brought (s. 3C (2)(b)). Variation of an extant application is all  that
    is permissible by s. 3C (5) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  by  way  of
    exception to the rule prohibiting applications for variations  of  s.3C
    leave: see s.3C (4).

21. If this is correct it follows that  not only will any fresh application
    made after a refusal not be one that can be  considered  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules, it is also not one that can be the  subject
    of an appeal to this Tribunal because it is made by someone who has  no
    leave to remain. Moreover, the evidence in this and  other  cases  that
    have come  before  the  Tribunal  on  the  same  point  indicates  that
    responsible sponsors are unwilling to  give  unconditional  sponsorship
    letters to students who would otherwise qualify for  admission for  the
    course under offer if they have no leave to remain. We accept  that  in
    some cases sponsors may be unwilling to issue such documentation  on  a
    misapprehension of whether a person has leave pursuant to s. 3C of  the
    Immigration Act 1971. We take this  opportunity  to  emphasise  that  a
    person with s. 3C leave who has an in-time application for an extension
    of leave under consideration may vary that application by  substituting
    a new college sponsor and sponsorship letters  need  therefore  not  be
    contingent on the outcome of the application.

22. Where the applicant is both innocent of any practice that led  to  loss
    of the sponsorship status and ignorant of the  fact  of  such  loss  of
    status, it seems to us that common law fairness and  the  principle  of
    treating applicants  equally  mean  that  each  should  have  an  equal
    opportunity to vary their application by affording  them  a  reasonable
    time with which to find a substitute college on  which  to  base  their
    application  for  an  extension  of  stay  to   obtain   the   relevant
    qualification. In the curtailment cases, express Home Office policy  is
    to afford sixty days for such application to be made.

23. Although we accept that there is no  such  policy  for  refusal  cases,
    fairness requires that such cases be treated in broadly the  same  way.
    The applicant must be given an  equal  opportunity  before  refusal  of
    application to amend it in the way we have described. This was  clearly
    not done in this case. The Home Office knew that it had  suspended  the
    college in January 2010 but no one else did. The  applicant  could  not
    have known that  subsequently  the  college's  status  as  an  approved
    sponsor was revoked before his application for an extension of stay was
    decided.

24. It is obviously unfair  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  revoke  the
    college's status after the application has been made  when  it  was  an
    approved sponsor and not to inform the applicant of such revocation and
    not afford him an opportunity to vary the application.

25. None of this applies where the applicant  has  not  been  a  bona  fide
    student at the college where he is seeking to extend his stay, or where
    he has participated in the practices that may have led the  college  to
    lose its sponsorship status, or where he has had  actual  knowledge  of
    the cessation that the termination of the college's status as a sponsor
    either before the application for an extension  of  stay  was  made  or
    shortly thereafter and when he had adequate opportunity  to  amend  the
    application by  seeking  to  substitute  an  approved  college  for  an
    unapproved one.

26. We accordingly conclude that the first Immigration Judge was  right  to
    reach the conclusion that the appeal should be  allowed  but  gave  the
    wrong reasons for doing so, by misunderstanding the policy  relied  on,
    rather than concluding that the decision was not in accordance with the
    law because it was unfair.

27. The next question is how immigration judges  faced  with  this  problem
    should deal with similar applications.  First,  in  our  judgment  they
    cannot remit a decision for reconsideration because they  do  not  have
    the powers of the High Court to quash decisions and remit. Their powers
    are those set out in the statute and these include the power under s.87
    of the 2002 Act to give a direction for the purpose of giving effect to
    its decision. Secondly, they cannot direct that leave to  remain  as  a
    student be granted if in truth there has  been  no  assessment  of  the
    applicant's ability to comply with the  relevant  rules  as  the  fresh
    sponsorship letter tends only to be provisional  rather  than  absolute
    (see also SP (allowed appeal: directions) South Africa [2011] UKUT  188
    (IAC). Thirdly, we doubt that in the normal case  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 and directing that  exceptional  leave  be  granted  is
    appropriate where the only problem is that the applicant has not had  a
    fair opportunity to submit an amended application.

28. We have carefully considered whether an applicant needs a  fresh  grant
    of leave to remain in order to make a fresh application  as  a  student
    with leave to remain within the  rules  that  would  bring  eligibility
    under the rules and a right of appeal in the case of dispute.  However,
    we do not think such a course is necessary in this case  or  generally.
    Where a judge finds that there was a duty to act fairly  that  has  not
    been complied with in the particular circumstances of the case,  he  or
    she can allow the appeal on the basis  that  the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.

29. In those  circumstances  no  lawful  decision  has  been  made  on  the
    application and  the  application  remains  to  be  determined  by  the
    Secretary of State or the relevant officer  and  the  leave  to  remain
    granted pursuant to s. 3C continues uninterrupted. A direction  may  be
    given to that effect where necessary specifying the time needed  before
    the application can be determined to allow a fair opportunity  to  make
    representations.

30. Where  there  has  been  no  lawful  refusal  of  an  application,  the
    application for leave to remain can  be  varied  under  s.  3C  (5)  as
    interpreted in JH (Zimbabwe) above.  We note that the decision  of  the
    UT in QI (para 245ZX(1) considered)  Pakistan  [2010]  UKUT  217  (IAC)
    concluding that s.3C leave  was  not  leave  for  the  purpose  of  the
    Immigration Rules has been over-ruled by the CA in QI (Pakistan) v SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 614 18  April  2011.  It  follows  that  subsequent  UT
    decisions applying it (such as HM and others v  SSHD  [2010]  UKUT  446
    (IAC)) should  no  longer  be  followed.  Hereafter,  colleges  can  be
    informed either by the Home Office or by  reference  to  this  decision
    that such a leave entitles a college to make an offer to a student that
    can be considered by the Home Office. The offer need not be conditional
    on the grant of leave, because the student already has leave sufficient
    for this purpose.

31. Accordingly in this case we state as follows:

          1) the decision is not in accordance with the  law  and  therefore
             ceases to have effect;
          2) the application for leave to  remain  remains  outstanding  and
             must be determined in accordance with the law  as  set  out  in
             this judgement;
          3) what is required to give effect to the principle of fairness in
             this case is for  a  direction  to  be  given  that  the  fresh
             decision is not to be made for a period of sixty days from  the
             date of the reason decision being transmitted to the parties to
             enable the appellant to obtain a fresh sponsorship letter  that
             is current and enable his existing application to be varied  to
             include study at the place  set  out  in  the  new  sponsorship
             letter.

32. For the future, having clarified the requirements of fairness  and  how
    they are to be met in an individual case, we would expect the UKBA in a
    case of this kind where the particular circumstances identified at para
    [22] above are met to inform the  applicant  that  the  college  is  no
    longer on the approved list of sponsors and that a period of sixty days
    will be allowed for any variation of the application that the applicant
    may wish to make before it is determined. If  the  applicant  fails  to
    respond to the invitation there has been  no  breach  of  the  duty  of
    fairness.

33. We were informed that UKBA is concerned as to the  potential  costs  of
    imposing a duty of having to inform the applicant that the college  was
    no longer sponsored. We are unpersuaded that this diminishes  the  duty
    to act fairly or the way in which the duty is discharged in the present
    case. The consequences of unfair decision making are much  more  costly
    than the consequences of sending out a simple letter. The present  case
    is a good example. It has been considered  by  three  judges  on  three
    separate occasions and  with  significant  case  management  directions
    being given in between. Public cost of such measures  far  exceeds  the
    cost of sending out a routine letter in standard terms that will enable
    all classes of applicants to be treated equally.

34. We are equally unpersuaded that merely putting  a  list  of  unapproved
    sponsors on the website will serve as a substitute for notification  of
    a change of circumstances since  the  application  has  been  made.  Of
    course, such a course may increase transparency and fairness in respect
    of applicants who can learn the status of  their  college  before  they
    apply and may therefore be a useful move.  But  it  is  unrealistic  to
    expect an applicant who has applied to monitor the Home Office  website
    every day just in case there has  been  a  change  in  the  sponsorship
    status of the college and relying on the college  to  notify  those  to
    whom it has issued sponsorship letters of a change  of  status  may  be
    equally ineffective.

35. For these reasons we remake the decision by  allowing  the  appeal  and
    giving the directions set out in paragraphs 31  (2)  and  (3)  of  this
    determination.







                                  Signed                       Date






                                     Mr Justice Blake
                                     President of the Upper Tribunal
                                     (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)







