

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


           Nimako-Boateng (residence orders - Anton considered) [2012] UKUT
      00216(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2012                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                           LORD JUSTICE McFARLANE
                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

             vanesSa niMako-boateng (also known as ELEANOR HOLM)
                                     and
                                     IA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Hourigan instructed by Time Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

A residence order or prohibited steps order made by a judge of  the  family
court under s.8 of the Children Act 1998 do not bind the Secretary of  State
for the Home Department.

The decisions of family courts in respect of the welfare and  best  interest
of children are important sources  of  information  for  judges  considering
immigration appeals. If an appellant wishes  to  advance  a  case  that  the
child's welfare will be jeopardised by removal because  it  would  break  up
existing patterns of contact with another  parent  or  relative,  one  would
expect to see clear and reliable evidence submitted to that effect.  See  RS
(immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218(IAC).

We direct that IA's name and identity be not  disclosed  in  any  report  of
these proceedings without leave of the Tribunal or further order.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. All members of the panel have participated in  the  making  of  this
       determination. The first appellant is a national of Ghana who states
       she was born there in November 1974. The  second  appellant  is  her
       daughter who we shall refer to as IA who  was  born  in  the  United
       Kingdom on 18 May 2002 to a man  called  NA  whose  nationality  and
       immigration status are uncertain.


    2. This is the hearing of the appellants' appeal  from  a  decision  of
       Immigration Judge Hanratty given on the 10 November  2010.  In  that
       decision the judge dismissed their appeal from  a  decision  of  the
       respondent dated 28 January 2010 refusing their  application  for  a
       document confirming that they had a permanent right of residence  as
       family members of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation  18  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


    3. A notice under s.120 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002 was served  on  the  appellants.  They  appealed  the  decision
       contending they were entitled to the right of permanent residence as
       claimed. They subsequently abandoned this claim but  contended  that
       the removal decision that the respondent had indicated would be made
       against them if their appeal failed would  be  unlawful  because  it
       would breach their human rights under Article 8 ECHR.

    4. In this roundabout way, the Article 8 ECHR question came before  the
       Immigration Judge and he dismissed the appellants'  contention  that
       it would be contrary to their human rights if they were returned  to
       Ghana. No immigration decision to remove the mother or daughter  has
       yet been taken.

    5. Permission to appeal was sought alleging that the Judge had made  an
       error of law in the Article 8 assessment and permission to appeal to
       the Upper Tribunal was granted on a single point, namely whether the
       judge had properly taken account of the  consequences  of  an  order
       made in the Principal Registry of the Family Division.

    6. Two orders were made in proceedings that  the  first  appellant  had
       instituted against NA in early 2010.  The  first  was  a  prohibited
       steps order made under s.8 of the  Children Act  1989  on  27  April
       2010 in the following terms:


          "the Respondent [NA] must not remove  the child  [IA]   (date  of
          birth 18 May 2002)..
                 a) from England and Wales;
                 b) from the care of the Applicant, except for such  contact
                    as the parties may agree in writing or as may be ordered
                    by the Court;
                 c) from her school...
                         without the written consent  of  the  Applicant  or
the consent of the Court".

    7. On 27 July 2010, a judge of the same court made  a  residence  order
       under s.8 of the Children Act 1989 that the child  IA  resides  with
       her mother. The form of order contained a statutory warning pursuant
       to s. 13(i)(b) of the Children Act 1989   with  the  warning  notice
       attached:


             "Where a residence Order is in force no person may  ....remove
             the child from the United Kingdom without the written  consent
             of every person with parental responsibility for the child  or
             the leave of the court".


    The factual background


    8. The first appellant has a remarkable history of  deception  relating
       to her entry to and residence in the United  Kingdom  from  1998  to
       2010. Her name at birth was Eleanor Holm.  In 1998 she applied for a
       student visa that was refused.  She  then  applied  using  the  name
       Salome to come to the United Kingdom as a visitor. Her  purpose  was
       said to be to visit her then boyfriend, NA.


    9. In 1999 she came to the United Kingdom but was subsequently removed.
       She then returned in 2001 using another assumed name Vanessa Nimako-
       Boateng, that has been her identity until quite  recently.  She  was
       given leave to enter as an accountancy student and  such  leave  was
       extended to 2002.  She then remained without leave.   By  reason  of
       the use of the  false  name  and  the  suppression  of  her  adverse
       immigration history she was and remains an illegal entrant liable to
       summary removal as such under the Immigration Act  1971  Schedule  2
       paragraph 9 and since the expiry of her leave to remain she has also
       been liable to summary removal under s. 10(1) of the Immigration and
       Asylum Act 1999.


   10. In June 2003 she applied for a residence card as  the  spouse  of  a
       Dutch national Cedric Juliana (hereafter  Cedric).  She  claimed  to
       have married Cedric  in  December  2001  in  Ghana  and  produced  a
       passport, Ghanaian marriage certificate and employment documents  in
       Cedric's name to support that  claim.  In  July  2004  a  five  year
       residence card was issued on the basis of this claimed marriage.  In
       November 2008 she procured from Barnet County Court the  dissolution
       of  this  marriage  on  the  grounds  of  Cedric's  alleged  violent
       behaviour towards her.

   11. In May 2009 she applied to the UKBA for permanent residence  as  the
       former spouse of Cedric. She contended that  she  had  the  retained
       right of residence on her  divorce  in  November  2008  because  the
       marriage had lasted three years and Cedric was  a  qualified  person
       (in this case an EU national who was working in the United  Kingdom)
       immediately preceding the divorce and that the material requirements
       of regulation 10(5) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2006 were met. She contended that as she had completed a
       period of five years lawful  residence  as  the  spouse  and  former
       spouse of a qualified person, she was entitled to a permanent  right
       of residence.

   12. It was this application that was refused  in  January  2010  on  the
       basis of an absence of supporting evidence.   One  month  after  the
       refusal decision NA wrote a letter to the respondent  revealing  the
       first appellant's immigration history summarised  above  at  [8]  to
       [11] and further disclosing  that  the  whole  EEA  application  was
       founded on a stolen Dutch passport supplied by a friend of hers  and
       impersonation of Cedric by another friend. The  letter  stated  that
       there was never any marriage to Cedric and the Ghanaian  certificate
       was a fake one. The letter concluded:

             "I am writing this letter because I  am  the  father  of  [IA]
             (date of birth 18/05/2002) and I am going  back  to  Ghana  to
             live there. I want my child to go with me to Ghana  where  the
             rest of my family are. She is trying to use my status  in  the
             Country as  a  British  citizen  to  get  her  stay  using  my
             daughter. She and her Lawyers have been threatening me  in  no
             uncertain terms that I would loose (sic) my child if I do  not
             help with copies of my passport which I refused".

   13. According to the first appellant[1] she became aware of this  letter
       on 7 April 2010 and it was in response to it  that  the  proceedings
       were issued in the Principal Registry that led to the orders made in
       April and July.


   14. The EEA appeal first came before the First-tier Tribunal on  7  June
       2010 when it was  adjourned  pending  further  inquiries  into  NA's
       letter. At this first  hearing  the  first  appellant  produced  the
       prohibited steps order from the  Principal  Registry  noted  at  [6]
       above.


   15. By the time the appeal came to be heard in November 2010, the  first
       appellant had admitted her history of deception outlined  above  and
       abandoned  her  claim  to  be  entitled  to  a  permanent  residence
       document.  She nevertheless contended that it would be  contrary  to
       IA's interests for her to leave the United  Kingdom  where  she  had
       lived all of her life and be removed to Ghana along with her mother.
       Reference was made to the residence  order  of  July  2010  and  the
       previous Home Office policy withdrawn in 2009  whereby  seven  years
       residence by a child was  a  presumptive  basis  to  regularise  the
       status of the mother, absent compelling reasons to the contrary.

The judge's decision:

   16. Having summarised the history and the submissions  of  the  parties,
       and the leading guidance on Article 8 cases then available  to  him,
       the judge concluded:


          "55. Balancing all these matters in  relation  to  the  principal
          appellant Ms Holmes and looking at her private life (I shall come
          to IA later) I find that this appellant  should  not  be  in  the
          country at all. She has  employed  sophisticated  and  deliberate
          deception almost certainly amounting to criminal conduct. She has
          certainly  perverted  the  administration  of  justice.  She  has
          admitted doing so. I do recognise that she has enjoyed a  private
          and family life in the UK. But I find in relation to her  private
          life that has been obtained in the country by means of systematic
          and sophisticated deception...For this appellant to be allowed to
          stay in the UK applying Article 8 ECHR would indeed drive a coach
          and horses through effective immigration control in this  country
          and encourage others to  engage  in  similar  abuses,  which  are
          matters to be taken into account as regards proportionality".

   17.   The  judge  then  turned  his  attention  to  IA's  interests.  He
       recognised that she was the innocent victim of the first appellant's
       activities. She was doing reasonably well at school and had  friends
       here. She had never been to  Ghana  and  did  not  speak  the  local
       dialects. The judge accepted that  IA  had  some  contact  with  her
       father but in his letter her father  had  said  that  he  wanted  to
       return to Ghana. If IA went to Ghana she  would  have  both  parents
       there, and contact with her maternal grandmother and grandfather. It
       was in her interest to be with her mother but her mother could  work
       and look after her in Ghana.   Despite  IA's  wish  to  continue  to
       reside in the United Kingdom, it would be unacceptable for her to be
       left behind and there was a balance to be performed  in  cases  like
       this.


   18.  The judge then said:

          "59. I have given very careful and anxious consideration  to  the
          case of [IA] whom I did not hear give evidence....It  is  a  hard
          thing to direct that she should leave the UK but the deception is
          so dreadful in this case and so cynical and well planned  by  her
          mother and by others that for the purpose of fair  and  effective
          immigration control there can be no other decision than that [IA]
          should go to Ghana  with her mother and she should be able to see
          her father on an occasional basis. I have carefully applied  s.55
          of the UK Borders Act 2009 and the case of LD (Article 8  -  best
          interests of the child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 00278 (IAC) where Mr
          Justice Blake held that the interests of a  child  is  a  primary
          consideration. I do respectfully apply that case in  the  balance
          to be struck. This child has the benefit of a  UK  education,  is
          still young and could relocate back to  her  mother's  family  in
          Ghana".


   19. The judge  considered  the  residence  order  but  agreed  with  the
       respondent's  submission  that  it  and  the  other  orders  of  the
       Principal Registry and the Barnet County Court had been obtained  by
       deception. It was open to the court to  revoke  the  order,  thereby
       allowing IA  to  be  removed  in  the  company  of  her  mother  and
       accordingly the existence of the order was not a bar to  a  decision
       to remove her under Article 8.  He  directed  that  a  copy  of  his
       determination should be shown  to  the  Principal  Registry  for  an
       appropriate order to be made.

 Subsequent events

   20.  Permission to appeal was refused by Senior Immigration Judge  Clive
       Lane sitting as a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who  observed
       that the residence order was not a bar to removal and in  any  event
       could be varied, and the judge had paid very close attention to  the
       position of the child.


   21.  Permission to appeal was granted in February 2011 on the basis that
       the  existence  of  the   residence   order   might   make   removal
       disproportionate.  Despite two sets of subsequent directions in 2011
       to the effect that the appeal could be re-made in the event that  an
       error of law was found without  hearing  fresh  evidence,  for  some
       reason the appeal was not listed for prompt determination.

   22.  On 1  February  2011  the  Supreme  Court  delivered  its  landmark
       decision in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 the  implications  of  which
       have been  subsequently  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
       sequence of cases: including  Omotunde  (best  interest  -  Zambrano
       applied - Razgar) [2011] UKUT 247 (IAC), 25 May 2011;  E-A  (Article
       8 - best interests) Nigeria  [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC), 22 July 2011; MK
       (best interest of child) India [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC); and Sanade and
       others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC).

   23. On 4 March 2011, on being informed that the decision of  Immigration
       Judge Hanratty was under appeal and had not been fixed for  hearing,
       a judge of the District Registry directed  that  the  orders  of  27
       April and 27 July were  to  continue  in  force.  On  this  occasion
       (unlike the hearings in April and July 2010) the father attended  in
       person. The order made further recites  the  fact  that  there  were
       pending proceedings between  mother  and  father  about  the  former
       matrimonial home in Milton Keynes.

   24. In the early part of 2012 the Tribunal was  informed  that  criminal
       proceedings had been instituted against the first appellant.  On  17
       May 2012 the appellant appeared before the Isleworth Crown Court and
       pleaded guilty to three counts of a six count indictment as follows:
        count 1, perjury before the Family Court  on  27  April  2010  when
       sworn as a witness; count  2,  making  a  false  statement  on  oath
       contrary to the Perjury Act in July 2008; count 3,  obtaining  leave
       to enter by deception  by providing the false name of Nimako-Boateng
       in March 2002.  Three further counts of obtaining leave by deception
       in October 2002, May 2004 and March 2009 were ordered to lie on  the
       file. Sentence was adjourned for reports and the appellant has  been
       advised to expect an immediate custodial sentence.

   25.  On the following day IA celebrated her 10th birthday  and  acquired
       the right to register as a British citizen  under  s.  3(1)  of  the
       British Nationality Act 1981.

   26.  Following further directions, this case was selected as  one  of  a
       group of cases raising issues about the  inter-relationship  between
       the family courts and the Upper Tribunal. We are fortunate  to  have
       the participation in this appeal of a very  experienced  family  law
       judge, Lord Justice McFarlane.  He drew attention to the decision of
       Munby J as he then was in the case of R (Anton) v SSHD  [2004]  EWHC
       2730 (Admin/Family) [2005] 2 FLR 818 where the judge decided:

             "[33] A judge of the Family Division cannot in the exercise of
             his family jurisdiction grant an injunction  to  restrain  the
             Secretary of State removing from the jurisdiction a child  who
             is subject to immigration control-even if the child is a  ward
             of court.....


             [34] This does not mean that the family court  cannot  make  a
             residence order in respect  of  a  child  who  is  subject  to
             immigration control....What it does mean, however, and this is
             an important point, is that neither the existence  of  a  care
             order, nor the existence of a residence order,  nor  even  the
             fact that a child is a ward of court, can limit or confine the
             exercise by the Secretary of State  of his powers in  relation
             to a child who is subject to immigration control."


         In support of the last observation he quoted part of  the  judgment
         of Russell LJ   in Re Mohammed Arif (An Infant) [1968]  Ch  643  at
         662-3:


             "any lawful deportation order affecting a ward must be  outside
             the normal position which I have mentioned already, that a ward
             must not leave  the  jurisdiction  without  permission  of  the
             judge; indeed, it would over-ride any existing express order of
             the judge in the wardship proceedings that the infant  was  not
             to depart from the jurisdiction...The wardship of  infants,  in
             my judgment, has not and could not in law have  any  effect  on
             the powers and duties of the immigration authorities so  as  to
             hamper them in  any  way  in  removing  the  infants  from  the
             jurisdiction."

   27. In advance of the hearing we drew this decision to the attention  of
       the appellant's solicitors and the Senior Presenting Officer's Unit.
       In the event it seems that Time and Co failed to notify Mr  Hourigan
       of our note, and so we gave him some time to consider  the  decision
       in the course of the hearing.

Submissions to us

   28. Mr Hourigan recognised in the light of Anton, he could  not  advance
       the submission that the Immigration Judge had erred in  law  in  his
       consideration of the impact of the  residence  order  or  prohibited
       steps order on the Article 8 decision.


   29. We agree. It is clear on established authority that the  order  does
       not bind the Secretary of State. It is  most  unfortunate  that  the
       decision in Anton was not cited to the First-tier Tribunal or in the
       application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It
       should be better known to immigration practitioners.  We  draw  from
       it the following conclusions:

          a. The prohibited steps order of 27 April 2010 was directed to the
             child's father NA and not to anybody else.
          b. The residence order made in July 2010 did not operate as a  bar
             on the respondent making a decision to remove IA as the  family
             member of a person facing removal. The  respondent  was  not  a
             party to those proceedings and the order is not to be  read  as
             directed to the respondent.
          c. In any event, the order cannot conceivably be read as a bar  on
             a decision that in principle the appellants could be removed to
             Ghana and Article 8 did not prevent their removal.  No  removal
             decision had actually been made.
          d. Yet further, as was pointed out to the judge below, even if the
             order did have some effect  on  the  immigration  decision,  an
             application could always be made to vary it before removal  was
             actually effected.


   30. In the circumstances it  is  most  unfortunate  that  permission  to
       appeal was granted on this point.  Both  Judge  Hanratty  and  Judge
       Clive Lane were entirely correct in their approach.


   31. However, we recognise that in the light of  subsequent  developments
       in the law, some of the supporting reasoning in  Anton  may  require
       revisiting. Both the Home Office and the immigration  judiciary  are
       concerned with an assessment of the  best  interests  of  the  child
       affected by an administrative decision to remove either the child or
       a parent or other person providing care or  support  to  the  child.
       This is made clear by: the terms of s.55 of the UK Borders Act 2009,
       the decision in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and the Strasbourg  case
       law on Article 8 such as Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR;  [2009]  INLR
       47 stating that immigration decision-making affecting children under
       18 has to be consistent with the  terms  of  Article  3  of  the  UN
       Convention on the Rights of the  Child  1990.  However,  whereas  in
       family law proceedings the welfare of the  child  is  the  paramount
       consideration, in immigration proceedings it is 'a  primary'  rather
       than 'the paramount' consideration and can be  outweighed  by  other
       compelling rights-based factors. These  include  those  set  out  in
       Article 8(2) ECHR namely the prevention of disorder and  crime,  the
       promotion  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  country  and  the
       protection of the rights of others by the maintenance of a system of
       immigration control see ZH (Tanzania); Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348;  see
       also the recent Strasbourg decisions of Nunez v Norway  [2011]  ECHR
       1047, 11 June 2011 and Antwi v Norway [2012] ECHR 259,  14  February
       2012.


   32.  Further, the family court is  best  placed  to  evaluate  the  best
       interests of the child in proceedings brought before  it.  Both  the
       decision itself and the reasons for the outcome are material to  the
       consideration of the Article  8  balance  to  be  conducted  by  the
       immigration judiciary and may be a decisive consideration.  Reasoned
       decisions of such courts  are  not  to  be  ignored  in  immigration
       appeals. Indeed the  problem  facing  immigration  judges  is  that,
       although they must attach weight to the best interests of the child,
       in many cases they will often not  be  able  to  assess  what  those
       interests are without the assistance of a  decision  of  the  family
       court. The  family  court  has,  amongst  other  things,  procedural
       advantages in investigating what the  child's  best  interests  are,
       independent of the interests of the parent, as well as the necessary
       expertise in evaluating them.

   33. An informed decision of the family judge on the merits and, in  some
       cases at least, the material underlying that decision, is likely  to
       be of value to the immigration judge. Equally the family courts  may
       need  to  be  informed  about  the  immigration  status  and  future
       prospects of foreign national parents and children as the  prospects
       of a member of the family being allowed to remain may be relevant to
       the assessment of the best interests of a child of  the  family.  We
       discuss the need for good  communication  between  the  two  systems
       further in our ruling in the case  of  RS  (immigration  and  family
       court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218(IAC) heard  on  the  same
       day.

   34. However, in this case there was no useful  material  in  the  family
       court decisions to inform the immigration judge. The first appellant
       had lied about her identity, immigration status and marital history.
       The timing of the orders gave rise to the reasonable suspicion  that
       they were obtained primarily for the purpose of  production  in  the
       immigration appeal. Even if there was a  dispute  about  the  future
       care of IA as between parents, that was a private law dispute  based
       on the false hypothesis that the first  appellant  had  a  right  to
       remain. In the circumstances it generated no material  of  relevance
       to the immigration assessment.

   35. Mr Hourigan next submitted that Judge Hanratty had erred in  failing
       to  assess  IA's  best  interests  and   making   them   a   primary
       consideration in the case.

   36. We disagree. The judge  plainly  gave  the  very  greatest  care  in
       considering the impact of removal of both appellants on IA's welfare
       and best interests. Although he did not have  the  guidance  of  the
       Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) he cited and applied LD (Article 8  -
       best of interest of the child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) to the
       same effect. He was entitled to conclude that the best interests  of
       IA were to be with her mother wherever the mother was to reside. The
       fact that she had spent all the eight  years of her  young  life  in
       the United Kingdom and had started primary school was not of  itself
       a sufficient reason to conclude that she should not be removed  with
       her mother  or  that  the  mother's  immigration  status  should  be
       regularised: see  MK  (India)  (cited  above).  Whilst  the  judge's
       reference to IA's ability to adapt in Ghana is not the  test  to  be
       applied, for the reasons we gave in E-A (Nigeria) (cited  above)  we
       conclude  that  it  is  not  an  irrelevant  consideration  in   the
       assessment to be undertaken.

   37. Finally, Mr Hourigan submitted that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  the
       assessment of the impact of the child's  removal  on  her  relations
       with her father.


   38. Again we disagree. Although the judge accepted that  the  child  had
       some contact  with  her  father  we  can  find  no  basis  for  that
       proposition in the evidence from the mother the judge recited at [7]
       to [25] of the determination. We should add that  neither  could  Mr
       Hourigan. We do not have the first appellant's further statement  of
       September 2010 that was before the judge. The appellant's solicitors
       have only chosen to place before us a draft witness statement of the
       mother (undated and unsigned) for  the  Principal  Registry  of  the
       Family Division. There is reference in that statement to the  father
       having contact with IA between 2007 and 2009.   This  statement  was
       used to support the orders made in April 2010 in  respect  of  which
       the mother has recently admitted perjury  and  where  she  persisted
       with a false narrative of a marriage to Mr Cedric. We  can  give  no
       credence at all to anything she says there.

   39. There is no independent evidence before us that the father  has  had
       contact with the child since the parent's relationship  broke  down.
       We note that the father has not applied for a contact order or  made
       arrangements for contact with the mother between 2010 and 2012.  His
       only appearance in the family court was in March 2011.

   40. If an appellant wishes to advance a case that  the  child's  welfare
       will be jeopardised by removal because it would  break  up  existing
       patterns of contact with  another  parent  or  relative,  one  would
       expect to see clear and reliable evidence submitted to that  effect.
       The burden of making out an Article 8 claim rests on the  appellant,
       even though the respondent may have her own duty under s.55 Borders,
       Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to investigate and consider the
       welfare of the child.

   41. The judge pointed out that the father in his  February  2010  letter
       said he wanted to return to Ghana with IA. Although much of what  is
       said in that letter is now accepted by the mother as true, we  treat
       his statement of future intent with caution in the  absence  of  any
       assessment  of  the  father's  credibility,  his   immigration   and
       nationality status and his conduct in the United Kingdom. The  first
       appellant contends that the  father  himself  was  involved  in  her
       deceptive conduct, but we  can  reach  no  conclusion  on  that.  Mr
       Saunders could provide no information  to  assist  us.  However  the
       judge can hardly be criticised for mentioning the  only  information
       before him as to the father's intentions with respect to IA.

   42. In brief, we conclude that there was no evidence that removal of  IA
       to Ghana would deprive her of a valuable source of parental  contact
       and support that she presently enjoyed. There was  some  information
       that the father would return to  Ghana  where  he  has  family.  The
       father appears to have taken no steps to arrange  contact  with  the
       mother or through the courts. In these  circumstances  there  is  no
       substance in the  submission  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
       consider and assess such evidence as there was  about  the  father's
       contribution to IA's welfare.

    Conclusion

   43. In our  judgment  no  error  of  law  has  been  identified  in  the
       determination of the judge. We therefore dismiss the appeal  without
       remaking the decision.


   44. We recognise that a further decision needs to be made  with  respect
       to the mother and the passage of time may have an impact on  whether
       IA can or should now be required to return to Ghana, but that is not
       an issue before us today.


                               Signed                         Date


                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

-----------------------
[1] Draft witness statement at [15] p 31 of bundle.

